,_,_.--




          Directions in Sociolinguistics
 DIRECTIONS IN
SOCIOLINGUISTICS

    The Ethnography of Communication



                   Edited by,

         John J. Gumperz
        University of California, Berkeley

              Dell Hymes
           University of Pennsylvania




HOLT, RINEHART AND WINSTON, INC.
 New York Chicago San Francisco Atlanta Dallas
        Montreal Toronto London Sydney
Copyright © 1972 by Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
All rights reserved
                                .
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 77-168981
ISBN: 0-03-077745-3

Printed in the United States of America
      6 038 98765 3
        Preface



         The present work integrates in a single volume some major direc-
tions of research on the social basis of verbal communication, a subject
which has become of considerable interest to social scientists working at
both theoretical and applied levels. In recent years, most linguists, in their
concern with formal methods of description, have concentrated on the
internal relations of linguistic signs, ruling out consideration of extra
linguistic factors. Today, semantics is once more a legitimate subject, and
syntax is seen to raise questions of the status of sentences as acts of
speech and parts of discourse. Basic theoretical problems of the nature of
grammar and its relation to speakers' verbal competence are therefore
once more becoming relevant. Similarly, questions of the functions of
language are again receiving serious attention.
   The importance of language in social problems, especially education
and national development, also is drawing linguistics into wider concerns.
The last decade has seen an increasing number of conferences, inter-
disciplinary symposia, and monographs attempting to stimulate serious
behaviorally oriented research on stylistics and expressive speech, intra-
societal diversity of language, attitudes to language, language politics and
policy, and other similar peripheral subjects (Sebeok I 960; Bright 1966;
Lieberson I 966b; Capell 1966; Haugen 1966; MacNamara 1967;
Fishman et al. 1968).
   Although sustained empirical work is only beginning, the response so
far seems highly promising. Social scientists are showing interest in
linguistic data as a means of studying behavior independently of overtly
expressed attitudes, while linguists are beginning to see that many impor-
tant questions of language change, education, and policy cannot be solved
without information on the social factors affecting speech. Almost over-
                                      V
         vi   Preface

night sociolinguistics has emerged as a distinct field, one of a series of
border disciplines which promises to provide novel insights into the bases
of human conduct.
   The ready currency of the term sociolinguistics, however, does not
reflect fundamental agreement on common problems, sources of data, or
methods of analysis. On the contrary, the recent publications reveal
almost as many methods of operation as there are workers in the field.
 Many scholars-probably a majority of those who identify themselves as
sociolinguists-are interested in language data as they contribute to the
solution of problems already posed by the academic dialogue in their own
disciplines. Some simply measure attitudes to language or speakers' self-
reports on their usage. Others analyze usage through counts of individual
words, or syntactic constructions and the like, using such counts as in-
dexes in somewhat the same way in which income, education, and attitudes
are used by other social scientists. Others again, seeking to make better
use of the full potential of linguistic description, tend to draw direct
parallels between features of the linguistic structure of a particular dialect
or speech style and independently measured social characteristics of its
users. A fourth group, oriented toward policy issues, has begun to utilize
descriptive and historical linguistics in the creation of new orthographies
and scientific terminologies, and in other aspects of language development
and planning.
   The gradual accumulation over the years of ethnographic information
and insight into verbal practices of human groups, however, has also
raised some entirely new questions about the very place of speaking
in human interaction. No one claims, that grammar, as the term is
normally understood, covers everything that is rule governed in speech.
Linguists and social scientists of many persuasions have long called at-
tention to the importance of prestige, politeness, expressive, ritual, and
religious values, and similar aspects of language. It has been argued that
such nonreferential functions may be determinant in language behavior
and language change. Language usage-i.e., what is said on a particular
occasion, how it is phrased, and how it is coordinated with nonverbal
signs-cannot simply be a matter of free individual choice. It must itself
be affected by subconsciously internalized constraints similar to gram-
matical constraints. But although issues of language function have stimu-
lated considerable discussion, they have, so far, not been integrated into
any general theory of language and society and, as a result, are rarely
taken account of in the research designs which underlie field procedures.
  The special issue of the American Anthropologist published in 1964
under the title "The Ethnography of Communication" (Gumperz and
Hymes 1964) was an attempt to stimulate empirically oriented work on
such problems. In the years since the publication of that collection, con-
                                                         Preface    vii

   siderable progress has been made both in theory and in field techniques.
  The articles in the present volume, many of which are contributed by the
  same authors, attempt to capture these advances, while at the same time
  bringing in relevant lines of work not previously included .
    . The theoretical goal of the type of sociolinguistic investigation repre-
  sented here is best illustrated by the notion of communicative competence:
  What a speaker needs to know to communicate effectively in culturally
  significant settings. Like Chomsky's term on which it is patterned, com-
  municative competence refers to the ability to perform. An attempt is
  made to distinguish between what the speaker knows-what his inherent
  capacities are-and how he behaves in particular instances. However,
  whereas students of linguistic competence seek to explain those aspects
  of grammar believed to be common to all humans independent of social
  determinants, students of communicative competence deal with speakers
. as members of communities, as incumbents of social roles, and seek to
  explain their use of language to achieve self-identification and to conduct
  their activities. While for linguistic theory in the former sense the ability
  to formalize sentences as grammatically acceptable is the central notion,
 for sociolinguistics as represented in the book, the central notion is the
 appropriateness of verbal messages in context or their acceptability in the
 broader sense.
     The contributors and their contributions represent an unusually broad
 range of fields. Different readers will recognize concepts and techniques
 drawn from linguistics, ethnography, sociology, dialectology, psychology,
 componential analysis, ethnoscience, paralinguistics and kinesics, folk-
 lore, ethnomethodology, stylistics, and possibly other sources as well.
 While most chapters are empirically oriented, none are merely descrip-
 tive. Many new and general concepts, suitable for the analysis of verbal
 interaction processes everywhere, are proposed. Yet there is by no means
 complete agreement on theory. Sociolinguistics is still many steps re-
 moved from the formal rigor of an integrated grammatical theory. It
 seems clear, however, that progress is not a matter merely of refining
 analytical apparatus. Since many of the relevant questions have only
 recently begun to be asked, we lack the empirical information on which
generalizations must be built. Our aim here is to present evidence docu-
 menting the existence of a level of rule-governed verbal behavior which
goes beyond the linguists' grammar to relate social and linguistic con-
straints on speech, to illustrate the type of data that must be collected for
its analysis and the elicitation methods by which it can be gathered.
     We hope that this book will stimulate students and professionals in the
linguistic and social sciences as well as educators concerned with lan-
guage arts. Because of the newness of the subject, it was impossible to
modify the content of the articles without seriously impairing their utility.
        viii   Preface

Additional explanatory material has, however, been provided in the
Introduction, the Plan of the Book, and in notes preceding each chapter.
The Introduction relates the interactional approach to language to past
and present theory and fieldwork practice. The Plan of the Book outlines
the scope of the volume and the rationale for its organization. Each chap-
ter is introduced by an explanatory note pointing out its significance for
our concerns and giving additional background readings. A general bibli-
ography lists all references cited. A list of background readings brings
together some basic background material relevant to modern sociolin-
guistics. Also included in the appendix is the "Outline Guide for the
Ethnographic Study of Speech Use," by Joel Sherzer and Regna Darnell.
We hope that the reader will enjoy direct contact with work that seeks to
build something and will gain new perspectives from which to approach
existing research on language and social interaction and its application to
education and policy making.

                                                                     J.J.G.
                                                                      D.H .




                  ,,
                  .
      Contents




             Preface v

              Introduction
                 John J. Gu111perz
              Plan of the Book 26

Part One      ETHNOGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION AND
              EXPLANATION 33
           1. Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life 35
                  Dell Hymes
           2. Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi 72
                  Ethel M. Albert
           3. "Struck by Speech": The Yakan Concept of
              Litigation 106
                  Charles 0. Frake
           4. The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling
              Rhymes 130
                 Alan Dundes, Jerry W. Leach, and Bora Ozkiik
           5. Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech
              Acts 161
                 Claudia Mitchell-Kernan
           6. Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation 180
                 John M. Roberts and Michael L. Forman
                                     ix
      x     Contents

Part Two      DISCOVERING STRUCTURE IN SPEECH                           211
           7. On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and
              Co-occurrence 213
                  Susan Ervin-Tripp
           8. Context and Alternation in Koya Kinship
              Terminology 25 I
                  Stephen A. Tyler
           9. Social Context and Semantic Feature: The Russian
              Pronominal Usage 270
                  Paul Friedrich
          I 0. Remarks on Ethnomethodology 30 I
                  Harold Garfinkel
          11. On the Analyzability of Stories by Children 325
                  Harvey Sacks
          12. Sequencing in Conversational Openings 346
                  Emanuel A. S clzeglojj'
          13. A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene 381
                  Ray L. Birdwhistell

Part Three GENESIS, MAINTENANCE, AND CHANGE
           OF LINGUISTIC CODES 405
          14. Social Meaning in Linguistic Structures: Code-Switching
              in Norway 407
                 Jan-Petter Blom and John J. Gumperz
          15. Domains and the Relationship between Micro- and
              Macrosociolinguistics 435
                 Joshua A. Fislunan
      16. Ethnic Processes on the Pathan-Baluch Boundary 454
                 Fredrik Barth
      17. A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization; with Some
          Reference to Educability 465
                 Basil Bemstein
      18. The Stylistic Significance of Consonantal Sandhi in
          Trukese and Ponapean 498
                 John L. Fischer
      19. On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change 512
                 William Labov
             Appendix 1:     Background Reading 539
             Appendix 2:     Outline Guide for the Ethnographic Study
                             of Speech Use 548
                 .Joel Sherzer and Regna Darnell

             Bibliography 555
             Index 583
        Introduction
        JOHN J. GUMPERZ


         The interactional approach to language behavior, which is the
unifying theme of this volume, exemplifies both new theoretical insights
and changes in research orientation. Since such changes are best under-
stood in historical perspective, we will begin this introduction by outlining
the background of modern sociolinguistics: early speech community
studies, descriptive linguistics, generative grammar, and correlational
sociolinguistics. We will then proceed to treat some of the most important
research paradigms and analytical concepts emerging from the work of
the last decade, and conclude with a discussion of implications for future
fieldwork.


        Early Speech Community Studies
         The systematic investigation of the speech of human groups dates
to the beginning of the nineteenth century and is part of the general inter-
est in organized knowledge concerning the variety of human customs and
beliefs which arose in the Enlightenment. For example, in the 16th cen-
tury, Montaigne collected oral literature from Brazilian Indians brought
to France. A unique manual of ethnography including language appeared
in the seventeenth century in France, and word lists were gathered ex-
tensively in the eighteenth century. But cultural description focused on
speech behavior was almost nonexistent. Most scholarly work of the era
was dominated either by a concern with evolution in which the institu-
tions of Western industrial society were seen as the end product of a
series of evolutionary stages of which the languages and customs of primi-
tives represented the beginning and/or with legitimizing the cultural ori-
gins of nations [e.g., the Italians (Vico) and the Germans (Grimm)].
   Linguists of all persuasions, like other scholars, were concerned with
documenting historical processes, but the source material for their studies
                                     1
          2   lntroduction

  differed. There were many linguists who, in the manner of the early clas-
  sical philologists, worked primarily with manuscript remains of extinct
  languages or with literary texts, inscriptions, or documents exemplifying
  earlier stages of modern literary languages. Work with single or at most a
  few manuscripts of earlier epics, tales, chronicles, or Bible translations,
  each relatable to a particular modern vernacular, led them to visualize
  speech distribution as describable in terms of a limited number of discrete
  languages and dialects. Their goal was to document the development of
  these modern varieties from earlier prehistoric protolanguages in some-
 what the same way that biological scientists studied the evolution of
 animal organisms.
    A second group of scholars preferred to concentrate on more recent,
 historically documented linguistic changes. Arguing that peasant commu-
 nities and tribal societies furnished living proof of evolutionary processes,
 many of them turned away from written documents to the direct study of
 the oral practices of such communities. The first-hand empirical inves-
 tigation of speech received particular impetus from the neo-grammarian
 doctrines of sound change. The N ea-grammarian thesis that language
 change is regular and that sound changes which relate contemporary ver-
 naculars to earlier forms of speech are describable by means of laws
 which, like the laws of natural science, allow no exceptions, was the first
 statement of historical linguistic processes sufficiently explicit to suggest
 practical field tests. It could be argued that iflocal peasant dialects of a lit-
 erary language represent divergent historical development of earlier
 stages of that language, and if sound correspondences are regular, then
dialects should be separated by sharp boundaries reflecting the historical
linguists' statement of these correspondences.
    Motivated by these and similar questions, dialectologists launched into
a series of field surveys in which peasant speech was studied either
through mail questionnaires or directly through fieldwork by inves-
tigators, who often covered many miles on foot in order to collect dialect
samples through direct methods. Other scholars, more skeptical of the
Neu-grammarian hypothesis, sought to disprove the latter theory by
studying the linguistic consequences of large-scale immigration or con-
quest or by investigating "language mixture" as revealed in pidgins and
trade languages found in regions of interethnic contact.
    Writings on these issues in the years 1875-1940 are often quite specu-
lative and poorly documented when compared with studies based on tex-
tual materials dating from the same period. Nevertheless, they served to
demonstrate that language is basically a social institution and to document
the importance of social factors in language change, thus disproving ear-
lier ideas of biological or geographical determinism. Although it is evident
that new expressions are always created by individuals, the acceptance of
such innovations by others, their spread, and their ultimate effect on the
                                                         Introduction    3

linguistic system is in large part socially determined. Conquest, popula-
tion migration, or other less dramatic forms of social change can lead to
the disappearance of old languages and the spread of others. Similarly,
new languages, pidgins, and creoles may be created as a result of forced
population resettlement and intensive intergroup contact'. Classification
by language, therefore, need not be correlated with groupings of mankind
on other bases.
   Perhaps the most detailed and, for the modern social scientist, the most
interesting evidence of the working of social factors in the spread of
linguistic innovations comes from the dialect surveys conducted during
the first decades of this century. The Swabian dialectologist Fischer
(Bach I 960), e.g., found that the rural dialect boundaries of the area of
southwestern Germany closely reflected the political borders of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. So close was the connection that
subregional borders drawn on the basis of dialect isogloss bundles were
almost as accurate as frontiers reconstructed on the basis of historical
records alone. A comparative study of dialect boundaries in Germany,
France, and Italy by Jaberg ( I 936) suggests that dialect diversity in these
countries is a direct function of the degree of centralization of political
power in a particular area. France, dominated for the last few centuries by
a single center of political and economic power, shows few sharp dialect
boundaries; transitions are gradual. Except in outlying areas, preexisting
differences seem to have been largely obliterated. In Italy, with a few
highly centralized city-states, dialect distribution follows the frontiers of
these states and boundaries are sharp. Germany, where political fragmen-
tation and small states were the rule, shows many small dialect areas, sep-
arated by relatively large transition zones, reflecting the lack of political
stability and the many territorial changes of recent history.
   Our understanding of the mechanisms by which social factors affect
language change has been clarified by Leonard Bloomfield's (l 933) dis-
cussion of speech communities, which argues that linguistic diversity in
human societies is directly related to density of communication or to the
amount of verbal interaction among speakers. Bloomfield writes:

Imagine a large chart with a dot for every speaker in the community and imagine
that every time any speakers uttered a sentence an arrow were drawn into the
chart printing from his dot to the dot representing each one of his hearers. At the
end of a given period of time, say 70 years, that chart would show us the density of
communication in the community. . . . Subgroups are separated by lines of
weakness in this net of oral communication.

  Whereas previous scholars had attempted to find direct correlations
between language and various environmental factors, Bloomfield here
postulates an intervening level of human communication which mediates
         4   I ntrod11ctio11

between linguistic and nonlinguistic phenomena. Political, economic, or
even geographical factors are no longer seen as directly reflected in
speech. They affect language only to the extent that they can be shown to
channel verbal communication among speakers, causing certain individu-
als to have more verbal contact with some than with others and thereby
influencing the rate at which innovations diffuse. Recent sociolinguistic
research leads us to question the relation between diffusion and mere den-
sity of communication as too simplistic, but the basic point about the ef-
fect of interaction on language structure is nevertheless valid and has
become a central issue in modern sociolinguistic research.
   Unfortunately, Bloomfield's suggestive remarks did not directly lead to
empirical investigations, perhaps because at the time they implied an
impossibly massive task. While there was widespread agreement about
the importance of extralinguistic factors in language change, efforts to rec-
oncile the linguistic findings of dialect surveys with the results of compar-
ative reconstruction based on manuscript sources aroused considerable
controversy. Although the issues are usually phrased in theoretical terms,
failure to resolve them is at least partly attributable to the imperfections of
field elicitation techniques and analytical tools. While scholars working
with literary texts were limited to relatively few written manuscripts for
each period, dialectologists sampled large numbers of speakers and were
faced with the additional .problem of reliability in transcription. For a
time, accuracy in the recording of interspeaker differences became a
major issue. One of the nineteenth-century pioneers of European dialec-
tology, Gillieron, fearing that scholars might permit their notions of lan-
guage history to influence their field recordings (Pop 1950), sought out
and trained as a fieldworker E. Edmond, a "na·ive" speaker of the lan-
guage whose main qualification was a good ear for sound and who, not
being a philologist, was presumably unencumbered by preconceived no-
tions about what he heard. Edmond received training only in phonetics,
and traveled in person from locality to locality interviewing local resi-
dents and setting down on paper just what he heard without attempting to
interpret it. Gillieron's approach set the pattern for dialect elicitation
procedures through the first third of the present century. Fieldwork was
viewed as a process of behavioral observation aimed at the production of
faithful records of natural speech. Interpretation and analysis were kept
separate from this elicitation stage, being deferred until the data were in.
     Geographical surveys, conducted on these principles, produced a
wealth of new and startling information on intracommunity variation in
pronounciation and word usage. Yet the larger the amount of data, the
greater the number of problems in evaluating the significance of what was
found. In spite of the basic insights gained into processes of change, the
very question of dialect borders and their relation to sound laws, the
                                                    Introduction   5

problem which initially had provided the impetus for these surveys, defied
solution. Since in many instances there was no basis for deciding which of
the many isoglosses that marked the transition from one region to another
was the actual boundary, some scholars maintained that each word had its
own history. Others attempted to group isoglosses into bundles of greater
and lesser importance so as to distinguish major from minor boundaries,
but there were no generally agreed upon criteria for such bundling
(Bloomfield 1933; Bach 1960). It seemed impossible to reconcile the
many interpersonal, interregional and social variations discovered in the
course of direct field surveys with the prevailing view of languages and
dialects as quasi-organic, internally uniform wholes. Clearly, objectivity
and accuracy in the recording of speech was not enough, no matter how
detailed and unbiased the data. What was needed was a theoretical basis
for judging the relative importance of the many potential indexes of
linguistic diversity


        Descriptive Linguistics

          Ferdinand de Saussure's (1916) distinction between speech
(parole) and language (langue) can be seen as an attempt to resolve the
dialectologists' dilemma. "Speech" refers to the actual sounds produced
by speakers, while "language" represents shared pattern, which is distinct
from what is actually said in somewhat the same way that Durkheim's
social facts are separate from behavior. Language structure is defined in
terms of the regularities derived from utterance sequences by a process of
analysis in which utterances are segmented into minimal segments and
these segments then classified by comparison with other similar elements.
The goal is to arrive at the minimum number of symbols necessary to ac-
count for observed articulatory characteristics and thus to eliminate
redundant features. The distinctive units derived in this way form a
system which is defined by the relationship of contrast among units and
which does not depend on the phonetic value of any one of them.
  With the notion of structure established, the emphasis in fieldwork
shifts from a search for greater accuracy to classification and contrastive
analysis. While detailed phonetic records continue to be important, they
are only the first step in linguistic research. Once recorded, the overtly
distinct or etic units must be converted into structurally distinct or emic
units (Pike 1964). The dialectologi;;ts' failure to agree on dialect and lan-
guage boundaries could thus be attributed to a tendency to emphasize sur-
face differences at the expense of structural relationship. Variations
recorded in fieldwork are of equal significance only if they alter the struc-
tural relationships among elements. While speech may change from place
        6   l ntroduction

to place and person to person, grammatical systems tend to be more
stable and less subject to change. With increased analytical refinement,
the notion of languages and dialects as discrete wholes seemed saved, or
at least salvageable. Henceforth it was argued that comparative state-
ments, generalizations about verbal behavior and linguistic change must
be based on emic analyses, not on raw field data. Homogeneity of lan-
guages and dialects was to be sought at the level of structural abstrac-
tion.
   Edward Sapir's article on the psychological reality of phonemes dramat-
 ically demonstrated the importance of the notion of linguistic structure
 for our understanding of human cognition. Using evidence from his own
efforts to train nai"ve natives to transcribe the sounds of their language,
Sapir shows that his subjects' phonetic accuracy is significantly affected
by the phonological system of their own native language. He explained
what at first hand seemed to be errors in transcription by demonstrating
 that these errors occur where structural and phonetic reality conflict, and
that the former takes precedence over the latter. Gillieron's quest for
 unbiased native transcribers is thus demonstrably futile. All human
 beings, informants and linguists alike, tend to prejudge or edit the sounds
 they hear. Linguistic structure is more than a mere scholarly construct.
 Structure constrains and potentially predicts the speaker's perception of
 verbal stimuli.
    Furthermore, since linguistic constraints operate largely below the
 level of consciousness, speakers themselves cannot be expected to pro-
 vide adequate explanations for their own verbal behavior. Information on
 language structure must be discovered indirectly by trained investigators.
 Emphasis on phonetic accuracy gave way to a search for techniques
 which would enable the linguist to overcome his own perceptual limita-
 tions so as to discover the system of a second language.
    The demand for better and more systematic analytical tools was es-
 pecially strong among the growing numbers of American anthropologists
 and linguists who, following the pioneering work of Gatchett, Boas, and
 others, had set out to record and preserve the many languages spoken by
 American Indians. Information on these languages at first derived in large
 part from word lists or text translations collected by missionaries or gov-
 ernment officials. As scholarly interest in tribal cultures deepened and
 linguistic skills increased, anthropologists began to record indigenous
 tales and myths as part of their regular ethnographic descriptions. A na-
 tive speaker, usually someone well versed in tribal traditions, would dic-
 tate texts which the investigator would then record phonetically as best he
 could. Even the most careful investigators, however, frequently failed to
  note important aspects of these tales and tended to misinterpret the
                                                      Introduction   7

speaker's utterances. It became evident that the systematic analysis of
linguistic form and of phonological and grammatical structures had to take
precedence over evaluation of content. Anthropological linguistic analy-
sis at the level of sound had to precede that at the higher levels:of syntax,
semantics, and culture.
   Among the most valuable accomplishments of this period is the devel-
opment of techniques which go beyond the mere recording of data to
enlist the native speaker's assistance in improving the validity of the
linguist's perception of sound. In order to determine if what was recorded
as different was actually different, or whether what was transcribed as
similar was actually similar, the method of variation within a frame was
employed. This method consists of contrasting like items varying only in
one feature. Thus, if an investigator wanted to test his transcription of the
English 'i' in 'bid,' he would search for other items in the speaker's vocab-
ulary, such as 'bed' and 'bead,' which shared the initial 'b' and the final 'd'
and differed only in the vowel. In this way, by keeping the elicitation
frame constant, he could concentrate all of his attention on one feature.
The method served both to discover new distinctions and as a way of ear
training or drill, helping the linguist to overcome the limitations imposed
by his own phonological system. Linguistic analysis became an integral
part of the fieldwork process. Moreover, since all speakers of a language
are equally affected by the subconscious perceptual constraints of the
system, structural linguists came to prefer intensive work with a single in-
formant to the dialectologist's language surveys. ;
   As anyone who has tried it can attest, the linguist-informant elicitation
procedure just described is not at all simple. Most na·ive speakers are
unaware of the formal features to which the linguist wishes them to attend
and think of language only in terms of meaning. The process thus involves
learning for both the linguist and the informant. Not any native can serve
as an informant. Linguists working in this tradition tend to search out
"good" speakers of the language, people with both the time and leisure to
work over a long period of time who had sufficient intelligence and verbal
ability to learn the required task (Samarin 1967). Statistically, their
sample is thus always biased.
   The interview setting, furthermore, is often formal and contrived and
almost always quite different from the settings within which people
usually interact. Some of the best-known work of the Sapir era was, in
fact, based on the speech of native speakers who had long been isolated
from other native speakers of the language. Sapir's informant on Nootka
was a student in a Pennyslvania college. Benjamin A. Whorf derived his
basic data on Hopi from an Indian resident of New York City (Hoijer
1954). Even those linguists who worked in or near actual communities
        8   Introduction

often found it necessary to do most of their elicitation in their own
quarters, away from the distracting noise of the native community.
   In spite of these limitations, however, the success of the new elicitation
procedures and the analytical techniques built upon them is well known.
As compared to earlier grammarians, descriptive linguists achieved a
unique degree of explicitness and replicability. Armed with the new meth-
odological tools, any two investigators making independent study of simi-
lar data could expect, with fair certainty, to arrive at similar or at least
comparable results.
   The new techniques of structural analysis earned for linguistics the rep-
utation of the most scientific of the social-science disciplines. But these
techniques proved to be quite limited in their application. Single isolated
utterances, rather than entire texts, became the chief units of study, with
meaning-and to some extent even syntax-frequently deferred for later
attention. Minor dialect variations, loan words, and other diffusionary phe-
nomena were also frequently dismissed as either marginal or not relevant
for formalization.
   The result was that much potentially important information on speech
behavior was lost in the process of converting etic into emic categories.
The notion of grammars as internally consistent systems, which must be
explained in their own terms without reference to outside information,
furthermore led to a reaction against earlier, premature, cross-language
generalizations. It became fashionable to emphasize the infinite variabil-
ity of phonemic and grammatical structures (Joos 1962).



        Generative Gram mar

          Fortunately, many of these limitations in scope proved to be
short-lived. During the 1950s, when some of the basic problems of
phonology and word morphology seemed settled, interest turned once
more to syntax and semantics. Concern with meaning in the makeup of
sentences led to some fundamental changes in notions of grammatical
structure, changes which were in some ways every bit as basic as those as-
sociated with the shift to descriptive linguistics. The key factor in these
theoretical developments was Chomsky's demonstration that mere tax-
onomic analysis and classification of phonological and morphological
units fails to explain some very basic grammatical relationships. Sentence
pairs like the by now well known "he is eager to please" and "He is easy
to please" are, Chomsky argues, overtly similar, yet native speakers of
English have no difficulty in recognizing that in the first item "he" refers
to the subject of "please," i.e., the one who does the pleasing, while in the
                                                    I 11trod11ctio11   9

second item "he" refers to the object, i.e., the one who is being pleased. In.
order to account for such underlying grammatical differences it is neces-
sary to recognize two distinct levels of syntactic structuring, a level of
"deep structure" dealing, among other things, with grammatical rela-
tionships (subject-object-verb, modifier-noun, etc.) and a level of surface
structure representing the overt arrangement of phonological forms in
actual sentences.
   The relationship of sound to meaning thus proves to be much more
complex than the earlier descriptivists had imagined. Segmentation and
analysis of utterance elements does not automatically lead to an under-
standing of the basic mechanism of language. The goal of linguistic
description therefore shifts from taxonomy of texts to grammar as a
theory of the speaker's "linguistic competence," i.e., a set of abstract
rules which account for his ability to generate and understand sentences.
   This change in research paradigm has some important consequences
for linguistic elicitation procedures. While much of the basic data for
grammatical analysis continues to be collected in linguist-informant inter-
view sessions of the type just described, the investigator, in order to prove
the speaker's ability, takes an increasingly active role in the elicitation
process. Rather than simply collecting speech forms and classifying them,
he seeks ways of challenging his informant by asking him to perform gram-
matical operations on sentences, i.e., changing sentences from active to
passive, positive to negative, singular to plural. He may himself test his
own understanding of grammatical rules by creating new sentences and
ask the informant to judge their grammaticality. The linguist thus ceases
to be an impartial observer and increasingly takes on the role of an active
experimenter.
   Whereas descriptive linguists had seen their work as being closely
related to the ethnographers' descriptions of foreign cultures, the genera-
tive grammarians' interest in grammar as a model of speakers' knowledge
or ability takes them into the realm of the human. Chomsky explicitly
characterizes linguistics as a branch of cognitive psychology. Generative
grammar has a profound effect on psychological theory. The notion of
linguistic competence clears the way for radically new approaches to cog-
nition (Miller, Galanter, and Pribham 1960) and has made significant con-
tributions to our understanding of human learning (Smith and Miller
 1966).
   It must be emphasized, however, that generative grammar studies
speakers as individuals, not as members of specific groups. Speakers' abil-
ities are dealt with at a very abstract level, with emphasis on those abili-
ties that are shared by all humans. Recent linguistic research has in fact
provided increasing evidence for the universality of basic grammatical
processes, and much attention has been devoted to the formalization of
        JO   /11trod11ction

universal grammatical rules (Chomsky and Halle 1968; Bach and Harms
1968). However, generative grammarians see the theory of grammars as
having little relevance as an explanation for the social basis of verbal
behavior (Hymes 1969).


        Typology of Language Situations

          Apart from grammatical theory, the last two decades have also
seen an expansion in the depth and range of empirical research on the
verbal habits of human groups. The Prague School linguists' writings on
diffusion and stylistics (Garvin 1969; Sebeok 1960), Weinreich ( 1953) and
Haugen's (1953) work on language contact as well as the British linguists'
studies of dialect and register (Halliday, McIntosh, and Strevens 1964)
had served to dispel the earlier structural preconceptions that formal anal-
 ysis is applicable only to internally homogeneous systems.
     Interest in problems of diversity grew as descriptive linguists working
 as ethnographers, second language teaching specialists, or government of-
 ficers began to come in close contact with the complex societies of Asia
 and Africa. In these societies it was by no means unusual to find several
 distinct and sometimes unrelated languages spoken in what for reasons of
 communication density and on political and administrative grounds would
 have to be regarded as a single community. Bilingualism, bidialectalism or
 diglossia, as Ferguson ( 1964a) has called it, seemed to be the rule rather
  than the exception. Since speakers may alternate among such distinct
  local speech varieties in much the same way and for the same com-
  municative ends as monolinguals select among styles of the same lan-
  guage, there is good justification for treating these communities as single
   multilingual or multidialectal speech communities.
      During the last two decades descriptive linguistic analysis has with
   increasing frequency been applied to such diverse groups and the re-
   sulting descriptions compared with independently collected cultural and
   social information. As a result, the scope of linguistic fieldwork has also
   been broadened. The growing political importance of hitherto almost un-
    known languages, the unsuspected intricacies of language distribution in
    the so-called developing nations, called attention to the lack of first-hand
    information on verbal communication practices. Linguists began to go
    beyond structur11l analysis of grammatical systems to concentrate directly
    on the language usage of human groups and to record how the varieties in
    questions were used in particular nations, geographical regions, market
     networks, etc. To this end it became necessary to account for the fact that
     the grammatical characteristics of a language variety are not always
     directly related to its communicative functions and that the same lan-
     guage may have quite different functions in different social groups.
                                                   lntroductio11   II

    A major sociolinguistic goal is to devise schemes for the comparative
study of language distribution which allow for the comparison of social
systems in terms of what languages are spoken, by how many people in
what contexts, and in terms of what the local attitudes to these languages
are. In one of the first attempts to deal with this issue Stewart ( 1962) clas-
sifies languages along two dimensions: inherent characteristics and com-
municative function. The first dimension distinguishes among such cat-
egories as (l) standard languages, with highly condified literary norms;
 (2) vernaculars, or spoken idioms having no literary style;(3) classical lan-
 guages, preserved only in texts; (4) creoles resulting from recent pidgini-
 zation processes, etc. The second category distinguishes between ( l)
 private or in-group media; (2) languages of wider communication used as
 scientific idioms; (3) trade languages, etc. Building on Stewart's classifica-
 tion, Ferguson ( 1966) has worked out a system of national language
  profiles capable of providing statistically codable information on language
  situations in nation states, comparable to the comparative sociologists
  cross-cultural studies of social variables.
     During the last few years several large-scale countrywide surveys have
  been undertaken in Africa by teams of linguists, psychologists, and other
  social scientists. In these surveys structural and historical analysis of
  local languages and dialects is supplemented by sociological survey infor-
  mation on language usage and attitudes to local languages and tests of
  mutual intelligibility and multilingual ,competence (Ferguson 1971;
   Prator 1970). Other interdisciplinary studies have focused on politics and
   language planning, the processes by which formerly low prestige vernacu-
   lars are transformed into standard languages. Haugen's (l 966) detailed
   history of this process in Norway shows how minor differences in
   grammar and pronunciation, which do not affect mutual intelligibility, have
    nevertheless caused major political problems over the last century. J. Das
    Gupta ( 1970), a political scientist, demonstrates that questions of lan-
    guage reform are intimately connected with pressure group politics and
    the competing aspirations of rival political power groups in modern India.


           Recent Social Dialect Studies

           A second major source of r~ew sociolinguistic data derives from
  the adaptation of dialect survey techniques to the study of language usage
  in modern urban settings. The linguistic survey of Scotland, which leans
  in part on J. R. Firth's notions of context of situation ( 1964), was the first
  to take account of the fact that wherever education is widespread local
  languages always coexist with the standard languages of the schools and
  of public affairs. Such standard language features were found to have
   quite different distribution patterns than local dialect features thus dem-
        12   lntrod11ctio11

onstrating the fact that speech variation is primarily a function of net-
works of social relationships (Barnes 1954) and is only indirectly depen-
dent on geography.
   In the United States, Labov's now classic study of English in New
York City (1966) while building on the work of the Linguistic Atlas of
the United States (Kurath 1941) makes a radical break with the cum-
bersome and often unreliable traditional dialect questionnaire interviews.
Rather than seeking out long-term local residents who are regarded as
"good dialect speakers" and surveying all significant aspects of their
speech as his predecessors had done, Labov begins by isolating a limited
number of locally current phonological and grammatical features, those
which are most frequent in everyday usage, most subject to interpersonal
and stylistic variation and which carry the greatest amount of social infor-
mation. He charts the distribution of these class-stratified features in a
sample of speakers sufficiently large to be representative of the area as a
whole, using elicitation techniques designed to record talk in a variety of
formal and informal contexts. When mapped along the dimensions of
stylistic variation and social identity of speakers, the distribution of
dialect variables proved to be a highly accurate index of both social class
and ethnic identity, as reliable as the best of the conventional sociological
survey measures.
   Labov's New York study has provided the impetus for a new tradition
of social dialectology in urban United States, much of it focused on the
speech of low-income minority groups: Blacks, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos,
etc. One aim is to provide linguistic information for curriculum reform in
urban primary schools. Typically these studies employ tape-recorded
questionnaire data with statistically representative population samples
and seek to relate the distribution of linguistic variables to the sociol-
ogist's measures of such factors as class, educational achievement, sex,
status, etc. (Wolfram 1969, Shuy, Wolfram, and Riley 1969).
   The recent surveys of bilingualism and bidialectalism have brought
about some important insights on attitudes to language and language ster-
eotypes. It has been shown that speakers regularly use dialect variables
as a basis for judging their interlocutors' social background, prestige and
 personality characteristics. Such conscious judgments are often indepen-
 dent of the speakers own subconscious use of similar variables in his own
natural speech, so that a speaker may downgrade others for using speech
features which he himself also employs. Wallace Lambert (1967) in his
 well-known "speech guise" exp"eriments has built on this phenomenon to
 develop some highly interesting measures of ethnic stereotypes.
   Historical problems arising from the findings of urban dialectologists
 have also led to a revival of the long dormant research on pidgin and
 creole languages. Many of the so-called nonstandard features of Afro-
                                                   l 11troductio11   13
                              )

American dialects have their source in Carribean Creoles, which in turn
seem to derive from West African pidgins. Attempts to explain some of the
historical processes involved here are leading to renewed questioning of
some of the basic assumptions regarding the interplay of linguistic and
social factors in borrowing, diffusion, and related types of linguistic
change (Hymes 1971 ).
   The above approaches to language and society, termed correlational
here because they seek to compare results from what are seen as two dis-
tinct types of enquiry, have served to establish the study of speech behav-
ior as an important subdiscipline of language study requiring field elicita-
tion procedures and analytical tools which go considerably beyond those of
linguistics. While the recent work in theoretical linguistics with its empha-
sis on formalization and its insistence on maintaining a strict distinction
between linguistic and nonlinguistic data has played a determining role in
shaping our understanding of grammatical rules, of the relation of
linguistic to cognitive processes, and in advancing our knowledge of lan-
guage history, speech community studies on the other hand are equally
essential for the study of ongoing processes of linguistic change for the
development of linguistic indices to the study of social phenomena and
for most areas of applied linguistics.
   In the realm of theory, speech community studies have shown that the
question of structural uniformity of languages is largely a matter of the
linguist's basic assumptions: the extent to which his analysis is abstracted
from everyday behavior and above all of the field elicitation procedures
he employs. When studied in sufficient detail, with field methods designed
to elicit speech in significant contexts, all speech communities are lingujs-
tically diverse and it can be shown that this diversity serves important
communicative functions in signaling interspeaker attitudes and in pro-
viding information about speakers' social identities. Speech communities
vary in the degree and in the nature of the linguistic relationship among in-
tracommunity variables and it is this relationship which is most respon-
sive to social change and most revealing of social information.
   Studies of the incidence of linguistic variables have thus opened up
many new avenues of research and have achieved some important
breakthroughs in the study of language usage and linguistic change, yet
important as they are, such correlational studies of linguistic and social
variables also leave unanswered a number of basic questions concerning
the nature of the relationship of linguistic to social facts.
   Why is it for example that in some societies, such as those of South and
Southeast Asia, major distinctions of language maintain themselves in
spite of centuries of intensive contact, while elsewhere as in Europe,
North and South Americas groups tend to give up their native tongues
after only a few generations? While it is true that in most cases bilingual-
ism leads to convergence or decrease in language distance among the
                                                                                ~I

        14   introduction

varieties concerned, a number of cases have been reported where the op-
posite seems to occur. Certain features of upper-class dialects in India,
for example, can be explained only on the assumption that they are
neologisms created in response to contact with other groups (Ramamijan
I 967). Similarly in the United States the increasing participation of
Blacks in public life seems to be leading to the creation of new local pres-
tige dialects which emphasize distinctness from standard English. How
do we explain the fact that language conflict between competing in-
tergroup aspirations and interethnic stereotypes are symbolized by what
to the linguist are almost trivial linguistic differences? There seems to be
almost no correlation between the linguistic distinctness of relevant vari-
ables and the social information they carry. The urban dialectologists' at-
titude studies moreover show that variable selection like the choice of
grammatical features is largely subconscious and is independent of overt
attitudes (see also Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). If this is the case and
if variable selection does communicate social information, then how and
in what way is this information communicated? What does the speaker
have to know to speak appropriately? Clearly these questions cannot be
answered by mere descriptions of linguistic variables. No more than the
structural linguists' taxonomic approach to phonem,es and morphemes
could account for the relations of meaning to sound. What is needed is a
more basic enquiry into the nature of communication processes, an
enquiry which extends the notion of linguistic competence to enquire into
the nature of communicative competence and the sociolinguistic rules
which enable us to use and produce appropriate speech.
   The remainder of this introduction will deal with some of the basic con-
cepts and elicitation techniques relevant to this type of enquiry as they are
described in this volume and from related writings (for a discussion of
 sociolinguistic rules see Ervin-Tripp, Chapter 7).


        Some Basic Sociolinguistic Concepts

         Before starting discussion of individual concepts it is necessary to
comment on the assumptions about social structure that these concepts
imply. Correlation sociolinguistics sees the relationship of linguistic to
social ·categories as a match between closely connected but nevertheless
independent systems. Language is regarded as a set of rules enabling
speakers to translate information from the outside world into sound.
Social categories are part of this outside world along with physical envi-
ronments, cultural artifacts, myths, etc. The model is one of social struc-
tures seen as fixed jural rules. When these rules are followed behavior is
said to be normal, failure to follow rules constitutes deviant behavior
(Schegloff, Chapter 12). Like physical objects such jural rules are
                                                   l ntrod11ctio11   15

 regarded as measurable by measures which are independent of com-
municative processes.
   An approach to social theory which is somewhat more in line with
sociolinguistic findings is the interactionist approach exibited in the writ-
ings of Goffman (1965), Garfinkel (1967), and Cicourel (1966). Noting
that most individuals in everyday situations have considerable freedom in
choosing which of several role relationships to enact, interactionists deny
the parallel between social and physical measurement. They point out
that information on social categories is obtainable only though language
and that sociological measurement therefore always involves both the in-
formant's and the investigator's perception of the categories that are being
measured. This perception is seen as subject to the same culturally deter-
mined cognitive processes that ethnographic semanticists (Frake,
Chapter 3) have discovered to be operative in human naming behavior.
Just as the meaning of words is always affected by context, social cat-
egories must be interpreted in terms of situational constraints.
   Concepts such as status and role are thus not permanent qualities of
speakers, instead they become abstract communicative symbols, some-
what like phonemes and morphemes. Like the latter they can be isolated
in the analyst's abstract description but they are always perceived in par-
ticular contexts. The division between social and linguistic categories is
thus obliterated. Communication is not governed by fixed social rules; it
is a two-step process in which the speaker first takes in stimuli from the
outside environment, evaluating and selecting from among them in the
light of his own cultural background, personal history, and what he knows
about his interlocutors. He then decides on the norms that apply to the sit-
uation at hand. These norms determine the speakers selection from
among the communicative options available for encoding his intent.
   In analyzing the factors entering into the selection of communicative
signs, it is important to distinguish between the perceptual clues and
background information that serve as the input to the selection process
and the actual stages that the analyst must postulate as part of his explan-
atory theory. The former are like the acoustic signals through which
speech is identified as speech, whereas the latter are equivalent to the
linguist's abstract grammatical categories. We assume that a speaker
begins with a certain communicative intent, conscious or subconsious. He
may want to ask for something specific: a favor, some information, or he
may want to persuade the other or simply talk to be sociable. One of his
first steps is to determine what if any limitations the environment imposes
on his choice of interactional stategies. Each culture classifies its sur-
roundings into discrete categories of environment (Blom and Gumperz,
Chapter 14), e.g., home, church, public square, classroom, etc. (see also
Fishman, Chapter 15). The speaker must scan his surroundings to
        16   I 11trod11ctio11

decide which classification applies. Simultaneously the speaker utilizes
his knowledge of his audiences and their possible social identities (Good-
enough 1965a) to determine what role to enact. Social rules, therefore, are
much like linguistic rules, they determine the actor's choice among cul-
turally available modes of action or strategies in accordance with the
constraints provided by communicative intent, setting, and identity
relationships.          ·   ·

       Speech Communities
         To the extent that speakers share knowledge of the com-
municative constraints and options governing a significant number of
social situations, they can be said to be members of the same speech com-
munity (Gumperz 1964; Hymes, Chapter I). Since such shared knowl-
edge depends on intensity of contact and on communication networks,
speech community boundaries tend to coincide with wider social units,
such as countries, tribes, religious or ethnic groupings. But this rela-
tionship is by no means .a one to one relationship. The adequacy of ex-
isting methods for delineating communities or other types of social
groupings has been a subject of considerable controversy in recent years
(Moerman I 968a; Barth I 969). It is not always possible to assume that a
functioning community exists merely from information about ethnic iden-
tity, territorial boundaries, or genetic relationship about language
varieties. The existence of shared values and of regular communication
patterns requires empirical investigation.
   As was mentioned above, members of the same speech community
need not all speak the same language nor use the same linguistic forms on
similar occasions. All that is required is that there be at least one language
in common and that rules governing basic communicative strategies be
shared so that speakers can decode the social meanings carried by alterna-
tive modes of communication. Ervin-Tripp (Chapter 7) and Albert
(Chapter 2) discuss relevant communication problems.
   While it is true that all speech communities are linguistically and
 socially diverse there is some relationship between the size and ecological
 characteristics of the communicating group and the nature of this diver-
sity. In small face to face groups, where speakers have detailed knowl-
edge of each others background and personal affairs, the signalling of
social information is less important than in large diverse industrial so-
cieties (Das Gupta and Gumperz 1969).

         Speech Events
      The basic unit for the analysis of verbal interaction in speech
communities is the speech event (discussed in detail in Hymes, Chapter
                                                    l ntroduction   17

 1). The speech event is to the analysis of verbal interaction what the sen-
tence is to grammar. When compared with the sentence it represents an
extension in size of the basic analytical unit from single utterances to
 stretches of utterances, as well as a shift in focus from emphasis on text to
emphasize on interaction. Speech event analysis focuses on the exchange
between speakers, i.e., how a speaker by his choice of topic and his choice
of linguistic variables adapts to other participants or to his environment
and how others in turn react to him. It is this emphasis on exchanges as
stressed in this volume by Dundes (Chapter 4), Mitchell Kernan (Chapter
5), Sacks (Chapter 1 l), and Schegloff (Chapter 12) that distinguishes the
interactional approach to sociolinguistics from the correlational study of
language and society, and from recent linguistic analyses of larger utter-
ance units (Halliday 1971; Hasan 1972) from the structural analysis of
myth (Barthes 1966) and the philosophers' discussion of speech acts
(Searle 1969). Speech event analysis derives its empirical validity from
the fact that, as Hymes (Chapter 11) and Albert (Chapter I l) have
pointed out, members of all societies recognize certain communicative
routines which they view as distinct wholes, separate from other types of
discourse, characterized by special rules of speech and nonverbal behav-
ior and often distinguishable by clearly recognizable opening and closing
sequences (Frake 1964a; Sacks, Chapter 11 ). Like the verbal duels
described by Dundes (Chapter 4) and the signifying, marking, and other
routines discussed by Mitchell-Kernan (Chapter 5) these units often carry
special names. Although speech events are popularly thought of as units
of content or activities, their social significance derives from the rela-
tionship they establish between certain types of content and certain types
of verbal routines. Following the usual linguistic practice such restrictions
can be analyzed along two dimensions: (1) the syntagmatic, involving the
temporal ordering of subunits, including allocation of rights to speaking,
and (2) the paradigmatic, referring to the selection among alternates
within a contextual frame.
   Just as sentences consist of ordered sequences of clauses, phrases, and
words, conversations subdivide into episodes (Watson and Potter 1962)
or discourse stages as Frake ( 1964a) has called them in his highly
revealing and suggestive analysis of ~:peech events in a Philippine tribal
group. In some societies, such as the Burundi described by Albert in
Chapter 2, verbal encounters begin with highly ritualized introductions,
where wording is relatively predetermined and they end with similarly
ritualized codas. In order to communicate effectively under these condi-
tions a speaker must know how to insert his message between such rit-
ualized sequences. A dramatic example of the communicative impor-
tance of order in conversation is provided by Schegloff (Chapter 12) in his
analysis of opening gambits in telephone conversations. Schegloff shows
how expectations about sequencing affect the interpretation of the social
        18   Introduction

significance of messages and can in turn be manipulated for com,
municative ends.
   Paradigmatic constraints govern selection among the constituent
factors in speech events described by Hymes (Chapter I) as well as selec,
tion among the linguistic variables which will be discussed below. Of par,
ticular interest for our understanding of social interaction processes is
Sacks' (Chapter 11) utilization of constraints on topic selection as a basis
for the semantic analysis of speakers' social categorization practices.
Sacks works out empirical procedures for determining the social cat-
egories which speakers use to regulate everday conversation and demon-
strates that social categories, at the interactional level at least, are in es-
sence semantic categories.
    Although speech event analysis has in large part focused on bounded,
readily isolable sequences, where the form of what is said and done is
relatively narrowly constrained, it is clear that not all interaction is
analyzable into such discrete and ritualized units. In everyday informal
interaction choice of linguistic form tends to be much less constrained and
 events often merge into one another without perceptible boundaries. But
 even in such informal situations the notion of speech events is important
 in determining the analysis of social meaning. Whenever particular Jin,
 guistic forms or other formal features of speaking are associated with par,
 ticular activities or with particular identity relationships, the formal fea,
 tures in question come to symbolize the cultural values attached to these
 environments. Such association between linguistic form and extralinguis,
 tic context can be used for communicative ends when, as in the cases of
 metaphorical code switching discussed by Blom and Gumperz (Chapter
  13) or in some of the instances of signifying discussed by Mitchell-Kernan
 (Chapter 5), contextually marked modes of speaking are used in other
 than their normal context. In these cases, values associated with the origi-
 nal context are mapped onto the new message. The association between
 linguistic forms and social meanings is part of a community's rules of
 speaking and is used to interpret social meanings even by those speakers
 who themselves do not ordinarily engage in the event in question. Thus
 speech events are cognitive phenomena that play an essential part in man-
 aging and interpreting everyday communications.



         Sociolinguistic Variables

       How are social meanings encoded linguistically'? Despite the
narrowing in the scope of linguistic analysis, the problem has never been
completely neglected. Sapir (1964) and his students (Haas 1964;
                                                     Introduction   19

 Newman 1964) are responsible for some highly interesting studies of
grammatical differences in the speech of men and women and expressive
 speech forms in non-Western societies. Differences between high and low
status styles in formal and informal speech have been described in con-
siderable detail, e.g., in Java (Geertz 1960), Korea and elsewhere (Howell
 1969). All these studies take as their point of departure structural data of
the type collected in the course of ordinary linguistic analysis. A more
general notion is the notion of sociolinguistic variable.
   Linguists concerned with language usage had frequently observed con-
 siderable variation in the pronunciation of phones in some words. Some
had explained this phenomena by postulating two alternating phonemic
 systems (Pike and Fries 1949). Others, noting the frequency with which
such variations occurred in linguistically diverse communities, preferred
to analyze them as shifts between allophones of phonemes within the
same system (Ferguson 1964a; Gumperz and Nairn 1960). Labov, using
elicitation techniques capable of generating stylistically differentiated
speech samples from large numbers of speakers, found similar phenom-
ena among monolingual residents in New York City. In particular he
noted that variations in the pronunciation of certain words were so exten-
sive as to cut across the articulatory range of what structural dialectol-
ogists using traditional field techniques had analyzed as distinct
phonemes. The vowel in 'bad,' e.g., could be homophonous with the [I·] in
'beer,' the [el in 'bear,' or the [re·] in 'bat.' Three distinct phonemes thus
seemed to collapse into a single articulatory range. Since there is no pho-
netic basis for isolating distinct articulation peaks within this range,
Labov argues that any attempt to deal with such shifts by postulating al-
ternation between distinct systems is without empirical foundation. They
must be treated as variables within a single system. He goes on to suggest
that the descreteness of phonemic systems is an artifact of the linguist's field
practice of abstracting rules from the speech of one or at most a few infor-
mants and of deemphasizing variation. Intensive study of speech behavior
should, in any one speech community, reveal both phonemes and vari-
ables. While phonemes are characterized by pronunciations clustering
around definable articulation peaks, variables are defined by a starting
point and a scale of values varying in a certain direction. The values along
such scales are conditioned by social factors in a manner analogous to
that in which phonological environments condition the phonetic realiza-
tions of allophones.
   Although the term variable, as used by Labov, applies primarily to pro-
nunciation phenomena, similar types of socially determined variation
have also been found in morphology and syntax and in the lexicon.
Fischer's (1958) study of the alternation between 'ing' and 'in' in such
English participles as 'going' and Geertz's ( 1960) analysis of high, middle,
                                                                           -1


        20   Introduction

and low speech levels in Javanese are cases in point. Particular attention
has been devoted to pronouns and terms of address such as the second
person singular tu and vous in French (Brown and Gilman 1960) or their
equivalents in Russian (Friedrich, Chapter 9), Korean, and Japanese
(Martin 1958; Howell 1967), which serve both as symbols of social struc-
ture and indexes of social change.
   Not all grammatical or lexical alternates in a language can automati-
cally be regarded as sociolinguistic variables, however. Since the same
language may be spoken in a number of socially distinct societies, it must
be demonstrated that selection among alternates carries social signifi-
cance for some groups of speakers. Furthermore, since social meaning is
always embedded in reference, it is useful to speak of sociolinguistic vari-
ables only when alternates are referentially equivalent, i.e., when they sig-
nify the same thing in some socially realistic speech event. Items with the
same or similar dictionary meanings may not be substitutable in actual
conversation and, per contra, some variables are semantically equivalent
only in specific contexts. An example will illustrate the problem. Few
would ordinarily claim that the words 'wife' and 'lady' are homonyms in _
English. Yet they are used as such in the following extract from an invita-
tion to an army social quoted in a recent issue of the San Francisco Ex-
aminer: "Officers with their ladies, enlisted men with their wives."
Referential equivalence here underlines social differences.
   The concept of the variable as discussed here is a general one, referring
to the selection of elements or strings of elements at any component or
level of linguistic structure (i.e., phonology, syntax, or lexicon). It is im-
portant to note that as long as the condition of referential equivalence in
some speech event is met, the values or alternates of such a variable need
not be confined to items normally considered part of the same language or
dialect. As it was just pointed out, in some societies the shift between
linguistically distinct codes may carry social meanings equivalent to the
selection of stylistic alternates in others. In his analysis of kinship termi-
nology in this volume Tyler (Chapter 8) finds it necessary to deal with
 Koya and Telugu forms as part of the same system. He sets up rules
which select among these alternates in terms of group membership of
speakers and addressee.


        Linguistic Repertoires

        The totality of linguistic resources (i.e., including both invariant
forms and variables) available to members of particular communities re-
fers to the linguistic repertoire of that community (Gumperz 1964b).
This concept is advanced to account for the fact that the linguist's gram-
matical analysis seldom matches verbal behavior of actual populations. A
                                                       Introduction    21

grammar of English, for example, deals with the linguistic competence of
speakers in a number of societies in England, in the United States, or even
in India, Africa, and elsewhere. Speakers in these societies differ not so
much in the way they speak English but in the fact that in their everyday
interaction they alternate between English and various other local dia-
lects or even languages. The concept of the repertoire enables us to cap-
ture these distinctions and thus uniquely describe the speech behavior of
a population in terms of their selection within particular clusters of
linguistic variants or sets of grammatical systems.
   The mere listing of variables is however not enough. It becomes neces-
sary to show how these component varieties are kept distinct in com-
munication. In the process of analysis, the boundaries between sub-
systems must be determined. There is evidence that variables tend to be
selected in co-occurrent clusters. In other words, the speaker's choice of
a particular value of a variable is always constrained by previous selec-
tions of variables. Thus, if a speaker varies between [i·], [d, and [re·] in
'bad' and, in addition, has alternates 'ain't,' 'is not,' 'going,' and 'goin' ,' he
is most likely to say, "This ain't gonna be [bi·d]," in some situations and,
"This is not going to be [bred]," in others. It would be unusual for him to
say, "This is not going to be [bi·d]." It is important to note that socio-
linguistic selection constraints which generate such co-occurrences cut
across the normal components of grammar (see Ervin-Tripp, Chapter 7;
Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). Their study, therefore, extends the
application of linguistic analysis to data not ordinarily considered a part of
grammar.
   The existence of sociolinguistic rules, selecting co-occurrent clusters of
variables, lends some empirical validity to notions such as code, variety,
dialect, or language. Whenever features in several components of
linguistic structure alternate simultaneously, we can speak of switching
among entire speech varieties rather than choice among individual fea-
tures. Note that when a language variety (whether dialect, style, language,
or whatever) is defined in this way (i.e., when the speech event is used as a
starting point, the unit in question emerges from the analysis), we need no
longer, as in the traditional field methods just discussed, start by asking in-
formants to speak in a particular style or dialect with the concurrent risk
that their attitudes will interfere with their response.


         The Genesis and Maintenance of
         Speech Differences

        How do different subgroups, co-resident within a larger social
unit, develop different ways of speaking? Bernstein's notion of code
explained in Chapter 17 represents one of the first attempts to deal with
        22   /11/rod11ction

this problem in cross-cultural terms. According to Bernstein, the key to
the acquisition and maintenance of different patterns is the socialization
process. While basic grammatical competence is innate, the network of
social relationships in which the individual interacts and the com-
municative tasks that these relationships entail ultimately shape the way
in which he uses language. Such patterns of language usage are referred to
as "linguistic codes" (see prefatory to Chapter 17). Once learned, a
linguistic code constrains the individual's perception of h:s and his in-
terlocutor's social role, just as lexical structures constrain the individuals
perception of features in the physical environment. Intrasocietal dif-
ferences in social relationships and especially in family role systems give
rise to different linguistic codes and thus to differences in role perception.
Following Bott ( 1957) a scalar distinction is made between closed or posi-
tional family role systems and open systems. Closed systems emphasize
communal values stressing status distinctions and propriety in speech and
lead to "restricted codes," a way of language usage which is highly
formulaic. Open or person-oriented role systems, on the other hand,
emphasize individual creativity, and ability to "take the role of the other"
and lead to elaborated codes which are more suited to the transmission of
new information and more acceptable to novel situations.
    Bernstein's earlier largely exploratory work has led to some highly
 interesting studies in the area of socialization and has pioneered the use of
 linguistic indices to the study of socialization and social control (Cook
 1972). Several linguistic analyses of interviews with mothers and children
 have revealed some important social differences in the use of sentence
 connectives, noun modifiers, deictic pronouns, etc. (Turner and Mohan
  1971; Hassan 1972). In the present state of our knowledge there is, how-
 ever, no evidence to assume that the distinction between restricted and
 elaborated codes corresponds to class-related differences in verbal skills.
 On the contrary, Labov (1969) using elicitation techniques which relied
 heavily on natural conversation and on his knowledge of culture specific
 speech events such as "sounding" found that the very children who in
 school or in interviews with strangers tend to speak only in short, seem-
 ingly truncated utterances of the type usually characterized as instances
 of restricted codes, show themselves to be highly creative and effective
 communicators when interviewed in settings which they perceive as cul-
 turally realistic or when their natural interaction with peers is recorded.
    An alternative explanation of the issues raised by the distinction
 between elaborated and restricted codes, one which relates the problem
 to more basic communication processes is suggested by Garfinkel's
 (Chapter I 0) concept of indexicality (see Cicourel 1968 for a discussion
 of this concept in relation to socialization). Indexicality refers to the fact
 that the interpretation of communicative acts always without exception
                                                    lntroductio11   23

depends upon the speakers background knowledge. For this reason the
spoken message is always an imperfect realization of what was in the
minds of the speakers and hearers. Background assumptioned may be sig-
naled as part of the message through choice of words, speech style or
stress and intonation; or they may be implicit in the actors' view of the
speech event. Seen from this point of view, elaboration and restriction are
simply two different modes of signaling or calling upon background
knowledge. Elaborated messages are messages where the maximum com-
munication load is carried by words; restricted messages, on the other
hand, rely on other nonlexical communicative devices (e.g., code
switching, stress, intonation, etc.). The greater the reliance on words, the
more accessible the message is to others who do not share similar speak-
ers' knowledge or personal background. In many written and spoken
formal (elaborated) communications an interpretation at the level of dic-
tionary meanings of words is adequate. Elaborated codes in this sense are
thus more suited for cross-cultural communication and are typically
taught in school systems. The fact that so much of literature and art relies
on nondiscursive devices suggests that elaborated codes are not always
the most effective means of communication.


        Some Implications for Fieldwork

         Although the preceding discussion of sociolinguistic concepts
does not give a complete theory, it does however carry some clear
implications for what is or is not adequate fieldwork. Throughout this dis-
cussion evidence has been presented for the close interdependence
between linguistic data and elicitation procedures. Since language choice
is largely subconscious, and since the signalling of social information is
crucially dependent on context, the study of social meaning requires field-
work techniques capable of challenging the verbal skills employed by
speakers in everyday interaction. It is evident that the linguist informant
method described earlier is riot in itself adequate for this task. Single
person informant interviews are essential starting points for the discovery
of basic grammatical information; yet, once this information is known,
such methods seem hardly suitable for eliciting natural conversations.
The very artificiality of settings where speech samples must be produced
on demand, apart from the customary circles of friends and family, is
hardly likely to generate the .subtleties in selection of speech forms, shifts
in formality, intimacy, etc. by which members categorize each other in
every day interaction. Even a highly skilled writer has difficulty in
reproducing natural conversations. Certainly an ordinary informant
cannot be expected to do it. At best the linguistic informant interview
        24   Introduction

yields samples of a single speech style, generally relatively formal speech.
The setting in such interviews tends to reduce to a minimum the very type
of linguistic devices by which social meaning is conveyed in normal in-
teraction.
    The common linguist's practice of asking speakers to speak in a particu-
lar language or dialect, furthermore, implies the assumption that the
delimitation of such entities presents no elicitation problems, and that
both linguists and informants agree on what forms should be omitted from
consideration and what forms included. This practice begs the question.
Variants are not always assigned to particular languages on the basis of
their grammatical characteristics alone. Religion, ethnicity, socio-
economic position of speaker and similar social criteria may play a more
important role than a grammatical similarity or difference (Ferguson and
Gumperz 1959). Since in such a diverse community the linguist's request
to a speaker to produce particular forms of languages may be interpreted
by speakers as a request to behave in a certain way (i.e., to be formal or
informal), or to emphasize otherwise some aspect of his social personal-
ity, the social implications of linguistic forms thus elicited may seriously
affect the validity of the linguist's analysis, for in effect, the question has
filtered out significant aspects of the potential corpus of data.
    The definition of sociolinguistic variables in terms of referentially
equivalent units in some natural speech event defines a basic task of
sociolinguistic fieldwork: to generate socially conditioned variations in
speakers natural performances. The basic elicitation method can be
regarded as an extension of the linguist's practice of studying the same
 linguistic forms in different linguistic environments. What is constant here
 is the basic message and what is varied is the social relationship. The
 search for natural speech or "good" language is therefore abandoned in
favor of efforts to sample significantly different speech events. Such
sampling of speech in a representative range of events clearly requires
 some knowledge of the rules of speaking discussed by Hymes (Chapter
  I). Mere behavioristic observation of daily activities is not enough. Albert
 (Chapter 2) basing herself on her own analysis of Barundi speech lists in
 detail some of the difficulties the observer may encounter and suggests
 field procedures for learning rules of speaking. Yet it would be premature
 to demand that all sociolinguistic analyses start with a complete taxonomy
 of speech events in particular societies. This is a major task in itself,
 equivalent to furnishing a description of a whole culture. A more practical
 goal would be to begin with a significant and representative range of dif-
 ferent contexts. But even for this task it is necessary to find some consis-
 tent criteria of defining or singling out particular contexts.
     Frake (Chapter 3) adapts the ethnoscientist's analysis of native termi-
 nological systems to the definition of speech events (e.g., litigants) among
                                                    Introduction   25

the Yakan. Albert (Chapter 2) points out that ritual events-ceremonies,
formal greetings, and speech making-are more sharply defined, and thus
more easily separable from other events, than everyday happenings.
Labov achieves contrast in setting by contrasting formal interview ses-
sions in which speakers are asked to perform such tasks as reading word
lists or reciting paradigms with more natural conversations. In these con-
versations he generates further variations by alternately involving his re-
spondents in neutral, emotionally charged, or humous subjects. Blom and
Gumperz utilize the anthropologist's ethnographic data to organize local
discussion groups with different social characteristics in order to compare
their treatments of similar conversational topics. Bernstein's more recent
studies adopt the social psychologist's role-play technique to test the
speaker's ability to respond to a variety of communicative tasks.
   The need to generate natural speech frequently makes it necessary for
the investigator to concentrate on group interviews rather than working
with single individuals. The role of the interviewer in such groups is sim-
ply to act as an observer who may introduce a topic, but who then allows
group processes to determine further treatment of the topic. Although it
would seem difficult to induce people to speak normally while a tape
recorder is operating, it has been found that when speakers are inter-
viewed in groups, the social obligations among members frequently lead
them to disregard the recording instrument and to behave as if they were
unobserved.
   Obviously, the investigator's skill in managing interaction is an impor-
tant factor in sociolinguistic elicitation. If the investigator wishes to vary
social stimuli, he must be able to predict which stimulus will produce what
reaction. The most successful investigators are those who can utilize their
own background knowledge of the culture in elicitation. It is not enough,
as some behaviorally oriented students of natural speech suggest, simply
to observe performances. The investigator must find ways of testing the
speakers' ability to vary their performances. Hence his success depends
on his knowledge of sociolinguistic rules.
                                                                                 --1




        Plan of the Book
          This book has three major divisions. Each part addresses itself
to a question at the forefront of sociolinguistic research. Part I is con-
cerned with how ways of speaking are shaped by both cultural values and
social institutions. Part 2 is concerned with how the rules of conversation
and address can be discovered and adequately stated. Part 3 is concerned
with how varieties of language arise and come to be appropriate to specific
social and cultural contexts-why they persist, why they change, and why
they disappear.
   The three divisions of the book are not independent, nor can they be.
Aspects of the structure and. meaning of speech h~ve a unity such that
focus on one aspect involves consideration of each of the others. To ask
about the meaning of a pattern of speech (I) involves being able to rec-
ognize an instance of it, that is, to describe its structure. The structure of
speech in a given segment of interaction (2) is not fully intelligible apart
from the context of values and institutions in which it is embedded. Each
of these aspects is intimately bound up with the genesis, maintenance, and
change of language varieties or codes (3). A topical index has been pro-
vided to help trace the connections among parts of the book.
   If the three divisions of the book form an integrated whole, the different
questions along which major divisions of the book are organized reflect
somewhat different sources of interest in the emerging field of socio-
linguistics. The first major division indicates the place of speech patterns
in the nexus of the cultural or social institution in which it occurs. The
second major division of the book focuses on discovery and descriptive
methods used in current sociolinguistic analysis. The third major division
focuses on variance in linguistic codes in terms of their genesis, main-
tenance, and change. It is, in effect, a synthesis of the first two major
divisions.
   In Part 1, Hymes suggests a general frame of reference for ethno-
graphic description and comparison. In addition, the volume includes, as
                                     26
                                                Plan of the Book    27

 an appendix, a short field guide by Darnell and Sherzer, listing some basic
 questions relevant for comparative study. Hymes shows the relationship
 of the ethnographic approach to other work in the first section and in the
 sections which follow. Albert provides a sensitive perspective on the
 significance of speech in one particular society. Her work serves as a
 useful datum point for a number of the articles which follow. In a similar
 vein, Frake analyzes an institution which, he observes, "is manifested
 almost exclusively by one kind of behavior, talk." He carefully analyzes
 native categories for kinds of talk, and for settings in which they occur.
 He concludes with an instructive contrast between these features in two
 cultures. Dundes and his collaborators provide a vivid analysis of a par-
 ticular speech genre, a verbal form of social strategy. This strategy, verbal
 dueling, is important throughout much of the world. Mitchell-Kernan
 discusses several common Afro-American speech acts. By means of skill-
 fully selected examples from everyday interaction, she shows how rhetor-
 ical devices reflecting these events are used to enrich conversation and to
 convey subtle nuances of meaning. Roberts and Forman are also con-
 cerned with explaining the presence or absence of a genre in a particular
 society, and with what motivates differential involvement in it. The par-
 ticular value of this study, apart from the fact that it describes a particular
 case, is its use of a comparative cross-cultural method combined with
analysis of individual variation in our society, in terms of a model of the
 role of verbal genres, such as riddling, in socialization. Thus, Part I is
designed to provide the reader with a sense of speech as part of larger
cultural patterns of behavior, using data drawn from a broad geographical
sphere-Africa, Turkey, the Philippines, and the United States.
    While Part I may strike many linguists as ethnographic, Part 2 may
 strike many social scientists as primarily of concern to linguists. In this
section, as in the first, however, the analysis is rooted in social science:
Ervin-Tripp is a social psychologist, Tyler and Friedrich are anthro-
 pologists, Garfinkel, Sacks, and Schegloff are sociologists. Birdwhistell is
an anthropologist with training in social psychiatry and, like many of the
other contributors, with training in linguistics as well.
    Studies of the sort in Part 2 are, and must be, concerned, like those in
Part I, with the kinds of settings of speech events, with what underlies
and brings participants into them, as well as with the difficulties that are
involved in providing accounts of the events themselves. What may make
the studies in Part 2 seem instances of "linguistic" rather than "social
science" subjects of inquiry is that they point the way toward a formal,
that is, explicit, account of some specific segment of behavior. In a variety
of ways such studies reflect the fact that speech manifests kinds of knowl-
edge and abilities (kinds of competence), largely outside the range of
immediate individual awareness, that can be characterized just as can the
        28   Plan of the Book

competence that underlies language proper. Such analysis may be said to
extend the notion of "rule-governed creativity" (cf. Chomsky 1966, 1968)
to speech-from the structure of sentences to the structure of their use.
   The charter for this generalization can in fact be found in the work of a
linguist who was an anthropologist, Sapir, and an anthropologist who was
something of a linguist, Malinowski, both of whom came to be concerned
with "living speech" (Sapir I 949a:592-593; Malinowski 1964:63). Sapir
recognized the continuity of linguistic form with the patterning of all
cultural behavior (1949c). Malinowski viewed language as a mode of
action, not merely as a countersign of thought (1935). In this synthesis of
language, thought, and behavior, the goals of leading schools of linguistic
theory and ethnography converge (Goodenough 1964).
    In Part 2 Ervin-Tripp provides the first general survey of kinds of rules
and forms of statement in sociolinguistic study of interaction. Her paper
is an invaluable introduction to the subject, and embodies original re-
search as well. Tyler takes a subject central to social life and social
anthropology, kinship; and whereas anthropological formal analysis of
kinship has tended to neglect context just as much as linguistic analysis
of sentences, Tyler shows the necessity and possibility of taking context
formally into account. Friedrich uses interaction as described in Russian
novels to show the subtlety and power of a grammatical choice when,
although in itself a detail, it is deeply embedded in social life.
    Garfinkel sketches a central concern of the movement of which he is
the pioneer and which is gaining increasing recognition in modern soci-
ology: to recognize the data of verbal interaction as neither trivial nor
 "degenerate" but rather as an artful accomplishment, one with profound
 import for understanding man's nature. Developing this theme, Sacks
 seeks to make us see everyday, taken-for-granted behavior as presuppos-
 ing complex rules of interpretation, as being something to wonder at and
 wish to explain. He suggests that children early sense and make skillful
 use of some of these rules. Schegloff, taking data that might have been
 treated only statistically or by content analysis, attends strictly to its
 formal structure. Finding an exception to a generalization that accounts
 for 99 percent of the cases, he does not dismiss it, but discovers a deeper
 generalization. Schegloff's rules govern nonverbal as well as verbal be-
 havior. Birdwhistell shows that nonverbal signals can countermand or
 repl~ce speech; from that standpoint, he demonstrates in precise detail
 that the study of speech in interaction is part of the study of communica-
 tive conduct as a whole.
    Between Parts 1 and 2, we noted, there is an apparent difference of
 scale; the significance of the genres dealt with in 1 is immediately ap-
 parent, and in dealing with them one can learn something without techni-
 cal analysis of actual speech. One lesson of the kind of work represented
                                                 Plan of the Book    29

in Part 2, however, is that it is in the nature of communicative interaction
for matters of great significance to be presupposed or expressed in slight
cues. Language-physically a matter of little marks and displacements of
air-is itself an example. The more that patterns and meanings of be-
 havior come to be shared, the more likely is it that bits of behavior, seem-
ingly trivial or unnoticed, are for the persons involved not trivial but eco-
 nomical. Our present understanding of the complexity, rapidity, and
 power of the human brain makes it no surprise that much of communica-
 tive behavior must be understood on the analogy of an improvised motet
or fugue.
    Part 3 takes up a subject initially linguistic, but recast in the larger con-
text that the preceding sections provide. The multiplicity of forms of
speech has interested mankind from earliest times. For much of human
history the most salient form of change has been that which has produced
the several thousand different languages now found in the world; some of
the great achievements of historical lingui~tics have been in discovering
common ancestors and past contacts among languages now separate, and
in establishing the methods by which this could be done. Folk explana-
tions of diversity have been replaced with work based on the simple yet
fundamental fact that language changes, inevitably and continually, and
that, to the extent that communities become separate, subsequent changes
in each, being independent of those in the other, eventually will produce
distinct forms of speech. Recent work in theoretical linguistics has added
depth of understanding of the form of change, and of ways in which it may
depend upon common, even universal, properties of linguistic structures.
Beyond recognition of the fact of change, however, lies the question of its
cause and mechanism. Explanation has been sought in the speech organs,
habits of articulation, the brain, the patterning of language itself-opera-
tive perhaps in terms of a cumulative drift, a functional gap, or the dis-
continuity between generations. The facts of "language history"-the
conquest, extinction, or migration of populations, contact with other
languages and new environments-causing new needs and providing
new models, have, of course, been taken into account; but seldom has
explanation been sought in the matrix of social relationships in which a
language is used. Such relationships have been seen as a factor contrib-
uting to the diffusion of :::hanges but not usually as a source of change.
Change, like structure, has usually been considered something to be ex-
plained within linguistics itself.
   Change, moreover, has been conceived essentially as change with re-
spect to some one form or variety of a language, so far as explicit theory
has been concerned, seldom as change in the functional role of a language.
Seldom has persistence been seen as the other side of the coin, and
equally in need of explanation. Rarely have modern linguists conceived
        30   Plan of the Book

the locus of persistence and change as the repertoire of a community-as
lying in the relations among, and constituency of, a set of forms of speech.
The existence of a set of alternative forms of speech is characteristic of
every community, however, and by far the dominant process of change,
today and for the future, is not diversification of whole languages (genetic
diversification will rarely, if ever, occur again), but differentiation of the
resources of languages into new functional varieties, together with the
integration of different languages into new functional unities-for ex-
ample, the development of new standardized varieties from former trade
argots or pidgins, on the one hand, and specialization and revitalization of
the role of surviving vernaculars, on the other, in new nations.
   In this book we can broach only the issues most closely tied to social
interaction. An essential step is to get at the social meaning of alternative
forms of speech. Blom and Gumperz investigate the relation between a
standard and a local dialect, and show the meaning of each to depend
upon participation in different types of social relationships. Their ap-
proach provides a quite general way of studying any choice of form of
speech, whether whole language, dialect, or style. Notice that it shows (as
does Labov's work) that usage may be as much out of awareness as gram-
matical structure; self-report by informants would not suffice. Fishman
seeks to relate fine-grained study of interaction to study of larger social
systems through the concept of domains of lan~uage choice. He provides
information on a situation in which an immigrant group alternately uses
two wholly distinct languages, and where, situation and participants and
even topic sometimes remaining constant, the expressive import of the
choice is made manifest.
   Both Barth and Bernstein deal with cases of shift from one form of
speech to another, Barth between distinct ethnic groups, Bernstein within
a single society. Barth succinctly analyzes a case in which neither gross
"prestige" nor demonstrated dominance-the usual catchall explana-
tions-can account for change of language and of linguistic boundaries.
Explanation must be sought in the choices available within two contrast-
ing types of social system and in the relationships of power and authority
internal to the ethnic groups in question.
   Bernstein argues that contrasting types of social interaction-partic-
ularly, of social control within the family-may introduce a boundary
within a single society, by giving rise to distinct "linguistic codes" that
express and perpetuate distinct orientations toward social reality. Where
 Blom and Gumperz dealt with maintenance of forms of speech, and Barth
with shift from one to another, Bernstein deals with their genesis. Where
social scientists, Durkheim and others, have sometimes seen correlations
between type of society and type of language, Bernstein seeks to explain
the mechanism by which such a link could come about, relating division of
                                                Plan of the Book   31

 labor, class structure, family role systems, social control, and speech in a
 general theory. Nowhere is it more explicit that the unit of ordinary
 linguistic work, the named language, "English" or the like, is inadequate
 as a basis for understanding the meaning of language in social life. When,
 as in the case of Bernstein's work, the phonology, lexicon, and grammar
 are essentially the same from the standpoint of ordinary linguistic anal-
 ysis, the need for new units and modes of description is evident.
    Bernstein here develops his concepts of elaborated and restricted
 codes. Notice that they are more complex than the simple dichotomy they
 are usually taken to be. The same person may command more than one,
 and there may be varieties within each type, differing as to primary
 orientation toward persons or objects. Bernstein's suggestions as to the
 implications of these concepts for education are controversial (he him-
 self has been critical of their application to the American situation), but
 the body of work on which they are based remains the most substantial
 of any so far.
    Fischer shows that a difference between two related languages in a
 phonological detail (and also perhaps in other features) fits with a general
contrast in outlook, social structure, and the role of speech between the
 two societies. Thus he shows the outcome, aided by geographical separa-
tion, of what may have begun as differential use of common linguistic
means. In addition, he suggests that the feature with regard to which the
languages differ has a universal expressive value, thus implying the pos-
sibility of inferring from phonology something of the orientation of the
social worlds languages occupy. Like Bernstein and Labov, Fischer sees
a social origin for linguistic change; again like both, his conception of such
origin requires a description of language use as well as language structure.
   Where Fischer deals with a stylistic feature, Labov demonstrates that
the central phonological systems of languages change in ways that cannot
be explained apart from social motivation. Linguists have tended to see
social factors as secondary, contributing to the diffusion of changes whose
source must be sought elsewhere. Labov shows social factors to be pri-
mary, and argues that the fact of inevitable, continual change in language
is due to a further fact, namely, that at any given time some features of
language are variables with social meaning, and differentially selected for
use accordingly. Thus, whereas some sociolinguistic research requires
linguists to add to the r,;cope of their interests, commonly, it might be felt,
to choose to "go beyond language," Labov shows that to explain a matter
already regarded as part of linguistics-sound change-one must go out-
side language, to the social matrix of speech with which, in one way or
another, all the contributions to this book are concerned.
part one




   ETHNOGRAPHIC
      DESCRIPTION
           AND
     EXPLANATION
          1
          Models of the Interaction
          of Language and Social Life                               1


          DELL HYMES




          Dell Hymes is Professor of Anthropology at the Univer-
          sity of Pennsylvania. He received his B.A. in anthro-
          pology and literature from Reed College, and his Ph.D.
          in linguistics from Indiana University. He has taught at
          Harvard and the University of California at Berkeley,
          and has lectured at Cambridge University. He has done
          fieldwork among American Indians of the northwest
          coast. His research interests include ethnography of
          speaking, verbal art, the history of linguistics and an-
          thropology, and historical linguistics. This chapter has
          evolved from a paper published in 1967 (Macnamara
          1967).
             To claim that sociolinguistics is a distinct field is to
          imply that there are both problems and types oflinguistic
          data that have not been adequately considered before.
          Language, after all, is all around us, and its description is
          among the oldest of man's scientific enterprises. What
          does it mean to do a description of a sociolinguistic sys-
          tem, and how does this differ from doing a grammar of a
          language or dialect, mapping dialect boundaries, deter-
          mining historical relationships, studying rules of rhetoric

  1 Revised from Hymes 1967, particularly elaborating the treatment of taxonomy and re-

casting the presentation of components of speaking. Many of the examples come from an
examination of ethnographic data undertaken with support of the culture of Schools pro-
gram of the Office of Education in 1966-1967. I am greatly indebted to Regna Darnell,
Helen Hogan, Elinor Keenan, Susan Philips, Sheila Seitel, Joel Sherzer, K. M. Tiwary, and
my wife, Virginia, for their participation in that work. My own thinking on the general
problem has benefited from a small grant from the National Institute of Mental Health in
spring 1968. I thank Meyer Fortes, Edmund Leach andJ. L. M. Trim for discussion of some
of these problems, and many kindnesses, while a visiting fellow at Clare Hall, Cambridge, in
1968-1969.

                                            35
36   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

and literary style, or analyzing the speech varieties char-
acteristic of the various ethnic groups or social classes
coresident in a particular region? Which of the many
aspects of verbal behavior do we observe, and what con-
cepts do we utilize in classifying what we observe to
insure comparability of data? This chapter addresses
itself to these issues. It is general in scope in that it sug-
gests criteria for gathering information on rules of speak-
ing rather than focusing on a particular social group. It is
thus in a sense complementary to the chapters by Ervin-
Tripp (Chapter 7), Bernstein (Chapter 17), and Garfinkel
(Chapter 10), which deal with similarly general problems
of theory and analysis.
   Rules of speaki11g are the ways in which speakers as-
sociate particular modes of speaking, topics or message
forms, with particular settings and activities. The con-
cern is, first of all, with the attitudes and knowledge of the
 members of the community, as manifest in contrasts in
native terminologies and conduct. Except for occasional
references in ethnographies or grammatical descriptions
 of certain linguistically distinct special pari'ances (such as
Vedic recitation styles, African praise singing, thieves
 argots, and the like) there is almost no systematic infor-
 mation on such matters. What ethnographic information
we have suggests considerable cross-cultural variation in
 rules of speaking (see Albert, Chapter 2; Frake, Chapter
 3; Philips 1970). Yet the range of this variation and its
 relation to social structure and linguistic form is as yet
 unknown. What is needed at this stage are new types of
 discovery procedures and concepts designed to facilitate
 the empirical collection of data.
    Since one human groups's theories of speaking can
 best be isolated by contrast with those of another, the
 comparative approach to fieldwork is probably the most
 useful at this stage. Note, however, that the basic unit of
 analysis is a community or group rather than a language
 or dialect. Recent work with Afro-American speech
 groups in the urban United States highlights the impor-
 tance of this distinction. Linguistically, urban Afro-
 American dialects (at least those of the urban northern
 United States) do not differ greatly from standard En-
 glish. Yet Afro-American speakers differ radically from
 their white neighbors by the cultural emphasis they place
  Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   37

 on speech acts such as "signifying," "sounding,"
 "toasts," etc. Such speech acts, until quite recently,
 were almost unknown in the community at large, and the
 average white educator's ignorance of relevant rules of
 speaking has been responsible for perpetuating some
 rather tragic misconceptions about lower-class black
 children's low linguistic competence. Labov and his
 colleagues ( 1968) have shown that if, rather than studying
 black teen-agers' responses to psycholinguistic tests
 (which, after all, are quite unfamiliar and at times seem
 threatening to ghetto children), one studies performance
 in these typically black speech acts, children who in
 formal interviews seem almost nonverbal in fact, prove to
 be highly skilled in the use of English.
    Emphasis on human groups rather than grammar per se
 does not mean a neglect of careful linguistic analysis.
 Both linguists and sociolinguists deal with linguistic
 form, but they do so from different perspectives. As
 Hymes puts it, "A linguistic sign is a relation between
 linguistic form and a linguistic value. A sociolinguistic
 feature is a relation between a form and a sociolinguistic
 value." Whereas linguists deal with dictionary meanings
 (denotation, or meaning abstracted from context), socio-
linguists deal with what Sacks calls situated meaning
(meaning mediated and sometimes transformed by rules
of speaking) which reflects speakers attitudes to each
other, and to their topics. [Sacks (see Chapter 11) pro-
vides one analysis of the process by which such meanings
are communicated.] Sociolinguistic value is discussed
either directly or indirectly in several chapters (Friedrich,
Chapter 9; Fischer, Chapter 18; Labov, Chapter 19).
    Note also Hymes' distinction between the marked or
ordinary value of sociolinguistic features and the un-
marked value of sociolinguistic features. This is analyzed
formally in Geoghegan's study of address rules among
the Samal of the southern Philippines ( 1970).
   Although the term ethnography of speaking has only
begun to gain currency, a number of studies recently
completed, or still in progress, give evidence of growing
scholarly interest. The field elicitation problems raised in
the present paper are dealt with explicitely in Darnell and
Sherzer's outline guide for the ethnographic study of
speech use (Appendix), which lists some of the basic
       38   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

        questions to be covered by ethnographers interested in
        speech behavior. "A Field Manual for the Cross-Cultural
        Study of the Acquisition of Communicative Compe-
        tence" (Slobin et al. 1967) also deals with relevant ques-
        tions. Tanner (1967), Hogan (1967), Sankoff (1968), and
        Seitel (1969) provide additional related readings.


           Diversity of speech has been singled out as the hallmark of socio-
linguistics. Of this two things should be said. Underlying the diversity of
speech within communities and in the conduct of individuals are sys-
tematic relations, relations that, just as social and grammatical structure,
can be the object of qualitative inquiry. A long-standing failure to recog-
nize and act on this fact puts many now in the position of wishing to apply
a basic science that does not yet exist.
    Diversity of speech presents itself as a problem in many sectors of
life-education, national development, transcultural communication.
When those concerned with such problems seek scientific cooperation,
 they must often be disappointed. There is as yet no body of systematic
 knowledge and theory. There is not even agreement on a mode of descrip-
 tion of language in interaction with social life, one which, being explicit
 and of standard form, could facilitate development of knowledge and
 theory through studies that are full and comparable. There is not even
 agr~ement on the desirability or necessity of such a mode of description.
     Bilingual or bidialectal phenomena have been the main focus of the
 interest that has been shown. Yet bilingualism is not in itself an adequate
 basis for a model or theory of the interaction of language and social life.
 From the standpoint of such a model or theory, bilingualism is neither a
 unitary phenomenon nor autonomous. The fact that two languages are
  present in a community or are part of a person's communicative compe-
 tence is compatible with a variety of underlying functional (social) rela-
 tionships. Conversely, distinct languages need not be present for the
 underlying relationships to find expression.
     Bilingualism par excellence (e.g., French and English in Canada, Welsh
 and English in North Wales, Russian and French among prerevolutionary
  Russian nobility) is a salient, special case of the general phenomenon of
  linguistic repertoire. No normal person, and no normal community, is
  limited to a single way of speaking, to an unchanging monotony that
  would preclude indication ofrespect, insolence, mock seriousness, humor,
  role distance, and intimacy by switching from one mode of speech to
  another.
     Given the universality of linguistic repertoires, and of switching among
  the ways of speaking they comprise, it is not necessary that the ways be
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   39

   distinct languages. Relationships of social intimacy or of social distance
   may be signaled by switching between distinct languages [Spanish:
  Guarani in Paraguay (Rubin 1962, 1968)]; between varieties of a single
  language (standard German: dialect), or between pronouns within a
   single variety (German Du:Sie). Segregation of religious activity may be
  marked linguistically by a variety whose general unintelligibility depends
  on being of foreign provenance (e.g., Latin, Arabic in many communities),
  on being a derived variety of the common language [Zuni (Newman
  1964)], or on being a manifestation not identifiable at all (some glos-
  solalia). Conversely, shift between varieties may mark a shift between
  distinct spheres of activity [e.g., standard Norwegian: Hemnes dialect
  (see Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14)], or the formal status of talk within
  a single integral activity [e.g., Siane in New Guinea (Salisbury 1962)],
  Latin in a contemporary Cambridge University degree ceremony (e.g.,
  Cambridge University Reporter 1969).
     A general theory of the interaction of language and social life must
  encompass the multiple relations between linguistic means and social
  meaning. The relations within a particular community or personal reper-
  toire are an empirical problem, calling for a mode of description that is
 jointly ethnographic and linguistic.
     If the community's own theory of linguistic repertoire and speech is
 considered (as it must be in any serious ethnographic account), matters
 become all the more complex and interesting. Some peoples, such as the
 Wishram Chinook of the Columbia River in what is now the state of
 Washington, or the Ashanti of Nigeria, have considered infants' vocaliza-
 tions to manifest a special language (on the Wishram, see Hymes 1966a;
 on the Ashanti, Hogan 1967). For the Wishram, this language was inter-
 pretable only by men having certain guardian spirits. In such cases, the
 native language is in native theory a second language to everyone. Again,
 one community may strain to maintain mutual intelligibility with a second
 in the face of great differentiation of dialect, while another may declare
 intelligibility impossible, although the objective linguistic differences are
 minor. Cases indistinguishable by linguistic criteria may thus be now
 monolingual, now bilingual, depending on local social relationships and
attitudes (discussed more fully in Hymes 1968c).
     While it is common in a bilingual situation to look for specialization in
the function, elaboration, and valuation of a language, such specialization
is but an instance of a universal phenomenon, one that must be studied in
situations dominantly monolingual as well. Language as such is not every-
where equivalent in role and value; speech may have different scope and
functional load in the communicative economies of different societies. In
our society sung and spoken communication intersect in song; pure speak-
ing and instrumental music are separate kinds of communication. Among
           40   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

the Flathead Indians of Montana, speech and songs without text are
separate, while songs with text, and instrumental music as an aspect of
songs with text, form the intersection. Among the Maori of New Zealand
instrumental music is a part of song, and both are ultimately conceived as
speech. [It is interesting to note that among both the Flathead and Maori
it is supernatural context that draws speech and music together, and
makes of both (and of animal sounds as well among the Flathead) forms
of linguistic communication.] 2 With regard to speaking itself, while
Malinowski has made us familiar with the importance of phatic communi-
cation, talk for the sake of something being said, the ethnographic record
suggests that it is far from universally an important or even accepted
motive (see Sapir l 949i: 16, 11). The Paliyans of south India "communi-
cate very little at all times and become almost silent by the age of 40.
Verbal, communicative persons are regarded as abnormal and often as
offensive" (Gardner 1966:398). The distribution of required and pre-
ferred silence, indeed, perhaps most immediately reveals in outline form
a community's structure of speaking (see Samarin 1965; Basso 1970).
Finally, the role of language in thought and culture (Whorf's query) ob-
viously cannot be assessed for bilinguals until the role of each of their
languages is assessed; but the same is true for monolinguals since in dif-
ferent societies language enters differeqtially into educational experience,
transmission of beliefs, knowledge, values, practices, and conduct (see
Hymes 1966a). Such differences may obtain even between different
groups within a single society with a single language.
   What is needed, then, is a general theory and body of knowledge within
which diversity of speech, repertoires, ways of speaking, and choosing
among them find a natural place. Such a theory and body of knowledge
are only now being built in a sustained way. Social scientists asking rele-
vant functional questions have usually not had the training and insight to
deal adequately with the linguistic face of the problem. Linguistics, the
discipline central to the study of speech, has been occupied almost wholly
with developing analysis of the structure of language as a referential code,
neglecting social meaning, diversity, and use. There have been notable
exceptions (as in the work of Firth, Jakobson, and Sapir), but the main
course of linguistic work has been from the then newly captured sector of
phonology (before World War II) through morphology and syntax. Now
that the inner logic of linguistics itself brings it to deal with semantics and
speech acts, and now that the social sciences generally in the United
States are engaged in the sort of cross-cultural and educational research
that makes language differences of concern, there has emerged something
tantamount to a movement to redress the situation. The movement is
commonly called sociolinguistics, especially when seen as relating Ian-

 2
     These examples draw on a study by Judith Temkin Irvine (1968).
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   41

 guage to sociological categories, or as mediating between linguistics and
 social science as a whole .
  . It is not necessary to think of sociolinguistics as a novel discipline. If
 lm_guistics comes to accept fully the sociocultural dimensions, social
 science the linguistic dimensions, of their subject matters and theoretical
 bases, sociolinguistic will simply identify a mode of research in adjacent
 sectors of each. As disciplines, one will speak simply of linguistics, an-
 !hropology, and the like (see Hymes 1964b, 1966b, 1970a, b, c). But, as
Just implied, the linguistics, anthropology, etc., of which one speaks will
 have changed. In order to develop models, or theories, of the interaction
of language and social life, there must be adequate descriptions of that
interaction, and such descriptions call for an approach that partly links,
but partly cuts across, partly builds between the ordinary practices of the
disciplines. This is what makes sociolinguistics exciting and necessary. It
does not accept, but it is a critique of the present partitioning of the sub-
ject of man among the sciences of man. Its goal is to explain the meaning
of language in human life, and not in the abstract, not in the superficial
phrases one may encounter in essays and textbooks, but in the concrete,
m actual human lives. To do that it must develop adequate modes of
description and classification, to answer new questions and give familiar
questions a novel focus.


         The Case for Description and Taxonomy
                                                                                 'I
          For some of the most brilliant students of language in its social           'I

 setting, the proper strategy is to select problems that contribute directly
 to current linguistic and social theory. A primary concern is relevant to
particular problems already perceived as such in the existing disciplines,              i
although the modes of work of those disciplines must often be trans-
formed for the problems to find solutions. Field studies in societies exotic
                                                                                 ::~
to the investigator, where strong control over data and hypothesis testing       ,/~
cannot easily be maintained, are not much valued. A concern to secure             ii
                                                                                 .,(
                                                                                 ;iii
reports from such societies is thought pointless since it suggests a pros-        Iii
pect of endless descriptions which, whatever their quantity and quality,
would not as such contribute to theoretical discovery.                           I!/!
                                                                                 I
   My own view is different. I accept an intellectual tradition, adumbrated
in antiquity., and articulated in the course of the Enlightenment, which
holds that mankind cannot be understood apart from the evolution and             :1
maintenance of its ethnographic diversity. A satisfactory understanding of       :I'
the nature and unity of men must encompass and organize, not abstract            ,,,
                                                                                 :11
from, the diversity. In this tradition, a theory, whatever its logic and
insight, is inadequate if divorced from, if unilluminating as to, the ways of
life of mankind as a whole. The concern is consonant with that of Kroeber,
                                                                                 l!,·,:!
                                                                                 ,J
reflecting upon Darwin:                                                          I
                                                                  -- - --- -- - ---·:=r r•c:rw·'l~




         42   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

anthropologists . . . do not yet clearly recognize the fundamental value of the
humble but indispensable task of classifying-that is, structuring, our body
of knowledge, as biologists did begin to recognize it two hundred years ago
(1960:14).

   Even the ethnographies that we have, though almost never focused on
speaking, show us that communities differ significantly in ways of speak-
ing, in patterns of repertoire and switching, in the roles and meanings of
speech. They indicate differences with regard to beliefs, values, reference
groups, norms, and the like, as these enter into the ongoing system of
language use and its acquisition by children. Individual accounts that
individually pass without notice, as familiar possibilities, leap out when
juxtaposed, as contrasts that require explanation. The Gbeya around the
town of Bossangoa in the western Central African Republic, for example,
are extremely democratic, and relatively unconcerned with speech. There
is no one considered verbally excellent even with regard to traditional
folklore. Moreover,

Gbeya parents and other adults focus little attention on the speech of children.
No serious attempt is made to improve their language. In fact, a child only un-
commonly takes part in a dyadic speech event with an adult . . . . Among the
Gbeya "children are seen and not heard." Finally, there appears to be very little
interest in reporting how a person speaks . . . (Samarin 1969).

The Anang (Nigeria) received their name from neighboring Ibo, the term
meaning "ability to speak wittily yet meaningfully upon any occasion."

The Anang take great pride in their eloquence, and youth are trained from early
childhood to develop verbal skills. This proverb riddle [not quoted here, but see
discussion] instructs young people to assume adult duties and responsibilities as
early as possible, even if doing so is difficult and unpleasant at times. As the vine
must struggle to escape growing into the pit [the riddle], so must the child strive to
overcome his shyness and insecurity and learn to speak publicly [the proverbial
answer], as well as perform other adult roles (Messenger 1960:229).

   Or, to consider the word and the sword, among the Araucanians of
Chile the head of a band was its best orator, and his power depended
upon his ability to sway others through oratory. Among the Abipon of
Argentina no desired role or status depended upon skill in speaking;
chiefs and members of the one prestigious men's group were selected
solely on the basis of success in battle. The Iroquois value eloquence in
chiefs and orators as much as bravery in war; the two are usually men-
tioned together and with equal status. A chief could rise equally quickly
by either.
            Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life             43

   Since there is no systematic understanding of the ways in which com-
munities differ in these respects, and of the deeper relationships such
differences may disclose, we have it to create. We need taxonomies of
speaking, and descriptions adequate to support and test them.
   Such description and taxonomy will share in the work of providing an
adequate classification of languages. If the task of language classification
is taken to be to place languages in terms of their common features and
differences, and if we consider the task from the standpoint of similarities,
then four classifications are required. Languages are classified according
to features descended from a common ancestor (genetic classification),
features diffused within a common area (areal classification), features
manifesting a common structure or structures, irrespective of origin or
area (typological classification), and features of common use or social
role (as koine, standard language, pidgin, etc.) (functional classification)
(see Hymes 1968c; Greenburg 1968: 133-135). The processes underlying
the classifications (various kinds of retention, divergence, convergence)
all can be viewed in terms of the adaption of languages to social contexts
but the forms of classification in which the dependence on social pro~
cesses can be most readily excluded (genetic, typological) are the forms
that have been most developed. Sociolinguistic research reinforces the
intermittent interest that areal classification has received, and can prop-
erly claim the most neglected sector, functional classification, the inter-
action between social role and features of languages, for its own. The
natural unit for sociolinguistic taxonomy (and description), however, is
not the language but the speech community.
   Of course, sociolinguistic taxonomy is not an end in itself, any more
than is language classification. A taxonomy is not in itself a theory or
explanation, though it may conceal or suggest one. There will indeed be a
variety of taxonomies, answering to a variety of significant dimensions,
as well as taxonomies of whole communities, societies, and social fields.
(For a step in the latter direction, see Ferguson 1966.) The work of
taxonomy is a necessary part of progress toward models (structural and
generative) of sociolinguistic description, formulation of universal sets of
features and relations, and explanatory theories. (I shall say something
about each of these later.) Just the demonstration that the phenomena of
speaking are subject to comparative study may help end the obscuring of
actual problems by descant on the function of language in general. Those
who do so should be received as if they were continuing to discuss physics
                                                                     3
in terms 'of the Ionian controversies as to the primordial element.

  3 For recent examples of uncritical praise and i~transigent indictm~nt of language, see
J. 0. Hertzler 1965 and Brice Parain I 969. On "high and low evaluat10ns of language" as
an integral part of the history of philosophy and human culture, sec Urban 1939: 12, 23-32.
            44    Ethnographic Description and Explanation



            An Illustration

           As an indication of what can be done, as well as of how much
  there is to be done, let me briefly consider the grossest, and most likely to
  be reported, aspect of speech, quantity. Contrasts were drawn already in
  antiquity, although amounting only to folk characterization, as when the
  Athenian says to his Spartan and Cretan interlocutors,

 But first let me make an apology. The Athenian citizen is reputed among all the
 Hellenes to be a great talker, whereas Sparta is renowned for brevity, and the
 Cretans have more wit than words. Now I am afraid of appearing to elicit a
 very long discourse out of very small matter (Plato, Laws 64 IE). 4

 One could extract a dimension with three points of contrast, naming the
 types according to the dialogue (as kinship systems are named after
 societies in which they are identified, Crow, Omah, and the like):

      i
 Dimension:             verbose           laconic          pithy
 Type:                ATHENIAN           SPARTAN          CRETAN


   A number of analytically different dimensions are probably confounded
 within gross observations as to quantity of speech, length and frequency
 of speech, and the like; and there are qualitative characteristics vital to
 the interaction of language with social life in the particular societies.
 Something of this appears in the quotation from Plato, and becomes
 explicit in the following contrast:

    ii
Dimension:               voluble             reserved, reticent          taciturn
Type:                BELLA COOLA                  ARITAMA               PALIYAN


   BELLA cooLA (British Columbia). Fluent, interesting speech is valued,
and a common, if not a requisite, part of social life. Essential roles in
ceremonial activity, and an important spirit impersonated in the Kusiut
initiation, had to have the ability to talk constantly, keeping up a flow of
witty and insulting remarks. The ethnographer Mcllwraith found that if
he could not joke with them constantly, people lost interest. When groups
talked, one was sure to hear bursts of laughter every few minutes.

   4 According to Sandys (I 920, I :4), the noun p/zilo/ogia is first found in Plato, and its

adjective, p/zi/6/ogia, is used in this passage to contrast "lover of discourse" with "hater
of discourse." Plato, Laws 641 E, quoted from Benjamin E. Jowett's translation of Dialogues
(New York; Random House, 1937, Vol. 2, p. 423).
                 LE---e




              Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life                45

     ARITAMA (Colombia).
  People in Aritama are not much given to friendly chatting and visiting. They are
 controlled and taciturn," evasive and monosyllabic .... This reserve ... is not
 only displayed toward strangers, but characterizes their own interpersonal con-
 tacts as well. There is a front of ready answers and expression, of standard af-
 firmations and opinions, and there is always, in the last resort, the blank stare, the
 deaf ear or the sullen nose . . . . Such behavior ... leads frequently to a highly
 Patterned type of confabulation (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1961 :xvii).

    PALIYAN (south India). See previous quotation from Gardner (1966).
  According to Gardner, the many hunting-and-gathering societies of the
  World should be divided into two types, of one of which the Paliyans are a
 perhaps extreme representative.
   1:he dimensions may, of course, apply within, as well as between,
 societies, as to groups, cultural content, verbal style, and situations. As
 to groups,

    iiia
Dimension:                voluble                             taciturn
Type:                                  ARAUCANIAN
Subcategory:               Men                                Women

    ARAUCANIAN (Chile). The ideal Araucanian man is a good orator, with
 good memory, general conversationalist, expected to speak well and
 often. Men are encouraged to talk on all occasions, speaking being a sign
 of masculine intelligence and leadership. The ideal woman is submissive
 and quiet, silent in her husband's presence. At gatherings where men do
 mu~h talking, women sit together listlessly, communicating only in
 Whispers or not at all. On first arriving in her husband's home, a wife is
 expected to sit silently facing the wall, not looking anyone directly in the
~ace. Only after several months is she permitted to speak, and then, only a
httl.e. Sisters-in-law do not speak much to each other. The one means by
which women can express their situation is a form of social singing
(ulkantun) in which mistreatment, disregard, and distress can be ex-
Pressed. The one approved role for a woman to be verbally prominent is a
shamanistic intermediary of a spirit (Hilger 1957). [Silence is expected of
a bride in her new home in a number of cultures, e.g., traditional Korea.
The restriction of women's expression of grievances to certain occasions
and a musical use of voice also is widespread, as in Bihar (India).]
   5
     Although the Reichel-Dolmatoffs use "taciturn" here of the Aritama, the subsequent
term "reserved" characterizes them well, while "taciturn" is specifically apt for the Paliyans.
~s taxonomy and description develop, careful explication of technical terms will be increas-
ingly important. Note that the three groups are also respectively "now-coding," "then-
Codmg," and "non-coding" (cf. footnote 7).
       46     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  As to situations,

    iiib
Dimension:                    discursive disclosure       reticent quotation
Type:                                  WISHRAM-W ASCO CHINOOK
Scene: (See discussion)

   WISHRAM-WASCO CHINOOK (Washington, Oregon). Recitation of myths
in winter, public conferal of personal name, and disclosure of an adoles-
cent guardian spirit experience upon approaching death are three major
communicative events. In each event, discursive disclosure (of the myth
as a whole, the identification of name and person, or the verbal message of
the vision) comes only when an implicit relationship (of culture to nature,
person to reincarnated kin-linked "title," or person to personal spirit) has
 been validated. Each is part of a cycle-the annual round of society, a
 cycle of reinstituting names of deceased kin, an individual life cycle from
 adolescence to death. At other times during the cycle there may be quota-
 tions (of a detail in a myth, a name in address, a song from one's vision in
 winter spirit dance), but the substance of the relationship must not be
 explicitly stated. In each case of discursive disclosure the speak~r is a
 spokesman, repeating words previously said, this being the rule that con-
 stitutes formal speech 'events. (See Hymes 1966a.)
    As to cultural content,

    iv
 Dimension:       verbal elaboration      verbal sparseness
 Type:                 HIDATSA                   CROW


    HIDATSA (North Dakota). CROW (Montana). According to Lowie
 (1917 :87-88), "The culture of the Hidatsa differs from that of the Crow
 not merely by the greater number and elaboration of discrete features but
 also in a marked trait of their social psychology-the tendency towards
 rationalization and systematization." Lowie illustrates the contrast in
 four domains: formal instruction; accounting for cultural phenomena;
 individual interpretation and conception of names, myths, and prayer; and
 kinship nomenclature. In each domain the Hidatsa use language to
 systematize and stabilize the cultural universe to an extent greatly in
 contrast to the Crow: (It was the Crow that Lowie knew more intimately;
  hence his sense of greater Hidatsa elaboration is trustworthy). Of par-
  ticular interest here is the following:

 The Crow child ... seems to have grown up largely without formal instruction.
 Even on so vital a matter as the securing of supernatural favor, the adolescent
 Crow was not urged by his elders but came more or less automatically to imitate .,,,.
 his associates .... With the Hidatsa everything seems to have been ordered and




                                                                                .• v
              Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life                    47

Prearranged by parental guidance; the father repeatedly admonished his sons, at
the same time giving them specific instructions. 6                   :



      As to verbal style,

        V
Dimension:             elaborate, profuse              restrained, sparse
Type:                        ENGLISH                          YOKUTS


    ENGLISH, YOKUTS (California). A contrast with regard to the limits of
 a~ceptable use of syntactic possibilities has been drawn by Newman, who
tnes to sketch each from the standpoint of the other. Sparseness and
restraint are found to characterize Yokuts narrative style as well (Gayton
and Newman 1940).
   _Work in societies, with the goals of taxonomy and descriptive models in
mind, is interdependent with detailed work in one's own society. Each
Provides insight and a test of universality and adequacy for the other. It
has been suggested, for example, that there is only a class-linked British
relevance to Bernstein's sociological model of elaborated vs. restricted
coding, governed by personal vs. positional types of social control. 7 While
some Americans indeed have misapplied Bernstein's two types to ethnic
and class differences in the United States, from the standpoint of tax-
onomy and description, the model takes on a new scope. It suggests a set
0
  ~ universal dimensions, and possibly polar ideal types, isolable and ap-
Phcable to the description and comparison of situations and whole com-
mu n1t1es,
     ··    as well as particular groups.
   ~hus Margaret Mead has analyzed the Arapesh and Iatmul of New
Guinea as contrasting types of society in which the adult patterns seem
appropriately interpreted as personal and positional, respectively. In the
ARAPESH type (which includes the Andamanese, Ojibwa, and Eskimo),
societies depend, for impetus to or inhibition of community action in
PUblic situations, upon the continuing response of individuals. The point

  6
     As the initial quotation indicates, Lowie did not relate the contrast explicitly to the role
~~.1.ang~age in social life. A major task and methodologic\11 challenge is to go b~y<;>nd super-
   ial p1 esence or absence of overt mention of speech, m order to restate ex1stmg ethno-
gra h'1_c analyses, wherever possible, in terms of speaking,just as i~ is often poss1'bl e to fim.d m
eari'                                                                                               ·
     1e1 ac_counts of languages evidence permitting restatement m terms of con.temporary
P~onolog1cal and grammatical models. Such restatement is more than an exercise; 1t con-
tn~utes to the !'ange of cases for comparative studies.·
. d Elaborated codes are largely now-coding, and adaptive in lexicon and synta~ to the
:daho~ elaboratio~ of subjective intent, while .restricted codes are largely then-co,~111g'. and
Pe/hv.e t? t~e remforcement of group solidanty throug~ u~e of prefo.rmul~ted ~xp1ess1~n.s.
tion~on,ll_ ~ocial co~trol appeals to individual charact~n~ttcs, role. d1scret10n, and mot'.va-
th '. Pos1ttonal social control bases itself on membership m categones of age, sex, class, and
m:J~~e. See Bernstein's chapter in this volume. Mead (1937) places Zuni also as a type inter-
      I,lte between Iatmul and Bali (cf. also footnote 5).
                                                                /
                     48    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

           of communication is to excite interest and bring together persons who will
           then respond with emotion to whatever event has occurred. In the
           IATMUL type the societies depend upon formal alignments of individ-
           uals, who react not in terms of personal opinions but in terms of defined
           position in a formal sociopolitical structure.
              At the same time the comparative perspective extends the model.
            Mead identifies a third type of society, such as that of BALI, which does
           not depend on situations in which individuals express or can be called
           upon to express themselves for or against something, so as to affect the
           outcome regarding it, but which functions by invoking participation in and
            respect for known impersonal patterns or codes, and in which communi-
           cators act as if the audience were already in a state of suspended, un-
           emotional attention, and only in need of a small precise triggering of
            words to set them off into appropriate activity. Mead interprets the dif-
           ferences as ones in which political feeling depends on "How do I (and
            A, B, and C) feel about it?" (Arapesh); "How does my group (their group)
            feel about it?" (latmul); and "How does this fit in?" (Bali). Such a type as
            Bali seems appropriately labeled one of traditional social control and
            communication. (Obviously, only a subset of the societies lumped to-
            gether as "traditional" by some social scientists can be said to be so in a
            useful way.) (See Mead 1937, 1948; the latter articly discusses Manus as
            well.) Keesing and Keesing (1956:258) suggest Samoa as a type com-
            bining Iatmul and Bali characteristics, but distinctive, so that one might
            have:

               vi
           Dimension:           personal         positiona/ 8       traditional      positional,
                                                                                     traditional
           Type:                ARAPESH           IATMUL               BALI            SAMOA

              Comparative ethnographic examples show the need to separate some-
           times the dimensions joined together in Bernstein's model. Iatmul is a
           society with important development of oratory, which might seem an
           instance of elaboration which should go with personal control. If the
           oratory is then-coding, employing largely preformulated expressions,
           there is, in fact, no discrepancy. Positional and personal social control
           do,. however, cross-cut then-coding and now-coding to define four types
           of cases, not just two. Cat Harbour, Newfoundland, as described by Faris
           ( 1966, 1968), shows positional social control and restriction of personal
           expression in speech and other normally scheduled activities. As in most
           societies, there are certain situations marked as reversals of normal con-
           duct (e.g., legitimated stealing of food); and, as if to compensate for

              8
                  Mead (193 7) places Zuni also as a type intermediate between Iatmul and Bali.




........
             Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life                    49

  pla!nness of life and to satisfy the great interest in "news" of any kind,
  While rem · ammg· wit · h'm normal restramts,
                                           .    there has .
                                                         ansen a genre known
  as kthe "cuffe r. " A " cuuer" may anse spontaneously, or someone may be
                               ,i,              •

  us. ed to start one. It consists of developing an intense argument over an
    nimportant detail (such as how many men actuaJly were Jost in a boat-
  :~eck some decades back); but to show personal emotional involvement
  e rmgs _sha?1e and exclusion. We thus find elaborated now-coding, indeed,
  si~ten~ive mvention, in a positional setting. There can be then-coding in a
  th uation of ad hoc subjective intent as weJI, as when Ponapeans arrive at
 foe status of mutual lovers through manipulating a Jong sequence of verbal
     rmuJas which aJJow for role discretion at each step (Paul Garvin, per-
 sonal communication), or when a traditional saying is used. precisely
 baecau se ·its ·impersonal, preformulated character grants role ·
                                                                 discretion to
  unother that direct rebuke would not (e.g., the Chaga of Central Africa
    se proverbs to children in this way). 9

 it ~elevant Features and Types. The examples just presented show that
 c is essential to isolate the dimensions and features underlying taxonomic
 stategorie
          . s. Th ese features and ·            ·
                                        d1mens10ns,                  · Iar con-
                                                     more than particu
 de 11 a~ 10~s of them, will be found to be universal, and hence elementary to
 ue~cnptive and comparative frames of reference. This is not to consider
 wniversal features and dimensions the only goal. Explanation faces two
 hays, toward the generic possibilities and general constraints, on the one
 t:nd (Chomsky's "essentialist" form of explanatory adequacy), and
     W~rd the types that are historicaJly realized and their causes (an "exis-
 tentia]" o_r ."
 l'h                     ·   ·
                 experiential"    form of explanatory adequacy ), on the ot h er.
      e heuristics of description require an etics of types as weJI as of ele-
 111
 a ents. ' for 1·ns·1g ht ·mto the organizat10n
                                             ·    · ·   · t o a case, as agams
                                                  mtnns1c                   · t
                                                                                                       l'

 st~r
     Pnori or mec h. amca
     B                    . I structuring
                                      . of .1t.                .             .
 e       both defimng some universal dimensions of speakmg and proposmg
       anation within social theory of certain consteJlations of them, Bern-
- em has shown the goal toward which sociolinguistic work must proceed.

 (~/he contrast between Hopi and Zuni on the one hand, and the Wishram Chinook
 With~:i5 I 9_67: 12) was incorrectly drawn.' Among both sociali~ation pressure is _initially

 refer
        f
 Bggan 9; 1th regard to toilet training and the like un!il _the. child ca~ talk (Denms .1940,
              8 [ 1943]; on the significance of early socmhzation pressure, though without
 duigeen:cee to ways of speaking, Whiting and Child 1953 :254 ff.). The sudden shi~t from in-
 1948 [I to control among the Hopi apparently came after the first few years ofhfe (~ggan
 "per      9 43]:232-233). It is the subsequent difference between "positional" (Hopi) and
 Periesonal"
           '       · 1 control that would seem to fit with the differences ·m a d uIt re 1· ·
                socia                                                                     1g10us ex-
 age (~~e, together w!th the shock of public disillusion in the kach!~as for Hopi children at_an
 they th IO), when W1shram children were training for private spmtual ~ncounters of wh\ch
 that st ehselves would be individually the interpreters and eventual disclosers. It remains
 as be/c contrasts as that between Hopi and Chinookan relations to the supernatural, and
 Word"W:en prayer as beseeching petition (e.g., the Oela~ar.e) ~nd prayer as "compulsive                    ,'
                                                                                                            ;:   I

          ( .g., the Navaho) need to be related to speech socmhzat1on.
                                                                                                            1:'
        50   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

The total range of dimensions and of kinds of explanation, to be sure, will
be more varied. Indeed, the fact that present taxonomic dimensions con-
sist so largely of dichotomies-restricted vs. elaborated codes, trans-
actional vs. metaphorical switching, referential vs. expressive meaning,
standard vs. nonstandard speech, formal vs. informal scenes, literacy vs.
illiteracy-shows how preliminary is the stage .3:1t which we work. With
regard to ways of speaking, we are at a stage rather like that of the study
of human culture, as a whole, a century ago, when Tyler, Morgan, and
others had to segregate relevant sets of data, and give definiteness and
name to some of the elementary categories on which subsequent work
could be built (on Tylor, see Lowie 1937:70-71; Tylor 1871, Chapter I).
    Like Tylor and Morgan, we need to establish elementary categories and
names. Among the Bella Coola of British Columbia, for instance, there is
a genre such that at the investiture of an inheritor of a privilege validated
by a myth, someone tells a public audience kept outside just enough of the
recited myth to be convincing as to the validation, but not so much as to
give it away (knowledge ·of the myth itself being part of the privilege)
(Mcllwraith 1948). Among the Iatmul of New Guinea knowledge of the
correct version of a myth may also be proof of a claim, in this instance to
land and group membership. In public debate ~ speaker refers to his myth
in cliches that fragment the plot. In this way "he demonstrates his mem-
bership in a group and at the same time keeps outsiders in the dark as to
the esoteric matrix of the story" (Mead 1964b:74). We lack a name for
this recurrent way of speaking. Identifying it would increase the chances
that others will notice and report it in ways that will lead to knowledge of
the conditions under which it occurs in various parts of the world.
    Anthropological contributions to this branch of comparative research
are almost nonexistent. Even a list of terms lacking careful definition is to
be noted (Keesing and Keesing 1956); careful description and analysis of
named concepts is remarkable (Calame-Griaule 1965; Abrahams and
Bauman 1970) .. There are no books on comparative speaking to put
                 1
beside those on comparative religion, comparative politics, and the like.
In the major anthropological collection of data for comparative studies,
the Human Relations Area Files, information on ways of speaking is
only sporadically included and is scattered among several categories.
Existing manuals and guides for ethnography, or for specific aspects, such
as socialization, largely neglect speech.
    The first break in this neglect is the pioneering field manual prepared
by a group at Berkeley (Slobin 1967). The manual has already contri-
 buted to (and benefited from) the research of a number of fieldworkers. It
 is important to note that it is acquisition of the structure of language with
 regard to which the manual can be most detailed. The linguistic code takes
 pride of place as to topics, procedures, and specific questions and hypo-
          Models of t/ze lnteractio11 of La11guage and Social Life   51

 theses, even though the acquisition of linguistic codes is in principle
 recognized as but part of the acquisition of communicative competence
as a whole. It is recognized that "before a description of the child's
 language acquisition can be undertaken, the conventions of the adult
 members of the group must be described" (Slobin 1967:161), but it has
not been found possible to make such description the initial matrix of
 research, nor to show what such description would be like, beyond
 sketching a conceptual framework with illustrations.
    An ethnographic guide, focusing on the acquisition of speaking as a
 whole (prepared by a group initially at the University of Pennsylvania), is
 now in press (Hymes et al., 1972). An outline is included as an appendix
 to this volume. The full form will have queries in considerably more detail,
together with ethnographic examples and sketches of cultural types.
    The need for etics (Pike 1967, Chapter 2) of terms and types, as an
 input to description, is clear from the frequency with which fieldworkers
 have let observations of great interest lie fallow, lacking precedent and
format for their presentation. There is need to show ethnographers and
 linguists a way to see data as ways of speaking. At this juncture we are
 still attempting to achieve "observational adequacy" in the sense of being
able to adequately record what is there in acts of speech.
    For an adequate etics we of course most need field studies of the sort
 the manual and guide just cited encourage. We can also make useful
ethnographic accounts not obtained with analysis of speaking in mind, by
a procedure that can be called "sociolinguistic restatement" (see Hymes
 1966a; Hogan 1967; Sherzer 1970). We must draw as well on the ac-
cumulated insight of all the fields that deal with speech, rhetoric, literary
criticism, and the like. To be sure, the terminologies of rhetoric and
literary criticism fall short of the range to be encompassed. Terminology
for ways of speaking seems not to have developed much since the heyday
of rhetorical education in the Renaissance-the recent revival of interest
in rhetorical analysis indeed returns to the starting point (see Joseph 1962;
Lanham 1968; Sonnino 1968). But treatments of verbal art of necessity
draw distinctions and make assumptions as to notions with which a de-
scriptive model of speaking must deal, as does much work in philosophy,
most notably in recent years "ordinary language" philosophy and the
work of J. L. Austin, John Searle, and others on "illocutionary acts," or
performatives. Several philosophers, psychologists, and literary critics,
as well as linguists, have proposed classifications of the components Of
the functions served in them (Karl Blihler, Kenneth Burke, Roman
Jakobson, Bronislaw Malinowski, Charles Morris, C. K. Ogden and I. A.
Richards, B. F. Skinner, William Soskin, and Vera John). Much is to be
hoped from the growing interest of folklorists in the analysis of verbal
performance (see Hymes 1970b). A systematic explication of these con-
tributions is greatly to be desired. These lines of work provide concepts
        52   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

and insights from which much can be learned, and for which a compara-
tive ethnography of speaking can perform anthropology's traditional
scientific role, testing of universality and empirical adequacy.
   In sum, just as a theory of grammar must have its universal terms, so
must a theory of language use. It can indeed be argued that the notions of
such a theory are foundational to linguistics proper (see Hymes 1964b,
where the theory is called "(ethno)linguistic"{ The fundamental prob-
lem-to discover and explicate the competence that enables members of a
community to conduct and interpret speech-cuts deeper than any
schema any of us have so far developed.


        Toward a Descriptive Theory

         The primary concern now must be with descriptive analyses from
a variety of communities. Only in relation to actual analysis will it be
possible to conduct arguments analogous to those now possible in the
study of grammar as to the adequacy, necessity, generality, etc., of con-
cepts and terms. Yet some initial heuristic schema are needed if the de-
scriptive task is to proceed. What is presented here is quite preliminary-
if English and its grammarians permitted, one might call it "toward toward
a theory." Some of it may survive the empirical and analytical work of the
decade ahead.
   Only a specific, explicit mode of description can guarantee the mainte-
nance and success of the current interest in sociolinguistics. Such interest
is prompted more by practical and theoretical needs, perhaps, than by
accomplishment. It was the development of a specific mode of description
that ensured the success of linguistics as an autonomous discipline in the
United States in the twentieth century, and the lack of it (for motif and
tale types are a form of indexing, distributional inference a procedure
common to the human sciences) that led to the until recently peripheral
status of folklore, although both had started from a similar base, the con-
verging interest of anthropologists, and English scholars, in language and
in verbal tradition.
   The goal of sociolinguistic description can be put in terms of the dis-
ciplines whose interests converge in sociolinguistics. Whatever his ques-
tions about language, it is clear to a linguist that there is an enterprise,
description of languages, which is central and known. Whatever his ques-
tions about society and culture, it is clear to a sociologist or an anthro-
pologist that there is a form of inquiry (survey or ethnography) on which
the answers depend. In both cases, one understands what it means to
describe a language, the social relations, or culture of a community. We
need to be able to say the same thing about the sociolinguistic system of a
community.
   Such a goal is of concern to practical work as well as to scientific theory.
                                                                                       .I




          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life     53

In a study of bilingual education, e.g., certain components of speaking will
be taken into account, and the choice will presuppose a model, implicit if
not explicit, of the interaction of language with social life. The significance
attached to what is found will depend on understanding what is possible,
what universal, what rare, what linked, in comparative perspective. What
survey researchers need to know linguistically about a community, in
selecting a language variety, and in conducting interviews, is in effect an
application of the community's sociolinguistic description (see Hymes
 I 969). In turn, practical work, if undertaken with its relevance to theory
in mind, can make a contribution, for. it must deal directly with the inter-
action of language and social life, and so provides a testing ground and
source of new insight.
    Sociolinguistic systems may be treated at the level of national states,       .1
and indeed, of an emerging world society. My concern here is with the
level of individual communities and groups. The interaction of language
with social life is viewed as first of all a matter of human action, based on
a knowledge, sometimes conscious, often unconscious, that enables per-
sons to use language. Speech events and larger systems indeed have
properties not reducible to those of the speaking competence of persons.
Such competence, however, underlies communicative conduct, not only
within communities but also in encounters between them. The speaking
competence of persons may be seen as entering into a series of systems of
encounter at levels of different scope.
    An adequate descriptive theory would provide for the analysis of indi-
vidual communities by specifying technical concepts required for such
analysis, and by characterizing the forms that analysis should take. Those
forms would, as much as possible, be formal, i.e., explicit, general (in the
sense of observing general constraints and conventions as to content,
order, interrelationship, etc.), economical, and congruent with linguistic
modes of statement. Only a good deal of empirical work and experi-
mentation will show what forms of description are required, and of those,
which preferable. As with grammar, approximation to a theory for the
explicit, standard analysis of individual systems will also be an approxi-
mation to patt of a theory of explanation.
    Among the notions with which such a theory must deal are those of
speech community, speech situation, speech event, speech act, fluent
speaker, components of speech events, functions of speech, etc.                             i.
                                                                                            !'

  SOCIAL UNITS
  One must first consider the social unit of analysis. For this I adopt the
common expression speech community.

  Speech Community. Speech is here taken as a surrogate for all forms of
language, including writing, song and speech-derived whistling, drum-

                                                                                       .[':

                                                                                       ~
        54   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ming, horn calling, and the like. Speech community is a necessary, pri-
mary term in that it postulates the basis of description as a social, rather
than a linguistic, entity. One starts with a social group and considers all
the linguistic varieties present in it, rather than starting with any one
variety.
   Bloomfield (1933) and some others have in the past reduced the notion
of speech community to the notion of language (or linguistic variety).
Those speaking the same language (or ~rime first language, or standard
language) were defined as members of the same speech community. This
confusion still persists, associated with a quantitative measure of fre-
quency of interaction as a way of describing (in principle) internal varia-
tion and change, as speculatively postulated by Bloomfield. The present
approach requires a definition that is qualitative and expressed in terms
norms for the use of language. It is clear from the work of Gumperz,
Labov, Barth, and others that not frequency of interaction but rather
definition of situations in which interaction occurs is decisive, particularly
identification (or lack of it) with others. [Sociolinguistics here makes
contact with the sh.ift ii) rhetorical theory from expression and persuasion
to identification as key concept (see Burke 1950: 19-37, 55-59).]
   Tentatively, a speech community is defined as a community sharing
rules for the conduct and interpretation of speech, and rules for the inter-
pretation of at least one linguistic variety. Both conditions are necessary.
   The sharing of grammatical (variety) rules is not sufficient. There may
be persons whose English I can grammatically identify but whose mes-
sages escape me. I may be ignorant of what counts as a coherent se-
quence, request, statement requiring an answer, requisite or forbidden
topic, marking of emphasis or irony, normal duration of silence, normal
level of voice, etc.' and have no metacommunitative means or opportunity
for discovering such things. The difference between knowledge of a vari-
ety and knowledge of speaking does not usually become apparent within
a single community, where the two are normally acquired together. Com-
munities indeed often mingle what a linguist would distinguish as gram-
matically and as socially or culturally acceptable. Among the Cochiti of
New Mexico J. R. Fox was unable to elicit the first person singular pos-
sessive form of "wings," on the grounds that the speaker, not being a
bird, could not say "my wings"-only to become the only person in
Cochiti able to say it on the grounds that "your name is Robin."
   The nonidentity of the two kinds of rules (or norms) is more likely to
be noticed when a shared variety is a second language for one or both
parties. Sentences that translate each other grammatically may be mis-
takenly taken as having the same functions in speech, just as words that
translate each other may be taken as having the same semantic function.
There may be substratum influence, or interference (Weinreich 1953) in
the one as in the other. The Czech linguist J. N eustupny has coined the
-
               Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   55

     term Spreclzbund "speech area" (parallel to Sprachbund "language area")
     for the phenomenon of speaking rules being shared among contiguous
     languages. Thus, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Austria, and southern ~er-
     many may be found to share norms as to greetings, acceptable topics,
     what is said next in a conversation, etc.
        Sharing of speaking rules is not sufficient. A Czech who knows no
     German may belong to the same Sprechbund, but not the same speech
     community, as an Austrian.
        The language field and speech field (akin to the notion of social field)
     can be defined as the total range of communities within which a person's
     knowledge of varieties and speaking rules potentially enables him to move
     communicatively. Within the speech field must be distinguished the speech
     network, the specific linkages of persons through shared varieties and
     speaking rules across communities. Thus in northern Queensland, Aus-
     tralia, different speakers of the same language (e.g., Yir Y oront) may have
     quite different networks along geographically different circuits, based on
     clan membership, and involving different repertoires of mutilingualism. In
     Vitiaz Strait, New Guinea, the Bilibili islanders (a group of about 200-
     250 traders and potmakers in Astrolabe Bay) have collectively a knowl-
     edge of the languages of all the communities with which they have had
     economic relations, a few men knowing the language of each particular
     community in which they have had trading partners.
        In sum, one's speech community may be, effectively, a single locality
     or portion of it; one's language field will be delimited by one's repertoire
     of varieties; one's speech field by one's repertoire of patterns of speaking.
     One's speech network is the effective union of these last two.
        Part of the work of definition obviously is done here by the notion of
     community, whose difficulties are bypassed, as are the difficulties of
    defining boundaries between varieties and between patterns of speaking.
    Native conceptions of boundaries are but one factor in defining them,
    essential but sometimes partly misleading (a point stressed by Gumperz
    on the basis of his work in central India). Self-conceptions, values, role
    structures, contiguity, purposes of interaction, political history, all may
    be factors. Clearly, the same degree of linguistic difference may be as-         i,,!:
                                                                                     I       I
    sociated with a boundary in one case and not in another, depending on
    social factors. The essential thing is that the object of description be an
    integral social unit. Probably, it will prove most useful to reserve the no-
    tion of speech community for the local unit most specifically characterized
    for a person by common locality and primary interaction (Gumperz 1962:
                                                                                         !.i
    30-32). Here I have drawn distinctions of scale and of kind of linkage
    within what Gumperz has termed the linguistic community (any dis-
    tinguishable intercommunicating group). Descriptions will make it pos-
    sible to develop a useful typology and to discover the causes and conse-
    quences of the various types.
        56   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

    Speech Situation. Within a community one readily detects many situa-
tions associated with (or marked by the absence of) speech. Such con-
texts of situation will often be naturally described as ceremonies, fights,
hunts, meals, lovemaking, and the like. It would not be profitable to con-
vert such situations en masse into parts of a sociolinguistic description by
the simple expedient of relabeling them in terms of speech. (Notice that
the distinctions made with regard to speech community are not identical
with the concepts of a general communicative approach, which must note
the differential range of communication by sp/ech, film, art object, music.)
Such situations may enter as contexts into the statement of rules of speak-
 ing as aspects of setting (or of genre). In contrast to speech events, they
 are not in themselves governed by such rules, or one set of such rules
 throughout. A hunt, e.g., may comprise both verbal and nonverbal events,
 and the verbal events may be of more than one type.
     In a sociolinguistic description, then, it is necessary to deal with ac-
 tivities which are in some recognizable way bounded or integral. From the
 standpoint of general social description they may be registered as cer-
 emonies, fishing trips, and the like; from particular standpoints they may
 be regarded as political,' esthetic, etc., situations, which serve as contexts
 for the manifestation of political, esthetic, etc., activity. From the socio-
  linguistic standpoint they may be regarded as speech situations.

   Speech Event. The term speech event will be restricted to activities, or
aspects of activities, that are directly governed by rules or norms for the
use of speech. An event may consist of a single speech act, but will often
comprise several. Just as an occurrence of a noun may at the same time be
the whole of a noun phrase and the whole of a sentence (e.g., "Fire!"), so
a speech· act may be the whole of a speech event, and of a speech situation
(say, a rite consisting of a single prayer, itself a single invocation). More
often, however, one will.find a difference in magnitude: a party (speech
situation), a conversation during the party (speech event), a joke within
the conversation (speech act). It is of speech events and speech acts that
one writes formal rules for their occurrence and characteristics. Notice
that the same type of speech act may recur in different types of speech
event, and the same type of speech event in different contexts of situation.
Thus, a joke (speech act) may be embedded in a private conversation, a
lecture, a formal introduction. A private conversation may occur in the
context of a party, a memorial service, a pause in changing sides in a
 tennis match.

   Speech A ct. The speech act is the minimal term of the set just discussed,
 as the remarks on speech events have indicated. It represents a level
 distinct from the sentence, and not identifiable with any single portion of
 other levels of grammar, nor with segments of any particular size defined
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   57

 in terms of other levels of grammar. That an utterance has the status of a
 command may depend upon a conventional formula ("I hereby order you
 to leave this building"), intonation ("Go!" vs. "Go?"), position in a con-
 versational exchange ["Hello" as initiating greeting or as response (per-
 haps used when answering the telephone)], or the social relationship
 obtaining between the two parties (as when an utterance that is in the
 form a polite question is in effect a command when made by a superior to
 a subordinate). The level of speech acts mediates immediately between
 the usual levels of grammar and the rest of a speech event or situation in
 that it implicates both linguistic form and social norms.
   To some extent speech acts may be analyzable by extensions of syn-
 tactic and semantic structure. It seems certain, however, that much, if not
 most, of the knowledge that speakers share as to the status of utterances
as ::icts is immediate and abstract, depending upon an autonomous system
of signals from both the various levels of grammar and social settings. To
attempt to depict speech acts entirely by postulating an additional seg-
ment of underlying grammatical structure (e.g., "I hereby X you to . . . ")
is cumbersome and counterintuitive. (Consider the case in which "Do you
think I might have that last bit of tea?" is to be taken as a command.)
   An autonomous level of speech acts is in fact implicated by that logic of
linguistic levels according to which the ambiguity of "the shooting of the
blacks was terrible" and the commonality of "topping Erv is almost im-
possible" and "it's almost impossible to top Erv" together requires a
further level of structure at which the former has two different structures,
the latter one. The relation between sentence forms and their status as
speech acts is of the same kind. A sentence interrogative in form may be
now a request, now a command, now a statement; a request may be mani-
fested by a sentence that is now interrogative, now declarative, now im-
perative in form.
   Discourse may be viewed in terms of acts both syntagmatically and
paradigmatically; i.e., both as a sequence of speech acts and in terms of
classes of speech acts among which choice has been made at given points.                                      I
                                                                                                     :I
                                                                                                     11
                                                                               .'I       :           1!
   Speech Styles. Style has often been approached as a matter of statistical
frequency of elements already given in linguistic description, or as devia-
tion from some norm given by such description. Statistics and deviations
matter, but do not suffice. Styles also depend upon qualitative judgments
of appropriateness, and must often be described in terms of selections that
apply globally to a discourse, as in the case of honorific usage in Japanese
(Mccawley I 968: 136), i.e., there are consistent patternings of speaking         !                  ;! i
                                                                                                 I   I~           I

that cut across the components of grammar (phonology, syntax, seman-              i :, , I':: I
tics), or that operate within one independently of the selectional restric-                 '                     I
                                                                                         I i'!
tions normally described for it. Whorf adumbrated as much in his concep-          1     I'               '.       I

tion of "fashions of speaking"; Joos has made and illustrated the point           i     [,,.I;:
                                                                                             ,       I
                                                                                  I,;, I 'i
                                                                                        l1·::
                                                                               :,::,,   ..           ~:
                                                                               ' ~
                                                                                i

        58   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

with regard to English; Pike (1967) has considered a wide variety of
contextual styles as conditions on the manifestation of phonological and
morphological units. Besides the existence of qualitatively defined styles,
there are two other points essential to sociolinguistic description. One is
that speech styles involve elements and relations that conventionally
serve "expressive" or, better, stylistic, as well as referential function
(e.g., the contrast in force of aspiration that conyentionally signals empha-
sis in English). The second point is that speec){ styles are to be considered
not only in terms of cooccurrence within each but also in terms of con-
trastive choice among them. Like speech acts, they have both syntagmatic
and paradigmatic dimensions. (Ervin-Tripp treats rules of cooccurrence
and of alternation in detail in Chapter 7.) The coherence, or cohesion,
of discourse depends upon the syntagmatic relation of speech acts, and
speech styles, as well as of semantic and syntactic features.

  Ways of Speaking. Ways of speaking is used as the most general, in-
deed, as a primitive, term. The point of it is the regulative idea that the
communicative behavior within a community is analyzable in terms of
determinate ways of speaking, that the communicative competence of
persons comprises in part a knowledge of determinate ways of speaking.
Little more can be said until a certain number of ethnographic descriptions
of communities in terms of ways of speaking are available. It is likely that
communities differ widely in the features in terms of which their ways of
speaking are primarily organized.

   Components of Speech. A descriptive theory requires some schema of
the components of speech acts. At present such a schema can be only an
etic, heuristic input to descriptions. Later it may assume the status of a
theory of universal features and dimensions.
   Long traditional in our culture is the threefold division between
speaker, hearer, and something spoken about. It has been elaborated in
information theory, linguistics, semiotics, literary criticism, and sociology
in various ways. In the hands of some investigators various of these
models have proven productive, but their productivity has depended upon
not taking them literally, let alone using them precisely. All such schemes,
e.g., appear to agree either in taking the standpoint of an individual
speaker or in postulating a dyad, speaker-hearer (or source-destination,
sender-receiver, addressor-addressee). Even if such a scheme is intended
to be a model, for descriptive work it cannot be. Some rules of speaking
require specification of three participants [addressor, addressee, hearer
(audience), source, spokesman, addressees; etc.]; some of but one, in-
different as to role in the speech event; some of two, but of speaker and
audience (e.g., a child); and so on. In short, serious ethnographic work
shows that there is one general, or universal, dimension to be postulated,
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life     59

that of participant. The common dyadic model of speaker-hearer speci-
fies sometimes too many, sometimes too few, sometimes the wrong par-
 ticipants. Further ethnographic work will enable us to state the range of
actual types of participant relations and to see in differential occurrence
 something to be explained.
    Ethnographic material so far investigated indicates that some sixteen or
seventeen components have sometimes to be distinguished. No rule has
been found that requires specification of all simultaneously. There are
always redundancies, and sometimes a rule requires explicit mention of a
relation between only two, message form and some other. (It is a general
principle that all rules involve message form, if not by affecting its shape,
then by governing its interpretation.) Since each of the components may
sometimes be a factor, however, each has to be recognized in the general
grid.
    Psycholinguistic work has indicated that human ~emory works best
with classifications of the magnitude of seven, plus or minus two (Miller
 1956). To make the set of components mnemonically convenient, at least
in English, the letters of the term SPEAKING can be used. The com-
ponents can be grouped together in relation to the eight letters without
great difficulty. Clearly, the use of SPEAKING as a mnemonic code
word has nothing to do with the form of an eventual model and theory.
    I. Message form. The form of the message is fundamental, as has just
been indicated. The most common, and most serious, defect in most re-
ports of speaking probably is that the message form, and, hence, the rules
governing it, cannot be recaptured. A concern for the details of actual
form strikes some as picayune, as removed from humanistic or scientific
importance. Such a view betrays an impatience that is a disservice to
both humanistic and scientific purposes. It is precisely the failure to unite·
form and content in the scope of a single focus of study that has retarded
understanding of the human ability to speak, and that vitiates many at-
tempts to analyze the significance of behavior. Content categories, inter-
pretive categories, alone do not suffice. It is a truism, but one frequently
ignored in research, that how something is said is part of what is said. Nor
can one prescribe in advance the gross size of the signal that will be cru-
cial to content and skill. The more a way of speaking has become shared             ''
                                                                                    I',

and meaningful within a group, the more likely that crucial cues will be
efficient, i.e., slight in scale. If one balks at such detail, perhaps because it
requires technical skills in linguistics, musicology, or the like that are
hard to command, one should face the fact that the human meaning of
one's object of study, and the scientific claims of one's field of inquiry, are
                                                                                              :~ ' :
not being taken seriously.                                                                    :j, :·:

   Especially when competence, the ability of persons, is of concern, one                 :i
                                                                                    . I 11'· ,;.
                                                                                    '        ,I

must recognize that shared ways of speaking acquire a partial autonomy,             i iii I
                                                                                    I!
developing in part in terms of an inner logic of their means of expression.         i. I!!:
                                                                                         tr
The means of expression condition and sometimes control content. For                :    I



                                                                                    i I ,f! I
                                                                                    : ;       (         .I
                                                                                    I   'i        r,:111
                                                                                    I!        ]i !
                                                                                    !Jii:;i
                                                                                        '
                                                                                    ' , , 11
                                                                                              \/    I

                                                                                    ''       1,I'
                                                                                    ''
        60   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

members of the community, then, "freedom is the recognition of neces-
sity"; mastery of the way of speaking is prerequisite to personal expres-
sion. Serious concern for both scientific anaiysis and human meaning
requires one to go beyond content to the explicit statement of rules and
features of form.
   While such an approach may seem to apply first of all to genres conven-
tionally recognized as esthetic, it also applies to conversation in daily life.
Only painstaking analysis of message f9tm-how things are said-of a
sort that indeed parallels and can learn from the intensity of literary crit-
icism can disclose the depth and adequacy of the elliptical art that is talk.
   2. Message content. One context for distinguishing message form from
 message content would be: "He prayed, saying' . . . '" (quoting message
form) vs. "He prayed that he would get well" (reporting content only).
   Content enters analysis first of all perhaps as a question of topic, and
of change of topic. Members of a group know what is being talked about,
 and when what is talked about has changed, and manage maintenance,
 and change, of topic. These abilities are parts of their communicative com-
 petence of particular importance to study of the coherence of discourse.
   Message form and message content are central to the speech act and the
 focus of its "syntactic structure"; they are also tightly interdependent.
Thus they can be dubbed jointly as components of "act sequence"
 (mnemonically, A).                       ,
   3. Setting. Setting refers to the time and place of a speech act and, in
 general, to the physical circumstances.
   4. Scene. Scene, which is distinct from setting, designates the "psy-
 chological setting," or the cultural definition of an occasion as a certain
 type of scene. Within a play on the same stage with the same stage set the
 dramatic time may shift: "ten years later." In daily life the same persons
 in the same setting may redefine their interaction as a changed type of
 scene, say, from formal to informal, serious to festive, or the like. (For an
 example of the importance of types of scene to analysis of speech genres,
 see Frake's contrast of the Subanun and Yakan at the end of Chapter 3.)
 Speech acts frequently are used to define scenes, and also frequently
judged as appropriate or inappropriate in relation to scenes. Settings and
 scenes themselves, of course, may be judged as appropriate and inap-
 propriate, happy or unhappy, in relation to each other, from the level of
 complaint about the weather to that of dramatic irony.
    Setting and scene may be linked as components of act situation
 (mnemonically, S). Since scene implies always an analysis of cultural
 definitions, setting probably is to be preferred as the informal, unmarked
 term for the two.
    5. Speaker, or sender.
    6. Addressor.
    7. Hearer, or receiver, or audience.
    8. Addressee.



                                                                                  J
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   61

    These four components were discussed in introducing the subJect of
 components of speech. Here are a few illustrations. Among the Ab1pon of
 Argentina -in is added to the end of each word if any participant (what-
 ever his role) is a member of the Hocheri (warrior class). Among the
 Wishram Chinook, formal scenes are defined by the relationship between
 a source (e.g., a chief, or sponsor of a ceremony), a spokesman who re-
 peats the source's words and others who constitute an audience or pub-
 lic. The source whose w~rds are repeated sometimes is not present; the
 addressees sometimes are spirts of the surrounding environment. In the
 Presence of a child adults in Germany often use the term of address
 which would be ap~ropriate for the child. Sometimes rules for partici-
 pants are internal to a genre and independent of the participants in the
 embedding event. Thus male and female actors in Yana myths use the
 appropriate men's and women's forms of speech, respectively, irrespec-
 tive of the sex of the narrator. Use of men's speech itself is required when
both addressor and addressee are both adult and male, "women's" speech
otherwise. Groups differ in their definitions of the participants in speech
events in revealing ways, particularly in defining absence (e.g., children,
maids) and presence (e.g., supernaturals) of participation. Much of re-
ligious conduct can be interpreted as part of a native theory of communi-
cation. The various components may be grouped together as participants
(mnemonically, P).
    9. Purposes-outcomes. Conventionally recognized and expected
outcomes often enter into the definition of speech events, as among the
Waiwai of Venezuela, where the central speech event of the society, the
olw-c/zant, has several varieties, according to whether the purpose to be
accomplished is a marriage contract, a trade, a communal work task, an
invitation to a feast, or a composing of social peace after a death. The
rules for participants and settings vary accordingly (Fock 1965). A tax-
onomy of speech events among the Yakan of the Philippines (analyzed by
Frake, Chapter 3) is differentiated into levels according jointly to topic
(any topic, an issue, a disagreement, a dispute) and outcome (no particular
outcome, a decision, a settlement, a legal ruling).
    10. Purposes-goals. The purpose of an event from a community
standpoint, of course, need not be identical to the purposes of those en-
gaged in it. Presumably, both sides to a Yakan litigation wish to win. In a           i·· I1




negotiation the purpose of some may be to obtain a favorable settlement,
of others simply that there be a settlement. Among the Waiwai the pro-
spective father-in-law and son-in-law have opposing goals in arriving at a
marriage contract. The strategies of participants are an essential deter-
minant of the form of speech events, indeed, to their being performed at
all (see Blom and Gumperz 2, Chapter 14).
   With respect both to outcomes and goals, the conventionally expected
 or ascribed must be distinguished from the purely situational or personal,      i             I
                                                                                'I     ;       i
                                                                                 I.
        62    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

and from the latent and unintended. The interactions of a particular
speech event may determine its particular quality and whether or not the
expected outcome is reached. The actual motives, or some portion of
them, of participants may be quite varied. In the first instance, descrip-
tions of speech events seek to describe customary or culturally appro-
priate behavior. Such description is essential and prerequisite to under-
standing events in all their individual richness; but 1 the two kinds of
account should not be confused (see Sapir 1949h:534, 543).
   Many approaches to communication and the analysis of speech have
not provided a place for either kind of purpose, perhaps because of a
conscious or unconsciously lingering behaviorism. [Kenneth Burke's
(1945) approach is a notable exception.] Yet communication itself must
be differentiated from interaction as a whole in terms of purposiveness
(see Humes 1964e). The two aspects of purpose can be grouped together
by exploiting an English homonymy, ends in view (goals) and ends as
outcomes (mnemonically, E).
   11. Key. Key is introduced to provide for the tone, manner, or spirit in
which an act is done. It corresp'ond; roughly to modality among gram-
matical categories. Acts otherwise the same as regards setting, partici-
pants, message form, and the like may differ in key, as, e.g., between
mock: serious or pe1functory: painstaking.
   Key is often conventionally ascribed to an instance of some other com-
ponent as its attribute; seriousness, for example, may be the expected
concomitant of a scene, participant, act, code, or genre (say, a church, a
judge, a vow, use of Latin, obsequies). Yet there is always the possibility
that there is a conventionally understood way of substituting an alterna-
tive key. (This possibility corresponds to the general possibility of choos-
ing one speech style or register as against another.) In this respect, ritual
remains always informative. Knowing what should happen next, one still
can attend to the way in which it happens. (Consider, for example, critics
reviewing performances of the classical repertoire for the piano.)
   The significance of key is underlined by the fact that, when it is in
                         1

conflict with the overt c ontent of an act, It often overrides the latter (as in
sarcasm). The signaling of key may be nonverbal, as with a wink, gesture,
posture, style of dress, musical accompaniment, but it also commonly in-
volves conventional units of speech too often disregarded in ordinary
linguistic analysis, such as English aspiration and vowel length to signal
emphasis. Such features are often termed expressive, but are better
dubbed stylistic since they need not at all depend on the mood of their
user. Revill ( I 966:251) reports, for instance, that "some forms have been
found which cannot [emphasis mine] be described as reflecting feelings on
the part of the speaker, but they will be used in certain social situations"
(for emphasis, clarity, politeness).
   12. Channels. By choice of channel is understood choice of oral, writ-
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   63

ten, telegraphic, semaphore, or other medium of transmission of speech.
With regard to channels, one must further distinguish modes of use. The
oral channel, e.g., may be used to sing, hum, whistle, or chant features of
speech as well as to speak them. Two important goals of description are
accounts of the interdependence of channels in interaction and the relative
hierarchy among them.
    I 3. Forms of speech. A m,\jor theoretical and empirical problem is to
distinguish the verbal resources of a community. Obviously, it is super-
ficial, indeed misleading, to speak of the language of a community
(Ferguson and Gumperz I 960). Even where there is but a single "lan-
guage" present in a community (no cases are known in the contemporary
world), that language will be organized into various forms of speech.
Three criteria seem to require recognition at the present time: the his-
torical provenience of the language resources; presence or absence of
mutual intelligibility; and specialization in use. The criteria often do not
coincide. Language and dialect are suggested for the first; codes for the
second; and varieties and registers for the third. One speaks normally of
the English language, and of dialects of English, wherever forms of speech
are found whose content is historically derived from the line of linguistic
tradition we call "English." The different dialects are nqt always mutually
intelligible (see Yorkshire and Indian English), and their social functions
vary considerably around the world, from childhood vernacular to bu-
reaucratic lingua franca. "Code" suggests decoding and the question of
intelligibility. Unintelligibility may result when speech is in a language
historically unrelated to one's own, but also from use of a simple trans-
formation of one's own speech, e.g., Pig Latin, or "op" talk. In short,
some forms of speech derive from others by addition, deletion, substitu-
tion, and permutation in various combinations. Finally, forms of speech
are commonly specialized to uses of various sorts. Register has become
familiar in English linguistic usage for reference to specific situations;
varieties, or "functional varieties," has been used in American linguistics
in relation to broad domains (e.g., vernacular vs. standard).
    For sociolinguistics, varieties has priority as a ,standpoint from which
 to view the forms of speech of a community. The criteria of provenience
 and intelligibility have to do with sources and characteristics of the crite-
 rion of use with the functional organization, of the forms of speech.
 Channels and forms of speech can be joined together as means or agen-
 cies of speaking and labeled, partly for the sake of the code word, partly
with an eye on the use of the term instrumental in grammar, as instm-
mentalities (mnemonically, I).
    14. N onns of interaction. All rules governing speaking, of course, have
a normative character. What is intended here are the specific beh,iviors
and proprieties that attach to speaking-that one must not interrupt, for
example, or that one may freely do so; that normal voice should not be
                                                                                    !

        64   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

used except when scheduled in a church service (whisper otherwise); that
turns in speaking are to be allocated in a certain way. Norms of interac-
tion obviously implicate analysis of social structure, and social relation-
ships generally, in a community. An illustration follows:

The next morning during tea with Jikjitsu, a college professor who rents rooms in
one of the Sodo buildings came in and talked of koans. "When you understand
Zen, you know that the tree is really there."-The only time anyone said anything
of Zen philosophy or experience the whole week. Zenbos ntver discuss koans or
sanzen experience with each other (Snyder 1969:52).

    15. Norms of interpretation. An account of norms of interaction may
still leave open the interpretation to be placed upon them, especially when
members of different communities are in communication. Thus it is clear
that Arabic and American students differ on a series of interactional
norms: Arabs confront each other more directly (face to face) when con-
versing, sit closer to each other, are more likely to touch each other, look
each other more squarely in the eye, and converse more loudly (Watson
and Graves 1966:976-977). The inyestigators who report these findings
themselves leave open the meanings of these norms to the participants
(p. 984).
    The problem of norms of interpretation is familiar from the assessment
of communications from other governments and national leaders. One
often looks for friendliness in lessened degree of overt hostility. Rela-
tions between groups within a country are often affected by misunder-
 standings on this score. For white middle-class Americans, for example,
 normal hesitation behavior involves "fillers" at the point of hesitation
 ("uh," etc.). For many blacks, a normal pattern is to recycle to the be-
 ginning of the utterance (perhaps more than once). This black norm may
 be interpreted by whites not as a different norm but as a defect. (I owe
 this example to David Dalby.)
    Norms of interpretation implicate the belief system of a community.
 The classic precedent in the ethnographic analysis of a language is
 Malinowski's ( 1935) ,treatment of Trobriand magical formulas and
 ritual under the heading of dognwtic context. (Malinowski's other rubrics
 are roughly related to these presented here in the following way: His
 sociological context and ritual context subsume information as to setting,
 participants, ends in view and outcome, norms of interaction, and higher ·
  level aspects of genre; structure reports salient patterning of the verbal
 form of the act or event; mode of recitation reports salient characteristics
  of the vocal aspect of channel use and message form.)
     The processes of interpretation discussed by Garfinkel (Chapter I 0),
  including "ad hoeing" generally, would belong in this category. These
  two kinds of norms may be grouped together (mnemonically, N).
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life     65

   16. Genres. By genres are meant categories such as poem, myth, tale,
proverb, riddle, curse, prayer, oration, lecture, commercial, form letter,
editorial, etc. From one standpoint the analysis of speech into acts is an
analysis of speech into instances of genres. The notion of genre implies
the possibility of identifying formal characteristics traditionally recog-
nized. It is heuristically important to proceed as though all speech has
formal characteristics of some sort as manifestation of genres; and it may
well be true (on genres, see Ben-Amos 1969). The common notion of
"casual" or unmarked speech, however, points up the fact that there is a
great range among genres in the number of and explicitness of formal
markers. At least there is a great range in the ease with which such
markers have been identified. It remains that "unmarked" casual speech
can be recognized as such in a context where it is not expected or where it
is being exploited for particular effect. I ts lesser visibility may, be a func-
tion of our own orientations and use of it; its profile may be as sharp as
any other, once we succeed in seeing it as strange.
   Genres often coincide with speech events, but must be treated as an-
alytically independent of them. They may occur in (or as) different events.
The sermon as a genre is typically identical with a certain place in a
church service, but its properties may be invoked, for serious or humorous
effect, in other situations. Often enough a genre recurs in several events,
such as a genre of chanting employed by women in Bihar state in India;
it is the prescribed form for a related set of acts, recurring in weddings,
family visits, and complaints to one's husband (K. M. Tiwary, personal
communication). A great deal of empirical work will be needed to clarify
the interrelations of genres, events, acts, and other components (mne-
monically, G).
   As has been shown, the sixteen components can be grouped together
under the letters of the code word SPEAKING: settings, participants,
ends, act sequences, keys, instrumentalities, norms, genres. That the
code word is not wholly ethnocentric appears from the possibility of re-
labeling and regrouping the necessary components in terms of the French
PARLANT: participants, actes, raison (resultat), locale, agents (instru-
mentalities), normes, ton (key), types (genres).

   Rules (Relations) of Speaking. In discovering the local system of speak-                            :,
ing, certain familiar guidelines are, of course, to be used. One must de-                              ,i
termine the local taxonomy of terms as an essential, though never per-             '       •I'
                                                                                   .. : I}''
fect, guide. A shift in any of the components of speaking may mark the
presence of a rule (or structured relation), e.g., from normal tone of
voice to whisper, from formal English to slang, correction, praise, em-
barrassment, withdrawal, and other evaluative responses to speech may
indicate the violation or accomplishment of a rule. In general, one can
                                                                                             r:
                                                                                   ,, I
                                                                                            I :
                                                                                          ;, r;I




                                                                                       '!' I~      •   Ii
                                                                                   ''     ',1,,,       '
                                                                                                       t'\1
                                                                                             ;:,1

                                                                                   :J4
                                                                               !

        66   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

think of any change in a component as a potential locus for application
for a "sociolinguistic" commutation test: What relevant contrast, if any,
is present?
   The heuristic set of components should be used negatively as well as
positively, i.e., if a component seems irrelevant to certain acts or genres,
that should be asserted, and the consequences of the assertion checked.
In just this way Arewa and Dundes (1964) discovered additional aspects
of the use of proverbs among the Yoruba: Channel){ad seemed irrelevant
(or rather, always spoken). Pressing the point led to recognition of a
change in the form of proverbs when drummed, in keeping with a pattern
of partial repetition particular to drumming. Again, the status of partici-
pant (user) as adult seemed invariant. Pressing the point by stating it as a
rule led to discovery of a formulaic apology by which a child could make
use of proverbs.
   Many generalizations about rules of speaking will take the form of
statements of relationship among components. It is not yet clear that
there is any priority to be assigned to particular components in such
statements. So far as one can tell at present, any component may be taken
as starting point, and the others"viewed in relation to it. When individual
societies have been well analyzed, hierarchies of precedence among com-
ponents will very likely appear and be found to differ from case to case.
Such differences in hierarchy of components will then be an important
part of the taxonomy of sociolinguistic systems. For one group, rules of
speaking will be heavily bound to setting; for another primarily to par-
ticipants; for a third, perhaps to topic.
   Experimentation with the formal statement of rules of speaking has
only recently begun. (See Tyler's informal examples in Chapter 8, and
Ervin-Tripp's'pioneering survey, with many original points, in Chapter 7.)
Work of Joel Sherzer and myself with some ethnographic data suggested
the possibility of adapting a syntactic mode of statement. In such a for-
mat, features holding throughout a speech event are stated at the outset
in a sort of "lexicon" of components. The sequential structure of the act
itself is stated in a sort of "syntax" by means of rewriting rules (Chomsky
 1965). Whe_n pros~ descriptions of events have been so restated, there has
been a considerable gain in understanding of structure; or, one might say,
a considerable clarification of what one understood to be the structure has
been demanded. The form of the event is disengaged, as it were, from the
verbal foliage obligatory in prose sentences, and can be more readily
seen. In order to compare events within a society, and across societies,
some concise and standard formats are needed. Comparison cannot de-
pend upon memorization or shuffling of prose paragraphs vastly different
in verbal style. And it is through some form of formal statement that one
can commit oneself to a precise claim as to what it is a member of society
knows in knowing how to participate in a speech act.
--
                Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life               67

 A bipon "Scoring" (= G)

     I.   Event: shaman's retribution (minor offense)

          Components: S                  -        shaman's house
                      p                  -        (I) shaman, (2) offender
                                                  shaman ---> [-female]
                                                  offender ---> person identified by shaman as
                                                                 responsible for a misfortune



                                         ---
                                                    to punish offender]
                         E                        [ to test courage?
                         K                        ritual seriousness
                                                  Abipon language, fish (pa/ometa) jaw
                         I
                         N
                                           -        -speech]- [courage
                                                  [ +speech - cowardice
                                                                            J

          Sequence:
                                           --     call + scoring


                                            --
                         Call                     ?
                                                  (Pl) {piercing}+ (P2) response
                         Scoring                         response
                                                    -avoidance, -speech]
                         (P2) Response            [ +avoidance, +speech

                         (PI) Response
                         RI
                                         --->
                                             --     RI
                                                  [ RI + R2
                                                             ]/[-avoidance, -speech
                                                                   +avoidance, +speech
                                                                                         J ·
                                                  reproach in name of ancestral spirit and tradi-
                                                  tions for initial offense
                                                  Reproach in name of ancestral spirit for offense
                         R2
                                                  of cowardice

     2.   Event: girl's puberty rite

          Components: S                  -        shaman's house
                                                                                                                    I
                      p                  --->     (I) shaman, (2) girl
                                                  shaman -        [+female, +old]                                 :1
                                                  girl      ---> [+female, +marriageable age
                                                                 (ca. 20)]

                         E
                                         --         to identify girl as marriageable
                                                    to beautify girl
                                                  [ to test/manifest girl's courage
                         K


                         N
                                            --    ritual seriousness
                                                  Abipon language, thorns
                                                    -speech + co~rage ]
                                                  [ +speech cowardice




                                          ---
                                                                                                     ; ' i,       'l
          SC'quence:                              (?call) + scoring                                               'I
                                                                                                                    I
                                                         pricking}                                            I   ;,I
                         Scoring                  (PI) {response + (P2) response
                                                    -avoidance, -speech J
                         (P2) Response            [ +avoidance, +speech

                         (PI) Response
                         R2
                                             --     (?)
                                                  [ R2 + R2
                                                            ]/[-avoidance, -speech
                                                                +avoidance, +speech
                                                                                         J
                                                  reproach in name of ancestral spirit and tradi-
                                                  tions for cowardice



                                                                                                     '        ,1 ·

                                                                                                     :   ....:::~,
                                                                                                     '~
         68    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                    R3             -        taunt of future spinsterhood

 3.   Event: testing of children

      Components: S
                  p
                  E

                    K
                                   --
                                   ->
                                            parent's home?
                                            (PI) parent, (P2) child
                                            to teach receiver's role in ritual taunting
                                            to teach, test courage (?)
                                            ?                    I

                                   -
                    I                       Abipon language
                    N                         -speech + courag~ ]
                                            [ +speech cowardice

      Sequence:
                    "Scoring"     -
                                   -   (?)+scoring
                                       (PI) { taunt
                                              response
                                                       } + (P2) response

                    Taunt         - > ?'?

                    (P2) Response ---" [ -speech]
                                         +speech

                     (PI) Response -          ? (praise?)J/[-speech]
                                            [ R2            +speech
                                        /

   It was the explicit analysis of the more formally defined events that led
Sherzer to notice features of the same sort in the casual mention by the
source of an informal use of speech by parents. More than one mode of
formal (explicit) statement obviously might be attempted-the format
used here differs from that in Sherzer ( 1967) and also in minor details
from the revised format of Sherzer (1970). The point is that to put the
analysis in such a format forces one to confront what prose may let es-
cape: Just exactly what does one's information specify, and what does it
fail to specify, about those features? The task of presentation in a for-
mat-something that can take a good deal of time to do consistently and
exhaustively-forces attention to structure, and brings out the parallelism
in organization of these events, as well as the revealing differences-the
relative hierarchy, e.g., of piercing with a fish jaw, pricking with, thorns,
and purely verbal t~unting, covarying with the relative hierarchy of the
initiator's response to silence, single reproach (RI), silence, and perhaps
 praise, in keeping with the general ends in view, punishment, initiation,
 and training. The parallel structure suggests the exploitation of the several
 sense of the English word "scoring" for the initiator's first action, and
 would direct attention (were the Abipones still extant) to behavior equiv-
 alent to the call of the shaman's retribution that might be found with the
 other two events.
    The labeling of the acts is unavoidably somewhat arbitrary. We cannot
 now determine how the Abipones would have translated "taunting" and
 "reproach," e.g., nor whether they would have distinguished the two as is
 done here. While the terms overlap in their senses in English, it is rea-
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life              69

sonable to use "reproach" with regard to offenses (cause of a misfortune,
offense against traditions by replying to "scoring"), and "taunting" other-
wise, while following Sherzer in choosing "taunting" for the general
category. Information from other indigenous South American cultures,
and general theory of speech acts, may later support or change the
interpretation.
  The analysis has been from the "syntactic" standpoint of the compo-
ne(!t of act sequence. The analysis also makes possible the standpoint of
categories or a "lexicon" of acts. The first participants acts of scoring and
response can be somewhat as subcategorization in the context either of
the event or the component of the second participant:

     Scoring         -      [piercing]/[Shaman's retribution] or [offender]
                            [pricking]/[Girl's puberty rite] or [marriageable girl]
                            [taunting]/[training of child] or [child]
     Taunting        -      r RI + (R2)l/fas abovel or [as above]
     (Pl)Response           [(R2 + R3)]/
                            [ (R2)         ]/

                                                                                          i.
We do not know the message form of the initial taunting or response                       I,
which might lead to further specification. The second participant's re-
sponse is constant throughout the three events on the level at which we
have information, but again, might be subcategorized if message form                      i    I   I      "I
were known.                                                                               i ,          : ii
  All three kinds of acts can also be seen as entries in a communicative              l       i'        ·:1
lexicon, where the familiar formulation X - (is rewritten, or realized, as)                                    I
                                                                                                               I

Y/(in the context) W-Z, can be adapted to read, X (has the value) Y/(in
the context) W-Z.

         Scoring__,. [punishment]/[shaman's retribution]         [offender]
                     [initiation]/[girl's puberty rite] or [marriageable girl]
                     [training]/[testing of child]      [child]

   The second participant's alternative responses have the same meaning
throughout: courage/cowardice. Perhaps it is not accidental that the one
                                                                                                        :J
insight into verbal socialization that we have from Dobrizhoffer fits with a
society in which no valued adult role depended upon verbal skill.                     \:
                                                                                      :
   Such a mode of analysis permits formal treatment of many of the acts               i'
                                                                                      ),,

of speech. The conventional means of many such functions can indeed                                     1'1'

be analyzed as relations among components, e.g., message form, genre,                                   'i"
and key in the case of the -y form of the accusative plural of masculine
nouns in Polish, which has the value "solemn" in the genre of poetry, and
the value "ironic, pejorative" in the genres of nonpoetic speech. Func-
tions themselves may be statable in terms of relations among components,
such that poetic function, e.g., may require a certain relationship among
         70    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

choice of code, choice of topic, and message form in a given period or
society.
   It would be misleading, however, to think that the definition of functions
can be reduced to or derived from other components. Such a thought
would be a disabling residue of behaviorist ideology. Ultimately, the func-
tions served in speech must be derived directly from the purposes and
needs of human persons engaged in social action, and are what they are:
talkin? to_ seduce, to stay awake, to a~oid a war. Thrformal analysis of
speakmg 1s a means to the understandmg of human purposes and needs,
and their satisfaction; it is an indispensable means, but only a means, and
 not that understanding itself.


           Explanation

         Beyond description is the task of devising models of explanation.
The many kinds of act and genre of speech are not all universal; each has
a history, and a set of conditions for its origin, maintenance, change, and
loss. All the questions that attach to explanation in social science- ques-
tions of primacy of factors (technology, social structure, values, and the
like), considerations of areal patterning, diffusion, independent develop-
ment, and evolution, will impinge. If the kind of explanatory adequacy
discussed by Chomsky (1965) is recognized as "essential," i.e., as con-
cerned with what is internal to language, and beyond that, internal to
human nature, we can see the need for an "existential" or "experiential"
explanatory adequacy, a kind of explanation that will link speaking with
 human history and praxis (Petrovich 1967: 111-1 18, J 26-127, 171-172;
 LeFebvre 1968:34, 45-46). To do this is not only to see languages as part
 of systems of speaking but also to see systems of speaking from the stand-
 point of the central question of the nature of sociocultural order-a theory
 of the maintenance of order being understood as implying a corresponding
 theory of change, and conversely. 10
    Each case, or eac~ type of case, to be sure, may be valued in its own
    10 See Cohen 1968. His cogent, penetrating account takes explanation as fundamental to

  theory and social order as central to what is to be explained {pp. x, 16, Chapter 2). Cohen
  speaks simply of "social order." I use "sociocultural order" to make explicit the inclusion of
  symbolic or cognitive order (see Berger 1967). On the relevance of sociolinguistics, note the
  introduction by Donald Mac Rae (center p. x). On an adequate theory of linguistic change, see
  Weinreich, Labov, and Herzog 1968, especially pp. 100-10 I: "The key to a rational con-
  ception of language change-indeed, of language itself-is the possibility of describing
  orderly differentiation in a language serving a commu~ity . . . native like command <?f
  heterogeneous structures is not a matter of multidialectaltsm or "mere" performan~e, but 1s
  part of unilingual linguistic competence . . . in a .language serving a compl~x (1.~., real)
  community, it is abs£'11ce of structured heterogeneity that would be dysfun_ct1.onal. ~IOI).
  The conclusions (187-188) make clear that an adequate theory must be soc10Itngu1st1c and
   be based on sociolinguistic description.
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   71

right as an expression of mankind. My own work stems in part from a
desire to understand the meanings of language in individual lives, and to
W~rk toward ending the frequent alienation from human beings of some-
thmg human beings have created (see Berger 1967, Chapter l, especially          I·
                                                                                I

Pp. 12-13, and notes l, 2, and l l; Lefebvre 1966: Chapter VIII, and
1968:72-74; and Merleau-Ponty 1967). Individuating, interpretive,                          ! ':


and phenomenological motives are consistent with a concern for general,
causal explanation. Each case and type is valuable, enlarging and testing
general knowledge, and it is only with a general view of conditions and
possibilities that the value of individual ways of speaking can be accu-
rately assessed .
 . We require a widely ranging series of-descriptions, whatever the mo-
tives that severally produce them. Neither a descriptive model nor an
explanatory theory is convincing if it has not met the test of diverse situa-
tions, of a general body of data. Recall that Darwin's exposition 'of natural
selection, and Tylor's (l 87 l, Chapter I) of exposition of a science of
culture, were convincing in piut for such a reason. We require some initial
0 :dering of the diversity, although the ordering need not be conceived as
~i~her historical or unique. Sociolinguistic description and taxonomy are
Jomt conditions of success for understanding and explaining the interac-
tion of language and social life.




                                                                                     Ii       .!
                                                                                      i. ·.I
                                                                                      !:      I
         2

         Culture Patterning
         of Speech Behavior in Bufundi                                       1



         ETHEL M. ALBERT




         Ethel M. Albert is Professor of Anthropology and Speech
         at Northwestern University. She received her doctorate
         in philosophy at the University of Wisconsin and taught
         logic and philosophy of science at Brooklyn College,
         Wisconsin, and Syracuse. As Research Associate of the
         Comparative Study of Values in Five Cultures at Har-
         vard, she concentrated on Navaho values with fieldwork
         among the Ramah Navaho. This chapter, revised from a
         paper included in Gumperz and Hymes' "The Ethnog-
         raphy of Communication" (Albert 1964), draws on two
         years of fieldwork on values and world view in Burundi.
         Dr. Albert's main interests are in "macrosemantics" as a
         theory of verbal and cultural contexts and cultural logics
         and ethnoepistemology.
             A comprehensive account of speech behavior, such as
          Dr. Albert provides here, is rare. To it she adds a dis-
         cussion of the problems of fieldwork on speech behavior
         that is also of great value. Most ethnographers obtain
         information on speech behavior through the sheer neces-
          sity of learning how to comport themselves and to obtain
         information, whatever their principal subject of study.
          Few make that process an object of reflection and report
          in itself, as Dr. Albert does here. Both ethnography and

          A revision of" 'Rhetoric,' 'Logic,' and 'Poetics' in Burundi: Cultural
          Patterning of Speech Behavior," reproduced by permission of the
          American Anthropological Association and the author from American
          Anthropologist, Vol. 66, No. 6, 1964.
  1
    The research upon which this paper is based was carried out in Burundi, Central Africa.
It wa.5 supp~r!ed by a Ford _Foundation Overseas Study Fellowship (1955-1957) and
materially facilitated by the assistance of 1.R.S.'A.C. (lnstitut pour la Recherche Scientifique
en Afrique Centrale).


                                              72
             Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi    73

       sociolinguistics would benefit if more researchers were to
       do so.
          Notice that while social structure is discussed first, its
       role in speech is seen by Dr. Albert as following from the
       underlying beliefs and values that are her main concern.
       Here cultural outlook is the explanatory starting point
       rather than social structure itself (as with Bernstein in
       Chapter 17). Among the many individual points of in-
       terest in this rich paper, notice particularly the "compe-
       tence of incompetence" required of peasants in the pres-
       ence of aristocrats (recalling the defensive image of
       "shuffling" and Steppinfechit imposed on American
       Negroes); the differential speech training of men' and
       women; the example of switching from formal to informal
       interaction between an aristocrat and servant, indicating
       that other aspects of speaking are predictable from the
       social position of the participants and the topic; the in-
       verse relationship between the manner ("key") in which
       an instruction is accepted by a servant and the likelihood
       of its being carried out; the prevalence of indirect refer-
       ence; the simultaneous concealment and invitation to
       disclosure of allusive narrative songs; the invention and
       interpretation of figurative and allusive speech as a gen-
       eral cultural skill; the pervasive valuing of both esthetic
       and instrumental aspects of speech. The paper is espe-
       cially valuable for its portrayal of the relations between
       cultural patterns of speaking and personal strategies.
       Another unique feature is the discussion of fieldwork
       problems. Albert lists in detail the possibility for mis-
       understanding arising from Rundi verbal strategies and
       gives practical suggestions for the ethnographer of speak-
       ing. Many of the problems of interpretation that Garfinkel
       alludes to in Chapter IO are exemplified here. For an-
       other important discussion of ethnography in a similar
       vein, see Moerman (1968b). Seitel (1969 and 1971) gives
       a highly suggestive analysis of how pronouns are used to
       convey meaning. Additional related readings are pro-
       vided by Calame-Griaule (1965), Hogan (1967), Hymes
       ( 1966a), and Samarin ( 1967).


        Like other universal categories of human behavior, speech is the
object of diverse, complementary specializations. In the context of the
        74    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ethnography of speaking, not only the language spoken but also the uses
of speech may be assumed to have distinctive culture patterns. Ideally, a
complete anthropological description of the pattern of a culture would in-
clude the rules and uses of speech, their implementation and violation, and
relevant sanctions, positive and negative. Conversely, when inquiry is
focused on cultural patterns of speech behavior, the optimum context is
the whole culture pattern. Major intracultural variations in the uses of
speech may be assumed to be systematically related to1(he constituents of
culture patterns, including aspects of the social structure, cultural defini-
tions of the situations of action, the cultural philosophy and value system,
and their patterned interrelations.
    The traditional kingdom of Burundi 2 is a particularly fortunate case study
of culture patterning of speech behavior. Speech is explicitly recognized
as an important instrument of social life; eloquence is one of the central
values of the cultural world-view; and the way of life affords frequent op-
portunity for its exercise. Sensitivity to the variety and complexity of
speech behavior is evident in a rich vocabulary for its description and
evaluation and in a constant flow .of speech about speech. Argument,
debate, and negotiation, as well as elaborate literary forms, are built into
 the organization of society and the content of the world-view as means of
gaining one's ends, as social status symbols, and as skills enjoyable in
 themselves.                                              ·
    A highly secularized, sophisticated feudal kingdom with a population of
 approximately two million, traditional Burundi has well-defined criteria
 of rhetoric, logic, and poetics, and well-developed ideas about their uses
 and interrelations. The norms governing the uses of speech are explicitly
 differentiated according to caste, sex, and age so that the relations of
 speech behavior to social structure are easily grasped by observers. For-
 malization and stylization of speech situations are extensive and elab-
 orate, suggesting ways in which the uses of language are conditioned by
 culturally distinctive conceptions of situational appropriateness. Esfhetic
 criteria are well developed and have an extensive range of relevance. Ex-
  plicit concern with the values of truth and falsity and their situational
  relativism connect concepts governing the uses of speech to the premises
  of the cultural world-view and value system.
    The primary intention of this paper is to explore concepts and cate-
  gories that may be useful for constructing cultural patterns of speech
  behavior. The descriptive data presented were provided by informants'

    2 "Burundi" is the post-independence form of the name of the kingdom earlier included in
  the joint designation, Ruanda-Urundi. The Bantu form will be retained for the nam~ of.the
  people, viz., Barundi (singular, Murundi); "Kirundi" for the language; but for the adJect1ve,
  only the stem will be used, viz., Rundi.
'
                   Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   75

     verbalizations, spontaneous or by elicitation, and checked by observation
     and the comparison of the interview protocols of a variety of informants.
     Space does not permit an exhaustive account of all the relevant data.
     Organization of the material is only in small part a reflection of explicit
     informant statements about speech as such.
        Adoption of the terms "rhetoric," "logic," and "poetics" from Western
     culture is necessarily tentative and obviously entails the risk of culture-
     bound distortion. Conventional denotative meanings will be used: "rhet-
    oric" designates the norms and techniques of persuasion, as well as the
    criteria governing styles of delivery in public speaking; "logic" refers to
    the rules and uses of evidence and inference; and "poetics" refers to the
    esthetic criteria that govern discourse. The referents of these terms are
    neither precise nor unambiguous in their native cultural habitat. "Poetics"
    overlaps with "rhetoric" insofar as public address and persm~sion are
    governed by esthetic rules; the line between rhetoric and sophistry is so
    fine that it not infrequently disappears when persuasion is contrasted with
    the strict rules of logic and the ideals of literal, descriptive truth. Ad-
    mittedly of limited utility, the terms "rhetoric," "logic," and "poetics"
    nevertheless call attention to a significant and large but often neglected
    body of data constitutive of culture patterns of speech behavior. They are
    also potentially useful for cross-cultural comparisons.
       Many of the components of Rundi patterns for the uses of speech are
    familiar to Western observers. Some of the key terms and concepts are
    close or equivalent in referential meanings to their English translations.
    However, contextual meanings-meanings that arise out of the relation-
    ships among the constituent elements of discourse-vary with specific
    cultural sets of assumptions and values. The allocation of intellectual
    resources in Burundi is controlled by a hierarchy of values far removed
    from Western ideals or a scientific approach to discourse, though very
    close to that of other African cultures and many Mediterranean societies.
    Practical and esthetic values take precedence over logical criteria in all
    but a few classes of communication situation. A well-brought-up Murundi
    would suffer agonies of shame in the presence of the naked truth and
    would hasten to provide the esthetic coverings called for by the cultural
    value system. Reliance upon appeals to the emotions as the chief tech-
    nique of rhetoric is taken for granted as right and natural and indeed the
    whole ground of its utility. There are no reservations about the desirability
    of flattery, untruths, taking advantage of weakness of character or prof-
    iting from others' misfortune. Whatever works is good, and esthetic-
    emotive values are higher in the hierarchy than moral or logical principles
    in speech and other behavior. The implications for fieldwork of culture
    patterning of speech behavior will be discussed in the conclusion.
        76   Ethnographic Description and Explanation


       Social Structural Definitions
       of Speech Situations

  BACKGROUND: HIERARCHICAL ORDER
  IN THE UNIVERSE AND SOCIETY
  The importance of speech to survival and success find the primacy of
esthctic-emotive values in speech behavior follow directly from Rundi
causal theory. ln the universe at large and in society, personal power is
the sole or chief causal force; it is conceived as directed by the actor's
free choice; choice is viewed as dependent on emotional dispositions,
assumed to be unstable and changeable. There is a steady diminution of
power, hence of freedom of self-determination, and proportionally an
increase in subjection to the whim and will of superiors in the hierarchy,
from the high god (/mana), to the king (mwami), the princes (bagamva),
the nobles (abafasoni), the herders (Batutsi), the farmer-peasant caste
(Bahutu), to the lowborn pariahs (Batwa).
   In a voluntaristic-emotive universe, no event is predictable. What
actually happens depends on the good pleasure of the determining supe-
rior power. Since emotion is the source of action and is much affected by
esthetic factors, manipulation of emotions by esthetic devices is the prin-
cipal business of speech behavior. To procure a gift and protection from a
superior, to obtain a favorable judgment in a court case, to defend oneself
against calumny or accusations of wrongdoing, to oust a rival-in short, to
survive and to succeed-is everybody's concern. The particularities of
esthetic criteria .vary in content and in degree or rigor of application with
subject matter, situation, and social roles. The primacy of esthetic-
emotive values gives the impression that there is more poetry than truth
in the flow of discourse.

  SPEECH TRAINI~G
   Socialization patterns reveal the main lines of social role differentiation
as relative to caste, age, and sex. Ubukuru, seniority or superiority, is the
guiding principle of all behavior: caste order is known; the older are
superior to the younger; men are superior to women. The ideal of good
breeding and aristocracy, imfura, includes "speaking well" as one of
its principal elements. From about the tenth year, boys in the upper
social strata are given formal speech training. The "curriculum" includes
composition of impromptu speeches appropriate in relations with
superiors in age or status; formulas for'petitioning a superior for a gift;
composition of amazina, praise-poems; quick-witted, self-defensive
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Bumndi     77

 rhetoric intended to deflect an accusation or the anger of a superior. Cor-
 rect formulas for addressing social inferiors, for funeral orations, for
 rendering judgment in a dispute, or for serving as an intermediary be-
 tween a petitioner and one's feudal superior are learned in the course
 of time as, with increasing age and maturity, each type of activity be-
 comes appropriate. Training includes mastery of a suitable, elegant
 vocabulary, of tone of voice and its modulation, of graceful gestures
 with hand and spear, of general posture and appropriate bodily move-
 ments, of control of eye-contacts, especially with inferiors, and above
 all, of speedy summoning of appropriate and effective verbal response
 in the dynamics of interpersonal relations. ·
    Girls in the upper caste are also carefully trained, but to artful silence
 and evasiveness and to careful listening that will enable them to repeat
 nearly verbatim what has been said by visitors or neighbors. Faithful
 wives and daughters, servants, and feudal dependents are expected to
 recount to the men of the family anything they have heard that might be
construed as inimical to husband, father, or brother, or as helpful in com-
 batting a real or potential enemy of the head of the household. Public
speaking is unseemly for women. The proper pattern of the irnfura female
requires shyness and delicacy. However, maturity brings with it the de-
velopment of highly effective bargaining and negotiating skills for use
behind the scenes. There are many women who in fact make the decisions
presented publicly by their husbands, or who become politically or eco-
nomically powerful through skillful though discreet and private use of
intellectual and verbal talents. Except at the extreme top and bottom of
the social scale, each individual learns verbal formulas and styles appro-
priate to a variety of roles, some those of a social superior, some those of
an inferior. For example, a herder of good family must know how to show
subservience and obedience to his elders and princely superiors and also
how to address and control the peasantry; peasants develop speech be-
havior patterns to deal with their immediate and remote superiors but also
with their younger relatives, with men of their own age and station, with        !
the pariah Batwa, and with any dependents they may have.                         I:
                                                                                 ''



  FORMS OF PETITION
   Petitioning for gifts or favors is one of the most frequent and significant          l' :j'
situations of interpersonal communication. It is, then, predictably, highly                  !1!
stylized. When a man asks for cattle or a bride or a wife or a son asks the      i
head of the household for permission to smoke or drink beer or to pay a
visit to a neighbor or relative, a physical position of submission is as-
sumed by the petitioner. Kneeling in the presence of the superior is usual                   /!
                                                                                 : 1:        :,:   I


                                                                                             ,/
                                                                                             11 !


                                                                                         I   I
                                                                                         ''

                                                                                        ~
        78   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

if the matter is intrafamilial. In the formal business of requesting cattle or
a bride, the petitioner assumes a formal stance, often rising from a seated
position to stand during the delivery of the formal request. His speech has
probably been carefully composed in advance. To follow the general
formula, one refers to the gift one has brought, a prescribed number of
pots of banana beer serving as a clue to the purpose of the visit; one ex·
presses love, admiration, and respect for the excellent qualities (real,
imagi?ed,. and ?oped-for) of the superior; one expre7'es the hope that the
affection 1s reciprocated; one again refers to the gift, this time as a token
 of affection; one promises further gifts in the future; one states one's wish;
 one closes with a repetition of the praise of the superior and an expression
 of hope that the wish will be granted. Seeking cattle or a wife entails a
 series of visits, each formal, but graded as to the number of pots of beer
 presented and the verbal formulas used as negotiations proceed.
    Cues that indicate the intention to refuse requests are sometimes de-
 layed. Superiors thereby gain pots of beer or services without compensat-
 ing the petitioners, but suffer a loss of reputation through gossip that
 directs potential petitioners away from them to more profitable patrons. A
 reputation for generosity is a necessity of high status since it attracts
 followers and augments political power. Negative publicity is a sanction
 at the disposal of social inferiors, not only frustrated petitioners for cattle
 but also disgruntled wives and overworked servants. Verbalization of the
  rules of the petitioning process and the forms of petition are easily elicited
 from persons of high and low rank.
     Choice of vocabulary and of gestures and other paralinguistic elements
  tends toward the ideal set by the aristocratic superior, but realization of
  the ideal varies, expectably, with the background, training, and social and
  personal characteristics of the petitioner. Humble peasant women are
  often capable of a very good approximation to the ideal, their speech
  flowing gracefully and smoothly, their gestures fitting the words, and com·
  pliments framed in poetic figures of speech. On the other hand, some
   members of upper caste patrilineages lack the wit or the character to
  learn their speech manners. They are privately and sometimes publicl)'
   mocked for behaving like peasants: Appropriate speech behavior for
   peasants in intercaste relations is that of an inferior; their words are halt-
   ingly delivered or run on uncontrolled, their voices are loud, their ges-
   tures wild, their figures of speech ungainly, their emotions freely dis-
   played, their words and sentences clumsy. As will appear below in the
   description of respect patterns, the appropriate style for inferiors is at-
   tached to roles and situations, not to persons. The speed and apparent
   ease with which individuals switch speech behavior patterns is likely to be
   disconcerting to observers trained to expect "consistency" or socialized
   in a system of low contrast among role-relative speech patterns.
               Culwre Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi     79


   FORMULAS FOR VISITING,
   FORMAL AND INFORMAL
   The notion of idle talk has little place in Rundi conceptions of verbal
 behavior. So too the notion of a social call without a definite purpose is
 not entertained, 'except in rare instances, e.g., visits among old friends
 Who are also close neighbors. Self-interest is assum~d n~tu~·al and uni-
 versal. Purposive behavior, especially speech behav10r, 1s its assumed
 natural complement. Visiting is categorized acc?rding to the visitor's
 Purpose and is subject to a variety of formulas which must be learned. A
 distinction appears to be made between formal. and informal visiting.
                                                                                       1:
 Formal visitis include those made to a feudal superior to request favors, to     . 1(
 give formal thanks for favors received, to remind him of one's continuing          ..
                                                                                    ·.·1·
 loyalty, and to improve the occasion by listening to whatever gossip may
                                                                                   .!:1·
 be available. Arranging marriages and funerals and conductirig other               I.
 social transactions have their own rules. Distinguished neighbors expect           i.1
·~o be waited upon by their inferiors and occasionally confer upon their          I'I
                                                                                    ••I
                                                                                  I,! I
 inferiors the honor of a visit. In either case, it is necessary to send at       ':i:
                                                                                    1l
 least one pot of beer in advance, both to announce one's intention to visit
 and also to insure that the host or hostess will "have something to offer."
 J:Iospitality, understood as offering drink and food, is a key value in social
                                                                                  i Ii
 hfe. Visiting, even when formal, need not preclude some quiet talk of a
 Political nature, calumny or lesser gossip, plans for cooperation in ef-
 fecting the downfall of some common enemy, probing for cues as to pos-
 sible gifts, and other everyday concerns of a very politically and eco-
 nomically alert people.
    Family visits follow prescribed sets of proper formulas for verbal and
 other behavior. The heaviest constraints of formality govern visits be-
 tween a father and a married daughter, separated by a nearly total avoid-
 ance taboo. In the event of important business to be transacted, e.g., if the
 daughter wishes to break up her marriage and hence impose upon the
 father the necessity to receive her again in his household and to return the
 bride-price, intermediaries must be used, usually the girl's mother or
 some other female relative. A slightly less rigid avoidance relation obtains
 between mother-in-law and son-in-law. He is obliged to pay visits of
 respect, but he is forbidden to seek her out at her hearth;joking and levity
 a~e proscribed; each addresses the other as m11faso11i, noble, irrespective
 of their actual caste position. Nephews and nieces visiting a paternal aunt
 are bound by a strict respect pattern, tempered by the fact that the home
 of the paternal aunt is a quasi-scared sanctuary from an angry father or
 pater~al ~ncle. Diminishing degrees of formality may be traced through
 the kmsh1p system to the open, joking relations between cross-cousins
 and the spouses of cross-cousins and between grandchildren and grand-
                                                                            ---
        80   Etlznograplzic Description and Explanation

parents. These call for rough sexual joking. Occasionally, young people
take umbrage at the sexual jokes of older relatives, .but there is open,
strong disapproval of so inappropriate a response. More in keeping with
custom is a young grandson's teasing his grandmother by telling her he
will not go to bed with her because she is wrinkled and ugly, to which a
suitable response would be an offer of references of excellence of per-
formance based on long experience.
   Family attendance at funerals is expected e~en of those residing some
distance away. They are expected to comfort the bereaved and to take
over household and other chores which the bereaved are too grief-stricken
to perform. Visitors also keep an eye on the execution of the last will and
testament when it is a head of a household being mourned. After the bur-
ial, there are formal orations and pledges of help, and calves or cattle are
led through the corral in silent acknowledgment that debts and obligations
incurred by the dead man will be honored by his heirs. Quarreling among
the heirs is so common as to be almost part of the prescribed behavior.
The "manifest content" of disputes is often some trivial goods not speci-
fied in the will. To quote, one Murundi, "Brothers will fight almost to the
death over a basket of beans." The outcome is far from trivial: quarrels
test the power of the father's heir and set up a pecking order among
siblings. Departures from the family homestead may occur if one of the
sons is dissatisfied with the new order.
   Quarreling is also a semiformalized part of another prescribed family
affair, the wedding. Quarrels between representatives of the two families
start as a symbolic abduction struggle. With the help of many pots of
beer, the symbolic fight not infrequently becomes quarreling in earnest.
However·, in these as in other situations where quarreling is virtually in-
evitable, some members of the family will probably have kept sober so as
to act as sergeants-at-arms and prevent matters from getting too far out of
hand.
   Relatives and neighbors are expected to make a formal call upon any-
one who has just been through a ritual cleansing ceremony;e.g., a woman
after the birth of twins. The visit signifies that they can now "ask for fire
from that house," the symbol that normal and friendly social relations
may safely be resumed.
   A limited amount of informal dropping-in on neighbors occurs, more
often than not the visitor being led to his destination by the news that
there is a supply of beer available. Gossip flows freely in proportion to the
flow of beer, sometimes too freely for the peace of mind of participants
suffering morning-after second thoughts. As in most other cultures, drink-
ing parties tend to end in fighting, also cause for misgivings in retrospect.
   The form appropriate to a neighborly or friendly social call is some-
times used for a mission customarily assumed on behalf of friends or
                                                                    81
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi
                                                                                                  ,,
                                                                                             ,    I·
      ·                                          ·        · d'      1·elative's              '.   11


relatives, viz., looking over a family into which the fnen s or                       , I'        1:

son or daughter may marry. Semiformal in pattern, such missio~s bear all                 !
the signs of being to some purpose. Each party knows at what disco~nt_ to
ta~e the other's questions and assertions. An experienc~d e~e can distm-
guish authentic from assumed industriousness and modesty Ill the poten-
tial bride, recognize the signs of a potential brutally excessive wife-beater
                                                                        0
or glutton in the would-be bridegroom, size up the tempe_rament _f the
potential mother-in-law who controls the life of a new wife. Details of              2
                                                                                         1
                                                                                             I

~he relevant skills and signs could not or would not be presented by                ·.I:,,
                                                                                    ':II!:
mformants.
   A long list of amenities, conventions, and rules are part of the Barundi's     , .i·           ;I
                                                                                                   , I
pattern of polite interpersonal relations and conversation. In the old
?ays, age-mates greeted each other in a lengthy ceremony of sung greet-
                                                                                             '     I       I
mgs, embraces, and stylized gestures; children knelt before parents or                            :'II
grandparents to pay respect and to receive blessings; feudal inferiors                       'iii
greeting a superior proceeded through the numerous steps ofan elaborate
                                                                                                  fl i
                                                                                             i',,,11.1
                                                                                             1 ·II
assurance of affection and respect that involved verbal formulas accom-                           ;j': /j.
                                                                                                 ,,
panied by touching the superior with both hands, literally from head to                           •111
foot.                                                                                        , I·'
                                                                                             I
                                                                                             I1 1,1
                                                                                                 \1
                                                                                                       I




                                                                                             '
  RULES OF PRECEDENCE
  AND GOOD SPEECH MANNERS
    The order in which individuals speak in a group is strictly determined
 by seniority. However, if the eldest present is lower in social rank than
 some other individual, age gives way before social status. Thus, a nephew
 may be older than his uncle but the uncle is of higher rank and will speak
 before him. A prince or chief may be younger than others present but
 speaks first by virtue of his higher rank. There is apparently no recorded
 confusion or conflict in the matter of determining order of precedence,
 even in very large groups. A question intended to discover what would              : 11



 occur in the event of confusion was rejected by all to whom it was pre-
 sented as irrelevant and improbable.
    The rule for servants, females, and other inferiors for behavior in the
 presence of outsiders is to speak when spoken to but otherwise to main-
 tain silence. Nevertheless, the pattern is so arranged that younger or
 socially inferior males are in due course able to express their views in
 public. At the opening stage of talk, strict order of seniority is observed.
 After the first or second round of remarks, the senior person will still
  speak first; the next in order of rank opens his speech with a statement to
. the effect, "Yes, I agree with the previous speaker, he is correct, he is
  older and knows best, etc." Then, depending on circumstances and issues,
  the second speaker will by degrees or at once express his own views, and
            82   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

       these may well be diametrically opposed to those previously expressed -
       No umbrage is taken, the required formula of acknowledgment of the
      superior having been used. If the umukuru, senior person, is aged and
      weak, his son may speak first, initiating his utterance by explaining his
      departure from the rules: "My father is old, his memory is not good, he
      wishes me to speak for him," or some other appropriate excuse is given.
      It is not unusual for the formal order of precedence to be abandoned in the
      latter part of a protracted discussion and for loud voices to be heard even
                                                        1
     among upper-class individuals.
         Caste stereotypes represent those in the upper strata of society ~is
     never raising their voices or allowing anger or other emotions to show. It
     is said that the Batutsi herders prefer to bear a grudge silently and to take
     revenge when opportunity permits, even ifit comes twenty years after the
     affront has been suffered. This applies to dealings with individuals of
    their own class. Communication with inferiors involves a different ap-
    proach that includes a kind of stylized "reverse signaling." If an underling
    quietly accepts an order, there is a good chance that he is showing re-
    spect but has no intentiqn o(carrying out the order. On the other hand, if
    he gets his resentments out of his system by shouting protest and refusal
    and by drawing his superior into a noisy quarrel, he is almost certain at the
    end to do as he has been told. Explicit references to the positive value of
   an inferior's outburst take various forms and appear to be an upper caste
   "in" thing to say.
       It is assumed that the peasants express their emotions and opinions
   freely, do not bear grudges,. and are generally warmer, more open and
   forthright, and friendler than herders. Generally, the Batutsi herders Jive
   up to the.ir reputation for dignity in public situations. They are also expe:rt
  in applying as a very effective rhetorical technique the rule that silence is
  golden. Good rhetoricians, they appreciate the utility of refraining frofll
  comment, reply, or rejoinder. The total, glacial silence of a pe1fectly
  immobile Mututsi who has chosen not to speak has to be experienced to
 be appreciated. To all appearances, the silence can be maintained in-
 definitely and in the face of every known technique of provocation,
 domestic or imported. In family conclave or political caucus, silence or
 avoiding the topic intended for discussion on the part of the ranking per-
 son present effectively cancels the proceedings. It is understood by all
 attending as total disapproval. Also, it can directly block discussion. Ap-
plication of the principle of seniority is such that a superior's silence or
evasion of the issue effectively silences all his social inferiors. At the verY
top of the social hierarchy, all the skills and patterns of refined behavior
are fully controlled, but they are modified by the value of princely mag-
nanimity and benevolence. A prince of the blood may unbend, a Tutsi
rarely if ever.




                                                                                     J
                      Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi      83


               Respect Patterns
               and Role Relativism
                 An intelligent man must measure the character of his interlocutor
        and select style and content for his speech accordingly. It would be an
        Unforgivable blunder for a peasant-farmer, no matter how wealthy or able,
        to Produce a truly elegant, eloquent, rapid-fire defense before a herder or
       other superior. However, the same peasant who stammers or shouts or
       f~rces a smile from a superior by making a rhetorical fool of himself when
       his adversary is a prince or herder may, with a change in the situation in-
       voJ_ving his superiors, or as a judge in a local or family affair, in a ~ou?cil,
       or m making a funeral oration, show himself an able speaker, a d1gmfied
       man who speaks as slowly and as intelligently as ever a highborn herder
      could. The accent will be different; the figures of speech will more likely
      be drawn from agriculture than from herding and only in the rare instance
      reflect knowledge of courtly life; the gestures of the muscular arms and
      ~eavyset body and the facial expressions will not be like those of the long-
      hmbed, slim-boned narrow-headed "Hamitic" Batutsi herders, but they
      Will not lack studied grace and dignity.                                    ·
   · In his role as rhetorician, the fortunate peasant is skillful and not at all
     the humble, mumbling fool he plays before his caste superiors. He is in
     control of alternative, appropriate patterns. Or, if he cannot make a fine
     speech, he has a legitimate excuse in his inherited caste inferiority. There                     'I

    are highborn men who speak badly, either because nature failed to endow
                                                                                               ,I     ,1
                                                                                                        I
    them with the intelligence, innate verbal ability, and grace assumed to be
    the biological inheritance of the herders or because drink, disease, or
    private disaster have destroyed their character. Failure to speak clearly
   and well, clumsy and wild gestures and allowing emotions to show, earn
   such unfortunates the epithet muhutu, peasant, whose socially stereo-
                                                                                                iii'.
   typed speech pattern they employ for want of the power to do better.                         ,,'

                                                                                                1:,
      In Kirundi, as in French and other languages, the second person singu-                     i!
  lar is the familiar, the second person plural is the respect form. In ad-
  dressing a superior, the plural must be used. Thus, to thank an inferior,
  one may say urakoze, but to thank a superior, it must be murakoze. The
 nonverbal signs of respect are numerous. In effect, they consist of the
 :"hol_e set of signs defining the charactedstics of social inferiority. The
 mfenor walks behind the superior, drinks and eats after the superior has
 begun or only after he has finished. If the superior is of princely rank,
 ~obody may be present during mealtimes, the taster remaining but squat-
ting with his back to his master. The inferior talks only after the superior
h_as spoken. He inclines his head in respect, and the body, too, must
signal humility, obedience, and respect.



                                                                                              ''11

                                                                                          j
        84   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   A highly formal respect situation, once official business is completed,
may abruptly change into easy, informal discussion. The redefinition of
the situation may be presumed to follow some sign from the superior,
probably a change from the formal stance prescribed for official business
to "at-ease." In response, the social inferior drops the plural form of
address, and the bodily stance and use of voice are transformed from
"humble respect" to "relaxed." Particularly if the s'ubject of discussion
is cattle, the Barundi's favorite subject for bull-sessions, informality pre-
vails. Voices rise higher as differences of opinion are defined and de-
fended, the expression of various emotions being permitted and even ex-
pected for this topic. The debating pair may easily be constituted of a
highborn prince and lowborn cowherd in his employ, but once the signal
for informal discussion has been given, the respect pattern becomes not
merely irrelevant but improper. However, it was pointed out by both
upper- and lower-caste persons that a judicious inferior will not allow
himself the liberty of too enthusiastic disagreement despite the permis-
siveness, nor overlook any cues to future opportunities for requesting a
gift or otherwise assuring or improving his position. Batutsi, male and
female, also adjust their speech behavior up and down the situational
scale. A gracious, silent lady of good family may be obliged to excuse
herself to attend to an emergency in the corral. Her voice rings loud and
sharp as she chastises the offending herder or servant girl, and there may
be an accompaniment of sharp slaps. Returned to her visitors and hostess
role, she resumes the ladylike pattern, the transitions apparently effortless
and expected. By contrast, if a peasant girl imitates too closely the speech
and manner of the upper caste, she must put up with teasing and the ac-
cusation of absurd affectation.

  AMENITIES AND CONVENTIONS
   A full inventory of the amenities and conventions that gover~ verbal
communication would properly include numerous minor rules for
speech. There are few word taboos. It is forbidden to tell what one has
eaten for dinner, or to mention the name of a dead person in the presence
of relatives, and euphemisms are in order when referring to excretion.
Violations of the rules are breaches of good taste, and verbal bad manners
are likely to be condemned by a graceful gesture and the expression
n'ishano, "how shocking!" The Rundi technique for avoiding an un-
wanted visitor is familiar: a child or servant is sent to announce that no-
body is home. It is perfectly proper for a servant or child to enter a room
where company is being entertained and to whisper some message to the
host or hostess. It is understood that something has gone wrong or that
another visitor has arrived. (An outside observer trained to a different
and negative evaluation of whispering in company has to make an adjust-
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   85

ment to local mores-perhaps more of a strain than learning the meaning
of some totally new element.)
   As in other communities, there are polite formulas for numerous oc-
casions, e.g., greetings, thanks, apologies, or terminating a visit. Men
usually offer thanks for hospitality and leave. Women will offer their
excuses: "I must go home now, there is nobody watching the house," or
"I must go home now, or my husband will beat me." Rundi women may
not properly leave their homes without permission from their husbands,
so that reference to the common and socially-accepted practice of wife-
beating means simply that permission to leave the house had not been
requested. It is as likely to be offered as an excuse by a peasant woman
as by a lady so distinguished for her gentility that she has been selected
as governess in a princely residence. (Again, an outside observer may
have to overcome a certain "culture shock" the first few times the threat
of a beating is daintily offered in farewell.)

  PARALINGUISTIC
  AND KINESIC SIGNS
   To comprehend Rundi communication fully also requires knowledge of
conventional gestures, sometimes replaced by statements, e.g., the action
or phrase, "I pull up grass for you" is a sign of subservience and gratitude.
Among the nonlinguistic vocal signals is one that in the United States is
the Indian war cry, in Iran the populace's cheer for the shah, but in
Burundi, the cry of alarm sent out into the hills to solicit help when animal
or human marauders threaten a household.
   Paralinguistic and kinesic signs have been indicated above as intrinsic
to specific speech situation behavior. Possibly the radical, highly visible
physical differences among the several castes of Barundi facilitate ex-
plicit naming and explaining of non-verbal signs, and categorizing them as
"Tutsi" or "Hutu." For the outsider learning the culture, however, the
subtleties are not so easily or quickly mastered. For example, open mock-
ery was the corrective initial treatment applied to the error of assuming
that anyone over six feet tall was a Mututsi. Detailed accounts of speech
and gesture patterns used as cues by the Barundi were offered as aid to the
ignorant foreigner. Not only authentic Batutsi and Bahutu, short and tall,
but also several Bahutu who came by their elegant Tutsi manners hon-
estly as servants in upper-caste households, were introduced as visual
aids. Instruction continued throughout the fieldwork period. The initial
error apparently seriously traumatized the staff and neighbors. Presum-
ably their own pride required that the observer, fitted into the social
system as a member of the upper caste, learn to recognize and to use the
appropriate role patterns. Again, the extraordinary sensitivity of Barundi
to speech behavior and the ease of verbalization associated with their
         86   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

socialization and social control patterns not only brought into prominence
the fact of cultural patterning of speech behavior but also much facilitated
the research.

  SUMMARY OF SOCIAL
  STRUCTURAL VARIABILITY
    The patterning of speech behavior in Burundi in rel.aiion to social struc-
  ture involves rules governing the specific relationships among those
. present in a speech situation according to caste, age and sex, kinship,
 friendship, contiguous residence, or political-economic ties. Distinctions
  are made according to the social roles of those present; the degree of
  formality, publicity or privacy; and the objectives of the speech situation.
 Together, social role and situational prescriptions determine the order of
  precedence of speakers, relevant conventions of politeness, appropriate
  formulas and styles of speech, including extralinguistic signs, and topics
  of discussion. Socialization and sanctions are also determined by the
  social role-situational complex.es 'Yithin which discourse occurs.



         Ubgenge: The Allocation of
         Intellectual Resources

   ETHNOEPISTEMOLOGICAL VALUES
    The conceptual context of the uses of intellectual resources, among
 which speech ranks high in many societies, is the cultural world-view and
 value system. Understanding the patterning of the content and style of
 speech in Burundi depends in part upon awareness of the cultural concep-
 tions of truth, falsehood, and fiction and of their value priorities and inter-
 relations. The key concept to the norms and values associated with the
 uses of language is ubgenge, "successful cleverness." Ubgenge chiefly
 applies to intellecttial-verbal management of significant life-situations.
 Situational adaptability is a permanent condition of action. Hence, the
 specific manifestations of ubgenge are numerous and diverse. The clever-
 ness of a rogue; the industriousness of a virtuous man whose overlord
 gives him a cow as a reward for virtue; the skill of a good psychologist-
 rhetorician in persuading a generous, impulsive-or inebriated-superior
 to give him a cow, although he had done nothing to earn it; the skill of a
 medical curer; the success of a practicaljoker who has victimized a simple-
 minded peasant or feeble-minded boy; the wise and just judgments of the
 abashingantalze, the "elders," in courts and councils; and the technologi-
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi    87

 cal accomplishments of Europeans are equally good examples of ubgenge
 -for they all succeed in bringing something good to their designers. In
 effect, success is beautiful and good, and the beautiful is more likely to
 succeed than the inelegant. Factual accounts of the use of ubgenge and
 fables and legends of successful cleverness evoke strong, positive,
 esthetic appreciation.
    In the Rundi vocabulary, the distinctions made between fact and ficti~n,
 knowledge and conjecture, truth, error, and falsehood, are close eqmv-
 alents to those of Western culture. Their hierarchical order and situa-
 tional relativity, however, reflect Rundi interpretations of the values of
 survival, esthetics, and the satisfaction of desire. Lexical distinctions are
 made between literal truth and fact, outright lies, errors, misleading others
 and being misled or ill-informed, offering a hypothesis without sufficient
 prior knowledge, foolishly offering an explanation despite ignornnce in
 ?rder to seem knowledgeable, and formulating a hypothesis or making a
 Judgment on the basis of satisfactory evidence. Oriented more to persons
 and personalities than to abstract principles, the Barundi also name these
 degrees of difference of reliability in substantives designating types of
 persons. Context distinguishes shades of meaning of kuvuga, to speak;
 kumva, to hear, to understand, to conceive of; and kurnenya, to know, to
 observe, to perceive. Culturally distinctive referents have also to be
 noted. Labeling a man a liar does not reflect a tendency to falsify factual
 statements, but rather denotes an individual guilty of breaking a promise
 to give a gift or to do a favor. Of especial emotional impact is calumny.
 The calumniator who reports evil of a man, with or without good grounds,
 !s perhaps more feared than any social threat, even witchcraft in some
                                                                                         ,,
 mstances, since it may lead to deprivation of property, protection of a                 '!
 superior, or loss of life itself.                                                           I
    The cultural requirement of the fine rhetorical style applies to all public
                                                                                         :1
 speaking, though methods and techniques vary with objectives. Logic is
 the correct method for the umushinga11tahe, whose goal is to arrive at a
 sound judgment-as a judge presiding in a formal court of law or infor-                  '
 mally adjudicating a family dispute, offering counsel at the behest of a          I''   !
 political superior, or decision-making and problem-solving generally in
                                                                                  I,
 the conduct of life's serious business. Sophistic rhetoric is the natural and
 acceptable resort of self-interested individuals, whether they are seeking
 to win a lawsuit or to procure a gift or protection from a superior or to
 satisfy a desire or to fulfill a need. The usual techniques include evasions,
 falsehoods, flattery, and other calculated appeals to and attempted manip-
 ulations of the emotions.
   Adults of both sexes in all caste and age groups learn both logical and
rhetorical techniques and criteria and the situations in which they are


                                                                                         ,,f     I




                                                                                    • !.i

                                                                                         ~
                                                                                     '
                                                                                    .
        88   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

applicable. A well-developed ethnopsychology is as pervasive through all
types of speech situation as is the esthetic. The emotive and esthetic are
twin necessities of discourse. The relative frequencies of logic-oriented
and rhetoric-oriented speech situations and their specific objectives de-
pend on age and position in the social structure. The higher a man is
placed, the less often need he defend himself, for the fewer are his su-
periors. On the other hand, they are more likely to be highly intelligent
and powerful and therefore dangerous. Defenses against numerous clever
inferiors competing for favor have also to be mounted with greater fre-
quency, the higher the individual's place in the social-political-economic
hierarchies.


  UMUSHINGANTAHE: LOGICAL
  AND RHETORICAL IDEAL VALUES

    The highest ideal of public weaking is associated with the role of
 umushingantahe. Informants of different age, caste, and social roles agree
 on the criteria and can verbalize them without hesitation. A good judge is
 intelligent, in complete command of the arts of logic, a fine speaker-
 i.e., he speaks slowly and with dignity, in well-chosen words and figures
 of speech; he is attentive to all that is said; he has a good memory, en-
 abling him to compare different reports of events; he cannot be bribed;
 and he is an able analyst of logic, empirical evidence, and the vagaries of
 the human psyche. Initiation as 11mushi11ga11tahe comes late-usually not
 before forty-five. It is restricted to men of means who can pay for the
 costly initiation party and who have demonstrated their ability, usually in
 a prolonged apprenticeship of attendance at cases conducted by those re-
 puted to be good judges. The qualifications stipulated for judges are ex-
 plained as indispensable to the resolution of conflicts. It is assumed that
 the self-interest and emotional involvements of disputants and witnesses
 will lead them to falsify evidence, to exaggerate accounts of damage or
 make excessive claims for compensation, and even to perjure themselves.
Testimony is likely to be contradictory. All human relationships involve
 matching wits, but in law cases and political strategy councils, there is a
 premium on good judgment based on clear logic and control of reliable
 information.
    Principles for the analysis of testimony are readily verbalized by court
judges. They closely resemble the principles in use in the Western world.
Contradictory statements cannot both be true, so a choice must be made;
the discovery of the truth depends upon evidence; in its evaluation, the
credibility of witnesses has to be weighed; eyewitness testimony is the
most reliable. So insistent is the demand for direct evidence that where it
is possible and relevant, a judge may adjourn court and go in person to



                                                                               J
               Culture Pattemini of Speech Behavior in Burundi     89

verify statements, e.g., respecting the location of a boundary marker be-
tween properties. Usually, however, such direct examination is not pos-
sible. To get at the truth, judges will subject principals and witnesses one
at a time in closed interrogation sessions to repeated questioning if con-
tradictory testimony has been given. After sifting and winnowing to come
to a conclusion as to the actual facts, the judge will probably recall each
one who has testified, confront him with his own contradictions or the
heavy weight of probability against him, and usually contrive to get an
admission as to the true state of affairs.
   The use of psychological observation imd principles is part of the
judge's apparatus, an adjunct to logical analysis and fact-finding. Rules
for detecting lies, exaggerations, and other departures from fact, and for
spotting subtle cues to distinguish guilty from innocent nervousness or
eloquence, are easily and even proudly verbalized by experienced elders.
In addition, the judges have mastery over appropriate rhetorical tech-
niques for wearing down stubborn witnesses, quieting overexcited ones,
browbeating by silence or scorn, and various other devices that experi-
ence has shown will give the judge, hence the truth, the upper hand. There
is no tolerance for the technique of "strategic obfuscation" used by many
Barundi to the despair of trial lawyers andjudges during European trustee-
ship government, viz., calculated inconsistencies in accounts of events
directed (often with great success) to so obscuring the truth that no case
could be made.
   In dealing with domestic disputes, judges are concerned primarily with
psychological and social factors and proceed to fact-finding only if it is
relevant. For example, a judge must discover from the spoken words and
the general demeanor of a couple demanding a divorce whether a divorce
is in keeping with their wishes and best interests or whether in truth they
wish to save face by having the court order them back together again. In
settling quarrels between father and son, a judge has a doubly difficult
task. Custom has it that the elder is never wrong. The judge must discover
what really happened. If in fact the father is at fault, he must find a way to
tell him so and to impose a suitable mild penalty on the son without openly
stating that it is the father who is in the wrong.
   Determination of appropriate principles and techniques for each case
is an integral part of ubgenge, as much for the cleverness of a judge as for
the wisdom of any mature person in the conduct of life's business. Each
one must make judgments-to decide whether a wife should be kept or be
sent back to her father and the bride-price refunded; to choose as the heir
the son who will be best able to carry on the responsibility of head of the
family; to select spouses for sons and daughters; to choose or dismiss
feudal inferiors; to choose or to abandon a feudal superior. Truth, as fact
tied into a web of sound logical organization, is indispensable where sound
judgment is the objective.
        90   Ethnographic Description and Explanation


 THE SURVIV AL VALUE OF
 DISCRETION AND FALSEHOOD
    Though truth is necessary for judgment, it is not useful for survival or
practical success. The Barundi make no bones about this. The proverb is
often quoted, "The man who tells no lies cannot feed his children." An-
other proverb warning against truth reveals further the awareness of the
Barundi that speech is not simply an instrument of social life but is often
a weapon: "Truth is good, but not all that is true is good to say." Truth is
not valuable in itself but is relative to other values. It is positively re-
quired when judgment is needed, positively dangerous when a person
must defend himself or wishes to maintain or better his position.
     The need for discretion, a halfway house between literal truth and bald
lie, is understood as either not speaking at all about delicate matters or as
refurbishing facts so that they wear an innocent face. Discretion is ap-
 propriate to a wide variety of situations in life. Its specific character de-
 pends on specific situations and actors. 19,, political matters (probably the
 chief concern of Barundi at every level of the society) discretion is neces-
 sary as a self-defensive measure. Information about the misbehavior or
 the faults of a political superior is best concealed, at least until such time
 as he has lost status and is thereby deprived of power to harm. Loyalty to
 a superior is defined largely in terms of what is said about him. If one
 spreads praises abroad-and amazina, poems based on praise-names
 composed for a superior are one of the formalized means of demonstrating
  loyalty-then one may hope for a reward. The formula "I shall sing your
  praises" is an often spontaneous response to a gift and a significant token
  of devotion. It has already been mentioned that social inferiors can use
  as a sanction against superiors publicizing his lack of generosity or other
  defects. However, if one speaks ill of a superior or plots against him, the
  disloyalty will bring down heavy punishment on the guilty one if it reaches
  the superior's ears.
      Among socio-political "equals," that is, those seeking favor with the
  same political superior, calumny is the chief weapon, discretion the best
   shield. Given the importance and quantity of verbal report in gossip and
   in calculated calumny and praise that may reach the ears of the superior,
   safety absolutely requires concealing faults and devising means to coun-
   teract calumny, whether or not it has a basis in fact. No one is so high or
   low in the social scale, no one so secure in the affections of a superior or
   inferior, as to be able to afford the luxury of speaking the unedited truth.
    Few if any individuals are so lacking in intelligence and in an esthetic
    sense of graceful, appropriate discourse as to blurt out truths without
    restraint or to reply truthfully to questions from the inquisitive. In rela-
                 Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi      91

    tions between husband and wife and in family relations generally, verbal
    discretion is a serious matter. A lazy wife or a sterile one may or may not
    be sent back home. A disloyal woman, by definition, one who speaks ill of
    her husband, will surely be severely punished and rejected. A disobedient
    son may be tolerated and even procure his share of the inheritance, but a
   disloyal one may be disinherited.
       In lesser matters than life and property and position, discretion still has
   its place. One may discuss with close friends and neighbors the problems
   created by a spouse who is a bit slow-witted, but not broadcast the fact
   far and wide. If one suspects that a neighbor is a witch, one refrains from
   mentioning it in his presence. There is no point in accusing him, it is said,
   for he will say, "Death is not afraid to come, whether you speak of it or
   not," or, "Whom have I killed? Have you caught me at it?" There are,
  then, some truths not to be spoken aloud to anyone; some to a faithful
  spouse or a blood brother but nobody else; some to close relatives or
  neighbors. Only rarely is any statement so innocent that it is not necessary
  to consider the possibility that it will bring trouble. That words are power-
  ful realities is a fundamental truth of the Rundi system of belief and
  behavior.
      There is a premium, practical and esthetic, on rapid, graceful, and
  more-than-plausible falsehood. Especially if anyone is directly accused of
  wrongdoing, on-the-spot composition of an effective defense is necessary.
  In general, a man is safer when he thinks quickly and lies, mixing the
 right amount of flattery for his superior with the other ingredients of his
 discourse, than when he tells the truth, good though the truth may be in
 some situations. There seems no anxiety, where lies are told or false ac-
 cusations made, as to the possible consequences of subsequent discovery
 of the facts. If one survives the critical moment, it is explained, one may
 find a way to deal with an ungainly or inconvenient truth if and when it
 appears. The time gained by on-the-spot inventions of defense is asso-
 ciated with an optimistic interpretation of the uncertainty of the future.
 Escape to another part of the country; a generous gift to the right per-
son; a change in mood of the feudal protector or accuser; in fact, any-
thing may happen.
     A cool head counts for more than a high I.Q. in realizing the practical-
esthetic-emotive values of effective speech. Everyone knows the rules.
Everyone plays the game of matching wits through verbal parry and
thrust. Differences of individual skills, the likelihood of fortuitous cir-
cumstances, and the inherent instability of emotions make it certain that
there will be few dull moments. Uncertainty of the outcomes of verbal
manipulations of one's affairs is built into the system and is part of the
game, enjoyed when the outcome is favorable, lamented when it is not.
       92    Ethnographic Description and Explanation



 AN ILLUSTRATION OF
 UBGENGE IN ACTION

   A full account of rhetorical styles and techniques and of situations in
which they are to be used would be necessary to a full description of the
role of ubgenge in speech behavior. A single illustration must suffice to
indicate the way in which Rundi values, esthetic and practical, operate in
behavior. It is contemporary in theme, traditional in form, and enjoyed
equally for its success and elegance of design. For what such assurance
may in fact be worth, the narrative was sworn to as having actually oc-
curred-but, of course, not to the narrator. A Murundi chief, who will
remain nameless, of course, was very rude to a young Murundi agricul-
tural officer. Instead of doing as he was told, viz., collecting a labor force
to start a coffee plantation, the chief went off to drink with one of his
favorite tenants. His delinquency discovered, the chief was roundly
 scolded by the agricultural officer and_,,assured that a report would be
 made to the higher authoritities, i.e., to the Belgian senior agricultural
 officer of the region. In due course, the summons came. The chief or-
 dered his wife to fill three huge baskets with food and he dressed in his fin-
 est robes. With his porters carrying the baskets, he proceeded to the office
 of the Belgian administrator. He was accused of refusing to provide work-
 ers to plant coffee, of rudeness as well as disobedience to the junior officer
 present, of permitting his cattle to browse on the plot designated for the
 coffee plantation. On hearing the accusation, the chieflooked very grieved
 and surprised. "Sir," he said, with all the respect and elegance his educa-
 tion enabled him to muster, "I have never seen this person. Since he
 knows my lands, perhaps he is the one about whom my tenants com-
 plained a few weeks back as demanding beer and getting drunk and dis-
 orderly." He waited for a moment for his statement to take effect, count-
 ing on the suspicion of a na,tional weakness for beer and tendency to false
  report to be transferred from him to the junior officer. He then went on,
  "I am here because I have heard that you are suffering from famine. Here
  are the few humble baskets of food I could assemble in haste, but do not
  fear, there are many more on the way. I wish you all health." Of course,
  the administrator was furious with his junior officer and very favorably
  impressed by the chief. The officer was punished, the chief courteously
  released. On the way home the chief passed a church. Being a good
  Christian, he stopped to pray. He addressed himself to God, confessing
  his false accusation of the young agricultural officer, a fellow-Murundi
  and a fellow-Christian. He explained to the Lord that he knew he had
  sinned, but he begged forgiveness. "O God, surely you will pardon me.
  Since you did not save me, I had to save myself."
                    Culture Patteming of Speech Behavior in Burundi    93



             Literary Form and Literal Truth

       THE ESTHETIC HIERARCHY
       OF SPEECH FORMS
        Practicality, esthetic values, and literal truth in different proportions
     characterize most Rundi discourse that satisfies cultural criteria for
     ~Peech. Descriptive precision and literal description are relevant not only
     In the fact-finding situation of judgment but also in discussion of objects
     of central interest. Kinship, economic matters, and social control-especi-
     ally where they involve the ownership and inheritance of land and ca,ttle-
     as well as speech itself, are matters in which direct, precise discourse is
     called for. Literal descriptions of cattle and agriculture involve vocabu-
     laries of minutely detailed discriminations beyond the capacities of an
     outsider to appreciate. Barundi are intensely interested in human psy-
     chology, and the extensive vocabulary and shrewd generalizations of the
    ethnopsychology supply linguistic evidence of the cultural concern with
    motives, emotions, intelligence levels; and personality types.
       Although the demand for esthetic composition and delivery applies to
    descriptive discourse as to all speech, factual accounts are at the bottom
    of a culturally defined series of steps of esthetic complexity. Public ad-
    ~ress may be placed at the midpoint. At the top of the esthetic scale is the
    rich tradition of oral literature. The various types of literary composition
    have well-defined social and practical functions and communication con-
    tent often of great significance, but esthetic criteria are most stringent for
    Poetry, prose (including the narration of historical events), songs, pro-
    verbs, and stylized conversational formula. While criteria for everyday
    conversation are near the bottom of the scale, elegance of composition              i:
                                                                                     l,,1
                                                                                     ( 11
    and delivery, figures of speech, and the interpolation of stores and prov-       '.'I


    erbs are expected and employed.
      THE PREEMINENCE OF
      INDIRECT REFERENCE

       Praise-poems (amazina, literally "names," figuratively, "praise-names,"
    are composed to honor a generous superior or the author's valor in battle.
    l-Iighly refined literary-rhetorical skills, composition and delivery of         i:
    amazina are included in the speech training of young boys of good family.
    •he form is fixed but the contents are created impromptu. The naturally
    alliterative character of Kirundi as a Bantu language is reinforced by con-
    scious selection of assonant words in the construction of praise-names
    and figures of speech. There are slight though perceptible modifications in
    Wording and number of verses as authors repeat their steadily increasing




h
                 94   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

         store of amazina on appropriate occasions. Nobody borrows the amazina
         of others, except to learn composition, but each must demonstrate his
         own abilities. For some, virtuosity earns wide fame. An elderly man with
         a long history of bravery and gifts of cattle may fill three of four hours with
         his chanted recitation.
             The amazina in fact are repositories of Rundi history. This is not im-
         mediately evident from their content. The chief requirement for esthetic
         accomplishment in literature is indirect reference. The value and delicacy
         of a composition depends on the remoteness and subtlety of the allusion.
         Composition of amazina is primarily for the upper castes, where in anY
         event the criteria for elegant speech behavior are determined. However,
          there are also farmers' arnazina of sorts, praise-poems to honor hoes,
         bees, and other things of interest to them. A prosperous peasant may
          compose praises for the patron who has given him cattle. Clever cow
          thieves, much-dreaded members of the community, may compose ama-
          zina in self-praise: since the punishment for stealing cattle is immediate
          crucifixion if the thief is caught in the act and since precautions against
          stealing are elaborate, a cow thief'who lives to tell the tale has earned the
          right to his amazina.
              A large stock of traditional figures of speech and inventions of new
           ones are used in ibicuba (songs composed by cowherds in praise of their
           herds), in hunting songs, lullabies, tales, fables, and riddles. Thousands of
           proverbs, old and new, are in some cases direct, but in others more or
           less stlb'tly allusive. Cultural skill in inventing and interpreting figurative
           speech and allusions is general, but indirect reference also operates to
           define boundaries between in-groups and out-groups in various situa-
           tions. At a princely court, a man may sing a tale full of allusions under- ·
           stood only by the prince himself or only by a few of those present. The
           incomprehensibility of the allusions is in itself meaningful. Listeners know
            something is in the wind, and they are not slow to inquire and to find out.
            If the information were not intended to be made public, it would not have
            been presented at a)l; if it were common knowledge, the allusions would
            not have been incomprehensible. Like the rhetorical technique of strict
            silence, the poetic technique of not quite telling all has positive informa-
            tion content of great significance.
               News is carried from one neighborhood to another by individuals on
            various types of business, but especially by a sort of self-appointed
            minstrel who sings the news, accompanying himself on a seven-string
            zither. Great humor, sly and stinging in many cases, is part of the per-
            formance, and indirect reference is characteristic. Indirectness of refer-
            ence through figures of speech is a popular device in polite social inter-
            course. Gratitude for a gift of beer and cigarettes, both much enjoyed,
             requires more than a simple word of thanks, e.g., from a visitor who had
             been ill at the time such a gift was given to him: "I know a man who named
             his child lnzokira, 'I shall be saved'. For, first he received beer and then



--.....---------~·
              Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi     95

he received tobacco. Through these, his spirits and his health were re-
stored." Discussing the hardships of life, an old gentleman may re-
mark: "Once I was strong, and now I am weak. Indeed, in the daytime,
the sun shines strongly, but at night it is gone. And for me, it is now night."
   A request to a superior for a trifling gift, e.g., a new pair of shoes, does
not take the form, "I am a poor man, you are rich; please give me money
for a new pair of shoes; as you see, these I have are torn to shreds."
Rather: "One does not hide one's misfortunes; if one tries to hide them,
they will nevertheless soon be revealed. Now, I know a poor old man,
broken in health and ill; there is a spear stuck in his body and he cannot
be saved." A terminal gesture directs attention to a pair of ragged old
tennis shoes, one of the pair held together by means of a "spear," i.e., a
safety pin.
   In addition to idioms, i.e., locutions that are incomprehensible if taken
literally, there are in Rundi discourse a number of stylistic conventions
that would make statements incomprehensible or misleading if taken
literally. Speaking of a revolutionary (there was much domestic political
disturbance in the 1920s), it is conventional to say, "Nobody knows who
he is; nobody knows his family." The speaker knows perfectly well and
~ill go on to tell in great detail the history of the patrilineage in question,
Its alliances, successes and failures and ultimate destruction: the conven-
tional introduction is a negative ~alue judgment or outright insult. If
anyone says of a man, "He has no children, there will be nobody to bury
him," this must not be taken literally, especially ifit is said in the presence
of the man's sons. It means that some of his sons have died, literally,
"He fathered many, but many have died." In a somewhat lighter vein, the
statement, "I went to X's house but there was no beer," means in fact
that only a few quarts were downed, but either the total available supply
Was small or the number of visitors great, or the reception was not friendly
enough, so there was no point in staying on, one's thirst would not be
quenched. The name traditionally given to an eleventh or twelfth child is
Bujana, "Hundreds," signifying that the family is a large one. Stylized
exaggeration is also common in practical contexts, notably in economic or
political negotiations, claims for damages, and in praises-a generous
person may be called mwami, king, or Jmana, God.


  FICTIONAL FORMS FOR FACTUAL
  DATA: AN ILLUSTRATION
   Generally, what men must understand is other men. All else is fit at           I    '
                                                                                  ''
best for imigani, tales, fables, and proverbs. The deity is far above
~an and beyond human comprehension. There are tales of Imana's crea-
!1on of the universe and of his benevolent dispositions toward men, but it
IS futile to wonder about his nature or why he created things as he did.
         96   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

 The natural environment is a passive instrument of various powers.
 Storms, lightning, midday sun, and heavy rain tend to be unfriendly to
 man and hence require ritual attention. Otherwise, nature is not impor-
 tant. Techniques and commodities introduced from European culture are
 warmly welcomed and much admired, but they are not human and there-
 fore do not stir intellectual curiosity.
     Life is here and now., so the past and future are of little interest. Older
  men may entertain the younger generation with family history or accounts
 of wars and political events of the past in which they have participated or
  to which they have been eyewitness. These automatically become fiction
  to the listeners because of the remoteness of the events and the require-
  ment for literary embellishment, especially allusiveness and figures of
  speech, in the style of narration. A single illustration may suffice to indi-
  cate the way in which historical events are likely to be presented.
     The leader of the Abadagi was a man named Gahezeri Binyori Dagi. He
  asked Mwongereza for one of his daughters in marriage. This was a trick,
  for he only wanted to obtain passage through the property of Mwongereza.
  Once he had married the girl, he asked for permission to hunt elephants.
· Mwongereza asked him to pay the hunting tax, but Dagi refused. Dagi
  then went to Mbiiigi to ask him for a place on which to settle. While
  they were talking, Mwongereza appeared. He asked Mbiligi, "What did
  Dagi say to you?" Mbiligi answered, "He has asked me for a place on
  which to settle." "Be careful," warned Mwongereza, "he is deceiving
  you. He wants to take over all your property and then chase you away."
  After that, Dagi fought with Mwongereza, whom Mbiligi helped. They
  killed Dagi, and after that Mwongereza and Mbiligi became good friends.
     Once a few indirect references and some Africanized eponyms are
  understood, the tale is a fairly straightforward though condensed account
  of World War I in Central Africa. Dagi is the Rundi version of Deutsch
  and means "the German." The plural prefix, aba-, makes of Abadagi
 "the Germans," who were in control of Burundi prior to World War I.
 Mwongereza is "the English," the word composed of the singular per-
  sonal prefix 11111-, modified to mw- before a vowel, and -Ongereza, the
  Rundi rendering of "English," reflecting the interchangeability of "r" and
 "[" in interme_diate positions. Mbiligi, with mu- reduced for euphony
  tom-, is "the Belgian." The rest is history. The Germans are represented
  by Dagi, an eponymous treacherous adventurer; the marriage is a simple
  symbol of alliance; European interest in the ivory trade is suggested by
  the reference to elephant hunting; "killing," in the story and in other
  literary forms, is stylized exaggeration for reference to inflicting damage
  or defeat; the subsequent shift in alliance that excluded Germany but
  made England and Belgium friends is also a familiar process in Rundi
  history and needed no comment. It is taken·for granted that each narrator

                                                                                       r
                                                                                   I
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   97

will invent his own way of telling a story and, if he can, a new way for
each telling. Multiple versions of historical events are common. The same
is true of other nonvital types of discourse, e.g., origin tales or descrip-
tions of nature and of natural events. ·

  IMPLICATIONS FOR FIELDWORK
   Attention to at least the most salient and accessible features of the
 cultural patterning of speech behavior in Burundi was in part a necessity
 imposed by the speech-oriented content of the pattern, in part a by-
 product of field research directed to the cultural philosophy, especially
the value system. Consequently, the description offered above is in many
 respects defective. It is incomplete descriptively, and the analytic model
 reflects an inelegant mixture of informants' and observer's categories and
 information. The methods and techniques of ethnophilosophy by which
the fieldwork research was conducted are resistant to orderly, complete
specification, but even if explicated would not be applicable without
modification to a study intended primarily to describe the cultural pat-
terning of speech behavior. Nevertheless, even a rough approximation to
such a pattern is useful as a starting point for exploring the potential
instrumental utility of knowledge of the speech behavior pattern of the
culture for the conduct of ethnographic research generally and for pro-
jecting possibilities for substantive studies in the ethnography of com-
munication which are focused directly on speech behavior.
   The potential for misunderstanding verbal behavior in Burundi and con-
sequently for misperceiving other behavior is obviously high. There is a
proportionately high necessity for understanding the uses of language in
the context of the culture's social structure, world-view, and value system.
Awareness of radical discrepancy between expected and observed verbal
behavior came early in the fieldwork. Specifically, earlier research on
values had proceeded on the assumption that the relevant data were not
easily accessible. For example, it was assumed that value judgments and
evaluations were relatively infrequent and obscure in discourse and their
elucidation by informants problematic. However, it was immediately
obvious that the Barundi habitually terminated descriptions of events or
persons or observations about cattle or the weather with an appropriate
moral proverb or other evaluative statement. In general, no utterance or
discussion seemed complete until a value judgment had been rendered.
By contrast, seemingly innocuous questions, for example about child-
rearing or food, were often met with silence or evasion. Apparently, there
are no intrinsically innocent or taboo topics for all societies. Preoccupa-
tion with speech as an instrument of survival and success and as an iden-
tifying criterion of social status was evident if not intrusive in general
        98   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

discussion. The assumptions and values expressed and the techniques
described and observed bore a startling resemblance to those of Plato's
enemies, the Sophists. Clearly, a revision of expectations and constan_t
awareness of the cultural assumptions of the observer were in order.
   Reasonable progress in fieldwork became po sible only as the local
                                                 1
speech behavior pattern was learned. To obtain a reasonably clear, cor-
rect, and comprehensive set of data, it was necessary to find ways around
the high cultural evaluation of clever lies and evasions and to devise
means to penetrate the elegant but often incomprehensively subtle literary
allusions. For Barundi (and possibly for a number of similar societies in
Africa and the Mediterranean countries), the rules of procedure for data
gathering included: (l) avoiding direct questions, except in such matters
as asking which road leads to Kitega or Nyabikere; (2) learning the cues
by which individuals signal an intention to use sometimes lengthy dis-
quisitions superficially concerned with religion or custom merely as a
request for a gift; (3) locating verbal and other cues by which individuals
unconsciously signal either ignorance of the subject on which they are
pretending to give information or intentional distortion-for example,
one elderly gentleman, the easiest to deal with, invariably told a whop-
ping lie each time he volunteered his assurance that he did not lie; (4)
seeking and comparing alternative accounts of institutions, customs, or
events since only rarely do different individuals lie about or conceal the
same facts; (5) learning good language manners to minimize interpersonal
friction and incomprehension; and (6) more generally, learning in detail
 the patterns .of language use and specific meaning-in effect, playing the
game of matching wits with informants, albeit against high odds.

  "LEARNING THE LANGUAGE" AS
  LEARNING SPEECH BEHAVIOR
   A culture patte~n of speech behavior is in principle easily researched.
As we know, however, it must be made an object of inquiry since neither
data nor patterns insist upon being observed. In the normal course of
research, language and its accompanying signs are used instrumentally to
obtain information on whatever subject we are researching, whether kin-
ship or political behavior, world-view or linguistic structure, even seman-
tic fields and ,taxonomies. As an instrument of research, it does not at-
tract our attention. To make it an object of early, intensive study as part
of learning the language imposes a special strain. It is a condition of nor-
mal, instrumental language use that language behavior be or become
unconscious.
   The analogy between enculturation of the young and the anthropologi-
cal fieldworker's induction into the ways of the culture he is studying,
though of limited utility, is instructive with respect to some of the prob-
                        Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   99

           !ems of speech behavior study. For the ethnographer, as for the young
           members of society, the language is the chief means of communication
          and enculturation. Command of the language and culture requires far
          ~ore than control of lexicon and syntax, and more than control of para-
          hnguistic and kinesic signs. Good speech manners may be more useful
          than technical control of the linguistic features of language, in much the
          same way that native speakers' intonation contours are more conducive
          to efficient communication than an extensive vocabulary or impeccable
         grammar.
             To all appearances, language learning is the medium by which the
         Young learn not only the social roles which they will have to 1 perform or
         to recognize but also the conceptual and value system. Inculcating speech
         ~ehavior patterns is part of the process. Only some parts of the encultura-
         hon processes to which the young are subject are verbally explicit or in
         the form of such easily observed behavioral signs as spankings for punish-
        ments or sweetmeats for rewards. It is here that the analogy between
        c.hild language learning and ethnographer's language learning begins to
        break down. Ethnographers are not children and cannot be taught as
        children are. Rather, they are adult strangers and can expect to be treated
        as members of that category. Not only are sanctions different but also
        exposure to nonexplicit instruction is limited. Further, unlike the child in
        Pro_cess of learning his mother tongue, the ethnographer already has his
        native language and the complex of behavioral and conceptual patterns
        ~cquired with it. These complicate further the usual difficulties of master-
       I~g even the mechanics of a second language acquired relatively late in
       hfe. To some extent, beliefs and values and role-playing directives ap-
       Propriate to the new language may be unconsciously absorbed in the
       course of learning it. For a full representation or awareness of the speech
       behavior pattern, such unconscious learning of culture with language has
       to be shifted to the level of consciousness. Errors resulting from extension
       of our native-speaker habits of thought to the new language are pointed
       and easy lessons in correct speech behavior.

         DENOTATIONS FOR TRANSLATING
          Knowledge of local patterns of speech use is necessary even for the
        ?1Undane business of correct literal interpretation of discourse. In study-
       ing _kinship or color terminology, we are now far too wise to look for
       equivalents to the terms found in the investigator's language and culture.
       The difficulties presented when the observer's language lacks an equiva-
       l~nt term to one in the culture being studied are readily overcome by
       circumlocution. Such difficulties have the merit of being immediately
       ev~dent to the observer. By contrast, as various anthropologists have
       Pointed out, when an equivalent word exists in the language of the ob-




!tr:
        I 00   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

server, there is a genuine threat to reliability. Each specific instance must
be discovered and dealt with. Not only is the cufrural-contextual meaning
likely to be different but also the "same" words may not have the "same"
referents. There is no apparent obstacle to asking a literal Kirundi equiv-
alent to the English question, "How many children do you have?" But if a
man answers, he will state only the number of his sons, if a woman, only
the number of daughters. There are distinct words for children (abana),
sons (ahalzungu) and daughters (abakobwa), but custom has it that only
the same-sexed offspring will be counted. Further, paternity and maternity
are highly valued, and their value is numerically determined. "Total"
offspring (abana base) includes the stillborn and those who died in infancy
or childhood as well as the living. For accurate census data or merely to
keep track of the living, it is necessary to ask a different question in
Kirundi, viz., "What is the numberofboth sons and daughters now alive?"
In principle, the idiomaticity of apparently straightforward discourse has
to be kept in the forefront in language-use learning.

  NAMING CATEGORIES
  OF DISCOURSE
   Seemingly familiar forms and ideas, it should be reiterated, are po-
tentially a threat to reliable perception and reporting. That literary form
is not a reliable index to the functions of discourse is one of the general-
izable implications for theory and method of the examination of Rundi
speech behavior. The priority of esthetic and practical valu~s over literal
truth and the e}plicit situational relativism of criteria governing the uses
of language and intellect reflect that culture's social system and ethno-
epistemology. The necessity for culturally specific interpretation of what
is habitually identified as literary form is indicated by scattered data on
many cultures. For example, poetry cannot properly be classed as ex-
clusively or even primarily an esthetic phenomenon when, as is so often
the case, its main significance is religious. Styles of forensic and political
rhetoric vary widely. The demand for fiery oratorical style is strong in
Burundi and many other places, but is explicitly deplored elsewhere, for
example, among Navaho and Zuni Indians and in many parts of the pres-
ent-day United States. Appropriate subjects and situations for literal
description, as well as the hierarchy of interest in different types of knowl-
edge-e.g., psychological, natural, supernatural-are also cultural vari-
ables that enter into the patterning of speech behavior. The uses and
values of truth, although the concept of truth may be highly uniform,
show variations other than those encountered in Buru!)di. For example,
among Navaho Indians, the value of truth-telling is very high. A sharp
line is drawn between in-group and out-group. Truth is for the in-group.
             Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   101

Lying to outsiders or performing other negative acts toward them will
either be given different names or different evaluations, or both.
   Literary style can be misleading to the researcher. That a curer or
rain-maker uses ritual formulas and a collection of bones or feathers is not
a relevant datum for evaluating the ernpirical efficacy of the totality of
his procedures. The same holds when customary technology is explained
as a gift of the gods or of culture heroes. These rationales are not "scien-
tific" in form or content. Nevertheless, trial and error have in every
society produced reasonably and sometimes highly reliable empirical
sciences. To infer from the ritualistic procedures and literary form that
the procedures are so much hocus-pocus is to be misled by appearances
and is contrary to scientific criteria, which call for suitable technical
training, laboratory facilities, and observation of the behavioral com-
plexes and actual consequences of the uses of mythical or ritual for-
mulas. This is not to say that all ritual formulas are science in disguise
but rather to emphasize the culture-bound distortion introduced by treat-
ing style as a universal clue to the referential significance of terms or
statements or formulas.
   Multiple versions of the "same" events cannot be interpreted as though
the Western rationalistic demand for strict consistency and uniform,
standard description were universal. Different versions of origin tales or
so-called mythopoeic history may well be the product of conscious art
and effort as in Burundi, not signs of confusion about facts. Many types
of discourse regarded as nonfiction in the West, on religious and secular
subjects, are found in multiple versions and literary form in many soci-
eties. Before we know with what name to label samples of discourse, we
need to know the cultural assumptions about the nature of truth and its
range of relevance, as well as the prescribed literary forms for communi-
cating different types of subject matter in different situations. Informants
may be relied upon to know about matters of such importance and wide
dispersion in their culture.
   In principle, anthropological inquiry is free from invidious comparison
with the observer's culture, where it does not bend over backwards to
make kindly interpretations. Yet, it is not improbable that some sense
of obligation to play fair or to show a culture in a favorable light affects
the selection, naming, and presentation of materials in what is intended
as objective reporting. Here, it seems a courtesy due the Barundi to state
that we are all well aware that although our highest ideals are different
from theirs, the practices in their explicit system of rhetoric and in our
actual practice bear a close resemblance. In Western culture, the tricks of
the rhetorician's trade, altering or concealing truths, hatching plots, and
various other aspects of practical speech behavior would perhaps be
called sophistry rather than rhetoric. It is a happy accident that the
          102   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  Barundi make explicit and accept as right a set of rhetorical norms dia-
  metrically opposed to the ideals but excellently descriptive of the prac-
  tices found in Western culture. The contrast makes for high visibility and
  suggests that for the sake of objectivity and in the interest of full descrip-
  tion, knowledge of cultural values governing the uses of speech should be
  treated as intrinsic to the method and theory of studies of speech behavior.
     Omitted from the description of Rundi speech behavior were several
  special languages (court language and a variety of formalized "talking
  with tongues" used in an obsolescent possession cult); oaths, insults,
. and curses; and speech situations not open to strangers (e.g., political
  caucuses, some illegal religious and curing ceremonies, and story-telling
  sessions after dark within the house's). The full list of types of discourse and
  speech situations discriminated in any culture has in all likelihood to be
  sought within the culture and degrees of publicity and privacy discovered.

    SPEECH AS BEHAVIOR:
    DATA COLLECTION
    Speech is usually an adjunct to or instrument of other behavior, but it is
 the primary identifying characteristic of s·uch phenomena as oratory,
 story telling, gossiping, and joking. Studies of speech behavior require
 data on both adjunct and primary speech events and theory and methods
 appropriate to behavioral research. Looking beyond accidental and trial-
 and-error discoveries, we may suggest some types of data and tech-
 niques relevant to study of the cultural patterning of speech bt;havior.
    Speech is so important and pervasive in any society that at least those
 with the reputation for wisdom or success are probably capable of stating
 the norms that govern the uses of speech. Moreover, enculturation in-
 cludes instruction of the young not only in the mechanics of speaking but
 also in the patterns of speech behavior. Hence, virtually any adult and
 probably many young people are potential sources of relevant informa-
 tion, direct or inferential. With speech behavior, as with other phenomena,
 once alerted to the subject, we perceive it with increased frequency and
 attention. It is probably easiest to start with observation of primary
 speech events, i.e., formal speech making, recitations of oral literature,
 courtroom proceedings, and whatever situations bear the extra-linguistic
 signs that define the role of "a speaker" in contrast to "an audience." In
 due course, an inventory could be made of the cultural answers to such
 questions as, "On what occasions-and of whom-are formal speeches
 expected?" "When are tales, or poems, or riddles in order?" "Who is
 qualified or permitted to tell myths and legends?" Observation and ques-
 tioning would normally be directed not only to language but also to con-
 ventional paralinguistic and kinesic signs. Comments about gestures,
 voice loudness, and voice control are pertinent data. Value judgments,
!--
                                                                                                    .   ---- ~. - ~- . .:--.:.-
                                                                                                                       -




                      Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi
                                                                                  103
      spontaneous or elicited, should yield cultural criteria gover .
      of speech and related extra-linguistic signs.                         nmg each class
         In general, fixed verbal formulas-conventional phrases .d.
                                                          .      .          , 1 1orns
      -though part of the recor d , are not rewar d mg as mforrnatio O b               • spells                      I'
      ing. Their literal meaning may be lost, or their significance ~ ,? 0 ! speak-
      their own right m.ay oversha.dow their significance as verba~s hthings" in
      Even the most hterate or hterary speaker of English WouJ~ ~00.rnena.
      ficulties if asked to say more about "good-bye" than that it is                 e m dif-
      of "God be with you," or to account for the malicious pow a ~ontraction
          · · the Lord's Prayer backward s.
      rec1tmg                                                                  er mher ent 1n ·
         Examination of adjunct speech behavior is more cornpJ                          .
      bedded in nonspeech situations, is far greater in quantity a e~. ht            1 ls ern-
      more varied in type than primary speech situations, is l~s; r~ ough far
                                                                                  1
      neatly categorized either in the local lexicon for speaking beh , e.ly to be
      any existing external analytic schemes.                                     c1vior or in
         Socialization and social control explicitly directed to Jangu
      probably easiest to begin work with. Nevertheless, practicat~~;se ~re
                                                                                     1                                I
      must be expected. Only rarely in any culture is even a small part f cu Ities                                    'I
                                                                                                                      l'f
      instruction explicit, systematic, and localized in time and place ~. s?eech
             ·
      occasions    cior cnhc1sm
                          · · ·  or correc t'ion are no t east·i Ypre d'1ctable Pr'
                                                                                  · 1rn1Iarly
                                                                                        .       '
      we must observe speec h events m w 1c positive or negative c mc1pally '
                                              .   h'    h    . .                ·
                                                   ·
      are addressed to or ma d e a b out an mexpenenced     ·         or inexpert ornments
                                                                                      s eak
      "Don't mumble'"      · and "Spe·1k
                                      ' when you are spoken to'",       · ,u.e typical
                                                                                    . p of ther.
      inglorious stuff of which we must construct our pattern. The criti .                   he
      someone 1s  . spea k'mg too muc h , w h en 1t  . occurs, must be checked       c1sm, t. at
      the language bemg spo en smce, not m requent 1Y, even a laggard agamst
                           ·     k     ·           ·  f                                       b
      condemned as verbose if he is speaking a dialect or language in wh~~ he
      listener is not fluent. Consistent criticism of an individual for speak:~ : e
      little ~robably refl_ects a cultu:al norm of corre~t quantity of speech fo~· t~~
      occas10n and social role. It 1s both relevant mformation and a basi c
                     · ·
      furt h er quest10nmg.   "Ta lk'mg out of turn " may a Iso b e noticed and scrit-
                                                                                   ior
      icized. I~ short, talk about talk should be noted and inquiry directed to its
      explanat10n.
I.        Observations about the speech components of behavior of any kind                                        'I I
      may be useful in themselves and as cues to additional information. For
      example, an aside offered during the conduct of a law case in Burundi
      gave useful hints: "His aunt is speaking for him. He is too young to plead
      his own case." Inquiry into the ways in which pleading skills are acquired
      and criteria for ascertaining maturity in their use is then obviously in
      order, especially since adults of both sexes serve as their own advocates.                                  ::
       Proverbs, axioms, or advice about good or correct speech will probably
      turn up in the course of time and can be used as a basis for eliciting more
       detailed information about the importance of speech, its powers, and its
       limitations.
        104   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   Some of the norms governing speech, characteristically for norms in
general, may be violated only at the risk of negative sanctions, while
others may be violated with impunity. It is therefore desirable to pursue
inquiry beyond discovery of the contents of the norms that define good
speech, correct speech, elegant speech, or whatever criteria are employed
in the culture. Barundi know and say that a well-brought-up woman
(imfura) does not shout at or beat a disobedient servant. She corrects him
gently, as a mother corrects a wayward child. But when specific violations
are discussed, it is stated that the ideal is rarely if ever carried out in
practice, excepting in the disagreeable sense that by and large mothers
systematically shout at and beat their disobedient children. Such a rule
belongs in the presentation of the pattern, but as an ideal which few if any
persons are expected to realize. Alertness to cultural concessions to
ideals and rules is appropriate not only for language behavior as such but
also for other types of institutionalized signs. For example, a law case in
Burundi is officially closed when the judge, plaintiff, defendants, and
witnesses drink beer together. The accompanying verbal form asserts that
all are now friends, that none will hold a grudge against the judge, and that
the plaintiff and defendant will resume friendly relations. According to
informants who know about or have been directly involved in litigation,
this is a sham. It is only the battle that has ended; the war goes on. The
principals will sooner or later find a fresh cause for litigation. The loser
will probably slander the judge by asserting that his decision was influ-
enced by a bribe, and he will quarrel with the witnesses for having failed
to support him more effectively.

  SAMPLING AND PATTERNING
    Observation of speech behavior, noting spontaneous statements that
are obviously or potentially about speaking, systematic questioning, and
confirmatory observation should produce the data required for a compre-
hensive view of speech behavior. Construction of the culture pattern from
the data, however, requires some principle of simplification and selection,
as well as a model for organizing the data. In the nature of the case, ad-
junct speech behavior situations are nearly as numerous and varied as the
totality of situations. Appreciation of their significance depends on un-
derstanding the general characteristics of the situations in which speech
occurs. Since no individual controls an entire culture, a well-chosen
sample of persons and situations is needed to construct the over-all
pattern.
    Ideally, the observer will uncover the speech patterns associated with
 all the social roles and speech situations distinguished in the culture.
 Simplification of the task is afforded by the complementarity between
 behavioral or institutional definitions of social roles and modes of speech
              Culture Patterning <~f Speech Behavior in Burundi   J05

 as indicators of variability of social roles. Systematic shifts in lexicon or
 syntax, extra-linguistic signs, style, and permitted or appropriate topics
 and types of comment are among the defining characteristics of social
 role variation. They are also cues for differential definitions of situations,
 as distinguished by the persons in the culture. Complementarity between
 speech behavioral indices and nonlinguistic defining characteristics of
 social differentiation may be assumed to hold in any culture, but it is
 obvious that the descriptive details and actual categories will vary with
 each culture.
    Somewhat more difficult to demonstrate and to characterize is inter-
 dependence between speech behavior patterns and the cultural world-
 view and value system. Far less is known about cultural logics and
 epistemology than about social structure. The exploration of the rela-
 tionship between the allocation of intellectual resources and the uses of
 speech in Burundi suggests that there are deep-lying interdependencies
 between the world-view and value system on one side and patterns of
 speech behavior on the other. Research in ethnophilosophy requires at-
 tention to language in as many of its aspects as knowledge and time allow.
 In the course of such research, language use, almost of its own weight,
moves out of the status of instrument to the status of a distinctive and
substantive subpattern in its own right. This is perhaps only to say that
speaking is behavior, and like other types of behavior, it is internally
patterned within the general pattern of the culture.
    Ethnophilosophy offers only one avenue of approach to the study of
culture patterns of speech behavior. Refinement of methods and concepts
is obviously needed. Moreover, not until'more is known of each of the
many aspects of speech behavior can specific linkages among the research
results of different specializations be reliably established, e.g., between
the lexicon and morphology of a language and the characteristics of the
world-view of its speakers, or between the universal features of cognition
or learning and the specific patterns of cultures and personalities, or be-
tween semantic fields or taxonomies and conceptual systems, or between
patterns of speech behavior and related patterns of nonverbal behavior.
Since the flow of human speech fills a reservoir of nearly infinite capacity,
its study does not lack for materials with which to work.
          3

          Struck by Speech: 'The Yakan
          Concept of Litigation                        1



          CHARLES 0. FRAKE




          Charles Frake is Professor of Anthropology at Stanford
          University. He received his doctorate at Yale University
          and has taught at Harvard. His fieldwork in the Philip-
          pines, first with the Subanun of Mindanao and currently
          among the Yakan, has been the basis for analysis of
          several spheres of cultural behavior and cognition, in-
          cluding kinship, ecology, and religion. His current in-
          terests include the development and structure of Philip-
          pine creole Spanish. The present paper is reprinted from
          an original appearing in Law in Culture and Society
          (Nader 1969).
             Frake's study exemplifies what has variously been
          called the "ethnoscience," "ethnographic semantics," or
          "new ethnography" approach to anthropological analysis
          (Frake 1964c; Conklin 1962; Sturtevant 1964). It utilizes
          the heuristic principles of descriptive linguistics in order
          to improve the validity of ethnographic field investiga-
          tions. The aim is to discover the ways in which members
          of a community themselves categorize their own be-
          havior and thus to overcome the tendency to superim-
          Reprinted from Laura Nader, editor, Law in Culture and Society
          (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1969); copyright © 1969 by
          the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, Inc.
  1 Field work among the Yakan in 1962, 1963-1964, and 1965-1966 was supported by a

United States Public Health Service Grant under the National Institute of Mental Health
and by an auxiliary research award from the Social Science Research Council. The state-
ments in this paper are at a level of generality applicable to the Basilan Yakan as a whole and
represent knowledge t~at any adult Yakan could be expected to have. Yakan expressions
are represented by a linguistically motivated orthography, but certain canons of traditional
phonemic analysis are ignored ("a," for example, represents both /a/ and /e/ where this
contrast is neutralized). This practice enables dialect differences to be accounted for by
special rules applicable to a uniform orthography. /q/ is a glottal cathc, /e/ a mid-front
vowel, /j/ a voiced, palatal affricative.
                                             106
                Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation                 107

             pose one's own analytical categories, while aiming at a
             description that goes beyond mere observation and
             recording.                     ·
               The methodological influence of linguistics appears
             in the attention to segmenting and classifying events
             within the stream of behavior. The informal norifestive
             nature of the relevant Yakan situation or scene, e.g.,
             means that the occurrence of litigation could not be
            recognized from the physical setting but only from the
            content and structure of the talk itself. The natural start-
            ing point for the analysis is, therefore, the Yakan's own
            legal terminology. The relevant named speech events are
            classified by the method of focusing on contrast within a
            frame to determine what counts as "the same" and "dif-
            ferent." In this litigation is found to be definable within a
            set of four contrasting, successively inclusive speech
            events. These events constitute a set in virtue of being
           instances of the native category of"talking to each other."
           These speech events themselves were defined in response
           to a query such as "What are they doing?" The dimen-
           sions that underlie the set of speech events are identified
           as focus, purpose, role, and integrity of the event. Focus
           denotes the topic of the discussion. Integrity denotes the
           distinctiveness of the event and its occurrence in relation
           to others of the same or different scale (i.e., whether it in-
           cludes or is included in others, is int~rruptible, is clearly
           bounded, etc.).
              Having placed litigation as one kind of Yakan talk,
           Frake describes the nature and structure of litigation
          itself. From one standpoint, the description is an example
          of the ethnography of law. But note that it differs from
          more conventional ethnographies in that it concentrates
          on the Jonns of litigation, how members recognize that
          grounds for a case exist. As Frake puts it, "What we are
         ,trying to formulate are the conditions under which it is
         'congruous, neither humorous nor deceitful, to state that

   The ethnographic record upon which this description is based includes the investigator's
observations of court sessions, transcriptions of forty-three tape-recorded trial sessions at
all jurisdictional levels, and informants' interpretations of the content of these observations
and texts. In addition, by living in Yakan households during the entire field period, the in-
vestigator was continually exposed to conve·rsations related to litigation. Special acknowl-
edgement is due to Samual Pajarito and Reuben Muzarin for assistance in recording and
transcribing court sessions and to Hadji Umar of Giyung for many long discussions about
Yakan law.
108   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

one is engaged in litigation. These conditions are the
semantic features of concept in question." Frake views
the Yakan legal system as a system of symbols or a "code
for talking." His description attempts to give the rules of
interpretation by which speakers evaluate this code.
These rules are seen as being of the same abstract nature
as the linguists' deep structure. The view of culture im-
plied here is quite similar to that of Goodenough (1964)
and Garfinkel (Chapter I 0).
   Frake's description is also a contribution to the ethnog-
raphy of speaking, specifying the place of various verbal
genres and particular acts of speech within the overall
cultural activity, or speech situation, e.g., choice between
complaint and gossip to initiate a charge; limorok "to
slip through," i.e., to inadvertently tell A in the presence
of B about a litigable offense of C, where B is likely to
inform C; the dependence for compliance with a ruling on
persuasive use of the elaborate verbal trappings that ac-
company the ruling; admonition and prayer as two of the
three outcomes of it ruling. (A monographic study would,
of course, give detailed analysis of each of these in its
own right.) Other aspects of speaking enter, as with the
forensic ability that is one of the qualifications of a judge,
and the specification of norms of interaction governing
allocation of speaking time and right to speak.
   Ethnographic semantics has an important part in the
description, regarding the criteria for an act to be inter-
pretable as an "offense" and two of the three possible
defenses against an accusation; each concerns the rela-
tion between a concept and instances of it. With regard
to lexicon, notice also that it is social prestige, rather than
intellectual impact, that accounts for the prevalence of
loan words in Yakan legal discourse. The idiom, or se-
mantic structure, of kinship is employed for the relations
among the participants on each side of the dispute; the
event is under the sign of speech itself, for the article's
title refers to the principals on each side, who are "struck
by speech."
   The concluding comparison between two cultures
points to the importance of this type of analysis for the
proper interpretation of speech. Although the terms for
litigation in Yakan and Subanun are superficially the
same, they reflect different speech events and imply
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation             109

            different things about the social relationships among
            participants. Two Yakan engaged in litigation probably
            are not serious enemies. This is not necessarily the case
            among the Subanun. The background knowledg~ fur-
           nished by this kind of analysis is thus an essential pre-
           requisite for sociolinguistic work because it deals with
           basic problems of segmentation in speech events. Abra-
           hams and Bauman ( 1970) and Faris ( 1968) provide ad-
           ditional related readings.
              For an attempt to apply Frake's procedures to the
           ethnographic study of drug culture in the United States,
           see Agar (1971).



                          tiyaq ku tmv1vaq bissiih.
                          (Here I am struck by speech.)
                          (Remark of an accused in a trial.)

    .       The Yakan legal system is manifest almost exclusively by one
  kin? of behavior: talk. Consequently the ethnographer's record of obser-
  vations of litigation is largely a linguistic record, and the legal system is a
  Code for talking, a linguistic code. In this chapter we focus initially on a
  s~all part of this talk, that representing the concept of litigation. Then,
  Without giving a full description we attempt to illustrate how a definition
  of this concept guides a descri~tion of the legal system, enables us to
 rel~te litigation with other activities within Yakan society, and finally,
 Points the way toward meaningful comparisions with legal systems of
 Other cultures.
    •he Yakan are Philippine Moslems inhabiting the island of Basilan
 1
  ocated off the southern tip of Zamboanga Peninsula, a western extension
?f the island of Mindanao. Southwest of Basilan stretches the Sulu arch-
telago, a chain of small islands extending some 200 miles to within a
;w.    mil.es of the northeast coast of Borneo: ~ome _6_0,_000 Yakan share
   asilan s 1,282 square kilometers with Chnstian F1hpmos concentrated
~long the north coast and with Taw Sug and Sama! Moslems living mostly
~~ coastal villages. all around the island. 2 The Y akan ~re close ling~istic
1 n of the sea-fanng Sama!; but, unlike them, practice an exclusively
 and-oriented economy: diversified grain, root, and tree-crop agriculture
0
  ~ Ploughed fields and swiddens commercial copra production, and cattle
~~Isi~g, _Supple~entary econo~ic activities include ?lantation labor,
   stnbution of cigarettes smuggled from Borneo by theJr Moslem broth-
 2
Z There are also Yakan speakers on Sakol, Malanipa, and Tumalutab islands just east of
 amboanga City. These communities are beyond the scope of this discussion.
        I IO   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ers, and banditry. These economic activities bring the Yakan into close
contact with the Philippine economy, political system, and army. Having
been given this much information, the anthropological reader has prob-
ably already classed the Yakan as "peasants," which is all right as long as
it does not bring to mind a downtrodden, economically exploited, cultur-
ally deprived people submerged by the weight of some "great tradition."
   Houses, mosques, and graveyards dot the Yakan countryside rarely re-
vealing any obvious patterns of spatial clustering. Each, however, rep-
resents the focus of a pattern of social alignment. Houses are occupied by
nuclear families, independent units of production and consumption. The
family is the unit of membership in a parish, a religious and political unit
under the titular leadership of a mosque priest (qima,n). Parishes are
alliances of independent families; affiliation is by choice, not by residence
or kinship ties. Parishes comprise only several dozen families and any
family has a network of social relations with kin and neighbors extending
beyond the parish. Ancestors, buried in conspicuously decorated graves,
define networks of cognatic kinship ties among the living. Although these
networks are unsegmented by discrete, corporate groups of any kind, the
Yakan talk about groupings of kin in ways that would do credit to a social
anthropologist. Note, for example, the contrast between pa?Jlwt baqiralz
'the unrestricted, non-unilineal descent group defined by an ancestor
(female) named Baira' and ,qusba baqirah 'the kindred centered around
an ego named Baira.' Like the legal expressions we are about to discuss,
this talk about social groups must be understood as a part of social be-
havior as well as a description of it.


        Defining Litigation

          A description of a culture derives from an ethnographer's ob-
servations of the stream of activities performed by the people he is study-
ing. As a first step toward producing an ethnographic statement, the in-
vestigator must segment and classify the events of this behavior stream so
that he can say, for example, of two successive events, that one is "dif-
ferent" from the other and, of two non-successive events, that they are
repetitions of the "same" activity. If the ethnographer claims his people
do X three times a week, verification of his statement requires not simply
counting occurrences of X but also assessing the criteria for distinguishing
X from all the other things people do during the week and for deciding
that all the different events construed as instances of X in fact represent
the "same" activity. Information about what is the "same" and what is
"different" can only come from the interpretations of events made by the
people being studied.
   Within the stream of behavior observable in Yakan society, there are
some events which ai·e difficult to characterize initially except as "a group
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation                  /II

of people talking together." There seems to be no focus of activity other
than talk, no distinctive settings, apparel, or paraphernalia. We might
postulate that all such cases are manifestations of the ·same category of
cultural activities, that they are all repetitions of the same scene. At a
very general level we could justify this decision. All these activities can be
labelled magbissiih 'talking to each other' in response to a query such as
magqine siyeh 'what are they doing?' But, as the English glosses indi-
cate, this categorization is not particularly informative, especially to an
observer of the scene. To discover a more refined categorization we must
attend to the way the Yakan talk about talking.
  Yakan, like English, provides a large number of linguistic expressions
for talking about a great variety of aspects of speech behavior. Of these
we sort out for consideration the following set of semantically related
expressions, all possible responses to the query "What are they doing?"
(Only the variable portion of the response is shown. 3 Some of these forms,
especially /wlwm, have different, but related, meanings in different con-
texts. Etymological information is given for later discussion.):

           I. mitin (<English) "discussion"'
           2. qis1111 "conference"
           3. nunvpakkat (<Arabic) "negotiation"
           4. lwkum (<Arabic) "litigation"

   The structure of inclusion and contrast relations manifest in the use of
these terms to denote events is shown in Fig. 3. I. Let A, B, C, D represent
situations that can be labelled as miti?J, qiswz, mmvpa/dwt, and /wkum re-
spectively. Then it is the case that miti?J can label the set of situations
[ABCD], qistm the set of situations [BCD], riunvpakkat the set [CD],
whereas lz11kun1 can only label [D]. Thus these expressions form an or-
dered series, the situations labelable by a given term including all those
labelable by each succeeding term. However, it is also the case that mili?J
can be used to contrast situation A with each of the other situations (A
not B, C, or D) as in the exchange:
   ,nagqisun qenteg siyelz 'They seem to be conferring'
   du1naqi11, magmiti!J hadja qiyan 'No, they're discussing'
The form hadja 'just, merely' specifies that mitiry is to be construed in
its minimal sense, but its use is not obligatory to convey this sense. Sim-
ilarly qisun, mawpakkat, and lwkum can be used to contrast B, C, Dre-
spectively with each of the other situations. We have then a case of the

  3 In response to magqine (<N 'active'+ pag 'mutuality'+ qine 'what') 'what is the mu-

tual activity or relationship'/', the forms cited, all unanalyzable morphemes, replace qine
'what': 111agqi11e siyelz 'What are they doing?' 111agqis1111 'Conferring with each other.' Note
also: 111a[.?qi11e siye/z 'How are they related to each other?' 11wgpo1)ti11aqi/z 'As siblings.'
  1
    Single quotes enclose English glosses. These are to be assigned the meaning given to the
Yakan expressions for which they substitute.               ·
         112      Ethnographic Description and Explanation


                       mitin



                                        qisun


                                                       mawpakkat




                 A                B                C
                                                            I    hukum


                                                                    D
          -----------------w
               -------------X
                                              --------y
                                                             ----z
         A, B, C, D: Situations represented     w, x, y, z: Features of meaning
         figure]./
Semantic structure

use of the same forms at different levels of contrast, a situation common
in semantic representation (Frake 1964d), and one that has caused some
controversy over interpretation (Bright and Bright I 965 :258).
   In the use of the same expression at different levels of contrast, there is
in Yakan a distinction between those cases, such as the present example,
in which use at the less inclusive level is specifiable by a deemphatic
particle (e.g., /zadja 'just, merely') and those in which it is specifiable by
an emphatic particle (e.g., teqed 'very, true, real'). Contrast
   magmitin hadja qiyan 'They're just discussing' (and not 'conferring,'
   'negotiating,' etc.)
with
   magpovtinaqi teqed qiyan 'They're real siblings' (and not 'half-sib-
   lings,' 'cousins,' etc.)
The use of the same term at different levels of contrast results, in the
former case, from a specification of the basic general sense of an expres-
sion. In the latter case it results from an extension of the basic specific
sense of an expression. Cases of specification, ~uch as the present ex-
ample, can be interpreted as manifestation of "marking," a phenomenon
widespread in linguistic representation in phonology and morphology as
well as in semantics (Jakobson I 957; Greenberg I 966). Semantic marking
means that given two expressions, A and B, sharing some feature of mean-
ing x but differing with respect to some feature y (and in that sense con-
trasting), that the difference is not
   term A represents the meaning: xy
   term B represents the meaning: xy
            Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation      113

 but rather
    term A represents the meaning: x _
    term B represents the meaning: xy
The use of term B necessarily implies feature y, but the use of term A does
not necessarily say anything about the presence or absence of y. Term B
is marked for y. In our series each term is marked for a feature (or fea-
 tures) not necessarily by its predecessor:
    miti?J 'discussion': w
    qisun 'conference': wx
    nzawpakkat 'negotiation': wxy
    hulwm 'litigation': wxyz
The next task is to characterize the features of nieaning represented
above as w, x, y, z; w being what the set has in common and x, y, z being
successive increments to this common meaning.
    At the outset we should be clear about just what linguistic and cognitive
operations of our informants we are trying to account for. It is not simply
a case of determining the perceptual cues for distinguishing one object
from another. If a Yakan sees some people engaged in mutual speech
behavior (that categorization he can make perceptually) and wants to
know what they are doing, he will in all probability ask them. In this case
the object of categorization, a group of people engaged in some activity,
is aware of what it is doing. This awareness is, in itself, an attribute, a
necessary one, of the category. Just as in classifying a plant one might
apply a test of taste or smell to determine a criteria) property, in classify-
ing these speech events one applies a test of eliciting a linguistic response
from the performers of the activity. It is impossible for people engaged in
'litigation' or in 'conference' not to be aware of what they are doing and
not to be able to communicate their awareness. For people engaged, say,
in 'litigation' to be able to state that they are 'litigating' is a necessary
condition for the activity to be 'litigation,' but it is not a sufficient condi-
tion. They might be lying or, more probable in Yakan life, they might be
joking. Being funny is a prominent goal of Yakan speech behavior and
semantic incongruity is a standard way of adding humor to speech-but
the effect is dependent on the hearer's ability to recognize the incongruity.
What we are trying to formulate, then, are the conditions under which it is
congruous, neither humorous nor deceitful, to state that one is engaged in
'litigation.' These conditions are the semantic features of the concepts in
question. Our evidence for semantic features does not come from in-
formants' statements about the linguistic representations of these con-
cepts (though such explicit definitions of terms are often useful guides for
 preliminary formulations) but from informants' interpretations of the
 situations which the concepts represent. Our aim is not to give an elegant
formulation of minimal contrastive features but a statement that reflects
            114    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

the various dimensions of speech behavior revealed in the use and inter-
pretation of these expressions.
  Let us consider first the features common to the whole set, those that
distinguish all events construable as miti1J 'discussion' from other things
Yakans do. This set of events includes the events labelled by the other
expressions. Then we will consider what each successive term adds to
these common features. Four dimensions of speech behavior appear to be
involved in contrasting "discussion" with other activities:

miti1J 'discussion'
   I. Focus. The focus of 'discussion' is on the topic of messages. There
is a subject of discussion. Excluded are speech events in which the focus
is on message form: story-telling, riddling, exchanging verses, joking,
prayer (which, being in Arabic, has no semantic content for the Yakan).
   2. Purpose. The purpose of the gathering is to talk. Excluded are ac-
tivities in which the intent to accomplish something other than talking is
responsible for the gathering of participants.
   3. Roles. Speaking time is distributed among the participants. Each
role in the scene, whatever its other characteristics, is both a speaking
and a listening role. Excluded are monologues in which speaking time is
monopolized by one person. 5
   4. Integrity. Integrity refers to the extent to which the activity is con-
strued as an integral unit as opposed to being a part of some other activity.
A 'discussion' must have sufficient integrity not to be construable as
incident to or accompanying some other activity. A 'discussion' can
occur within the context of another kind of event, but only as a recog-
nizably bounded interruption, as when participants disengage from some
other activity to talk something over. (This dimension will sound Jess
fuzzy when we consider its relevance to the contrast between 'litigation'
and other kinds of 'discussion.')
   The expression mitil) 'discussion' necessarily implies only these
features. Each of the succeeding expressions in the series adds some
necessary implications along one or more of these dimensions (Table 3.1).

qisun 'conference'
   I. Focus. The subject of discussion is an issue, some topic that pre·
sents a problem to be decided: when to plant rice, when to go on a trip,
what price to pay in a transaction.
   2. Purpose. A 'conference' has an expected outcome, a decision about
the issue. Participants meet in order to reach a decision, and, if a decision
is made, the conference is concluded.                                       ;'
                                                                           I
  5
      The mutuality of the behavior is represented by the prefix pag in the sequence N ~
pag > ,nag. See footnote 3.
             Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation          115

   3. Roles. No added implications.
   4. Integrity. No added implications.

nunvpakkat 'negotiation'
   I. Focus. The issue in 'negotiation' is a disagreement, a topic over
Which participants have conflicting interests.
  2. Purpose. The decision is a settlement, a legally binding resolution of
the disagreement.
  3. Roles. Participants are divided into two protagonistic sides. Wit-
nesses may be present.
  4. Integrity. No clear added implications. Although mawpakkat is
more likely to refer to an integral event than qisun, and quisun than mitiy,
these are not necessary implications.

 hukum 'litigation'
     I. Focus. The disagreement is a dispute, a disagreement which arises
from a charge that an offense has been committed. A dispute can also be
handled by negotiation, but the topic of litigation is necessarily a dispute.
A dispute handled by litigations is a case.                                      ,
    2. Purpose. The settlement takes the form of a legal ruling based on
Precedent and having special sanctions .
  . 3. Roles. In addition to protagonists and optional witnesses, 'litiga-
~Ion' requires a court, a seat of neutral judges who control the proceed-
ings and attempt to effect a ruling.
    4. Integrity. 'Litigation' is always an integral activity. If it is inter-
~Upted by a different kind of activity, eating, for example, there is a new
instance of litigation, a different court session. 'Discussion,' 'confer-
~?~e,' and 'negotiation,' in their minimal senses, can occur as parts of
 litigation,' but 'litigation' cannot occur as a part of these other activities.

                                                                                     , I'

                table 3.1                                                              i I
                                                                                     ; : '
                                                                                       I I
      Semantic Features
                         Topic        Purpose,'   Role Structure     Integrity
                                                                                      ii
      'discussion'    subject        talk         undifferentiated   mimimal
      'conference'    issue          decision     undifferentiated   minimal
      'negotiation'   disagreement   settlement   opposing sides     moderate         i'
                                                                                      I'

      'litigation'    dispute        ruling       court              maximal



  Each expression in our series, except the terminal one, has a maximal
and minimal sense, depending on whether the speaker intends to include
or exclude the meanings marked by succeeding expressions. 'Mere dis-
        116    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

cussion' (rnitit] hac{ia), the minimal sense of nzili!J, implies the features
listed as common to the whole set, but the topic is simply a subject to
discuss, not an issue to be decided, a disagreement to be settled, or a case
to be ruled on. The purpose is to talk, but there is no expected outcome
which terminates the event, no decision to be reached, no settlement to be
negotiated, no ruling to be handed down. Role structure is undifferentiated
and integrity minimal, although still greater than that implied by magbissah
 'talking to each other.' A ,niti!] in its minimal sense more closely re-
 sembles an American 'bull session' than what we would call a "meeting."
     'Mere conference' applies to situations in which the issue is not a
 dispute, the decision not a settlement, and role structure remains undif-
 ferentiated. 'Mere negotiation' applies to situations in which, though the
 disagreement may be a dispute, the intended outcome is a settlement that
 is not a legal ruling and that is reached without the aid of judges.
     The flexibility of reference afforded by this semantic structure, the
 ability to be ambiguous about whether a general or specific sense is in-
 tended, reflects the fact that these expressions are used not only to talk
 about speech behavior, but their use is also a part of the behavior they
 describe. A Yakan uses terms like nzawpakkat and /zulwm not simply to
 give serious answers to probes for information but also to further his own
 objectives in speech situations by advancing a particular, perhaps osten-
 sibly incongruous, interpretation of an event and by representing this
 conceptualization linguistically in an effective way. He can, for example,
 call for a 'conference' without immediately committing himself to an
 interpretation of the divisiveness of the issue; he can call for a 'discus-
  sion' without implying there is an issue at stake.
      For these reasons stylistic features of expressions, selections among
  alternative linguistic representations of a given conceptual distinction,
  figure importantly in their use and effect their semantic properties. In our
  set, mawpakkat is considered more learned than the other terms, all of
  which are ordinary, everyday words. Although the word is widely known,
  it occurs most often during 'litigation' when 'negotiations' are being
  talked about. In other contexts the notion of 'mere negotiation' is more
  likely to be referred to as qiswz, using 'conference' in its general sense. It
  is probably a consequence of this stylistic difference that the semantic
  contrast between mmvpakkat and qisun seems less sharply drawn than
  that between the other pairs of expressions. In direct questioning about
   the meaning of these terms, many informants have stated offhand that
   mmvpakkat and qisun mean the same thing. No one has said that of hukunz
  and any other term in the set. The same informants will still agree that if,
   for example, several guests at a festivity get together to decide when to
  leave, this is a case of qisun but not of rnawpakkat. The two expressions
  are not synonymous, but the difference between them is somewhat harder
   to uncover than in the other cases. The concept of 'negotiation' can also
             Struck by Speech: The Ya/am Concept of Litigation          117

be represented by expressions referring to the distinctive aspects of the
event, for example:
    pagsulutan 'agreement, settlement-not including :Jegal rulings
    (hukuman)'
    qalegdalz (<Spanish) 'to settle a dispute by any means'
   ja11jiqa11 (<Malay) 'negotiated contractual promise'
    Any citation of Yakan legal terms illustrates another property of these
expressions, that is, the large percentage of forms that are loan words
 from the languages of both of the "great traditions" impinging on the
Yakan: Arabic and Malay of the Malaysian-Moslem tradition, English
and Spanish of the Filipino-Western tradition. 6 These loans have been
acquired through contact with intermediary languages (Taw Sug and
Zamboanguefio) and their prevalence is not a reflection of a crushing im-
pact of either Moslem or Western legal concepts upon Yakan Jaw but of
the stylistic coups a speaker of Yakan scores by displaying a knowledge
of foreign words. This process apparently has a long history. Many loans,
such as lwkum (<Arabic), are now completely assimilated and are not
now recognized as foreign. The term 1nitir;, currently much more popular
than alternative designations of 'discussion,' seems to be on the verge of
losing its loan-word aura. English Joans used in current litigation include:
wantid, /10/dap, kidnap, wadan ('warrant'), supena/z, pospon, pendiy,
qokelz ('approval'), and qistodok ('strategy' from "stroke").


         Describing Litigation

          Our formulation states that litigation is a kind of topic-focused
 mutual speech behavior whose distinctive attributes pertain to the content
and role structure of talking. An observer of Yakan litigation would have
difficulty finding anything else that sets it apart from other activities.
There are no distinctive settings, no courtrooms, for litigation to take
place. A site for a trial should be neutral and should require no one to play
a host role, a role which requires the offering of food. A typical result of
these considerations is to meet on the porch of the house of one of the
judges (in Yakan terms "on" the house but not "within" it). But a wide
variety of other activities take place here as well. There are no distinctive
paraphernalia associated with litigation: no law books, no gavel, no judges'
bench, no witness stand. There is no provisioning of participants. They
may smoke and chew betel, but the rules for soliciting and proferring
smoking and chewing makings are the same as for other informal gather-

   6 The source of etymological information on Malay and Arabic loans is Wilkinson's

( 1932) dictionary. Yakan expressions are marked as Malay loans only when there arc
phonological grounds for distinguishing loans from inherited cognates.
        118   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ings. There is no distinctive dress associated with litigation-no judges
robes-and participants do not dress up to go to court as they do to go to
ceremonies. If one were to make a cut in Yakan activities between festive
and nonfestive, formal and informal, litigation would clearly fall ~n the
nonfestive, informal side. As speech-focused activity, litigation is outside
the domain of ceremonies, feasts, technological tasks, and other object-
focused activities. We must, therefore, organize a.description of litigation
along those dimensions of speech behavior fo4rid to be significant.


  CASES
  The topic of litigation is a 'case' (p{ikalag < Malay < Sanskrit), a 'dis-
pute' brought to court. A 'dispute' arises when an identified part is
'charged' with an 'offense' and the accused counters the charge. To make
a charge is to publicly proclaim a particular interpretation of an act. To
counter a charge is to advance another interpretation. Clearly the key
descriptive problem is to state the rules for interpreting an act as an of-
fense. Equally clear is that these rules cannot be perfectly consistent in
their formulation or straightforward in their application. There must be
room for argument if there is to be litigation.

   Offenses. 'Offenses' (salaq) are a subset 'of 'wrongs' (duseh), those
wrongs against persons that can lead to a dispute. There are also wrongs
against God (tuhan), such as desecrating a Koran; wrongs against this-
world supernaturals (saytan < .Arabic), such as cutting down a tree they
inhabit; and wrongs against ancestors (kapapuqan) now in the other world
(qahilat < .Arabic), such as selling an heirloom. But these beings need
not rely on courts to seek redress.
   The Yakan employ a large number of linguistic expressions for talking
about different kinds of offenses along a variety of semantic dimensions
dealing with the nature and consequences of acts as well as with the social
relationships between offender and victim. The saliency or' dimensions
with respect to one another can vary in different portions of the domain.
For example, physical assault with intent to kill (bonoq) and sexual as-
sault (hilap from Arabic, and many other expressions) are terminologically
distinguished unless the offense is also a wrong against God, as is the case
if victim and offender are primary kin or primary affines. There is one
term, sumbay, to cover these grievous sins against both man and God.
One might say that the contrast "sex vs. killing" is neutralized when an
expression is marked for "interference by God." (It might be noted that
sexual relations are often designated euphemistically or facetiously by
metaphors based on expressions for killing or fighting. "To make a killing"
in Yakan does not refer to business success.) We will state here only a few
                   Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation     119

         general inferences about the nature of the concept of 'offense' which have
         been drawn from Yakan talk about particular kinds of offenses.
           At the most general level, for an act to be interpretable as an offense, it
         must be a threat to a dapuq relationship. The term dapuq occurs together
        Wi~h a possessive attribute in response to the same query that elicits kin-
        ship terms and other relationship expressions. Unlike kinship relations,
        ho':"'ever, a person may be dapuq of an object as well as of another person.
        Bemg someone's or something's dapuq implies having an economic in-
        terest in it and a responsibility for it. The notion includes, but is broader
       than, that of ownership. To be a dapuq of a person in no way implies that
       the person is one's slave. One is dapuq to his children, his legal wards, his
       ~pouse, and to himself. To be a dapuq of an object does not necessarily
       imply that one has rights of use, possession, or sale but only that one has a
       !egitimate interest in its use or disposal. A water source, for example, has
      Its dapuq (dapuq boheq), those who use it and who would suffer economic
      loss if it were destroyed, but no owner. The dapuq of a mosque (dapuq
      l~l1Jgal) is not its owner-there is such a person-but the entire congrega-
      tion. The dapuq of an inheritance (dapuq pusakaq) is a potential heir. Any
     threat to a dapuq relationship can be interpreted as an economic threat, a
     ~hreat whose gravity is expressible in pesos and centavos. All offenses,
     lllcluding murder, can be compensated for by money. The purpose of
     Yakan litigation is not to mete out punishment but to award compensation
     for injury.
         There are two ways in which an act can be an offense. First, it can
     challenge a person's status as a dapuq, usually in the form of a claim that
     some other person is properly the dapuq of a given object or person.
    ~econd, an act can damage an object or person in such a way as to reduce
    It~ ~conomic value to its dapuq (including, in the case of persons, the
    victim himself). Since a given object or person is likely to have more than
    0
       ne dapuq, an offense generally produces several plaintiffs. A sexual as-
    sault, for example, is an offense against the victim (dapuq badannen 'dapuq
    of one's body'), her parents (dapuq qanakin 'dapuq of the child'), and, if
    married, her husband (dapuq qandahin 'dap11q of the wife').

       Charges. It is up to a victim of an offense to make a charge (tun tut); all
     Yakan law is civil law. He must furthermore determine the identity of the
     offender and assume responsibility for the identification. Offenses in
     Which victim and offender do not meet face to face or in which the victim
    does not survive are difficult to prosecute. Even though theft, ambush
    shootings, and murder are among the more common, and certainly the
    most complained about offenses in Yakan life, they rarely reach the
    courts. It is largely sex and, to a lesser extent, fights and property disputes
    that keep court agendas full.
                                                                                            '
                                                                                           'I




L
                                                                                         'I
        120    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   An initial charge can be made in the form of a complaint (diklamuh <
Spanish) to a court or even by directly confronting the accused. More
often an accuser will utilize gossip channels to make his charge known
to the accused. In this way he can feel out the response of his opponent
before being irrevocably committed. A way out is left open through deny-
ing the truth or serious intent of the gossip. One of the dangers of Yakan
life is limorok (literally 'slip through'): 'inadvertently instigating a dispute
by incautious gossip in the presence of someone who is likely to relay the
accusation to be accused.'
   There are three strategies available for countering a charge:

         I. One can deny the validity of the accuser's definition of the of-
         fense in question, disputing the meaning of a concept. Does, for
         example, the notion of sexual offense include all acts in which a
         male makes unnecessary physical contact with a female not his
         spouse or only those acts 1n which a male has sexual designs on
         the woman?
         2. One can deny that the act in question has the properties to
         qualify it as an instance of an offense, disputing what really hap-
         pened. For example, granted any physical contact as described
         above is an offense, did any such contact actually occur in the
         particular instance?
         3. One can deny responsibility for the act because (a) someone
         else did it; (b) the accused was provoked by the accuser; (c) the
         accused was incited by some third party (a much stronger excuse
         for wrong-doing among the Yakan than among ourselves); (d) the
          act was unintentional.

 To deny a charge is at the same time to make a charge against one's ac-
 cuser, for a false charge is in itself an offense. It threatens the economic
 interests of the accused. The set of arguments propounded by one side in
 a dispute to counter the charges of the other is their daqawah (<Arabic)
 or "case" in the sense of "the defense rests its case."

     Disputes. Once a charge has been made and countered, a dispute exists.
  Disputants may simply decide to live with the dispute, they may attempt
  to dispose of each other, or they may seek a settlement. If they decide on
  the last course of action, they may either 'negotiate' or 'litigate.' In 'nego-
  tiation' two opposing parties meet to settle a disagreement by mutual
  agreement. The disagreement need not be a dispute (i.e., the outcome of a
  charge). Negotiating a contract, property settlements, marriage (which
  involves all of the preceding) are cases to point. Negotiations are often
· sufficient to handle minor disputes and are necessary for major disputes
  difficult to place under the jurisdiction of any Yakan court. An agreement
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation       121

   is specific to the negotiating parties and need not derive from legal prec-
   edents. The breaking of an agreement, however, is an offense and can re-
  sult in a dispute taken to court. MmTiages are made by negotiation but
  dissolved by litigation. To settle a dispute by litigation it must be reported
  to a court at which point the dispute becomes a legal case. The party that
  considers itself offended against should report first, but often by the time a
  case reaches court there is such a complex of charges and countercharges
  that any distinction between plaintiff and defendent becomes obscure.

     COURTS
      What distinguishes litigation from other methods of settling disputes is
   the presence of a court (saraq < Arabic), a set of persons performing the
   role of judge, who are ostensibly neutral on the issue and whose task it is
   to formulate a settlement. The Yakan court has few of the tangible mani-
  festations of its Western counterpart: professional judges holding an
  office, court houses, explicit and continuous schedules, and well-defined
  jurisdictions. On the other hand, a set of judges is not recruited ad hoc to
  try each case that appears. Particular sets of judges meet more than once
 and may try more than one case in a single session. Furthermore, there is
 a fundamental difference between a single case appearing again in a sub-
 sequent session of the same court-a continuation of a single trial-and a
 case appearing again in a different court-a retrial of the same case. One
 may also report to a court when the court is not in session, to file a charge,
 for example, or to seek asylum. The crucial problems in a description of
 Yakan courts are those of legal authority and of jurisdiction: How are
 persons recruited to the role of judge? How are cases assigned to partic-
 ular courts?

   Judges. To act as a judge, a person must be a parish leader with the
 ability and knowledge to perform the role and sufficient political power at
 the jurisdictional level of the court to make his voice effective. Parish
 leadership is not a political office with formal rules of recruitment but a
 position achieved by accumulating influence and prestige by a variety of
 means: religious learning, economic success, military prowess, forensic
 ability, acquisition of a title, pilgrimage to Mecca, election to a local office
in the Philippine political system (councilor or barrio captain), or simply
growing older. (The most common expression for a leader is bahiq 'elder'.)
Typically parish leadership is vested in a small group of close kinsmen,
each specializing in one or more of these routes to power. One man may
be the priest and litigator, another the entrepreneur, another the fighter.
Larger political groupings are informal and unstable alliances of parishes.
To exert leadership at this wider level, one must also be a leader at the
parish level. One does not rise to higher positions; one merely extends the
        122   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

range of his influence. An exceptional position is that of titular tribal
chief (datuq) of all the Yakan, a hereditary office now held by the West-
ernized son of a Christian Filipino escaped convict, who, during the latter
part of the Spanish regime, fled to Basilan. There he assumed political
leadership over the Yakan and achieved formal recognition of his position
by both the Spaniards and the Sultan of Sulu.

   Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of a court is a function of the social dis-
tance between the judges who/comprise it. This distance, in turn, is a re-
sponse to the need to preserve neutrality with respect to the cases brought
before it. The rule for assignment of a case to a court is to maintain mini-
mal social distance between court and protagonists consistent with pre-
serving neutrality. This rule has the effect that the greater the social dis-
tance between protagonists and the more serious the case, the higher the
jurisdiction of the court that can try the case. If both protagonists belong
to the same parish, then one or more of their own parish leaders may be
found who, by kinship and other dimensions of social affiliation, are
equidistant from both sides. If, however, the protagonists belong to dif-
ferent parishes, the court must comprise representatives of both parishes.
The seriousness of a case is measured by the number of active supporters
recruited by each disputant. As the number of supporters surrounding
each disputant increases, that is, as each party of protagonists grows
larger, the further afield one must go to find judges who are not involved
on one side or another. Because of these considerations, there is a certain
 ad hoc nature to the formation of courts as adjustments are made to handle
 particular cases. Nevertheless, three basic jurisdictional levels can be
 distinguished: parish, community, and tribal.
    The tribal court, composed of leaders appointed by the tribal chief,
 meets in the yard of the chief's Western-style house in the town of Lami-
 tan. Although in theory it is sort of a supreme court for all the Yakan,
 handling cases local courts have failed to settle, in practice its jurisdiction
 and its composition is geographically limited to the side of the island
 where the court meets. Parish courts are generally formed ad hoc to try
 relatively trivial disputes-fights among young men, for example,-among
 parish members. Occasionally a parish trial will be conducted with the
 absolute minimum personnel: two disputants and one judge. The bulk of
 litigation occurs at what might be called the community level. In most
 areas there are regular court sessions about once a week. Adjustments are
 made in these courts to handle particular cases. Any court intermediate
 between a regufar community court and the tribal court is an ad hoc for-
 mation to handle a special case. Before reaching the tribal level, however,
 there is a limit beyond which jurisdiction cannot be stretched, where
 judges who are neutral and at the same time sufficiently close socially to
 act together cannot be found. Disputes at this level may be referred to the
            Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation     123

tribal court, to government courts, or a settlement by negotiation may be
attempted. Frequently, however, disputants resort to violence at this
point.

   Other roles. Added to the basic role structure of litigations-a court and
two opposing sides-there is a further differentiation of roles within each
party of protagonists:
   I. The principal, the one primarily involved in the original dispute, the
person who, as the Yakan say was 'struck' by speech (tawwaq bissalz) or
who 'collided' with litigation (lumavgal si hukum).
  2. His guardian, the one who assumes responsibility for accepting or
rejecting a ruling and complying with it. The guardian may be the principal
himself, a parent or parental surrogate, or a spouse.
  3. Senior and peer supporters.
The Yakan talk about this role structure in the language of kinship using
an ideal model in which the principal is a child, the court his peers, the
guardian his parent, and his supporters his senior and peer kin. A final
role is that of witnesses, who may be called by either side or by the court.

   Rulings. The intended outcome of litigation is a ruling (/wkuman) on a
case handed down by the court. The crucial fact shaping Yakan legal
rulings is that the court has no powers of coercion to force compliance
with a ruling. It must resort to persuasion. What distinguishes a ruling
from an agreement arrived at by negotiation consists largely of the elab-
orate verbal trappings that go along with a ruling and lend it a sacrosanct
aura. The ideology expressed in talking about rulings during the process
of proclaiming them should not be taken as an expression of the manner in
which rulings are actually derived but as part of the behavior of making a
ruling in the most effective way. The basic principle for actually arriving at
successful rulings seems to be the same as those for agreements; namely,
to give each side somewhat less than full satisfaction but something better
than the worst they might expect. In other words, to effect a compromise.
The basic objective of both litigation and negotiation is to eliminate a
dispute, to reestablish normal social relations between the disputants. It is
not to do justice whatever the cost.
   A ruling may call for one or more of three acts: payment of a fine
(multah < Spanish, qt1taq < Malay < Sanskrit), listening to an admoni-
tion (nasilwt < Arabic, pituwah < Arabic, toqan) from the court, and
performing a prayer (duwaqah < Arabic) of reconciliation. A fine, in
turn, has one or more of three components: a compensation for the of-
fense, an amount serving to "wipe away" any sin against God associated
with the offense (which the court collects), and a payment to the court the
baytalnu7l (<Arabic 'treasury'). Fines are calculated in ten-peso units
(laksaq) and paid in Philippine currency (PI = $.25). In proposing a ruling
                                                          I
            124    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  the court must explain in detail how the amount was arrived at, relating it
  to traditional fines for the offense and to the particular exigencies of the
  case at hand. In one case involving two youths who had been in a fight,
  one side claimed damages for bodily injury and presented a medical bill
  for the amount of P 180.25 from a Christian Filipino physician. The court
. suggested a fine of P 100 to be paid to the injured party explaining its
  decision as follows:

        P 120         For paying the medical bill (principle: never give full
                      satisfaction)
        -     50      In recognition of the countercharge of collusion between
                      the plaintiff and the physician; The court was careful to
                      state it did not necessarily believe the countercharge
                      but, since there were no witnesses, account must be
                      taken of the possibility
              50      For the offense against the plaintiff
        _m            For the plaintiff's responsibility in instigating the fight
        P 100

    If an aclrnonition is part of the ruling, it is given in the form of a lecture
 by the court to both sides at the end of the trial. It is designed to make
 both parties feel their share of responsibility for the dispute, to smooth
                          1
 ruffled feelings, and to warn of the grave consequences of repeating the
 offense. Admonitions are especially common in rulings over marital dis-
 putes and fights among youths.
    If a prayer of reconciliation is called for, it is performed at a later time
 as a different scene, a religious ceremony. Its performance involves ex-
 penses, instructions for the payment of which is an important aspect of
 the ruling. The prayer unites the former disputants in a divinely-sanc-
 tioned ritual-sibling tie. A call for prayer is especially common in cases
 of violence.
    Upon suggesti~g a ruling the court argues for compliance, not only by
 carefully justifying the form of the decision but also by pointing out the
 dire consequences of refusal to comply .. God and the ancestors may mete
 out sickness upon the offender and his kin. Opponents may resort to
 violence against the offender and his kin. The offender's kin, under threat
 from these sanctioning agents, may withdraw support or even disown the
 offender. Judges threaten to wash their hands of the case and withdraw
  political support, and finally the case may be referred to Philippine gov-
 ernment legal system with its expensive lawyers and prisons. See Fig. 3.2
 for a portrayal of these sanctioning forces converging on an offender.
     If the litigants agree to the ruling, those who are called upon to hand
  over money almost never pay in full on demand, this being a rule in all /'        I

  monetary transactions. They ask for ta7Jguh, a deferment of part of the
             Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation              125

          ANCESTORS                     GOD




                                                prison, fees   GOVERNMENT
                                                                 COURTS




         OPPONENT                  THE Y AKAN COURT
         figure 3.2
Sanctions and sanctioning agents

payment until a specified later date. As might be expected, failure to pay
tal)guh when due is itself a major cause of disputes.
   If a court fails to formulate an acceptable ruling, the litigants may at-
tempt to take the case to another Yakan court, seek redress in a govern-
ment court, or drop attempts to settle the dispute by litigation. Another
alternative is to turn the decision over to God. In a religious ceremony,
each disputant swears (sapah) on the Koran to the validity of his argu-
ments in the case. God decides who is right and announces his decision by
inflicting fatal illness (kasapahan) upon the person who swore a false oath
or upon his kin. Swearing is a serious matter, rarely resorted to in fact.
The threat of it, however, figures prominently in legal debate. One can
protect himself from false charges by challenging his opponent to parti-
cipate in a swearing ritual. In several recorded cases, young men saved
themselves from conviction on charges of sexual assault by this tactic.
The fact that God may punish not only the offender but also his kin may
seem capricious to Western moralists; yet it greatly increases the effec-
tiveness of the punishment. Support of one's kin is crucial in a dispute, but
they will be extremely reluctant to carry this support to the point of swear-
ing unless they are firmly convinced of their kinsmen's innocence. Also, if
the disputants are in any way related to each other, as is often the case,
this relationship tie must be dissolved before swearing. Consanguineal
kinship ties can be formally broken in a religious ceremony. The term for
the ritual payments required to disown a kinsman is tallak from the Arabic
word for the formula spoken by a husband to divorce his wife (Yakan
divorce is not that simple).

  PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULES
   Our formulation of the concept of litigation states that litigation is an
integral activity never performed as part of another scene. It is a maximal
           126     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

unit of planning and scheduling. The description of the manifestations of
this aspect of the concept requires a statement of the constituent structure
of the scene-the sequence of parts that make up the whole-and of the
scheduling of litigation with respect to other scenes in the society.

   Procedures. Unlike mere negotiation or conference, litigation is con-
ducted according to definite procedural rules. Although these rules are
much looser than those of Western courts, they are, by Yakan standards,
fairly strict and explicit. During procedings, judges frequently make
reference to general rules governing the speech conduct of court sessions
such as the following:

            I. Speaking time is a free good available in unlimited quantity to
            any person present as long as what he says is relevant to the case.
            2. A speaker has the right to finish before being interrupted.
            3. Judges have the right to call on a person to speak, but one may
            speak without being called upon. 7
            4. Litigants should address all their arguments to the court.
            5. Overt expression of anger, and especially any violence, must
            be avoided. Allowance should be made for the necessity, in litiga-
            tion, for people to say unkind things about one another. Dispu-
            tants must be a)lowed to accuse, judges to admonish.
            6. Each party of protagonists, as well as the judges, has the right
            to confer in private whenever necessary.
            7. A continuous period of time should be allotted to each case
            during a single court session.

  Although there is some variation in the type of case, the usual sequence
of events is as follows:

             I. Presentation of the case by the person to whom it is reported
             2. Taking testimony from each side and from witnesses
             3. Interrogation by the court
             4. Arguments from each side presented together (one side does
             not present its complete case and then defer to the other side)
             5. Private conference of the judges
             6. Presentation of a ruling
             7. Further argument (optional but inevitable)
             8. Private conference of each side (optional)
             9. Expression of acceptance or refusal by each side
           I 0. · Final decision for disposition of case

  7   The question of someone refusing to testify never seems to arise.
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation              12 7

          11. Payment of fines, listening to courts admonition (if required)
         12. Ritual handshaking (salanz < Arabic) with the judges signal-
         ling the termination of a·trial session

   Steps 2-4 often occur simultaneously. Steps 5-9 may be repeated sev-
 eral times.

   Sclzedules. Fixed timing is not an attribute of litigation as it is, say, of
some calendrical religious ceremonies and agricultural activities. Court
sessions are fitted into vacancies left by the schedules of other scenes. As
a matter of convenience, community courts generally have regular sched-
uled meetings (Friday afternoon after Mosque service is a favorite time),
but these are easily accommodated if schedules conflict. The tribal court
meets two afternoons a week. Court sessions must be scheduled between
meals with allowance made so participants can return home to eat. The
five daily prayers of Islam, performed in most localities only by a few
religiously inclined individuals, cause no problem. If someone wants to
say a prayer, he can always go off and do so.


          Comparisons
         In this section we make a few summary comparisons with another
 Philippine legal system. The purpose is not to offer an explanation of these
differences but to demonstrate that the ethnographic approach argued for
here, rather than hampering cross-cultural comparison as some critics
seem to fear, provides a basis for determining which units are comparable
and points up significant dimensions of comparison.
   The Eastern Subanun are pagan swidden agriculturists inhabiting the
interior of Zamboanga Peninsula on the island of Mindanao. 8 The Yakan
and Subanun are not in direct contact but they speak related languages
and, along with other central Malaysian peoples, share many basic
technological and social-organizational features. Subanun communities
are much smaller and more scattered, although the basic principles of
settlement pattern are the same: nuclear family household dispersed in
individual fields. The difference is that the Yakan practice continual ex-
ploitation of privately owned fields and groves. Both groups have long
been subject first to Moslem, then to Christian, cultural influence, political
authority, and economic exploitation. The Yakan accommodated where
necessary and resisted where possible. They became Moslems, they par-
ticipate in Philippine politics, and they market copra. At the same time

   " Reference is to the Eastern Subanun of the Li pay area of Zarnboanga de! Norte studied
in the field in 1953-1954 and 1957-1958.
        128   Ethnographic Description and Exp/anati y
                                                     1
they have retained a marked cultural distinctiveness, some freedom to
run their own affairs, and, above all, their land. The Subanun, on the other
hand, retreated or succumbed entirely. They have remained pagan and
retained temporary economic and political independence at the price of
increased isolation and loss of land. Perhaps not unrelated to this differ-
ence in adaptation to external pressures is a marked difference in the
behavior of the two peoples today: the Subanun drink whereas the Yakan
fight.
   There is among the Subanun a set of activities that, in contrast to other
Subanun activities, can be defined in much the same terms as Yakan
litigation: an integral speech event concerned with settling disputes by
means of a ruling formulated by neutral judges. A brief description of
litigation in one Subanun community appears elsewhere (Frake 1963).
Here we will restrict ourselves to a few comparisons along the dimensions
of topic, role structure, outcome, and integrity.

   Topic. Subanun legal cases arise in much the same way as Yakan ones
except that they need not be initiated by a plaintiff. A judge can try some-
one for an offense even if no complaint has been made. It seems ridic-
ulous, however, to call this criminal Jaw since the offenses in question are
generally slanderous or flirtatious remarks made by an incautious drinker,
often not at all resented by the victim. Otherwise the definitions of par-
ticular kinds of offenses are similar. (A major difference is that the Yakan
consider sexual relations with an affine as incestuous wheteas the
Subanun practice le,virate and sororate marriage and sororal polygyny.)
There are great differences, however, in the kinds of offenses that occur
(violence is almost unknown among the Subanun) and the types of cases
that reach court. Adultery, for example, fills the agendas of Yakan courts
whereas it is rarely the overt basis of a Subanun legal case. This is not a
comment on Subanun virtue but on the weakness of their legal sanctions.

   Outcome. The rulings of a Subanun court, like those of the Yakan,
generally demand financial compensation (but fines are calculated in units
of twenty centavos rather than of ten pesos), and may call for admonitions
and rituals of reconciliation. But, not only does the Subanun court have no
legal sanctions of force to back up a decision, there is also little realistic
threat of illegal force it can bring to bear. The Subanun offender may fear
a certain amount of social censure-a real enough sanction to be sure-
but he need not fear a shotgun blast interrupting his evening meal, the
outcome of more than one Yakan dispute. The Subanun also lack an
Almighty God to mete out justice when litigation fails. For this reason,
"a large share, if not the majority, of legal cases deal with offenses so
minor that only the fertile imagination of a Subanun legal authority can
magnify them into a serious threat to some person or to society in general"
            Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation      129

 (Frake 1963 :221 ). Yakan courts too cannot cope with the full range of
 offenses committed, but the Yakan, by absolute standards, commit much
 more serious crimes. A Parkinsonian cynic viewing Yakan and Subanun
 life ·and law might conclude that the severity of crime increases with the
 ability of a legal system to cope with it.

     Role Structure. Subanun courts are always formed ad hoc to try a par-
  ticular case. There are no court schedules or regular meeting places. The
  role of judge is open to any adult male with the ability to formulate suc-
  cessful decisions and performance in the role is largely a route to com-
  munity leadership rather than a result of it. Unlike the Yakan, where a
. parish priest is generally a political leader as well, Subanun roles of legal
  and religious authority are quite distinct and typically filled by separate
  individuals. Subanun litigation less often musters bodies of kin in support
  of disputants, partly because there is usually less of common interest at
  stake, and kin do not share collective responsibility under mortal and
  divine sanctioning agents.

   Integrity. The striking difference between Subanun and Yakan litiga-
tion, and one that does not derive from differences in socioeconomic
complexity in any obvious way, is the place of the activity in the overall
structure of cultural scenes. Subanun activities are sharply divisible into
festive and nonfestive scenes, the former always involving feasting and
drinking (Frake 1964b). Subanun litigation is festive behavior, performed
as part of a larger scene and accompanied by eating, drinking, and merry-
making. In this respect it is the same kind of thing as the performance of
religious offerings, and the two activities in fact often occur together as
parts of the same festivity. Subanun litigation, then, is less of an integral
unit of performance and scheduling than the comparable Yakan activity.
Subanun legal arguments, as they develop in the course of drinking, ex-
habit more obvious attention to message form. Litigants and judges em-
ploy esoteric legal language often arranged into verse and sung to the tune
of drinking songs (Frake 1964a). Thus whereas the Yakan try relatively
serious cases in scenes of informal discussion, the Subanun devote them-
selves to trivial disputes in scenes of formal festivities. This difference is
crucial to any functional interpretations of litigation in the two societies.
Participation in litigation has different meanings and different conse-
quences in the two societies because of it.
4                                          /
The Strategy of Turkish Boys'
Verbal Dueling Rhymes
ALAN DUNDES, JERRY W. LEACH, AND BORA OZKOK




Alan Dundes is Professor of Anthropology and Folklore
at the University of California, Berkeley. He received his
doctorate in folklore at Indiana University, and he has
taught at the University of Kansas. Dr. Dundes has
played a leading part in the revitalization of folklore as a
discipline in the United States. Much of his work has
been concerned with the structural definition and analysis
of folkloristic genres, such as folktales, superstitions, and
riddles. He has also been active in colJecting and inter-
preting folkloristic features of contemporary popular
culture. Jerry W. Leach has done graduate work at Cam-
bridge University, England, and at the University ,of
California, Berkeley. Bora Ozkok, a native of Turkey, is
a graduate student at the University of California,
Berkeley.
   This chapter focuses on verbal dueling, a welJ-defined
genre of oral art which can be found in many parts of the
world. As the authors point out, however, folklorists' ac-
counts of these phenomena tend to be confined to de-
scriptions of content or ad hoc lists of elements or sty-
listic characteristics. Folklorists have failed to show how
the forms in question are used in actual interaction and
what they imply about language usage in relationships in
the societies in which they occur. This chapter attempts
to overcome these limitations. By analyzing Turkish
verbal duels within the conceptual framework of the
ethnography of communication in terms of the structural
relations among constituent factors, it opens up new pos-
sibilities for evaluating the communicative devices in-
volved in speech play and comparing them to other more
                            130
The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes      131

common interaction processes in Turkey and elsewhere.
   Turkish verbal duels do in fact show most of the char-
acteristics of speech events in general. Interaction typ-
ically revolves around a culturally specific range of topics.
In this case the topic is homosexuality, including sexual
attack on a person's close relatives, manliness, courage,
etc. There are rigid constraints on message form, with
exchanges consisting of two parts: a challenge 'and a
reply, which are linked both through content and form
(rhyme). Similarly, there are limitations on speakers and
audiences: Only teenage boys can participate. Like the
telephone conversations analyzed by Schegloff (Chapter
12), dueling exchanges in Turkey have clearly defined
sequencing rules which determine who gets the floor and
under what conditions. There are further stereotyped
openings and closings, which function to channel what
can be conveyed in a manner similar to that described by
Frake in his discussion of Subanun drinking behavior
(1964a).
   A number of features of communication are illustrated
which have clear counterparts in every sequence of the
interaction. One of the most important features is the
contrast between overt topic or content, on the one hand,
and communicative goal, or function, as Ervin-Tripp
(Chapter 7) calls it, on the other. Topics such as sex-
uality, manliness, etc., are not used for the information
they convey by themselves. Sexual submission serves as
a symbol for interactional inferiority. The actual com-
municative intent seems to be to put one's opponent
down or to test his ability to maintain presence of mind
in interaction. Compare the Turkish material with Ervin-
Tripp's example of a husband who, upon entering a room,
finds his wife talking to a lady friend and is told: "We
were talking about our next sewing club meeting." In
this case, the husband takes the hint and withdraws. As
with sex in Turkish duels, the topic is introduced in that
case because of what it implies about restrictions upon
participants not because of its inherent content.
   Note also the semantic strategy of the duels. The
opponent singles out central, potentially ambiguous fea-
tures of the speaker's challenge and by placing them in a
new environment alters their meaning so as to make them
reflect on the speaker. There is some similarity with
common children's word games such as the following:
 132   Ethnographic Description and Explaru;tion

   A: I love that dog.
   B: Why don't you marry it?

  In terms of the concepts developeo/6y Sacks in Chapter
  11, the change of environment forces the reassignment of
  an item from one category collection to another.
     Participation in verbal duels requires both specific
  linguistic skills and general cultural knowledge. A com-
  petent performer must know a large number of set
  rhymes, he must display ingenuity in inventing new
  metaphors and combining them within the constraints
  imposed by the medium. This suggests that verbal dueling
  among boys may serve as an important language social-
  ization device. Labov's recent extensive study of verbal
  behavior in black' ghetto peer groups illustrates a similar
  case of this type of speech play (Labov et al. i 968).
  Labov's attempt to describe the grammatical competence
  of peer groups in culturally reali.stic settings led to the
  discovery that what folklorists have variously called
  "sounding" or "playing the dozens" (Abrahams 1964;
  Kochman 1969) is a daily occurrence in ghetto areas and
  forms an integral part of interaction within ghetto peer
  groups. Analysis of transcripts of such sounding sessions
· show that the very process of competing with others
  (i.e., the necessity of topping one's opponent's "sound")
  may cause a speaker to produce highly complex and in-
  volved syntactic constructions of the type usually thought
  to be lacking in lower-class uneducated speech. How-
  ever, these same black children, when interviewed alone,
  by white or black interviewers, away from their peers,
  frequently may seem unresponsive, communicating only
  in brief and stereotyped statements. When speech per-
  formance is investigated only in these contexts, speakers
  may be considered as lacking in verbal skills. Clearly,
  failure to respond in formal interviews cannot be under-
  stood simply in the framework of linguistic competence,
  in the way that that term is usually defined. One must
  also deal with the social meaning which the interview
  setting carries for respondents. This is a classic illustra-
  tion of the fact that communicative competence involves
  more than just grammatical skills.
     After analysis of the forms and symbolic content of a
  number of sequences, the authors turn to the place of
        The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes    133

       verbal dueling in the society in which it occurs. Taboos
       on obscenity perhaps account for apparent neglect of this
       genre in previously published work, but grafitti and folk-
       tales indicate that it is well known. The authors.attempt
       to explain the involvement of men in the genre and its
       general meaning by arguing that symbolic sexual dom-
       inance is a predominant theme in terms of the encultura-
       tion experience in the male life cycle.
          An alternate explanation, more in line with the the-
       oretical position taken elsewhere in this volume, would
       be to turn away from the search for psychological motiva-
       tion, disregard the literal meaning of the key terms, and
       view them as symbolic of the community's most deeply
       ingrained social taboos or notions of boundary. The duel
       thus tests the performers' ability to manipulate these
       emotion-charged topics within the constraints imposed
       by the speech event. By besting his opponent in this
       dangerous and potentially explosive situation, he demon-
       strates his fitness as a member of the peer group and
       ultimately his social communicative skill.
          To the student of verbal interaction, the importance of
       verbal dueling lies in the fact that it illustrates, in rit-
       ualized and vivid form, some highly important and, so
       far, relatively little understood aspects of the communi-
       cation process, and thus materially contributes to our
       understanding of the social basis of verbal interaction.
       For an additional related reading, see Paulhan's (1913)
       book. Many of the articles in Kochman (in preparation)
       deal with similar matters within the context of Afro-
       American culture, especially Labov's "Rules for Ritual
       Insult." Peter Seitel (l 971) gives a highly interesting and
       suggestive analysis of the communicative uses of prov-
       erbs in Africa.



        The underlying strategy of specific traditional verbal encounters
has not received much attention from anthropologists and folklorists.
Anthropologists speak at length of joking or teasing relationships in gen-
eral, but rarely do they describe in detail actual verbal duels or provide
anything remotely resembling explication de texte. Folklorists, who tend
to be text rather than context oriented, do at least present reasonably
complete texts of insults, taunts, retorts, etc. However, more often than
          134     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  not, these texts are presented in no particular order other than the arbi-
  trary one imposed by the collector. Given this presentation of the data, it
  is virtually impossible to reconstruct even an approximate idea of a live
  verbal battle in which the texts might appropriately be employed. In
  Roger Abrahams' valuable study of the dozens, e.g., the classic American
  Negro example of verbal dueling, he first lists thirty different dozens in-
  sults ("raps") and then follows them with a separate list of twelve dozens
· replies ("caps") (1962). It is conceivable, of course, that it really doesn't
  matter which reply follows which initial insult. Yet, there is obviously a
  particular order or sequence in any one actual dueling encounter. For
  those students who are interested in understanding folk rhetorical strategy
  (e.g., what strategic factors influence a verbal duel participant to choose
  one retort rather than another), it seems clear that knowledge of the par-
  ticular sequence of exchanges is absolutely essential. Thus full transcrip-
  tions of observed or at least participant-reported hypothetical verbal
  duels must be collected if we are ever to attempt to analyze underlying
  strategies.
     The study of strategy in verbal duels is part of what has been termed
  "the ethnography of speaking folklore" (Arewa and Dundes 1964). The
  ethnography of speaking folklore refers to the rules governing the use of
  both whole genres of folklore and particular exemplars of those genres.
 Thus it is not just a matter of describing the general function of one type
  of insult but also of describing the particular rationale underlying.the use
  of one particular insult by one particular individual to another particular
  individual on .one particular occasion. Admittedly, the determining factors
  involved may not be in the conscious mind of the duel participants. Nev-
  ertheless, like so many of the "rules" of culture, they may be articulated
  after careful analysis. If there is to be any fruitful study of the dynamics of
  the transmission or communication of folklore, then the particulars of the
  processes in which the folkloristic materials are employed must begin to
  receive the critical attention of folklorists and anthropologists. If folklore
  is a code, then folklorists must consider the rules of usage of that code by
  examining its concrete contexts. As an illustration of "the ethnography of
  speaking folklore," we shall briefly examine one type of verbal duel found
  throughout Turkey. 1


   1
     Although almost all of the materials in this paper were provided by one of the co-
 authors, Bora Ozkok, who was himself an active participant in the tradition, spotchecking
 with more than twenty other Turkish students revealed that the same or similar texts were
 common in Istanbul, Ankara, Adana, Erzurum, and Izmir. Professor Ilhan Basgoz of In-
 diana University also had personal knowledge of the tradition and we are indebted to him
 for several useful comments on the paper. The undoubted popularity of the tradition tempts
 us to speculate about the possibility of its relationship to the alleged sexual indignities suf-
 fered by the famed Lawrence of Arabia, when he was captured by Turkish forces at Deraa.

                                                                                                    r'
                                                                                                J
         The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes    135


        Some General Features of Turkish
        Verbal Dueling

          Among Turkish boys from about the ages of eight to around four-
teen, there is a traditional form of ritual insult exchange which depends
upon an individual's skill in remembering and selecting appropriate retorts
to provocative insults. While it is possible that some of the initial insults
or curses might be known by girls and women, it is quite unlikely that the
retorts are similarly known. Moreover, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, it seems doubtful that the elaborate mechanics and tactics of
engaging in these linked retort contests are familiar to many Turkish
females. For that matter, the very existence of this verbal dueling tradi-
tion seems to be little known by professional students of Turkish culture,
judging by lack of allusions to it in the Turkish scholarly literature. Most
 probably, the same obscenity which keeps the tradition out of the reach of
 most Turkish women has tended to keep it out of the province of scholars.
Still it seems incredible that none of the anthropologists who have con-
ducted ethnographic fieldwork in Turkey have so much as mentioned the
tradition.
    The tradition includes the following general principles:
    I. One of the most important goals is to force one's opponent into a
fernale, passive role. This may be done by defining the opponent or his
 mother or sister as a wanton sexual receptacle. If the male opponent is
thus defined, it is usually by means of casting him as a submissive anus, an
anus which must accept the brunt of the verbal duelists's attacking
phallus. A more indirect technique is to disparage or threaten the op-
ponent's mother or sister, which is a serious attack upon his male honor.
Thus the victim either has to submit to phallic aggression himself or else
 watch helplessly as phallic aggression is carried out upon his female ex-
 tensions: his mother or sister. Of course, the victim normally does not
 simply remain passive. Rather he tries in turn to place his attacker in a
 passive, female role. Much of the skill in the dueling process consists of
 parrying phallic thrusts such that the would-be attacking penis is frus-
 trated and the would-be attacker is accused of receiving a penis instead.
 According to this code, a young boy defends and asserts his virile standing
 in his peer group by seeing to it that his phallus threatens the anus of any
 rival who may challenge him. It is irnportant to play the active role in a
 homosexual relationship; it is shameful and demeaning to be forced to
take the passive role.
   2. The retort must end rhyme with tlze initial insult. This is a critical
stylistic principle as opposed to the overall structural or content require-
ment just noted. It clearly involves a fairly demanding and restrictive
        136    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

rule. In most instances, there are specific rhymed retorts for given in-
sults, and if one is the victim of such an insult, he is expected to come
back with the most appropriate traditional retort. It is thus to an individ-
ual's advantage to memorize as many of such traditional retorts as pos-
sible inasmuch as such memorization thereby arms him against any sud-
den attack. Failure to respond in rhyme will almost certainly invite a
scathing comment from one's opponent. However, even worse than not
answering in rhyme or in what is adjudged good rhyme is not answering
at all. If one does not or cannot retort to a phallic insult, one essentially
admits that he is reduced to the female receptive role.
   Within the general necessary requirements of content (one's phallus
must enter one's opponent's anus) and texture (the retort must rhyme
with the immediately preceding insult) there is still some room for in-
dividual skill. This skill entails making editorial judgments upon the qual-
ity of the previous verbal thrust and also making a judicious selection of
either another attack formula or a sufficient defense formula from the
large fund of available formulas. So long as one fulfills the minimal content
and rhyme requirements, one can continue to duel. In some of the fairly
lengthy sequences of linked retorts, the participants must often be able to
seize upon an actual or. alleged "mistake" in the attacker's previous text.
Often it is just one word or the quality of the rhyme which forms the basis
for the selection of an appropriate traditional response formula. In one
sense, an individual is almost honor-bound wherever possible to take part
of the previous text as the point of departure for the continuation of the
duel. With such a folk esthetic principle, two evenly matched youths may ,
produce quite an extensive/ series of linked retorts. Frequently, con-
siderable word play may be required to keep the linkage going. In sum-
mary then, an important part of the strategy would seem to entail selecting
a retort from the repertoire, the selection to be based in part upon one or
more "weak" elements of one's opponent's text as well as upon the exi-
gencies of the rhyme requirement. At the same time, the retort should be
sufficiently clever so as not to provide that same opponent with potential
ammunition for a good thrust in return. In addition, the pace is fast and the
retorts are supposed to be quickly and flawlessly delivered.


        Brief Exchanges

        Before examining some examples of the lengthier strings of linked
rhymed retorts, it might be well to consider several brief exchanges (in
these and all following examples the first line gives the Turkish text, the
second line a literal English translation, and the third, in parenthesis, a full
idiomatic English translation, if required):
                                       ~==========:··11:
                                                                                  I
                                                                                  :! ,;

         The Strategy 0 ,1· T       .                                             'Ii··
                                urk1s/z Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes               11:;
                         J                                            137         I'
          Speaker A:                                                              Ii
                             Ay1                                                  :I
                                                                                  II,
                             bear
                                                                                  :I:I I
          Speaker B:
                             Sana    girsin      keman yayi
                             You to enter let it violin bow
                                                                                  ,11,,,
                             (May the bow of a violin enter your anus.)                'i'

Ay1 meaning 'you b       , .                           .
notes a clumsy b ·   ear   1s a commonly   used
                                              . insult
                                                    .  m Turkey. Bear ·con- ,1     I
    I 'M         ' ig, and supposedly stupid animal. The convent10ncl
re~ Y ay the bow of a violin enter your ass' illustrates the rhyme re-
qu1rement. Yay, ('bow' in the possessive form) rhymes with ay1 ('bear'). In        I:
theory, there are many other word forms which rhyme with ay1 and which
could hwe b           d                                               d" ·    1
         '    een use . However, there are in fact only two tra 1t1ona
retorts t~at We know of to the ay1 insult. The bow of a violin is particularly        I
appropnate because of its length, its smoothness, its unusualness in t~is
context, and perhaps even because the nuances of the repeated bowmg
motion suggest. the possibility of repeated penetrations of the opponent's             i ,:
                                                                                       I I
~nus. The mo~10n of the bow thus gives it an advantage over more sta-
tionary potential Phallic symbols such as a winnowing fork or a hoe. (Of
course, the latter are ruled out by the rhyming pattern.) One informant,                  ',
                                                                                             '
when asked to comment on the violin bow image, suggested that the most                       I

habitual homosexuals-i.e., the ones with larger or extended anuses-
would "require the longest and biggest instruments."
   Another traditional retort to ay1 is:

      Sana     koysun       (speaker' s own first name) day1
      you to put let him                                mother's brother
      [Let a real man like (B's name) put his penis in your anus.]

Incidentally, day1, the mother's brother, in terms of the qual~ty o~ t~e
relationship is the familiar uncle, the uncle with whom one canJoke. fhis
is in contrast with amca, the father's brother, the more formal uncle, to              I.
whom one must invariably show respect.

                        Speaker A:        fhyar
                                          cucumber

                        Speaker B:        Gcitiine       uyar
                                          ass your to fits
                                          (It fits your ass.)


Hiyar meaning 'you cucumber' is a_ pithy _insult. There are, as a matter of
fact, a number of idiomatic usages mvolvmg the cue.umber.
        138   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                          H1yara         bak!
                          cucumber to look at
                          (Look at that cucumber!)
                        H1yarhk          etme!
                        cucumberness act not
                        (Don't act like a cucumber!)

'Look at that cucumber' or 'Don't act like a cucumber!' are representa-
tive. Cucumber is an insult not because of any literal sense but rather
because of its fancied resemblance to the male organ. Cucumber basically
implies stupidity. A speaker who is called a cucumber (which would be
somewhat analogous to being called a "prick" in American argot) must
reply under pain of admitting that he is indeed a cucumber. By using the
traditional retort Gotiine uyar, he neatly turns the insult back upon his
opponent inasmuch as he has asserted that the "cucumber" fits the in-
sulter's ass. At this point B, the second speaker, having rhymed uyar
with luyar, and having placed his phallus deftly in his opponent's anus, has
earned the advantage of the verbal duel.
   Although most of the brief exchanges do not involve a great deal of
choice on the part of the boy trying to retort, there are some insults which
may be answered by quite a variety of standard responses. For example,
if speaker A tells speaker B

                           Has        siktir
                           Come on penised get
                           (Get fucked.)

B may choose one of a number of possibilities. While has siktir literally
refers to "getting penised," i.e., fucked, figuratively, it is normally used
to tell someone to "get the hell out of here." However, the second speaker
will normally use the literal sense as the basis of his comeback. He might
say:

          Siktirdigin            yere      mum     diktir
          penised got that you place to candle set up
          (Put a candle at the spot where you got yourself fucked.)

The second speaker thus implies that his opponent has already been
sexually assaulted and he specifically tells him furthermore that the place
where this occurred, e.g., a particular room, a clearing in the woods, or
wherever, should be memorialized by placing a lighted candle there. This
mockingly sanctifies the "holy" place. The brief exchange may end at this
point, but the first speaker could reply
          The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes       I 39

                A blan            wirsa     ba11a      siktir!
                older sister you there is if me to penised get
                (If you have an older sister, let me fuck her.)

Here the first speaker wishes to avoid the passive role as signaled by
having a lighted candle mark the spot where he was supposedly in the
habit of accepting a male phallus. So instead he launches a would-be
phallic attack against the older sister of the second speaker. A verbal
sexual attack on a speaker's mother or older sister is a tactic commonly
resorted to in these duels.
   It should be noted that not all the traditional retorts to has siktir are in
strict rhyme. One such alternative response is

                  fl as  sik    istiyorsan ' I stanbula    git!
                  good penis want if you Istanbul to go
                  (If you want a good penis go to Istanbul.)

This retort informs the initial speaker that if he wants a good prick, he
should go to Istanbul, the latter presumably being the hometown of the
second speaker. Once again, the obvious principle is that when one is
confronted with the threat of being sexually assaulted, one attempts to
sexually assault the attacker in turn.
  Still another possible retort to Has sikter is

T abii      siktir
Of course penis it is
(Of course it's a prick!)

                          p(l(;ac1*  kemigi      mi                 za1111ettin?
                          butcher's shinbone (question marker) think did you
                         (Did you think it was a sheep's shinbone?)
* Pa~·ac1, kemigi is the sheep's shinbone, obtained from a butcher, used to make
broth.

In this case, there is a play on the word siktir, which can mean 'get fucked'
as the causative form of the verb sikmek ('to penis'), but which can also
mean 'Indeed it is a prick.' The second speaker pretends to ignore the
first and more usual meaning in favor of the second meaning. By so doing,
the second speaker implies that the first speaker is stupidly unable to
recognize a penis when he sees one.
   It is perhaps worth noting that the retort tradition is so well entrenched
that sometimes routine innocuous statements are converted into excuses
for an exchange:
         140    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

               Speaker A:       Hayrola
                                What's going on?

               Speaker B:       Gotllne       girsin      karyola
                                Ass your to enter let it bedstead
                                (Stick a bedstead up your ass.)

  In this instance, the simple innocent question 'What's going on?' is
 .answered with 'Stick a bedstead up your ass.' However, this is almost a
  play on the whole retort convention, and it probably would not be taken
  seriously as an invitation to duel by either participant. In true duels, there
  is a serious atmosphere of jousting insult. In this case, there was abso-
  lutely no offense meant by the initial remark, and its utilization as an ex-
  cuse for a retort is facetious. Nevertheless, the rules of the convention are
  observed karyola ('bedstead') rhymes with H ayrola ('What's going on?'),
  and a large, unlikely object is shoved up the victim's anus. Boys familiar
  with the retort tradition must always be alert for playful traps of this kind.
  In practice, almost any word or phrase can lead an unwary boy into com-
. mitting himself to the dupe's role. When one of the authors of this paper
  wrote to one of his friends in Turkey for examples of the retort tradition,
  e.g., he was victimized. The friend, after giving some examples of the
  tradition, ended his letter by asking, "Bora, you know this airplane that is
  bringing you this letter?" Bora naturally said yes to himself, expecting
  some comment about the airplane. The next line in the letter was:

                            Sana      girsin!
                            you to    enter let it
                            (May it enter your anus.)

meaning 'May that stick up your ass.' In casual conversation, the same
danger prevails. The only defense is not to say evet ('yes' or 'yeah') when
someone says, "Do you know the car we're driving in?" "Do you know
the weather today?" etc. If one silently nods rather than saying, "Yeah,"
the attacker cannot shove the car, weather, etc., up the prospective
victim's anus.
   Before proceding now to the extended exchanges, it should be men-
tioned that in a few instances the second speaker simply buries the first
speaker with a list of rhymes. In these cases, the first speaker is not given
an opportunity to reply at all. He must stand and take the punishment.
One such example is afforded by the use of the precipitating insult lnek,
one of the many Turkish insults involving an animal term of abuse.

                   Speaker A:      lnek
                                   cow
                                                                                       ,··
                                                                                   I
          The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes         141

                   Speaker B:       U stiine       binek
                                    top your to    ride let's
                                    (Let me ride you.)
                                    Dagil            gidek
                                    mountain to      go let's
                                    (Let's go to the mountain.)
                                    Seni    sikek
                                    you     penis let's
                                    (Let me fuck you.)

This exchange involves speaker A calling B a cow-a female animal-
followed by B's reply, 'Let me ride you. Let's go to the mountain. And
there let me fuck you.' In a variant from Adana, the retort is:

                  Ustiine        binek
                  top your to    ride let's
                  (Let me ride you.)
                  Hale be       gidek
                  Aleppo to     go let's
                  (Let's go to Aleppo.)
                  fl alep   y1/ald1
                  Aleppo    flattened
                  (Aleppo was flattened.)
                  I c;ine        t1kild1
                  inside your    to stick in
                  [It (Aleppo) was crammed inside (your ass).]

This implies that the opponent's anus is so large that not only could an
entire city fit in it but a city totally flattened with all of its ruins (e.g., col-
lapsed walls) could be accommodated. Whether or not the flattening of
Aleppo is supposed to be caused by the severity of A's sexual assault on
B is open to question.
  The burying or overwhelming of an initial attacker may consist of more
than four lines. A fairly elaborate response of this type is the following
reply to still another domestic animal insult:

 Speaker A:       Esolesek
                  son of a donkey
 Speaker B:       Essoglu            essek        baban
                  (Y~ur father is the ~in of a donkey.)

                  Seni    siken      roban
                  you     pemsmg     shepherd
                  (The shepherd who fucks you.)
        142   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                c; obc111   da     ben
                shepherd    so     me
                (That shepherd is me.)

                A /elm         1111                  agz1mn            pay1111
                get did you    (question marker)      mouth your's     share
                (Did you get your mouth's share? (i.e., You sure got the
                answer you deserved)?)

                Y edin       mi                   la/Ii   day1111
                eat did you (question marker)     hairy   mother's brother my
                (Did you eat my hairy prick?)
                0      .1·ijzlerini    atlattr1m
                that   words your      make jump I
                (Your words don't get to me.)
                G jjfiinii    patlattr1m
                ass your      explode I
                [I .burst your ass (i.e., by means of a massive ejaculation).]
                0        soz/erin     havaya
                that     words your   air to
                (Those words that you gave me go to the air (mean nothing
                to me).)

                G otiin i   tavaya
                ass your    frying pan to
                (Your ass goes into the frying pan.)
                K oprii   alt,       cam       cam
                bridge    below      glass     glass
                (Beneath the bridge is lots of broken glass.)
                Seni    siken        am cam
                you     pemsmg       paternal uncle my
                (My paternal uncle fucks you.)
                Koprii   altt       boy boy
                bridge    below     length length
                (Underneath the bridge are varying lengths.)
                S eni   siken      kovboy
                you     pemsmg     cowboy
                (The cowboy fucks you.)

First of all, it should be noted that although the whole retort can be used
as a single reply, it actually consists of separate sections. Speaker B might
well have paused after 'Did you eat my hairy prick?' to see if A had any-
thing to say. The following atlatmm/patlatmnz couplet could be held in
          The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes       143

  abeyance to squelch anything A did say. The same is true for the havaya/
  tavaya lines and for the final four lines concerned with kOprii ('bridge').
  On the one hand, B might elect not to use so much ammunition at once but
  rather to save some of his salvos for the duel which may ensue. On the
  other hand, B's rattling off such a list of retorts might, tactically speaking,
  be the most effective course of action.
    In this elaborate retort sequence are a large number of allusions which
 are not clear at first glance. The shepherd, for instance, seems to have
  special significance because he lives his life alone, often far from human
 society. Frequently, he has only animals for companionship. According to
 one informant, it is the shepherds' presumed sexual relations with donkeys
 and dogs which are thought to make their penises larger than normal.
 Thus speaker B, by assuming the identity of a shepherd, takes on super-
 phallic characteristics. (The same informant also indicated that it was a
 sin to have sexual relations with animals that one eats. Hence there was
 supposed to be no intercourse with cattle or sheep. Donkeys and dogs,
 however, are not eaten and thus may serve as possible sexual partners.
 Assuming that intercourse with any animal is in some sense a "sin," the
 distinction between animals one eats and animals that one does not eat is a
 most interesting one.)
    The reference to 'mouth's share' in 'Did you get your mouth's share?'
 refers to an answer in kind. In other words, your mouth issued a verbal
 challenge or insult; now it is being paid back in kind. It may or may not
 also refer to fellatio. Certainly, the next line 'Did you eat my hairy prick?'
 does suggest oral-genital contact. However, the informant said that it was
 the ass which "ate" the hairy phallus. The allusion to bursting the victim's
 ass is a self-congratulatory bit of hypermasculinity. One's phallus is so
 large and so powerful that the opponent's passive anus cannot contain it
 and, consequently, the poor anus quite simply falls apart. The explosion
patlamnz implies orgasm, and, more precisely, it is the power of the or-
gasm or ejaculation which destroys/bursts the victim's anus.
    The broken glass under the bridge is somewhat obscure. Possibly,
broken glass cam cam was introduced primarily for rhyming purposes.
However, the area under bridges in Turkey-as elswhere-is often a
favorite trysting place for homosexuals, and homosexual activities do
occur there. The broken glass may suggest certain physical danger (cas-
tration?) to the body. Probably, the varying lengths "under the bridge"
refer to various sized phalluses, which might also cause pain. The refer-
ence to the U.S. cowboy may be like the reference to the shepherd. The
cowboy, like the shepherd, spends much of his time alone with animals
with whom he is thought to enjoy sexual intimacies. A cowboy is tough;
he carries a gun; he has a large phallus. Thus B heaps ignominies upon A
by having A submit to sexual attacks from shepherds, cowboys, and B's
father's brother.
                144     Ethnographic Description and Explanation



                Extended Duels

                Having sampled several short examples of rhymed retorts, one
        may be better able to appreciate what is involved in an extended duel.
        Here is an example of such a duel. Individual A, angered at individual B,
        says to him,

                                    A nan m            a, 111
                                     mother your's    cunt
                                     (Your mother's cunt.)

        This is a serious insult and B, the addressee, may respond in one of several
        ways. He may go and physically strike A, or he may reply using exactly
        the same words or he may elect to respond with a retort. Ifhe chooses the
        latter alternative, he has to end rhyme with ami. B could reply to A,

                                 Baba111111     kc/le      dame
                                 father my's    hairy      roof
                                 (My father's hairy roof.)

        This retort stresses the role of B's father as the protector of B's mother.
        The parts of the retort which carry meaning are 'father' and 'hairy.' To-
        gether they mean that the retorting person has a father with a hairy prick
        and that this father, acting as the protector of the mother, will sexually
        assault the first speaker as a matter of revenge. The word dam1 ('roof' in
        the possessive) is used primarily for the sake of rhyme. However, in the
        context of this retort, danu, following as it does the words Babanun ktlh,
        takes on the meaning of 'phallus'. (Also, since a roof covers a house, the
        implicit reference may even be to A's having been "covered" by B's
        father, that is, that A has submitted to a phallic attack by B's father.)
           Now A is on the spot. Having started by mentioning the vagina of B's
        mother, he suddenly finds himself attacked by the hairy phallus of B's
        father. He must try to retort in turn. Examining B's rhyme, he quickly
        realizes that one part of it makes little sense. B said dam1, which literally
        means 'roof,' and this gives A an opportunity to criticize B's retort. A
        could say:

               Onu ijy/e         demezler
               that t.his way say don't they
               (They don't say it that way.)
               Peynir    ekmek   yemez/er
               cheese bread eat don't they
               (They don't eat bread and cheese.)




.....
         The Strategy of Tu 1·k·,        ,
                                 1                                                 !.
                                  sh Boys Verbal Dueling Rhymes      145
      Ben de        seni sik,, 1                                                 I ,;
                                                                                 I.·
                                ezsem
      I      too You Penis don't 'f I
      (If I don't fuck You)            1
                                                                                 '.
                                                                                 I'
      Bcma    (speaker's na 111 ,,)    l                                         I•

                                ~     c emez 1er
      me to (speaker's name)          say don't they             :
      [They won't cal] me Ahmet (or whatever the speaker's name is).]
A_ tense and fast-moving duel is now in progress. B must now come up
with another ~nswer. He realizes that now he himself as well as his mother
is under possible sexual attack. A has criticized his preceding retort and
has articulated the guiding principle of the dueling code: If I, A, do_n't
fuck you, B, they, the other males, our peers, will not honor me by calhng
me by 1?1Y name. ,B, sizing up the situation, spots the weak point of _A's
rhyme. !hey don teat bread and cheese,' as a part of A's retort, has h~tle
to do with the context. It apparently has neither literal nor figurative
relevance and is there perhaps only because yemezler ('they don't eat')
provides a rhyming base for demezler ('they won't call') in this, pa~ticuh~~-
rhyme scheme, which involves end rhyming in Jines I, 2, and 4. With this
potential weak spot in mind, B mounts a new assault:

              Uyduramac/111            yan g1tt1
              make up couldn't you side went it
              (You couldn't fit in the rhyme; it/what you said
              went to the side/missed the target.)
              Ananm           amana (or ammdan) kan      gitti
              mother your's to (or from) cunt     blood went
              (And blood went to or came from your mother's
              cunt in the process.)

This is a good thrust and a good rhyme. The only pro bl em 1s
                                                            · t h a t the same
                                                                            .
word gitti is used at the end of each line to produce the rhyme. Here 1.s a
good point upon which A might base his counterattack. A's retort, usmg
the I, 2, and 4 line end-rhyme scheme, could be:                     ·

                    Uyduramadm             ya11c1g11w · .
                    make up couldn't you side its to of 1t
                    (You didn't make a very good rhyme.)
                   Bin devenin ka11c1g11w
                   ride camel's female to
                   (You ride a female camel.)
                   A nan         ~·ama§ll' y1kar~en   .
                   mother your laundry washing while
                   (While your mother was washing clothes)
        146   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                  Sabun     kgc111iJ        amc1g11w
                  soap     escapes cunt her to
                  (Soap slipped into her cunt.)

First, A tells B that his rhyme is inferior (referring to the double use of
gitti). Then he insults him further by saying that he, B, is not even able to
ride a male camel, only a female one. The subsequent reference to B's
mother implies that her cunt is so large that anything-even the soap used
in washing clothes, can gain access to it!
   At this point, B cannot argue abo4t the quality of A's rhyme. It is clear
that the rhyme in B's previous retort (which used gitti twice) was not up
to par and that A has used a very good rhyme yanc1g11w, ka11c1g111a, and
a1nc1g111a in his last retort. B therefore changes tactics and retorts as
follows:

                 0      laflari     atlatt1k
                 that words make jump did we
                 (Those words don't have any effect on me.)
                 Ananm                   a1111m    patlatt1k
                 mother your's cunt blew up we
                 (We blew up your mother's cunt.)

   It would appear that B is on the defensive. He may be running out of
rhymes and he is seemingly helpless against the onslaught of a good rhyme
from A. This may be ,why, instead of basing his rhyme upon a selected
aspect of A's previous rhyme, B retreats to the position that A's entire
retort doesn't make sense, taking care to rhyme atlatt,k and patlatt,k. B
does, however, attempt to burst A's mother's vagina. A, in replying to the
challenge that his words don't make any sense and to the phallic attack
on his mother, might offer the following:

                  0       laflar     lwvaya
                  that words air to
                  (Those words have no meaning.)
                  Ta,xak/ar        tavaya
                  testicles frying pan to
                  (Testicles go into the frying pan;)
                  Bir     giit     ver      bana
                  One ass give me to
                  (You give a piece of your ass)
                  Ahmet   (speaker's name)     agaya
                  A hmet  (or speaker's name) Mr. to
                  [To me, Mr. Ah111et (or speaker's name).]
          The Strategy o" T
                          'J   lirkisfz Bo    ,
                                             Ys Verbal Dueling Rhymes    147
Note the high quality f h
Iu1vaya, tavaya and o• t e rhy me m        ·    .
        .        '       agaya A .         . this retort·. J1'nes 1' -,
                                                                     ? and 4 with
masculme that he does            ·     imphes that B is no good and is so un-
well cut off his testicles ~~dneed his t~sticles. B might therefore just as
thereby castrates B. Ba .           put them m a frying pan and cook them. A              I
iating process by askin;n: ~;asculated ~, A then completes the,humil-
thereby converted B fr                Present his anus for penetration. A has                  ·,'
kind to this excellent rhom a male. to a female. If B is unable to reply in
                                                                                          I'
verbal duel.               Yme, then m some sense A is the "winner" of the
                                                                                          II,
   Let us now turn to the stn
pose A calls B lbne wh· h c tegy of another extended verbal duel. Sup-                    't

important to note th~t thtc. ~eans passive homosexual. It is extremely
homosexuality in gen          e /nsu~t refers to passive homosexuality, not to
                            I
being the active homera · n this context there is nothing insulting about
                         asexual In a h omosexuaI re Iat10ns   .   h'1p, t h e ac t'1ve
Phallic aggressor ga1·ns status·· the        ·    . .                       .
status. This distinct'     b       '     passive v1ct1m of such aggress10n loses
passive female roleionh' etween
                              h . horn osexuaI roes    I m · w h'1c h 1t
                                                                      · 1s
                                                                         · on Iy th e         I,,

ture. It' is found    , w_ tc bnngs d_iscredit is not limited to Turkish cul-
(lngham 1968·
Jbne as follow~:
                  23 :{j  m rural Mexican verbal dueling known as albures
                     · n any event, B might respond to A's calling him
                                                                                               I     i,

       Speaker A:       lbne                                                                   I


                        passive homosexual
       Speaker B:       Sen ibneysen           bana ne'!
                        you a queer if you me to what
                        (What is it to me if you are a passive homosexual?)

B could answer A's 'You queer' with 'What is it to me if you are a queer?'
Note that B ends with 11e, thereby rhyming with A's initial lbne. As de-
scribed earlier, the individual attacked tries to make the initial attacker the
victim of an attack instead. It is analogous to children's disputes in Amer-
ican culture in that the rhetorical device consists of repeating the initial
insulter's pronoun so as to refer back to him. One child says to another,
"you're crazy." The second might reply, "That's right, you're [or you are]
crazy," pretending that the first child's exact words are correct, but cor-
rect only when uttered by the second child in reference to the first child.
The device is not terribly sophisticated, but it is apparently reasonally
effective. In this case, B says, if it is A who is the one who is queer, what
is that to me? In other words, B not only calls A a passive homosexual,
but he completely disassociates himself from A's problem. It is then A's
turn. He might well, with a new tack not really connected to the preceding
couplet, insult B by using one of the many animal insults such as:
        148    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                               it    oglu     it
                               dog son of dog
                               (son of a dog)

A calls B a 'son of a dog.' If B is alert, he may reply,

                   iti     Allah yarat1111s
                   dog the God created
                   (God created the dog.)
                   Anamn         amtm kim kanatmts?
                   mother your's cunt  who made bleed
                   (Who made your mother's cunt bleed?)

The logic of B is that a dog is certainly (like all of us) a god-created, legit-
imate animal. There is nothing wrong with a dog. A dog is a legitimate
being and the son of a dog is likewise a legitimate being. But while it is
perfectly all right for Allah to make a dog, it is obviously not all right for
anyone to make A's mother's cunt bleed. The cunt bleeds presumably
because of the great phallic force applied to it. The implication is that A's
mother is a prostitute who sleeps with anyone who comes along. A could
parry this insult in the following way:

                 Anamuz      sahibi var
                 mother my's owner there is
                 [My mother has an owner (i.e., A's father).]
                 Bacuun        da am1 dar
                 sister your's so cunt tight
                 (Your sister has a tight cunt.)
                 Baltceden     balcan    getirip
                 garden from eggplant bring and
                 (They bring eggplant from the garden.)
                 Bac1111n        amtna sokarlar
                 Sister your's cunt to stick they
                 (They stick it in your sister's cunt.)

First of all, we can see that A has duplicated the technique employed by
B in B's last retort. Remember that B had responded to A's initial 'son of a
dog' insult in two steps. He began by setting the record straight with
respect to being a son of a dog and he ended by going on to attack A's
mother. In this retort, A does much the same. He starts by correcting the
record with respect to the question of the ownership of or access to his
mother's vagina. A points out that his father is the one and the only one
who "owns" A's mother and her sexual parts. Having answered B's
         The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes       149

attack, A goes on to an attack of his own, in this case, an attack on the
virginity of B's sister.
   The virginity of a male's sister is almost sacred in terms of Turkish
family norms. The honor of the family depends upon it. A penis enters
her only when she marries and the penis is that of her husband. When A
refers to B's sister's tight vagina, he is referring to her virginity, but when
he mentions that an "eggplant," i.e., phallus (the eggplant which grows in
Turkey is long and thin), has entered B's sister's vagina, he is saying that
B's sister is no longer a virgin. B's allusion to A's sister's initial virginity
is not so much a compliment as a means of underlining the contrasting
ruthless violation of that virginity. B must now defend the honor of his
family. Perhaps he can only muster the following rather mediocre retort:

                 Bac1y1     kansttrma
                 sister the mention don't
                 (Don't mention my sister.)
                 A nantn        amuw koydurma
                 mother your's cunt      place cause to don't
                 (Don't force me to enter your mother's cunt.)

This is almost an indirect admission by B of his acceptance of defeat. He
asks A not to mention his sister. Still, he does make a last effort to insult
A by saying that if A does mention his (B's) sister, then he, B, will be
forced to retaliate by having intercourse with A's mother.
   One final example of an extended series of linked retorts should suffice
to demonstrate the nature of this extraordinary tradition. In this example,
there are especially instructive instances of the use of metaphor and allu-
sion. Frequently in verbal duels, it is the nuance which is most important.
It is the connotation, not the denotation, which may cause the greatest
concern. Unfortunately, these subtleties are not always obvious from an
examination of the text alone. This is why informants must be encouraged
wherever possible to spell out "oral literary criticism," that is, their
interpretations and understandings of particular words and phrases
(Dundes 1966b).
   In this example of an extended verbal duel, there are not only cryptic
suggestive metaphorical descriptions which the uninitiated will probably
not easily comprehend but there are allusions to other specific verbal
dueling routines as well. In other words, one of the duel participants may
test his opponent's knowledge of the entire tradition by referring to one
or more of the shorter discrete retort sequences, several of which have
been discussed here. Readers of the following verbal duel may decide for
themselves how much or how little they could understand from just the
texts alone.
  Two young boys, say about twelve years of age, are talking. The subject
         150       Ethnographic Description and Explanation

is their penises. One claims that his penis is big (an obvious point of pride
among both boys and men). The other boy contends that his penis is just
as big. Now the first boy, A, should say something else, something more
about his penis, something "impressive." So he says,

                                        Kara     kaslt
                                        black    eyebrowed

A says 'black eyebrowed' meaning that his penis has black hair around it.
The acquisition of abundant or at least sufficient pubic hair is another
point of phallic pride among young boys. "Eyebrow" is immediately
understood by the second boy, B, to refer to the hair around A's penis.
He may be a little overwhelmed, but his answer, which rhymes with the
first boy's boast, is just as impressive. He says,

                                          Sogan        bas It
                                          onion        heilded

This refers to another desirable phallic attribute, namely, that the head of
a penis is just as big as an onion. B has thereby matched A's boast with a
boast of his own. It is worth noting here that there is a well-known boys'
song which lists these phallic characteristics:


~J.¥jjUJ±UJ JIJJIJJ J JIBlg fJ JJ JJIJ
     ba-~·i   so gan. gi   bi or-tasi yi Ian gi bi    di -bi or mari gi- bi ham   hili   bili   bili   hom



figure 4.1


                                     Ba~·1           sogan         gibi
                                     head its        onion         like
                                     Orta st    yilan              gibi
                                     middle its snake              like
                                     Dibi              Of/11(//l    gibi
                                     bottom its        forest       like
                                     Bam bili bili bili bom

 Here is a valuable insight into Turkish body esthetics. The head of a penis
 should resemble an onion. The middle of the penis should be as round and
 as smooth as a snake. The bottom should have a 'forest' of pubic hair
 around it. (The last line Bam bi/i bili bili born is nonsense, but it does
 connote happiness. In this case, the happiness is that of a boy attaining
        The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     151

the three stated requisite attributes of an ideal penis.) This boys' song
thus confirms the appropriateness of the terms of the verbal duel.
  In any case, A, realizing that B has matched his boast kara kasli with
sogan ba.yh, tries a new gambit:                        ·

                            Agz1111      art1
                             mouth its opened
                             (opened its mouth)

'Opened its mouth' in this context means that the second speaker's fe-
male sex organ has opened its mouth as a gesture inviting sexual inter-
course. Since the second speaker, B, is a male, the retort reverts to his
wife. However, since B is too young to be married, the insult indirectly
applies to his mother or sister. B immediately answers,

                         I' r111e      ka~·tt
                         inside its to escaped it
                         (penis enters open mouth)

The retort means that the second boy suddenly sticks his penis into the
'open mouth.' He thereby changes the intended meaning of A's retort by
making it sound as though A had said that his (A's) own mother's sexual
organ had opened its mouth to him (B). A realizes that he is obligated to
impress B with a new rhyme. He offers

                              Dedi hastay1m
                              said sick I
                              (I am sick.)

Decli 'said' is a semiliterary word, a kind of formal quotative. It is espe-
cially used by wandering minstrels at the begining of sentences in their
poems. Here it has no significance other that that of a child imitating an
elder. By saying 'I am sick,' A means that he is "sick" with love or, as we
might put it in American slang, sexually "ho(' for B's mother or sister.
However, B is quick to counter with

                              Dedi ustay1m
                              said expert I
                              (I am an expert.)

Note that the rhyme requirement is strictly observed: ustayun rhymes
with hastayim. B, by stating that he is the expert, tells A that he, B, is a
great lover and that he would accordingly be greatly appreciated by A's
mother or sister. One should realize that even though 'mother' and 'sister'
are not specifically mentioned, they are definitely implied.
       152    Ethnographic Description and Explanation


       Duels as Tests of Verbal Skills

          At this point, the duel may cease to be a matter of strategy and
become more a matter of memory testing. In this form of the duel there
is no absolute winning or losing per se. Nevertheless, there are some
governing unwritten rules with respect to gauging the outcome. It is the
first boy who is the aggressor. He begins with an initial boast or insult.
The second boy must come up with an appropriate rhymed retort or an
acceptable portion thereof The first boy can only "win" if the second boy
fails to respond with a rhyming retort. So long as the second boy succeeds,
the first boy must go on proposing other retorts, each time posing a dif-
ferent word which the second boy must counter with a proper rhyming
 word. The first boy is, however, obliged to use only traditional retort
 sequences. He cannot make up new retorts. Thus, in effect, the first boy
 tests the second boy's knowledge of the verbal dueling tradition. The
 Dedi routine might continue in the following manner with A saying,

                                Dedi inek
                                said cow
                                (you cow)

A, by calling Ba cow, is testing B's familiarity with the standard retort(s)
to the cow insult (seep. 141). If B knows a retort, he will simply say;

                               Dedi binek
                               said ride Jet's
                               (Let's ride.)

The 'Let's ride' (binek) is the crucial rhyming portion of the traditional
retort to the inek insult. B has "won" that portion of the match. A may
continue,

                              Dedi siktir
                              said penised get
                              (Get fucked.)

 Again, if B knows one of the usual retorts, he may reply,

                            Dedi mum        diktir
                            said candle set up
                            (set up a candle)

 In this unusual form of the duel, the retort need not be linked. In fact, the
 order of the retort couplets may be quite loose. In essence, A is simply/
         The Strateiy of Turkish Boys' Verba/ D11eli11i Rhymes   153

testing B's knowledge of the whole tradition. So what B needs at this point
is a good memory rather than a good sense of tactics and strategy. Pre-
sumably, only boys very familiar with the tradition and very well armed
with a considerable repertoire would conduct the duel in this fashion.
   The fact that one boy can, in the course of a duel, test a second boy's
knowledge of the different retort traditions supports the notion that these
traditions are well established and well known. To be sure, there may be
some Western-educated Turkish youths who are not familiar with this
type of verbal duel, but there is evidence that the tradition has permeated
Turkish male youth culture and this includes urban youth. For instance,
 the tradition finds expression in the graffiti found on bathroom walls, that
 is to say, in what has been termed "latrinalia" (Dun des 1966a). Inter-
 estingly enough, the same kind of verse linkage so prominently charac-
 teristic of the oral encounters occurs in the latrinalia. A common latrinalia
 verse in Turkey, found written in various boys' public school bathrooms
 is as follows:                                            -

                   Ba1111 yazan         Tos1111
                   this   writing one Tosun
                   (This was written by Tosun.)
                   Okuyana        kos1111
                   writing one to place let him
                   (Anybody who reads it is fucked by him.)
                          ,                       '


This boasting taunt 'This was written by Tosun: anybody who reads it is
fucked by him,' has both the rhyme and content features of the oral insult.
Tosun is a man's name as well as a word for young male ox. It implies
masculinity but it also has a slightly humorous connotation. Naturally,
the key reason for using Tosun is that it conveniently rhymes with kosun.
  Now if someone enters the men's rooms and reads the insult, he will, if
he is well versed (pun intended!) in the tradition, be tempted to reply. He
would almost certainly write the following traditional retort:

                     Ok11d11 b111111 Molla
                     read    this    Molla
                     (This was read by Molla.)
                     Tos1111 iot111111 kolla
                     Tosun ass your watch for
                     (Tosun, watch out for your own ass.)

 Here are the familiar elements. The first verse contained the phallic at-
 tack. The reply warned the attacker that the attacker's ass might be the
 ass which is attacked. It is clearly the my-penis-up-your-anus strategy,
 and furthermore, like the oral duel, it may continue. A third person may
        154     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

enter the bathroom and take note of the exchange thus far. Assuming the
role of the first writer and addressing a retort to Molla, the second writer,
he might write,

                   Og/11111 Molla sen toysun
                   son my Molla you inexperienced
                   (My son Molla, you are so inexperienced;)
                   Tosun sana     yine  koysun
                   Tosun you to again place let him
                   (Let Tosun fuck you again.)

This gives the advantage back to the initiator of the exchange. Notice the
skillful word play. The original rhyme was on Tosun and kosun. This
third verse rhymes toysun and lwysun. Note also that the third person
does not' add a new name. Rather, since the duels are almost invariably
dyadic and it is "Tosun's" turn to answer, the third person speaks on
behalf of Tosun.
   Still another indication of how well-known the verbal duel rhyming
tradition is may be found in a Hodja folktale. The Hodja figure is, of,,
course, the national character of Turkish folklore, and there are scores of
tales about him. In a striking example of metafolklore (Dundes 1966b ),
the very nature of the dueling rhyme tradition becomes the subject of the
following humorous folktale:
   One day Hodja was coming home, riding his donkey from the forest,
with wood he had cut for the day. A friend of his stops him and asks him
what he is carrying. Hodja answers, "Odwz" ('wood'). The friend im-
mediately replies with a rhyme:

                             Ben    de sana     kodum
                                    so you to placed I
                             (So I fucked you.)

   Hodja is really mad at his friend. But he just can't come up with a rhyme
like his friend's in order to put him down. So finally he says,

                        Bugiin giiizlerden ne?
                        Today days from what
                        (What day of the week is it today?)

His friend answers, "Parzaetesi" (Monday). "Ben de smut lwdwn" ('so I
fucked you'), says the Hodja. The friend protests, "But Hodja, the rhyme
doesn't fit." Hodja, red with anger, answers,

              Uysada      lwdum uynwsada             kodum
              fit if even place I fit not if even placed I
              [I fuck you if it fits; I fuck you (even) if it doesn't fit!]
             The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     155

        As in so many of the Turkish Hodja tales, the Hodja, in childlike or fool
     fashion, is unable to operate successfully in the adult world. Yet he is no
     ordinary fool; he is a wise fool, as are so many trickster figures. Although
     he is slow-witted (he couldn't think of a rhyme), he is also quick-witted
     (he made a good retort anyway). The opposition is exemplified with re-
     spect to the rules of verbal dueling. On the one hand, the Hodja takes it
     upon himself to ignore or violate the established norms: He forgets about
     the rhyming requirement. On the other hand, when questioned about this
     breach, the Hodja has the last word by which means he in fact conforms
     to the norm, i.e., he successfully threatens placing his penis in the anus of
     his friend! Perhaps this suggests that the phallic thematic principle takes
     priority over the stylistic rhyme principle.
       The Hodja narrative also tempts us to speculate that there may be a
     symbolic parallel between the rhyme requirement and the entire penis-in-
     anus image. 0Qe has to place his penis in his opponent's anus, but he has
     to make this threat in rhyme form. The rhyme form, like the opponent's
     anus, are the limiting boundaries into which the phallic thrust must go.
    Just as the penis must be bounded by the anus, so the verbal insult must
     be couched in rhyme form. With this reasoning, there does seem to be
     precedent for Hodja's violating the rhyme rule. Judging from some of the
     verbal duel texts previously cited, one can see that a particularly strong
     phallus is capable of bursting the anus. If bursting one's opponent's anus
    is an assertion of hypermasculinity, then the Hodja's breaking the rhyme
    convention may possibly be similarly construed. On the one hand, he is so
     phallic that he penetrates his opponent whether it (it being the content in
     the rhyme scheme and/or perhaps the presumably large phallus itself) fits
    or not! On the other hand, the apparent violation of formal rhyming
    contraints on form of content may be nothing more than an intentional
    sort of clumsiness.
       At this point, regardless of the validity of the suggestion that the rhyme
    scheme may be sy~bolically parallel to the anus with respect to contain-
    ing or restricting phallic thrusts, there can be no doubt whatsoever that
    the verbal dueling tradition exists in modern-day Turkey. In fact, there is
    evidence that a similar if not cognate tradition thrives in modern Greek
    folklore and northern African Arabic cultures. Most probably, this form
    of male verbal dueling occurs throughout" the Near East. It also shares
    some features in common with verbal dueling in Africa generally (Mayer
    1951) and also with the African-derived form of verbal dueling found in
    the United States known as "playing the dozens," among other terms. It
    is, however, apparently more similar to the Mexican albures (Ingham
    1968:231-236) than to the American Negro dozens. But the question of
    the distribution of verbal dueling among the peoples of the world is an-
    other matter altogether. Even if verbal dueling as a form were universal,
    the specific content would surely vary with individual cultures. The issue
    thus is the significance of the tradition as it is found in Turkish culture.



L
        156   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  What cultural/psychological needs does the tradition attempt to fill?
Here we must enter the ever-treacherous area of interpretation. The
empirical evidence of the tradition's existence is clear enough; we are
similarly confident about our analysis of verbal strategies; the meaning of
the tradition in the context of Turkish culture is not as obvious and may,
of course, be controversial. Nevertheless, we assume that the thematic
content of the linked rhyming retorts must be intimately related to Turkish
male psychology.


       Cultural Meaning of the Tradition

         One of the most curious features of Turkish psychology or per-
sonality concerns an apparent paradox. On the one hand, Turkish world
view is said to be fatalistic such that individuals are almost totally de-
pendent upon the wishes and whims of a higher power, e.g., the Will of
Allah and the inevitability of Kismet (fate). On the other hand, there ap-
pears to be a very positive attitude toward aggression. Courage and
strength are highly valued male ideals. One of the most popular national
sports is wrestling, and military deeds are greatly esteemed. Many
Turkish boys look forward with great anticipation to their military service.
The question is whether Turks are fatalistic dependent, or whether they
are actively aggressive, or whether they are both. ls it possible for an
individual to be docile and obedient, often to the point of what Westerners
would regard as obsequiousness, to seniors and at the same time be ac-
tively engaged in proving his manliness through various socially sanc-
tioned forms of aggression? Is there, in fact, a culturally caused insoluble
problem arising from any attempt to reconcile these seemingly contra-
dictory behavior patterns?
   We believe that one of the origins of or, should we say, one of the con-
tributing factors to the formation of specific world-view paradigms is the
enculturating experience implicit or explicit in the dominant parent-child
sets of relationships in any given culture. If the childhood experience is
relevant to the study of world view, then it is logical to look into the
Turkish boy's childhood for possible precursors for the "dependent-
aggressive" conflict. In the Turkish childhood experience, it is clear that
sex and age are critical social factors. In Turkish culture, there is con-
siderable sex segregation. Furthermore, men decidedly dominate women.
Publicly women are definitely subordinate to men. There is also the factor
of age. The young are subordinate to the old; children are subordinate to
parents. How does all this affect the young Turkish boy?
   The Turkish boy learns that since men dominate women, he can assert
himself with respect to his sisters and even his mother. In the world of
women, even a little boy has status. But just as soon as this little boy
          The Strate1;y of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     157

  leaves the world of women to join the segregated society of men, he sud-
  denly finds that he has junior, very junior, status. He is at the bottom of
  the social pecking order. He discovers that men do rank one another. In
  the rural oda, the room in some village houses where meri and only men
 congregrate, for example, he learns that ranking oneself with regard to
 one's peers is crucial and that even the seating order in the oda may reflect
 the public evaluation of any one individual's status (Stirling 1953 :35).
 Thus, though the boy wants status, he finds he doesn't have much.
     It is possible that the boy's extremely low status in the men's society is
 essentially equivalent or analogous to the low status of women. In other
 words, little boys have learned that men should be aggressive and forceful
 with regard to male-female relations, and so the little boys were while
 they lived in the world of women. But once having entered the world of
 men, the little boys soon realize that their own relationships to older men
 must, in fact, entail the assumption of passive, deferential roles quite
 similar to what they understand are the roles of women vis-a-vis men. Yet
 there is an additional critical feature of Turkish boyhood which may well
 bear upon the specific nature of the verbal duel pattern. This feature is
 circumcision.
    The circumcision of boys was traditionally performed without anes-
 thesia, typically when the boy was in the four- to eight-year age range
 (Oztiirk 1964:346). It is, in this light, entirely appropriate for Pierce to
 have begun his Life in a Turkish Village (1964:4-8) with an account of a
 circumcision. 1t has been suggested that circumcision performed at this
 age may be perceived by the child as an aggressive attack (Cansever
 1965 :322, 326). Cansever, in his interesting study of the psychological
effects of circumcision on Turkish boys, suggests further (pp. 322, 325)
than circumcision, perceived by the child as symbolic castration, may
lead to confusion concerning sexual identity such that boys may later
tend to assume feminine traits. Cansever also indicated that some boys
regarded females rather than males as the perpetrators of the castrative
circumcision (although circumcision is in fact pe1formed by a male-in
villages it is often the barber). Cansever explained (p. 328) that the Turk-
ish child's initial close contact with the mother, in .contrast with the child's
relationship with a distant father-Bradburn's study (1963 :464) indicates
that Turkish males find their fathers to be "stern, forbidding, remote,
domineering, and autocratic"-may partially explain why a female rather
than a male is perceived as the primary castrator. The great trust in the
mother has been betrayed. She is blamed for having allowed the "castra-
tion" to take place. But whether it is the father or mother who is blamed
for the traumatic ritual, the fact remains that the "higher powers" upon
whom the child depended have betrayed his trust, and they have betrayed
this trust with respect to a particular part of the body: the boy's phallus.
    If circumcision is regarded by the young boy as a serious aggressive
          158    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

    attack, and this is precisely what Cansever found from the results of
    standard psychological tests, then it is not illogical for the young boy to
    focus upon this part of the body as a means of combating future forms of
    aggression. In fact, from psychological data alone, one might well be led
    to hypothesize that boys would want to punish attacking males by dem-
   onstrating to these males their considerable priapic prowess. Thus to
   gain status among one's male peer group, one would need to prove that
   one's phallus was in perfect working order and in fact was sufficiently
   powerful to place one's opponents in the passive, feminine position. In
   addition, if some old men as practicing pederasts demand that young
   boys assume the female position, then as these young boys become older
   and seek to attain a man's status, they must insist, in turn, upon the active,
   male role. In other words, the shift from the boy's female passive role to
   the man's male active role is an intrinsic part of the process of becoming
  an adult male.
        There is another facet of the circumcision experience which may be
  related to the verbal dueling tradition. If Cansever is correct-and he
  does have supporting data-in stating (1965 :328) that it is frequently
  females who are perceived as the castrators, then it would be pe1fectly
  appropriate for a young male to perform some act of retaliatory damaging
  mutilation upon an analogous portion of the female anatomy. One such
  technique might be causing a vagina to burst or fall apart. Another might
  be to have the original injured party, the phallus, cause the vagina to
  bleed. After all, the bleeding of the newly circumcized phallus of the
  young boy was thought to have been caused by the castrating mother!
 Certainly, the repeated references to making mother's cunt bleed can be
 more logically explained by this than by, say, references to menstruation.
     Circumcision does, then, appear to be a critical factor in the boyhood
 of Turkish males. And one cannot help but notice that it usually occurs at
 an age immediately preceding the initial participation in the verbal dueling
 ti;adition. Cansever puts the problem caused by circumcision among
Turkish youth in this way: "The Turkish male, with his strivings towards,
on the one hand, bravery, courage and endurance to pain, and on the other
hand total submission to authority, particularly father figures, might rep-
resent a good example of the conflict between masculinity and homo-
sexuality" (1965 :329).
     In the light of all this, there does seem to be some basis for maintaining
that the verbal dueling pattern among young Turkish males is a vivid
dramatization of the whole dilemma. It is in quasi-ritual form a con-
cretization, an externalization, of what is undoubtedly a crucial internal
psychological'dilemma for most young boys. The problem is that to belong
to the world of men in Turkish culture, a boy needs to prove that he is a
man, not a woman, and one of the ways of proving this is to demonstrate
through act or symbolic words that one has a powerful, aggressive phallus.
           The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     159

   Yet the difficulty is that such existence in the world of men necessarily
   involves the danger of being put in the female position by a more powerful
   male. Just as women in a male-dominated society can do little more than
   serve as passive victims of male aggression, so boys and weak men may
   be forced by the same society into similar passive roles. Young boys,
  under the threat of having been castrated, a threat caused by a culturally
  induced misreading of circumcision, must do their best to avoid being
  like women in serving as helpless victims of male phallic aggression. In
  this sense, Turkish male personality is not unlike that of Algerian males
  as described by Miner and De Vos ( I 960). In analyzing the psychological
  characteristics of Algerians, Miner and De Vos remark that "The fear
  of retreating into passive homosexuality is one of the dangers besetting
  an individual who retreats from genital masculinity in the face of sub-
  conscious castration threat," and they also comment on the Algerian
  males' unconscious fear of being penetrated, as would be the case of
  one assumed a passive homosexual role (1960:141, 138; cf. Ingham
  1968:236).
    Turkish male verbal dueling serves in part as a kind of extended rite
 ~f passage. Like most if not all puberty initiation rites, the duel allows the
 young boy to repudiate the female world with its passive sexual role and
 to affirm the male world with its active sexual role. The fact that the re-
 pudiation of the female role seems to involve the partial enactment of
 that role by males is in accord with Bettelheim's general theory of initia-
 tion rites in which males, envious of female organs, seek to usurp female
 sexual powers and activities (1962:45; cf. Burton and Whiting).
    The verbal duel, then, offers the opportunity of penetrating one's fellow
 male but also the danger of being penetrated in turn by that same fellow
 male. The homosexual relationship involves dependence coupled with
 mistrust: dependence upon friends who will not attack but mistrust in the
fear that they might attack. Just as the higher powers upon whom the
young boy depended suddenly launched an emasculating attack (circum-
cision), so one's peers upon whom one depends may suddenly threaten
one's masculinity. In the verbal duel, a boy must try to aggressively hand
out at least as much as-and hopefully a bit more than-he is forced to
take. To the extent that Turkish world view contains an oppositional
contrast between fatalistic, passive dependence and individualistic, active
aggression, the presence of both kinds of behavior in the verbal dueling
situation makes sense. The Turkish proverb "Some· said he was deli,
some said he was veli" says much the same. Deli 'insane' refers to de-
structive, aggressive behavior, while veli 'saint' has connotations of
passivity and stability (Oztiirk I 964:349). The point is that an individual
must be both. The inconsistency is consistent. Each Turkish male must
be both deli and veli.
   One last detail concerns the Turkish male concept of friendship. The
          160     Eth11ographic Description a11d Exp/a11ation

most commonly used word for 'friend' is Arkada,}'. Without presuming
etymological expertise in Turkish, one is nevertheless tempted to remark
that arka means among other things the backside of the body and cfo1· is a
suffix implying fellowship or participation. A friend is thus literally a
back participant or a "backfellow." It is, in short, someone who is trust-
worthy and who can therefore be allowed to stand behind one. One must
be careful who one allows to enter one's back zone. A nonfriend might
take advantage of such a position to initiate an aggressive attack. Only a
true friend or "back" can be trusted not to do so. To trust to the protec-
tion of someone is:

                            Birine arka vermek
                            One to back give to
                            (to give one's back to someone)

This and many other traditional metaphors involving the arka root suggest
that friendship is semantically related to a safe backside. 2 If these philo-
logical materials are relevant, as they would seem to be, they would tend
to support the idea that an active penis attacking a passive anus has been
a critical psychological configuration in Turkish culture for some time.
   In any event, whether the ritual phallic penetration of an opponent's
anus is a long-standing tradition or not, it seems safe to conclude that as
the 'verbal dueling technique exists in twentieth-century Turkey, in city
and in village, it is hardly an isolated, unimportant bit of esoterica. Rather
it is a dynamic functioning element of Turkish culture, an element which
provides a semipublic arena for the playing out of common private prob-
lems. The duel affords the young Turkish boy an opportunity to give
appropriate vent to the emotional concomitants of the painful process of
becoming a man.
    In the spirt of this essay, we should like to close by asking the reader:
"Do you know the chapter you just read?" (Reader: Yes.)

                                    Sana      girsin
                                    you to    enter let it

   2
     Among the traditional words and phrases found in A. D. Alderson and Fahir lz, eds.,
The Concise Oxford Turkish Dictionary (Oxford, 1959) and Mehmet Ali Agakay, ed.,
Tiirk(e SOzlllk (Ankara, 1966) which we might cite in support of our hypothesis are: ( 1)
arkas1pek-literally, he has a lot of back; figuratively, one who has protectors or one who
trusts somebody or one who trusts in a strong place. (2) arkalamak-literally, to back, to
support, or to back up someone; figuratively, to help by giving trust to someone. (3) arkada.)·
de[!//, arka tas1-literally, he's not a friend, he's a back stone (a stone in the back); figura-
tively, he's hardly a friend. This might be said about friends who do one harm. (4) ard111a
kadt1r arik-literally, open up to the backside; figuratively wide open. (5) birinin arkas1111
s1va11wk-literally, to plaster (as in construction) someone's back; figuratively, to flatter
someone insincerely, to butter up.
    5
    Signifying and Marking:
    'Two Afro~American Speech Acts
    CLAUDIA MITCHELL-KERNAN



I
     Claudia Mitchell-Kernan is assistant professor of anthro-
     pology at Harvard University. She received her B.A. and
     M.A. degrees from Indiana University, her Ph.D. from
     the University of California, Berkeley, and has done field-
     work in the urban United States and Samoa. As one of a
    group of anthropologists and psychologists who have
    recently embarked on a long-term cross-cultural study of
    the development of communicative competence, she is a
    coauthor of the field manual prepared to guide this study
    (Slobin et al. 1967). The present chapter, which is
    adapted from her dissertation, reports on her eth-
    nographic work in a northern California urban black
    community.
       The last few years have seen a growing concern with
    Afro-American dialects on the parts of linguists con-
    cerned with descriptive and historical problems (Stewart
    1967; Labov 1969b; Wolfram 1969) and educators inter-
    ested in improved language and reading instruction
    (Barnt and Shuy, 1969). These studies h~we made impor-
    tant contributions to our understanding of black speech.
    It has been shown, e.g., that the language of urban blacks
    is not, as some have implied, simply a random collection
    of features deviating from the standard but rather an in-
    dependent dialect of English. Like other dialects of
    English, it has its own rules of grammar and pronuncia-
    tion, rules which are explainable in terms of the history of
    its speakers in much the same way as rules of other
    English language dialects. The educator's notions of
    "linguistic deprivation" have also been discredited.
    These notions, which are based almost entirely on
                                161
162   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

responses to formal questionnaires and psychological
tests which assume a knowledge of middle-class white
culture, have led some educators to characterize ghetto
children as linguistically underdeveloped and lacking in
verbal abilities. Ethnographic studies which deal with
black speech behavior in terms of the culture's own con-
ceptual system show quite different results. As Mitchell-
Kernan suggests, the exceptio'nally rich terminological
system including such folk concepts as "sounding," "rap-
ping," "running it down," "signifying," and "marking,"
all referring to verbal skills, testifies to the importance
which black culture assigns to verbal skills.
   The American urban situation is thus best regarded as
a system of multilingualism and multiculturalism charac-
terized by the coexistence of a variety of distinct ethnic
groups, each with its own body of traditions, values, and
rules of speaking. To understand this complex system, it
is, of course, first of all necessary to identify and describe
its constituent components. But mere description of sub-
systems is not enough if we are to learn how the plurality
of cultures operates in everyday interactions and how it
affects everyday I speech behavior., Members of ethnic
minority groups spend much of the day in settings where
dominant norms prevail. Even those individuals whose
behavior on the surface may seem quite deviant tend to
have at least a passive knowledge of the dominant cul-
ture. What sets them off from others is not simply the fact
that they are distinct but that their own private language
and life styles are juxtaposed with those of the public at
large as well. Mitchell-Kernan deals with juxtaposition of
values and its effect on everyday speech behavior
through her analysis of signifying the marking.
   Her study builds on the work of folklorists such as
Abrahams and Kochman ( 1969), and her discussion also
shows some similarity to Dundes discussion of verbal
dualing (Chapter 4). Note the similarity of the skills in-
volved in choosing topics appropriate to the context,
building on weaknesses in opponents argument, and
relying on shared cultural knowledge.
   While folklorists, however, deal with their material in
its own terms, emphasizing description and structural
analysis, Mitchell-Kernan is primarily concerned with
the way folk themes are used in natural conversations to
convey special culture-specific meanings. All her ex-
     Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts      163

        amples are taken from tape recordings in everyday set-
        tings. She also devotes considerable discussion to the
        value of signifying and marking as communicative strate-
        gies, discussing the condition under which a speaker
        might find it advantageous to rely on such indirect means
        of getting across his point rather than making his point
        directly.
           Mitchell-Kernan also illustrates many of the features of
        communication discussed elsewhere in this volume, such
        as the discrepancy between surface meaning and com-
        municative function referred to by Ervin-Tripp (Chapter
        7) and Sacks (Chapter 11), the notion of culture as back-
        ground knowledge (Garfinkel, Chapter 1O; Sacks,
        Chapter 11; etc.). Of particular importance is the way in
       ·which she relates choice of linguistic code to content and
        function. Basing her ideas on Hymes's (Chapter 1) notion
        of the speech event as a structured whole, she shows how
        these components of speech events combine to convey
        meaning. Her view of black dialects is thus quite different
        from that of the other traditional dialectologists, who deal
        with black dialects purely on the level of syntax and ref-
        erence. For Mitchell-Kernan, these formal features of the
        linguistic code are merely signals of culturally based
        communicative strategies, strategies which reflect the
        Afro-American concern with speaking as a skill and an
        art.
           Like many of the chapters in this volume, Mitchell-
        Kernan 's work constitutes a departure from previous
        academic tradition and must be read not for its solid
        research results but for the suggestions it implies for fur-
        ther work. Nevertheless, it would seem that her point of
        view has several important implications for educational
        policy. Some of these implications are discussed by
        Gumperz ( I 970b ). See also the works of Frederick Wil-
        liams (I 969) and Henrie (1969). For a historical discus-
        sion of Afro-American speech patterns, see Dalby 1970,
        as well as his article in Kochman (in preparation).



        In a linguistic community which is bilingual or bidialectal, the
code in which messages are conveyed is likely to be highly salient both to
members of the community and to the ethnographer. The languages
spoken tend to be named, and individual speakers, who speak one or the
        164   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

other dialect in particular settings, identified as belonging to one or more
groups. The fact that more than one language is spoken, that various
social categories of people use specific languages in certain settings when
discussing particular topics with members of other social categories, is a
significant point of departure.
   Aside from language or grammar per se, there are, however, other as-
pects of the communicative compete~ce of such a group which require
analysis. The appropriate beginning point for an investigation may be the
analysis of the components which are emphasized by elaboration in a
variety of speech forms. Well-elaborated components comprise a basis for
selection among alternates. The pattern of such selection reveals crucial
social information.
   Hymes ( 1967) notes that precedence of components may differ from
case to case, and such differences may be a basis for the classification of
sociolinguistic systems. Such. hierarchies of precedence may depend not
simply on apparent causal direction in the interrelationships between
components but also on the cultural focus (salience-emphasis) upon one
or more of the components.
   The artistic component is significant in black English. The salience of
consideration of the artistic characteristics of speech acts in black English
is evidenced by both thy proliferation of terms which deal with aspects of
verbal style and the common occurrence of speech routines which may be
labeled by these terms. The artistic characteristics of a speech act are the
characteristics that have to do with the style of the speech act, i.e., with the
way in which something is said rather than with such components as the
topic or the interlocutors. Moreover, the very term art carries connota-
tions of value or judgment of appreciation (or nonappreciation).
   The speech acts which will be described here are among the many
which are given labels in black English. The terms themselves are some-
times descriptive of the style of the speech act. A partial list of such terms
is: signifying, rapping, sounding, playing the dozens, woofing, marking,
loud-talking, shucking, and jiving. Some of these terms are variants used
in particular geographic areas. Undoubtedly, other variants exist.
   I shall deal in detail two of these speech acts, treat their stylistic as-
pects, and attempt to relate the artistic characteristics to the other compo-
nents which together comprise the speech act. I will describe how these
speech acts are used and demonstrate that concern with style and value of
artistic merit on the part of speakers of black English influences' the other
components. Specifically, I will show that this concern has a direct effect
upon the choice of the linguistic code in certain conversational settings
and frequently explains the use of black dialect forms.
   Value regarding verbal art in black English is evident not only from the
 high frequency of occurrences of nameable artistic variants but also from
 the comments on such variants in ongoing conversations, including stated _/
I~-


             Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts         165

      values regarding speech use and judgments of the ability of particular
      speakers that are based upon considerations of artistic merit and style.
      Concern with verbal art is a dominant theme in black culture, and while
      these speech acts do not have style as their sole component, style is nev-
      ertheless the criterion which determines their effective use.


              Signifying

                 A number of individuals interested in black verbal behavior have
       devoted attention to the "way of talking" which is known in many black
       communities as signifying (see Abrahams 1964; Kochman, 1969). Sig-
       nifying can be a tactic employed in game activity-verbal dueling-which
       is engaged in as an end in itself, and it is signifying in this context which
       has been the subject of most previous analyses. Signifying, however, also
       refers to a way of encoding messages or meanings in natural conversa-
       tions which involves, in most cases, an element of indirection. This kind
       of signifying might be best viewed as an alternative message form,
       selected for its artistic merit, and may occur embedded in a variety of dis-
       course. Such signifying is not focal to the linguistic interaction in the
      sense that it does not define the entire speech event. While the primacy of
       either of these uses of the term signifying is difficult to establish, the latter
      deserves attention due to its neglect in the literature.
          The standard English concept of signifying seems etymologically re-
      lated to the use of this term within the black community. An audience, e.g.,
      may be advised to signify "yes" by standing or to signify its disapproval
      of permissive education by saying "aye." It is also possible to say that an
      individual signifies his poverty by wearing rags. In the first instance we
      explicitly state the relationship between the meaning and the act, in-
      forming the audience that in this context the action or word will be an ade-
      quate and acceptable means of expressing approval. In the second in-
      stance, the relationship between rags and poverty is implicit and stems
      from conventional associations. It is in this latter sense that standard
      English and black usage have the most in common.
          In the context of news analyses and interpretation we hear the rhetori-
      cal question, "What does all of this signify?" Individuals posing this ques-
      tion proceed to tell us what some words or events mean by placing m,\jor
      emphasis on the implications of the thing which is the subject of interpre-
      tation and, moreoften than not, posing inferences which are felt to
      logically follow. Such interpretations rely on the establishment of context,
      which may include antecedent conditions and background knowledge as
      well as the context in which the event occurred.
         The black concept of signifying incorporates essentially a folk notion
      that dictionary entries for words are not always sufficient for interpreting
        166   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

meanings or messages, or that meaning goes beyond such interpretations.
Complimentary remarks may be delivered in a left-handed fashion. A par-
ticular utterance may be an insult in one context and not in another. What
pretends to be informative may intend to be persuasive. Superficially,
self-abasing remarks are frequently self-praise. The hearer is thus con-
strained to attend to all potential meaning carrying symbolic systems in
speech events-the total universe of discourse. The context embeddedness
of meaning is attested to by both our reliance on the given context and,
most importantly, our inclination to c~nstruct additional context from our
background knowledge of the world. Facial expression and tone of voice
serve to orient us to one kind of interpretation rather than another. Situa-
tional context helps us to narrow meaning. Personal background knowl-
edge about the speaker points us in different directions. Expectations
based on role or status criteria enter into the sorting process. In fact. we
seem to process all manner of information against a background of as-
sumptions and expectations. Thus, no matter how sincere the tone of
voice affected by the used car salesman, he is always suspect.
    Labeling a particular utterance as signifying thus involves the recogni-
 tion and attribution of some implicit content or function, which is poten-
 tially obscured by the surface content or function. The obscurity may lie
 in the relative difficulty it poses for interpreting (I) the meaning or message
 the speaker is adjudged as intending to convey; (2) the addressee-the
 person or persons to whom the message is directed; (3) the goal orienta-
 tion or intent of the sp~aker. A precondition for the application of the
 term signifying to some speech act is the assumption that the meaning
 decoded was consciously and purposely formulated at the encoding stage.
  In reference to function the same condition must hold.
     The following examples of signifying are taken from natural conversa-
  tions recorded in Oakland, California. Each example will be followed by
  interpretations, intended to clarify the messages and meanings being con-
  veyed in each case.

I. The interlocutors here are Barbara, an informant; Mary, one of her friends;
and the researcher. The conversation takes place in Barbara's home and the epi-
sode begins as I am about to leave.

 BARBARA:         What are you going to do Saturday? Will you be over here?
 R:               I don't know.
 BARBARA:         Well, if you're not going to be doing anything, come by. I'm
                  going to cook some chit'lins. [Rather jokingly] Or are you one of
                  those Negroes who don't eat chit'lins?
 MARY:            [Interjecting indignantly] That's all I hear lately-soul food,
                  soul food. If you say you don't eat it you get accused of being
                  saditty [affected, considering oneself superior].
                                                                                      1
                  [Matter of factly] Well, I ate enough black-eyed peas and neck-




                                                                                   J
             Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts            167

                        bones during the depression that I can't get too excited over it. I
                        eat prime rib and T-bone because I like to, not because I'm
                        trying to be white. [Sincerely] Negroes are constantly trying to
                        find some way to discriminate against each other. If they could
                        once get it in their heads that we are all in this together maybe
                        we could get somewhere in this battle against the man.
                        [Mary leaves.]
       BARBARA:         Well, I wasn't signifying at her, but like I always say, if the shoe
                        fits, wear it.                                                             I.
                                                                                                   I::
           While the manifest topic of Barbara's question was food, Mary's
        response indicates that this is not a conversation about the relative merits
       of having one thing or another for dinner. Briefly, Barbara was, in the met-
       aphors of the culture, implying that Mary (and/or I) is an assimilationist.
           Let us first deal with the message itself, which is somewhat analogous
        to an allegory in that the significance or meaning of the words must be
       derived from known symbolic values. An outsider or nonmember
       (perhaps not at this date) might find it difficult to grasp the significance of
       eating chit'lins or not eating chit'lins. Barbara's "one of those Negroes
       that" places the hearer in a category of persons which, in turn, suggests
       that the members of that category may share other features, in this case,
       negatively evaluated ones, and indicates that there is something here of
       greater significance than mere dietary preference.
           Chit'lins are considered a delicacy by many black people, and eating
       chit'lins is often viewed as a traditional dietary habit of black people.
       Changes in such habits are viewed as gratuitous aping of whites and are
      considered to imply derogation of these customs. The same sort of sen-
      timent often attaches to other behaviors such as changes in church affilia-
      tion of upwardly mobile blacks. Thus, not eating or liking chit'lins may be
      indicative of assimilationist attitudes, which in turn imply a rejection of
                                                                                                         i
      one's black brothers and sisters. It is perhaps no longer necessary to men-                        I

      tion that assimilation is far from a neutral term intraculturally. Blacks
      have traditionally shown ambivalence toward the abandonment of ethnic
      heritage. Many strong attitudes attached to certain kinds of cultural                    I     I


     behavior seem to reflect a fear of cultural extermination.
          It is not clear at the outset to whom the accusation of being an assimi-
     lationist was aimed. Ostensibly, Barbara addressed her remarks to me.
     Yet Mary's response seems to indicate that she felt herself to be the real
     addressee in this instance. The signifier may employ the tactic of ob-
     scuring his addressee as part of his strategy. In the following case the
     remark is, on the surface, directed toward no one in particular.

     2. I saw a woman the other day in a pair of stretch pants, she must have
     Weighed 300 pounds. If she knew how she looked she would burn those things.




b:
        168   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   Such a remark may have particular significance to the 235-pound
member of the audience who is frequently seen about town in stretch
pants. She is likely to interpret this remark as directed at her, with the in-
tent of providing her with the information that she looks singularly unat-
tractive so attired.
   The technique is fairly straightforward. The speaker simply chooses a
topic which is selectively relevant to his audience. A speaker who has a
captive audience, such as a minister, may be accused of signifying by
virtue of his text being too timely and selectively apropos to segments of
his audience.
   It might be proposed that Mary intervened in the hope of rescuing me
from a dilemma by asserting the absence of any necessary relationships
between dietary habits and assimilationist attitudes. However, Barbara's
further remarks lend credence to the original hypothesis and suggest that
Mary was correct in her interpretation, that she was the target of the
insinuation.

BARBARA:        I.guess she was saying all that for your benefit. At least, I hope
                she wasn't trying to fool me. If she weren't so worried about
                keeping up with her saditty friends, she would eat less T-bone
                steak and buy some shoes for her kids once in a while.

   Although Mary never explicitly accuses Barbara of signifying, her
response seems tantamount to such an accusation, as is evidenced by Bar-
bara's denial. Mary's indignation registers quite accurately the spirit in
which some signifying is taken.
   This brings us to another feature of signifying: The message often
carries some negative import for the addressee. Mary's response deserves
note. Her retaliation also involves signifying. While talking about ob-
stacles to brotherhood, she intimates that behavior such as that engaged
in by Barbara is typical of artificially induced sources of schism which are
in essence superficial in their focus, and which, in turn, might be viewed
as a comment on the character of the individual who introduces divi-
siveness on such trivial grounds.
   Barbara insulted Mary, her motive perhaps being to injure her feelings
or lower her self-e~teem. An informant asked to interpret this interchange
went further in imputing motives by suggesting possible reasons for Bar-
bara's behavior. He said that the answer was buried in the past. Perhaps
Barbara was repaying Mary for some insult of the past, settling a score, as
it were. He suggested that Barbara's goal was to raise her own self-esteem
by asserting superiority of a sort over Mary. Moreover, he said that this
kind of interchange was probably symptomatic of the relationship
between the two women and that one could expect to find them jockeying
for position on any number of issues. "Barbara was trying to rank Mary,"
      Signifyi11g and Marking: Two AJ)·o-American Speech Acts      169

to put her down by typing her. This individual seemed to be defining the
function of signifying as the establishment of dominance in this case.
   Messages like the preceding are indirect not because they are cryptic
(i.e., difficult to decode) but because they somehow force the hearer to
take additional steps. To understand the significance of not eating
chit'lins, one must voyage to the black social world and discover the char-
acteristics of social types referred to and the cultural values and attitudes
toward them.
   The indirect message may take any number of forms, however, as in the
following example:

3. The relevant background information lacking in this interchange is that the
husband is a member of the class of individuals who do not wear suits to work.

WIFE:            Where are you going?
HUSBAND:         I'm going to work.
WIFE:            (Your're wearing) a suit, tie, and white shirt? You didn't tell
                 me you got a promotion.

   The wife, in this case, is examining the truth value of her husband's as-
sertion (A) 'Tm going to work" by stating the obvious truth that (B) he is
wearing a suit. Implicit is the inappropriateness of this dress as measured
against shared background knowledge. In order to account for this dis-
crepancy, she advances the hypothesis (C) that he has received a promo-
tion and is now a member of the class of people who wear suits to work. B
is obviously true, and if C is not true, then A must also be false. Having no
reason to suspect that C is true, she is signifying that he is not going to
work and moreover, that he is lying about his destination.
   Now the wife could have chosen a more straightforward way of finding
an acceptable reason for her husband's unusual attire. She might have
asked, e.g., "Why are you wearing a suit?" And he could have pleaded
some unusual circumstances. Her choice to entrap him suggests that she
was not really seeking information but more than likely already had some
answers in mind. While it seems reasonable to conclude that an accusa-
tion of lying is implicit in the interchange, and one would guess that the
wife's intent is equally apparent to the husband, this accusation is never
made explicit.
   This brings us to some latent advantages of indirect messages, es-
pecially those with negative import for the receiver. Such messages,
because of their form-they contain both explicit and implicit content-
structure interpretation in such a way that the parties have the option of
avoiding a real confrontation [Brown (1958:314) provides a similar dis-
cussion]. Alternately, they provoke confrontations without at the same
time exposing unequivocally the speaker's intent. The advantage in either
        170    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

case is for the speaker because it gives him control of the situation at the
receiver's expense. The speaker, because of the purposeful ambiguity of
his original remark, reserves the right to subsequently insist on the
harmless interpretation rather than the provocative one. When the situa-
tion is such that there is no ambiguity in determining the addressee, the
addressee faces the possibility that if he attempts to confront the speaker,
the latter will deny the message or intent imputed, leaving him in the em-
barrassing predicament of appearing contentious.
    Picture, if you will, the secretary who has become uneasy about the ten-
dency of her knee to come into contact with the hand of her middle-aged
boss. She finally decides to confront him and indignantly informs him that
she is not that kind of a girl. He responds by feigning hurt innocence:
"How could you accuse me of such a thing?" If his innocence is genuine,
her misconstrual of the significance of these occasions of body contact
possibly comments on her character more than his. She has no way of
being certain, and she feels foolish. Now a secretary skilled in the art of
signifying could have avoided the possibility of "having the tables turned"
by saying "Oh, excuse me Mr. Smith, I didn't mean to get my knee in
your way." He would have surely understood her message if he were
guilty, and a confrontation would·have been avoided. lfhe were innocent,
the remark would have probably been of no consequence.
   When there is some ambiguity with reference to the addressee, as,in the
first example, the hdrer must expose himself as the target before the
confrontation can take place. The speaker still has the option of retreating
and the oppqrtunity, while feigning innocence, to jibe, "Well, if the shoe
fits, wear it." The individual who has a well-known reputation for this
kind of signifying is felt to be sly and, sometimes, not man or woman
enough to come out and say what he means.
   Signifying does not, however, always have negative valuations attached
to it; it is clearly thought of as a kind of art-a clever way of conveying
messages. In fact, it does not lose its artistic merit even when it is
malicious. It takes some skill to construct messages with multilevel
meanings, and it sometimes takes equal expertise in unraveling the puzzle
presented in all of its many implications. Just as in certain circles the
clever punster derives satisfaction and is rewarded by his hearers for con-
structing a multisided pun, the signifier is also rewarded for his clev-
erness.

4. The following interchange took place in a public park. Three young men in
their early twenties sat down with the researcher, one of whom initiated a conver-
sation in this way:

I:     Mama; you sho is fine.
R:     That ain' no way to talk to your mother.
      Signifying and Marking: Two Aji·o-American Speech Acts            17 I

       [Laughter]
I:     You married?
R:     Um hm.
I:     Is your husband married?
      [Laughter]
R:     Very.
       [The conversation continues with the same young man doing most of the
       talking. He questions me about what I am doing and I tell him about my
       research project. After a couple of minutes of discussing "rapping," he re-
       turns to his original style.]
I:     Baby, you a real scholar. I can tell you want to learn. Now if you'll just
       cooperate a Ii'! bit, l 'll show you what a good teacher I am. But first we got
       to get into my area of expertise.
R:     I may be wrong but seems to me we already in your area of expertise.
       [Laughter]
I:    You ain' so bad yourself, girl. I ain't heard you stutter yet. You a Ii'! fix-
      ated on your subject though. I want to help a sweet thang like you all I can.
      I figure all that book learning you got must mean you been neglecting other
      areas of your education.
II:   Talk that talk! [Gloss: Ole]
R:    Why don't you let me point out where I can best use your help.
I:    Are you sure you in the best position to know?
       [Laughter]
I:     I 'mo leave you alone, girl. Ask me what you want to know. Tempus fugit,
       baby.
       [Laughter]

   The folk label for the kind of talking engaged in by I is rapping, defined
by Koch man as "a fluent and lively way of talking characterized by a high
degree of personal style," which may be used when its function is referen-
tial or directive-to get something from someone or get someone to do
something. The interchange is laced with innuendo-signifying because it
alludes to and implies things which are never made explicit.
   The utterance which initiated the conversatio·n was intended from all
indications as a compliment and was accepted as such. The manner in
which it was framed is rather stylized and jocularly effusive, and as such
makes the speaker's remarks less bold and presumptuous and is permissive
of a response which can acknowledge the compliment in a similar and jok-
ingly impersonal fashion. The most salient purpose of the compliment was
to initiate a conversation with a strange woman. The response served to
indicate to the speaker that he was free to continue; probably any
response (or none at all) would not have terminated his attempt to engage
        I 72   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

the hearer, but the present one signaled to the speaker that it was appro-
priate to continue in his original style. The factor of the audience is crucial
because it obliges the speaker to continue attempting to engage the
addressee once he has begun. The speaker at all points has a surface
addressee, but the linguistic and nonlinguistic responses of the other two
young men indicate that they are very aware of being integral participants
in this interchange. The question "ls your husband married?" is meant to
suggest to the hearer, who seeks to turn down the speaker's advances by
pleading marital ties, that such bonds should not be treated as inhibitory
except when one's husband has by his behavior shown similar inhibition.
    The speaker adjusts his rap to appeal to the scholarly leanings of his
addressee, who responds by suggesting that he is presently engaging in his
area of virtuosity. I responds to this left-handed compliment by pointing
out that the researcher is engaging in the same kind of speech behavior
and is apparently an experienced player of the game-"I' ain't heard you
stutter yet."-which is evidenced by her unfaltering responses. At the
same time he notes the narrowness of the speaker's interests, and states
the evidence leading him to the conclusion that there must be gaps in her
knowledge. He benevolently offers his aid. His maneuvers are offensive
 and calculated to produce defensive responses. His repeated offers of aid
 are intended ironically. A member of the audience interjects, "Talk that
 talk!" This phrase is frequently used to signal approval of some speaker's
 virtuosity in using language skillfully and colorfully and, moreover, in
 using language which is appropriate and effective to the social context.
    The content of the message is highly directive. Those unfamiliar with
 black cultural forms might in fact interpret the message as threatening.
 But there are many linguistic cues that suggest that the surface meaning is
 not to be taken seriously. Note particularly the use of such expressions as
 "scholar," "cooperate," "area of expertise," "fixated on your subject,"
 and "neglecting other areas of your education." All these relatively
formal or literary expressions occur in sentences spoken with typically
 black phonology and black grammar (e.g., "I ain't heard . . . " and "Are
 you sure you in the best position to know?"). By his code selection and by
 paralinguistic cues such as a highly stylized leer, the speaker indicates
that he is parodying a tete-a-tete and not attempting to engage the
 researcher in anything other than conversation. He is merely demon-
 strating his ability to use persuasive language, "playing a game," as it
 were. The researcher signals acknowledgment by her use of black forms
 such as "That ain' no way no way . . . ", and " . . . we already in . . . ".
The speaker indicates that the game is over by saying, "I'mo leave you
 alone," and redirects the conversation. The juxtaposition of the lexical
 items "tempus fugit" and "baby," which typically are not paired, is meant
 to evoke more humor by accentuating the stylistic dissonance of the
 speech sequence.
       Siun(fying and Marking: Two Afi:o-American Speech Acts       173


         Signifying as a Form of Verbal Art

            All other conditions permitting, a style which has artistic merit is
 more likely to be selected than on which does not because of positive cul-
 fural values assigned to the skillful use of speech. Having discussed some
 of the characteristics of signifying, I would now like to examine briefly the
 artistic characteristics of signifying.
    No attempt will be made here to formulate an all-encompassing defini-
 tion of art. That individuals may differ in their conceptions of art is made
 patently clear, e.g., by Abrahams's (1964:54) summarizing statement that
 signifying is "many facets of the smart-alecky attitude." That my appreci-
 ation differs has, more than likely, been communicated in these pages. For
 present purposes, what is art is simply what native speakers judge witty,
 skillful, and worthy of praise. This is a working definition at best. It never-
 theless serves to limit our field of discourse and, more importantly, to
 base our judgments on the native speaker's own point of view.
    It is true that poor attempts at signifying exist. That these attempts are
 poor art rather than non-art is clear from comments with which some of
 them are met. Needless and extreme circumlocution is considered poor
 art. In this connection, Labov has made similar comments about sounding
(Labov et al. 1968). He cites peer group members as reacting to some
sounds with such metalinguistic responses as "That's phony" and "That's
lame." Signifying may be met with similar critical remarks. Such failures,
incidentally, are as interesting as the sucesses, for they provide clues as to
the rules by violating one or more of them while, at the same time, meet-
ing other criteria.
    One of the defining characteristics of signifying is its indirect intent or
metaphorical reference. This indirection appears to be almost purely
stylistic. It may sometimes have the function of being euphemistic or dip-
lomatic, but its art characteristics remain in the forefront even in such
cases. Without the element of indirection, a speech act could not be con-
sidered signifying. Indirection means here that the correct semantic
(referential interpretation) or signification of the utterance cannot be ar-
rived at by a consideration of the dictionary meaning of the lexical items
involved and the syntactic rules for their combination alone. The apparent
significance of the message differs from its real significance.
   Meaning conveyed is not apparent meaning. Apparent meaning serves
as a key which directs hearers to some shared knowledge, attitudes, and
values or signals that reference must be processed metaphorically. The
words spoken may actually refer to this shared knowledge by contradict-
ing it or by giving what is known to be an impossible explanation of some
obvious fact. The indirection, then, depends for its decoding upon shared
         174    Et!tnograp/zic Description and Explanation

knowledge of the participants, and this shared knowledge operates on two
levels.
   It must be employed, first of all, by the participants in a speech act in
the recognition that signifying is occurring and that the dictionary-syntac-
tical meaning of the utterance is to be ignored. Second, this shared knowl-
edge must be employed in the reinterpretation of the utterance. It is the
cleverness used in directing the attention of the hearer and audience to
this shared knowledge upon which a speaker's artistic talent is judged.
   Topic may have something to do with the artistic merit of an act of sig-
nifying. Although practically any topic may be signified about, some
topics are more likely to make the overall act of signifying more appreci-
ated. Sex is one such topic. For example, an individual offering an
explanation for a friend's recent grade slump quipped, "He can't forget
what happened to him underneath the apple tree," implying that the
young man was preoccupied with sex at this point in his life and that the
preoccupation stemmed from the relative novelty of the experience. A
topic which is suggested by ongoing conversation is appreciated more
than one which is peripheral. Finally, an act of signifying which tops a
preceding one, in a verbal dueling sense, is especially appreciated.
   Kochman cites such an example in the context of a discussion of rap-
ping:

A man coming from the bathroom forgot to zip his pants. An unescorted party of
women kept watching him and laughing among themselves. The man's friends hip
(inform) him to what's going on. He approaches one woman-"Hey, baby, did
you see that big Cadillac with the full tires, ready to roll in action just for you?"
She answers, "No, mother-fucker, but I saw a little gray Volkswagen with two flat
tires" (1969:27).

As mentioned earlier, signifying may be a tactic used in rapping, defined
by Kochman as "a fluent and lively way of talking, always characterized
by a high degree of personal style" ( 1969:27).
   Verbal dueling is clearly occurring; the first act of signifying is an indi-
rect and humorous way of referring to shared knowledge-the women
have been laughing at the man's predicament. It is indirect in that it
doesn't mention what is obviously being referred to. The speaker has
cleverly capitalized on a potentially embarrassing situation by taking the
offensive and at the same time, displaying his verbal skill. He emphasizes
the sexual aspect of the situation with a metaphor that implies power and
class. However, he is, as Kochman says, "capped." The woman wins the
verbal duel by replying with an act of signifying which builds on the
previous one. The reply is indirect, sexual, and appropriate to the situa-
tion. In addition, it employs the same kind of metaphor and is, therefore,
very effective.
      Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts      175

   M ot/ze1fucker is a rather common term of address in such acts of verbal
dueling. The term nigger also is common in such contexts, e.g., "Nigger, it
was a monkey one time wasn't satisfied till his' ass was grass" and
"Nigger, I'm gon be like white on rice on you ass."
   These two examples are illustrative of a number of points of good sig-
nifying. Both depend on a good deal of shared cultural knowledge for their
correct semantic interpretation. It is the intricacy of the allusion to shared
knowledge that makes for the success of these speech acts. The first
refers to the toast "The Signifying Monkey." The monkey signified at the
lion until he got himself in trouble. A knowledge of this toast is necessary
for an interpretation of the message. "Until his ass was grass"-meaning
"until he was beaten up"-can only be understood in the light of its
common use in the speech of members of the culture and occurs in such
forms as "His ass was grass and I was the lawnmower." What this ex-
ample means is something like: You have been signifying at me and, like
the monkey, you are treading on dangerously thin ice. If you don't stop, I
am likely to become angry and beat you!
   "Nigger, I'm gon be like white on rice on your ass" is doubly clever. A
common way of threatening to beat someone is to say, "I'm gonna be all
over your ass." And how is white on rice?-all over it. Metaphors such as
these may lose their effectiveness over time due to overuse. They lose
value as clever wit.
   The use of the term nigger in these examples is of considerable
linguistic interest. It is often coupled with code features which are far
removed from standard English. That is, the code utilizes many linguistic
markers which differentiate black speech from standard English or white
speech. Frequently, more such markers than might ordinarily appear in
the language of the speaker are used. Thus participants in these speech
acts must show at least some degree ofbidilectalism in black and standard
English. Th'ey must be able to shift from one code to another for stylistic
effect. Note, e.g., that the use of the term nigger with other black English
markers has the effect of "smiling when you say that." The use of stan-
dard English with nigger, in the words of an informant, represents "the
wrong tone of voice" and may be taken as abusive.
   Code selection and terminological choice thus have the same function.
They highlight the fact that black English is being used and that what is
being engaged in is a black speech act. More is conveyed here than simple
emphasis on group solidarity. The hearer is told that this is an instance of
black verbal art and should be interpreted in terms of the subcultural rules
for interpreting such speech acts.
   Code and content serve to define the style being used, to indicate its
tone, and to describe the setting and participants as being appropriate to
the use of such an artistic style. Further, such features indicate that it
should be recognized that a verbal duel is occurring and that what is said is
        176   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

meant in a joking, perhaps also threatening, manner. A slight switch in
code may carry implications for other components in the speech act.
Because verbal dueling treads a fine line between play and real aggression,
it is a kind of linguistic activity which requires strict adherence to
sociolinguistic rules. To correctly decode the message, a hearer must be
finely tuned to values which he observes in relation to all other compo-
nents of the speech act. He must rely on his conscious or unconscious
knowledge of the sociolinguistic rules governing this usage.


         Marking

         A common black narrative tactic in the folk tale genre and in ac-
counts of actual events is the individuation of characters through the use
of direct quotation. When in addition, in reproducing the words of individ-
ual actors, a narrator affects the voice and mannerisms of the speakers, he
is using the style referred to as mai·king (clearly related to standard
English 'mocking'.). Marking is essentially a mode of characterization. The
marker attempts to report not only what was said but the way it was said,
in order to offer implicit comment on the speaker's background, personal-
ity, or intent. Rather than introducing personality or character traits in
some summary form, such information is conveyed by reproducing or
sometimes inserting aspects of speech ranging from phonological features
to particular content which carry expressive value. The meaning in the
message of the marker is signaled and revealed by his reproduction of
such things as phonological or grammatical peculiarities, his preservation
of mispronounced words or provincial idioms, dialectal pronunciation,
and, most particularly, paralinguistic mimicry.
   The marker's choice to reproduce such features may reflect only his
desire to characterize the speaker. It frequently signifies, however, that
the characterization itself is relevant for further processing the meaning of
the speaker's words. If, e.g., some expressive feature has been taken as a
symbol of the speaker's membership in a particular group, his credibility
may come into question on these grounds alone.
   The marker attempts to replay a scene for his hearers. He may seek to
give the implications of the speaker's remarks, to indicate whether the
emotions and affect displayed by the speaker were genuine or feigned, in
short to give his audience the full benefit of all the information he was
able to process by virtue of expressive or context cues imparted by the
speaker. His performance may be more in the nature of parody and cari-
cature than true imitation. But the features selected to overplay are those
which are associated with membership in some class. His ability to get his
message across, in fact, relies on folk notions of the covariance of
      Sign(fying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts       177

linguistic and nonlinguistic categories, combined, of course, with what-
ever special skill he possesses for creating imagery.
   The kind of context most likely to elicit marking is one in which the
marker assumes his hearers are sufficiently like himself to be able to in-
terpret this metaphoric communication. Since there is, more likely than
not, something unflattering about the characterization, and the element of
ridicule is so salient, the relationship between a marker and his audience
is likely to be one of familiarity and intimacy and mutual positive affect.
   An informant quoted a neighbor to give me an appreciation of her
dislike for the woman. She quoted the following comment from Pearl in a
style carefully articulated to depict her as "putting on the dog," parodying
gestures which gave the impression that Pearl is preposterously affected:
"You know my family owns their own home and I'm just living here tem-
porarily because it is more beneficial to collect the rent from my own
home and rent a less expensive apartment." "That's the kind of person
she is," my informant added, feeling no need for further explanation. This
is, incidentally, a caricature of a social type which is frequently the object
of scorn and derision. The quote was delivered at a pitch considerably
higher than was usual for the informant, and the words were enunciated
carefully so as to avoid loss of sounds and elision characteristic of fluid
speech. What was implied was not that the phonological patterns mim-
icked are to be associated with affectation in a one-one relationship but
that they symbolize affectation here. The marker was essentially giving
implicit recognition to the fact that major disturbances in fluency are in-
dexes of "monitored" speech. The presence of the features are grounds
for the inference that the speaker is engaged in impression management
which is contextually inappropriate. Individuals who are characterized as
"trying to talk proper" are frequently marked in a tone of voice which is
rather falsetto.
   A marker wishing to convey a particular impression of a speaker may
choose to deliver a quotation in a style which is felt to best suit what he
feels lies underneath impression management or what is obscured by the
speaker's effective manipulation of language. In the following example,
the marker departs radically from the style of the speaker for purposes of
disambiguation. The individuals here, with the exception of S 1 , had
recently attended the convention of a large corporation and had been part
of a group which had been meeting prior to the convention to develop
some strategy for putting pressure on the corporation to hire more blacks
in executive positions. They had planned to bring the matter up at a gen-
eral meeting of delegates, but before they had an opportunity to do so, a
black company man spoke before the entire body. S 2 said, "After he
spoke our whole strategy was undermined, there was no way to get around
his impact on the whites."
        178    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

S1 :   What did he say?
S2:    [Drawling] He said, "Ah'm so-o-o happy to be here today. First of all, ah
       want to thank all you good white folks for creatin so many opportunities
       for us niggers and ya'II can be sho that as soon as we can git ourselves qual-
       ified we gon be filin our applications. Ya'II done done what we been
       waiting for a long time. Ya'II done give a colored man a good job with the
       company."
S1:    Did he really say that?
S,1:   Um hm, yes he said it. Girl, where have you been. [Put down by inti-
       mating S 1 was being literal]
S1:    Yeah, I understand, but what did he really say?
S-1:   He said, "This is a moment of great personal pride for me. My very
       presence here is a tribute to the civil rights movement. We now have ample
       evidence of the good faith of the company and we must now begin to
       prepare ourselves to handle more responsible positions. This is a major
       step forward on the part of the company. The next step is up to us." In
       other words, he said just what [S 2] said he said. He sold us out by ac-
       cepting that kind of tokenism.



   S2 attempted to characterize the speaker as an Uncle Tom by using
exaggerated stereotyped southern speech coupled with content that was
compromising and denigrating. It would certainly be          an
                                                           overstatement to
conclude that southern regional speech is taken by anyone as a sign of
 being an "Uncle Tom," but there is an historical association with the
 model of this sterotype being southern.
   The characterization of individuals according to the way they speak is,
of course, not peculiar to black people, although the implicit association
of particular ways of speaking with specific social types may be more
 elaborated than elsewhere.
   The parodying of southern regional black speech may sometimes serve
 as a device for characterizing a speaker as uneducated or unintelligent,
and sometimes it is used to underscore the guilelessness of the speaker.
The marker encodes his subjective reactions to the speaker and is con-
cerned with the expressive function of speech more than its referential
function.
   Because marking relies on linguistic expression for the communication
of messages, it is revealing of attitudes and values relating to language. It
 frequently conveys many subtleties and can be a significant source of infor-
mation about conscious and unconscious attitudes toward language. An
individual, on occasion, may mark a nonblack using exaggerated black
English, with the emphasis clearly being on communicating that the sub-
ject was uneducated and used nonstandard usages. Perhaps more than
anything, marking exhibits a finely tuned linguistic awareness in some
      Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts        179

areas and a good deal of verbal virtuosity in being able to reproduce as-
pects of speech which are useful in this kind of metaphorical com-
munication.


         Conclusion

           Signifying and marking exemplify the close relationship of mes-
sage form to content and function which characterizes black verbal
behavior. Meaning, often assumed by linguists to be signaled entirely
through code features, is actually dependent upon a consideration of other
components of a speech act (cf. Gumperz 1964b). A remark taken in
the spirit of verbal dueling may, e.g., be interpreted as an insult by virtue
of what on the surface seems to be merely a minor change in personnel, or
a minor change in code or topic. Crucially, paralinguistic features must be
made to conform to the rules. Change in posture, speech rate, tone of
voice, facial expression, etc., may signal a change in meaning. The audi-
ence must also be sensitive to these cues. A change in meaning may signal
that members of the audience must shift their responses, and that meta-
linguistic comments may no longer be appropriate.
   It is this foc:.is in black culture-the necessity of applying sociolinguistic
rules, in addition to the frequent appeal to shared background knowledge for
correct semantic interpretation-that accounts for some of the unique char-
acter and flavor of black speech. Pure syntactic and lexical elaboration is
supplemented by an elaboration of the ability to carefully and skillfully
manipulate other components of the speech act in order to create new
meanings.
        6

        Riddles: Expressive Models
        of Interrogation               1



        JOHN M. ROBERTS AND MICHAEL L. FORMAN




        John M. Roberts is Professor of Anthropology at Cornell
        University. He received his doctorate from Yale Univer-
        sity and has taught at Harvard and the University of
        Nebraska. His principal fieldwork has been with the Zuni
        and Navajo Indians of the American Southwest, empha-
        sizing values and laws. His concern has been to develop
        fresh approaches to the description of cultural behavior
        in terms of information storage and management ( see
         Roberts I 964 and references therein). Roberts' m,tior
         research currently deals with the investigation of expres-
         sive culture as it is retllected in this paper. He has also
        been actively concerned with the development of formal
         analysis of anthropology.
            Michael Forman, a linguist specializing in Philippine
         languages, has done graduate work at Cornell University.
         He is currently affiliated with the Pacific and Asian
         Linguistic Institute, University of Hawaii.
            This previously unpublished study of riddling suggests
         the complexities encountered when any one of the many
         genres of speech activity-such as oath taking, verbal
         dueling, praying, cursing, and punning-found in human
         cultures are studied. First, there is the problem of de-
         scription-how the genre may be described, in both gen-
         eral and specific terms. Any serious study is confronted

  1
    This research was supported in part by PHS Research Grant MH 08I61-03. The
authors are particularly indebted to William W. Lambert and Brian Sutton-Smith for help in
dealing with the theory of riddles. They are grateful to Sheila Forman for her aid in con-
ducting the Tagalog study and to Cynthia Burton and Maureen Liebl for assistance. They
must also thank Donn V. Hart, Gerald B. Kelley, Bernard Lambert, Terence S. Turner, and
numerous students and informants for help and suggestions.

                                           180
           Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation     181

at present, as Roberts and Forman point out, by lack of
agreed definitions on precisely what is being studied, by
inadequate reporting in comparative ethnographic litera-
ture, and other problems. Second, there is the problem of
explanation. Here lies the special interest of the ,approach
taken in this chapter.
    In virtue of a general hypothesis relating genres of
speech to socialization, Roberts and Forman are able to
use comparative data as a preliminary approximation (a
point they stress), and to seek to confirm an explanation
in more fine-grained experimentation in their own soci-
ety. This approach opens up the possibility of both of
generality for results obtained only in one society and of
continued relevance and validation of reports from so-
cieties no longer accessible, as a result of extinction or
change.
    Notice that the key to the method is that it is able to
 deal with not only the presence or absence of a trait but
 also with the frequency of occurrence of that trait, and
 with the strength or weakness of commitment or motiva-
 tion. The method can be seen as one realization of
 Edward Sapir's view that "it is only through an analysis
 of variation that the reality and meaning of a norm can be
 established at all" (1949f:576). Sapir called for "an inves-
 tigation into living speech" (1949a:593). Robert's ap-
 proach shows one way that Sapir's concern with the
 concrete, with personally realized meanings in actual
 networks of communicative experience, can be linked to
 theories of human culture as a whole. Notice also that
 variation in order to validate pattern is essential to the
 methodology developed by Labov (Chapter 19).
     Roberts and Forman had initially thought that riddling
 shows a relationship mainly with the presence of a strong
 interest in strategy (Abrahams 1968); instead, their pre-
 liminary cross-cultural survey displays a primary rela-
 tionship with strong training for responsibility (note the
 parallels with Dundes', verbal dueling Chapter 4). The
 Tagalog inquiry confirms this latter link. At the same
 time it indicates a shift in principle settings for riddling,
 from wakes and courtship to schools. It also suggests a
  possible difference between men and women in the kinds
  of riddling preferred, and it links riddling with the socially
  important role of intermediary in marriage arrangements.
  The study of American students further substantiates the
  fact that strategy is not the answer, and it brings out new
         182    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

         associations between high interest in riddling and the im-
         portance of chores (responsibility) and the absence of
         nagging in childhood, as well as with a balanced or posi-
         tive attitude toward oral questioning. The paper con-
         cludes with a sketch of the further lines of inquiry that
         are needed for an adequate theory.
            One point of general methodological importance
         touched on is the study by fieldworkers of the relation
         between their own modes of questioning and those native
         to the community. Both Hymes (1969) and Grimshaw
         ( 1969) provide discussions of cross-cultural variations in
         modes of questioning. Goffman (1967) discusses involve-
         ment in conversational terms.



          In the United States riddling is largely a children's recreational
activity, although many adults retain an interest. If riddling is not particu-
larly salient, then, it is still so general that everyone, other than quite small
children has some familiarity with it. (It will be assumed here that the
reader has this general familiarity.)                                  '
   Riddles thus have a place in American culture, just as they do, often
more importantly, in many other cultures throughout the world. Riddles,
however, do not occur in all cultures; and within the cultures in which
they occur, individuals and groups differ, both in their involvement in
riddles and riddling and in their control of them. There is something here
to be explained. An adequate theory must account for the uneven dis-
tribution of the genre in time and space, both in culture-historical and in
functional terms, for differential involvement and cognitive control of the
patterns of the genre, and for the structure and meaning of the patterns
themselves. No such theory of riddling now exists, but the research
reported here suggests a view point from which such a theory may be
developed.
   Our general approach has been developed through the study of games
and similar phenomena and is embodied in a number of publications. 2 In
the main these studies have been concerned with explaining the interest
and competence that persons acquire in what may be called expressive
models. By 'model' is meant simply a representation of something. Here
we are concerned with the natural models found in cultures, such as
games, portraits, maps, etc., rather that with the formal models of mathe-
  2
    Roberts, A'rth, and Bush 1959; Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1962; Roberts, Sutton-Smith,
and Kendon 1963; Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and Kozelka 1963; Sutton-Smith, and Roberts
1964; Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and Rosenberg 1964; Roberts 1965; Roberts, Hoffmann, and
Sutton-Smith 1965; Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1966; Roberts, Thompson, and Sutton-Smith
1966; Sutton-Smith and Roberts 1967; and Roberts and Koenig (1968).
                     Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation       183

matics and science. Every such natural model has both expressive and
cognitive components, but usually one of the two is the more important.
Thus chess, regarded as a model of war, emphasizes the expressive com-
ponent, while an aerial photograph, as a model of terrain, emphasizes the
cognitive (or instrumental) component. Both chess and aerial photographs
are surrogates, but normally the photograph is primarily a means to an
end whereas chess, like other expressive models, becomes an end in itself,
whose relation to other ends may be hidden. It seems natural to us that
people should enjoy games and related expressive involvements. It is only
when we ask why they should foster some and not others, that we see that
these phenomena may be not only expressive but models as well.
  The investigations noted previously (see footnote 2) have supported a
hypotheses as to personal involvement in models that may be termed
conjlict-e11culturation. Two earlier statements of a conflict enculturation
hypotheses, as it pertains to game playing by American adults, are the fol-
lowing:

These relationships suggested a conflict-e11culturatio11 hypothesis of model
involvement which stated . . . that conflicts induced by social learning in child-
hood and later (such as those related to obedience, achievement, and responsi-
bility) lead to involvement in expressive models, such as games, through which
these conflicts are assuaged and as a result of which a process of buffered learning
occurs which has enculturative value for the competences required in the culture
(such as acquiring the competitive styles of strategy, physical skill, or chance).
In sum, the conflict-enculturation hypothesis says that child training induces
conflict which leads to curiosity about representations (as in expressive models) of
the dimensions of this conflict. Involvement in models follows because their
microcosmic representation reduces the conflict's complexities to cognitive and
emotional comprehensibility and because the participant can learn about the cog-
nitive and emotional aspects of winning in a model in a way that he cannot do out-
side of it, and because his successes give him increased confidence that he can
manage the achievement pressures in full-scale cultural participation. The models
thus have the general cultural function that they contribute to the learning and ad-
justment of persons who must maintain a high level of achievement motivation if
the general cultural norms are to be sustained (Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and
Kozelka 1963: 15, 28).

   These statements will need to be revised to take into account three kinds
of results of further research: (a) There are relevant differences between
interest and competence; (b) the scale, representativeness or verisimili-
tude, and complexity of the model are important variables; (c) most im-
portantly, new research into the psychology of conflict must be taken into
account. For the present we rely on Berlyn's definition: "when two or
more incompatible responses are aroused simultaneously in an organism,
we shall say that the organism is in conflict (Berlyne 1960: l 0). Rela-
tionships between conflict and arousal, curiosity, and other relevant
         184     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

matters are discussed by Berlyne ( 1960). The subject has also been
approached from an anthropological standpoint (Roberts 1965; Roberts
and Koening 1971; Roberts, Strand, and Burmeister, in press; Meyers
and Roberts 1968), but the findings are preliminary. For the present, we
simply say that conflict can be measured and described, and that it leads
to involvement and curiosity. The place of riddling in the general body
of research can be indicated in this way. Many of the papers cited here
deal with contests or contesting (games, folktales which represent con-
tests, etc.). One deals with testing in the form of oaths and autonomic or-
deals (Roberts 1965), and one with expressive self-testing (Roberts,
Thompson, and Sutton-Smith 1966). The present discussion deals with
expressive testing, but testing of a nature which can be transformed into
contesting (riddling contests occur in a number of cultures) or self-testing
(as when an individual reads printed riddles and attempts to guess the
answer before he turns to the printed answer).
   The interpretation of riddling that has emerged from the present
research is this: Riddles may be regarded as natural models which repre-
sent interrogation, i.e., riddles represent an instrumental (nonexpressive)
activity in a expressive way. More specifically, riddles will be regarded
here as expressive models, or representations, of the serious and even
formal interrogation of subordinates by superordinates. Such interroga-
tion occurs when a parent questions a child, a teacher a pupil, an
employer an employee, a judge a defendant, an officer a soldier, and so on.
In these situations the subordinate usually is deemed to have less knowl-
edge and power, and the superordinate to have more, at least with regard
to the specific context of a given interrogation. (The extent to which
written interrogation should be considered part of the antecedent cultural
question which riddles model is not clear. Certainly, for riddles the basic
pattern of questioning is an oral one.)
   For our purposes a dictionary definition of riddle can be accepted:
"riddle: a mystifying, misleading, or puzzling question posed as a problem
to be solved or guessed often as a game" (Webster's Third New Interna-
tional Dictionary 1967: 1952). More technical definitions exist,3 but the
advantage of the dictionary definition is its focus on the riddle as a ques-
tion, this being the heart of the matter so far as the present inquiry is con-
cerned. Also, the definition describes a riddle as a game, thus bringing out
its expressive character. (The relationship between expressive and non-
expressive questioning will be considered throughout the discussion.)

   " See especially the important study by R. A. Georges and Alan Dundes (1963). They
survey definitions of the riddle from Aristotle to Archer Taylor and then provide one of their
own, which has been used since by others, e.g., Hart (1964:25). Another such survey has
been provided by C. T. Scott (1965: 14-22). Insofar as classification implies a kind of defini-
tion, we might also note here that the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF) lists riddles
under category 524, "Games," under the subhead "Problem Games." Notes and Queries
orders riddles under "Knowledge and Tradition": "Proverbs, traditional sayings and riddles
may be education or a form of intellectual recreation" ( 1951 :206).
                      Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation        /85

   Questions, of course, are linguistic phenomena. Unfortunately,
linguists have not provided us with a formal definition of question suitable
for universal or cross-cultural use. Recent discussions of linguistic univer-
sals touch on interrogation (Weinreich 1963: 150-151) (Greenberg,
1966:50, 70), yet never quite state the question as a language universal.
Perhaps the most used definition is that of Fries: Questions are the largest
group of those utterances (calls, greetings, and questions) which regularly
elicit oral responses (Fries 1952:47; see also 53: 142-172). Other work by
linguists asserts that neither phonological nor grammatical charateristics
have proven adequate for identifying phrases as questions (Pike,
1945: 168; Bolinger, 1958:3). Transformational work discusses such
questions as permutational transforms, but the assumption is made that
the reader can identify questions. As our study moves "outward into the
exploration of speech behavior and use" (Hymes 1962: 18), we too must
be content for the present to use our cultural judgment. We all recognize
questions.
   The recognition of settings of interrogation poses a similar problem. A
relatively rare offering from linguistics is found in Samarin's guide to field
linguistics ( 1967: 144-145):

Sustained questioning (or what we call in English interrogation) is probably
restricted in all societies to a limited number of settings. In our own we can imag-
ine being questioned by a physician, highway patrolman, income tax controller,
census taker, personnel manager, bank mortgage representative, and so on. This
list of interrogators points out a significant fact about these settings: That the
person opposite us is in some official capacity: his role is formally defined within a
legal, occupational, or other context. In this setting we are passive and vulnerable.
This is no less true when the questions are put by those with whom we are
otherwise on intimate terms, our parents or our spouses, for example.

Anthropologists have given little explicit attention to informal and formal
interrogation as cultural phenomena. Like sociologists, however (cf.
Hyman 1954), anthropologists have been concerned with interviewing.
Frake has recently argued for a new approach to "queries in eth-
nography." The investigator's ethnographic record has traditionally been
a list of questions and answers, Frake says, the questions being brought
from home and the answers sought in the field. The ethnography Frake
argues for

also includes lists of queries and responses, but with this difference: both the
queries and their responses are to be discovered in the culture of the people being
studied. The problem is not simply to find answers to questions the ethnographer
brings into the field, but also to find the questions that go with the responses he ob-
serves after his arrival (Frake 1964c: 132).

This is done at least partly by listening for:
         186     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

queries in use in the cultural scenes he observes, giving special attention to query-
rich settings, e.g., children querying parents, medical specialists querying patients,
legal authorities querying witnesses, priests querying the gods (1964c: 143).

Work of the sort which Frake seeks to encourage obviously would be of
great value, indeed would ultimately be essential, to the theory of riddling
proposed here. The concern with questioning in this particular study
stems from examination of the formal interrogation associated with use of
judicial oaths and ordeals (Roberts 1965) and with the development of a
field technique of dyadic elicitation (Roberts and Arth I 966). 4
   The design of the present study is very simple, and the study must be
regarded as an exploratory, low-cost venture. First, a preliminary cross-
cultural study was conducted in the Human Relations Area Files. 5 Next,
a small study of Tagalog riddling was made, from literature on the Tagalog
and by working with Tagalog informants available in Ithaca, New York.
 Finally, several small surveys were made of American students at Cor-
nell. In the pages which follow each of these substudies will be discussed
in turn, and then the overall conclusions and implications to be drawn
from this research will be given in a final section.


         A Preliminary Cross-Cultural View

         Despite the facts that a substantial comparative literature exists
on riddles and a few anthropologists have made brilliant contributions to
the study of riddles, 6 the cross-cultural literature is so uneven that riddles
are not a good subject for conventional cross-cultural investigation. The
interest in riddles and riddling has not been general enough to insure stan-
dard anthropological coverage. A great deal of intensive and extensive
scholarship would be required to produce a cross-cultural study of riddles
and riddling which would be definitive in its own right; the authors have
lacked the resources to produce such a study. Yet it can be argued that a
preliminary and admittedly inadequate cross-cultural survey can be most
uesful in putting riddles into cross-cultural perspective, testing prelimi-
nary hypotheses, and framing revised hypotheses for further testing. This

   1
  · The senior author of this chapter has also profited from discussions on this subject with
Lindsey Churchill, who is currently studying questioning.
  "The Human Relations Area Files at Cornell University were searched in the fall of
1966. Since new materials are steadily added to the files, it is always necessary to give the
date of the search.
  " Archer Taylor's work is perhaps the best known. The outstanding structural study is
that by Georges and Dundes (1963). T. R. Williams (1963), D. Simmons (1958), and B. M,
du Toit (1966) have made notable functional studies. Potter (1950) and Hart (1964;
Chapters II I, IV, and V) provide general surveys. See also the linguistic study by C. T.
Scott (1965).




                 AW                                                                             d
                        Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation           187

     use of the cross-cultural survey to provide a first approximation of a
     Problem has not received the attention that it deserves from the cross-cul-
     tural methodologists, largely because most of them (with the outstanding                 Ii
                                                                                            1·!
     exception of Whiting) have failed to consider the possibilities of sub-                     I



     ~ystem replication and validation. 7 In any event, this is1 the method which             ::
    Is used here.                                                                             I I
                                                                                              I      I
        Initially, it was thought that riddles were expressive models of strategy.           ''
                                                                                             Ii
                                                                                             :
    This led to the hypothesis that riddles should occur in the same cultural
    environments as games of strategy. Since it was not convenient to com-                   i
                                                                                             I

    ~are the riddling variables with the numerous additional variables pub-                  I'


    hshed in the literature, the authors used a series of variables selected for
    relevance to the hypothesis. Later the initial hypothesis was modified, as
   ~he relation to interrogation emerged, but the same variables still have
   mterest, and the results of these comparisons will be given here.
       In the fall of 1966 students who had been trained to judge the presence
   and absence of riddles surveyed the material in the Human Relations
   Area Files. Each reviewed only a limited number of cultures, but the
   survey was made in such a way that every culture had two judges. An at-
   tempt was made to correct their file-based entries where they disagreed
  or where the findings did not make sense, but after a few corrections were
  made, this attempt was abandoned because of lack of time for additional
  research. This judging technique is not ideal, but it may have been ade-
  quate for the present preliminary or exploratory view.
      The survey had other limitations which ought to be mentioned. Clearly,
  the most advanced requirements for ethnographic sampling have not been
  ~et, and a purist might argue that the use of the simple statistics used here
 is not appropriate (riddles, e.g., are clearly concentrated in the Old
 World). Practical experience has shown, however, that work with unac-
 ceptable samples is often robust in the sense that acceptable predictions
 can be made for single system or subsystem replication. Undoubtedly,
 t.here was error in the judging, but there was even more error in the filed
 hterature.
      A few cultures lacking riddles may have been reported as having them.
 Much more importantly, cultures having riddles have been reported as
lacking them or, more probably, as not containing information on them. If
We treat no information as indicating absence, as we do, we are undoubt-
edly introducing a substantial amount of error into the study. This latter
source of error stems from the facts that riddles are a minor interest for
many ethnographers, with the result that they are not reported even when
!hey exist and that riddles are often reported in obscure, highly special-
ized articles which are too specific for general inclusion in the files. Again
  7
    This method was used by Roberts and Sutton-Smith in several studies (c.f. Roberts and
Sutton-Smith 1962; Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and Kozelka 1963).
        188    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

few ethnographers state that riddles are definitely absent even when they
are genuinely absent. All of these errors are compounded, of course,
when riddles are compared with other ethnographic variables, for the
judgments used in producing the other variables are also subject to error.
Still it is argued that the robustness of the findings is great enough to
permit the toleration of a substantial amount of error.
     Turning now to the riddles, the following cultures were reported as
definitely having riddles: Afgan, Amharic, Apayao, "Arabic," Austrian,
Aymara, Bemba, Bhil, Bisayan (central), Bulgariam, Bush Negro, Cal-
linago, Cambodian, Chagga, "Chinese," Cornish, Cuna, Czechoslova-
kian, Oard, Dhegiha, Eskimo (central), Estonian, Fang, Fellahin, (mod-
ern) "Formosan," Gondi, Greek, Gujerati, Hausa, Hottentot, Hungarian,
 lban, Ila, Indonesian, Iranian, Irish (rural), Kashmiri, Kikwyu, Kol,
Korean, Kurdish, Lapp, Lithuanian, Lovedu, Malays, Maori, Masai,
 Mayan (Yucatan), Mbundu, Mongolian, Ngondi, Ngoni, Nuer, Polish,
 Rumanian, Rundi, Rwala, Samoan, Serbia, Somali, Soviet Union, Syrian,
Thonga, Tibet, Tiv, Toda, Ukrainian, Wolof, Yao, Yakut, and Yugosla-
 vian.
   The following cultures were reported as being indeterminate (hereafter
 they will be classed with the riddles-present group): Aden, Burmese,
 Chukchee, Iraqi, Jordanian, Kuwait, Lebanese, Nahane, Nootka, Saudi
 Arabian, Thailand, Tuareg, Yemen.
   The following cultures are those in which riddles were reported as
 being definitely absent: Manus, Miao, and Pukapuka.
   The following cultures are those in which the presence of riddles is
 unreported: Ainu, Albanian, Aleut, Andamans, Azandi, Aztec, Bahrain
 Islands, Bambara, Bedouin, Bellacoola, Burusho, Bushman, Caingang,
 Carib, Caucasian, Cayapa, Choroti, Comanche, Creek, Crow, Delaware,
 Dorobo, Easter Islands, Eskimo (Copper), Gandian, Georgian, Goajiro,
 Gros Ventre, Guana, Hadhramut, Ifugao, Incan, Indian, Iroquois, Jivaro,
 Kachin, Kamchadal, Kapauku, Katab, Kazak, Khasi, Koryak, Laotian,
 Lepcha, Lolo, Luo, Manchurian, Mandan, Marquesas, Massachusetts
 (historical), Mende, Micmac, Mongo, Monguor, Montagnais, Mosquito,
 Mossi, Munduracu, Murgnin, Nambicuara, Navaho, New Ireland, Nupe,
 Ojibwa, Orokaiva, Paiute (northern), Papago, Pawnee, Pomo, Punjab
 (east), Rif, Russian (great), Samoyed, Semang, Senegal, Seri, Siberian,
 Sinkiang, Sino-Tibetan border, Shilluk, Sirono, Siwan, Talamanca, Tal-
 lensi, Tanala, Tapirape, Tarahumara, Tarasco, Tehuelche, Tepoztlan,
 Tewa, Tikopia, Timpira, Tiwi, Tlingit, Tubatulabal, Tucuna, Turkestan,
 Tupinamba; Twi, Uttar Pradesh, Yahgan, Yokut, Yoruba, Yuman (pla-
 teau), Yuman (river), Yurok, Vedda, Wogeo, and Zuni.
    In the tables which follow, those societies in which riddles are definitely
 and probably absent are compared with all others. For any one compari-
 son, though, the full range of societies may not be used since the entries
 for other cultural variables may not exist.
                      Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation          189

   In 13 of the 3 8 cases where it could be studied, riddling was true game,
and in 13 of the 28 cases where -the matter could be judged, there were
riddling contests. The relationship between riddling and gaming clearly
merits more examination than it will receive here.                ,
   In 22 of 33 judgeable cases riddles were regarded as J;,eing important in
the culture, and in 22 of 29 cases the frequency of riddling was judged to
be high. In general, importance and frequency could not be judged.
   In all of the 18 cases where the presence of rote learning and riddles
could be judged, rote learning was present. In 15 of these cases, rote
learning had a religious connection. It proved to be exceptionally difficult
to judge rote learning.
   Comparisons were made with variables from the "Ethnographic Atlas"
(as it existed in the fall of 1966)8 (see Murdock 1967). There is, e.g., an
obvious relationship between levels of political integration, the presence
or absence of authority, and the presence ofriddles. This distribution speaks

         table 6.1
Level of Political Integration
                             Autonomous     Peace      Depen-    Minimal    Lillie
                  Absent        Local       Groups      dent      State     State    State

Riddles absent       9           40            2          3         16        6       25
Riddles present      0             8           2          2         10        7       16


for itself, but ifwe omit the possibly ambiguous "peace group" and "depen-
dent" categories, x2 = 13.92, p < .01, with four degrees of freedom. Note
that the riddle-absent-state cell almost certainly contains a large number
of erroneous entries, but these work against the hypothesis that riddles
will be associated with institutionalized interrogation. Again, if we con-
trast the "absent" and "autonomous local" categories against all others
(e.g., simple against complex), x 2 = 11.10, p < .001, G = .627. Riddles
appear to be associated with political integration.
   The higher the level of political integration, the more likely the pre-
sence of institutionalized interrogation. Probably, some interrogation
occurs in all courts, so if we compare the presence or absence of riddles
with the number of levels in the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local
community, we can again see the predicted association. The distribution
speaks for itself (Table 6.2). x 2 = 10.81, with four degrees of freedom,
p < .05. Again if the societies with no and one level are compared with all
others, X 2 = 8.90,p < .01, G = .553. The more elaborate the jurisdictional
hierarchy, the more likely the presence of riddles.
  8 The atlas as it was published in Ethnology was used, but the complete summary is cited

for the reader's convenience.
        190    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                              table 6.2
                  Number of Levels in Jurisdictional
                  Hierarchy Transcending Local Community
                                         0                    2        3        4

                  Riddles absent         47        28        13        9        2
                  Riddles present         7        11        14        4        2


   Oaths and ordeals are associated with formal judicial interrogation,
although they can occur in other settings. Table 6.3 shows the asso-

                    table 6.3
              Riddles and Oaths and Ordeals
                                         Riddles

                                 Absent            Present                 x2        p<      G

              Oaths absent          70                  15
              Oaths present         28                  20
                                                                       7.94          .01   .538
              Ordeals absent        78                  17
              Ordeals present       18                  20
                                                                       10.70         .01   .672


ciation. The association is somewhat stronger with ordeals than it is with
oaths, and this is not surprising.
   There is also an association with domestication, as Table 6.4 illustrates.


                 table 6.4
        Riddles and Domesticated Animals
                                                   Riddles

                                         Absent              Present                x2     p<      G

       Domesticated animals
        absent                                36                  4
       Domesticated animals
        present                               53                  35
                                                                                10.14      .01    .712
       Domesticated animals other
        than large animals (cows,
        camels) present                       65                  12
       Domesticated large animals
        present                               34                  27
                                                                                12.4       .001   .612
                    Riddles: Expressive Models 0 , 1II t          .
                                                      'J   errogatwn   191

Thl·s is probably
              •
                    an• •important
                               •
                                   association ' and its releva< nee w1.11 emerge
weh  n the
         . chtld-trammg
                  .         variables
                               ..     are considered.      1

   Finally, there is an asso~mt1on between the presence of games of strat-
egy and the presence of riddles (see Table 6.5). Table 6 _5 has x2 = 4 .4 5 ,

                            table 6.5
                   Riddles and Games of Strategy
                                                       Riddles

                                               Absent      Present
                   Games of strategy absent      47              11
                   Games of strategy present     21              16


p < .05, {! ~ .530: It ~ill be noted that this association is not as strong as
the associattons with either ordeals or cows and camels. Originally, this
  articular association had been predicted to be exceptionally strong. It is
~resent, bu~ it is weak. The Barry, Bacon, and.Child mimeographed child-
training ratmgs were also used. These have smce been published in cor-
rected form (Barry, Bacon, and Child 1967). Here the samples are even
smaller, but the. r~sults P_resented in Table 6.6 have obvious interest.
   This brief prehmmary view suggests that riddling is associated with ( J)
strong responsibility training, (2) large domestic animals, (3) high political
integration, (4) more than one level of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the
local community, (5) oaths, (6) ordeals, and (7) games of strategy. No
doubt a more elaborate survey would reveal other associations, but these
findings constitute a pattern which is consistent and which will be in-
terpreted after the evidence of the other studies has been presented. It
would appear, though, that responsibility training is more important than
the hypothesis had originally predicted and that the strategy component is
less important.


         The Tagalog Study

          In order to gain more insight into riddles and riddling, it was
 decided to study riddles in Tagalog culture. The Tagalog are an eth-
 nolinguistic subclass of Philippine people found chiefly in the central and
 southern parts of Luzon. The decision to study Tagalog riddling was
 made in part because native speakers were available on the Cornell Uni-
 versity campus, in part because of the stimulation of the recent anthropol-
 ogical analysis of Filipino riddles (Hart 1964), and in part because of the
 saliency of riddling in Tagalog culture. The material presented here is
                  table 6.6
         Riddles and Child-Training Practices
                                                                Contingency Table Cells

                                                        (Riddles absent)       (Riddles Present)
                                            Sex           (I          b         C            d
                                          (male, M;   (Low CT (High CT       (Low CT (High CT
             Child-Training Variable     female, F)    rating)     rating)    rating)     rating)     x•    p~      G

......   Responsibility
\Cl
Iv         Reward for performance            M           19         16          3          12        3.95   .05    .652
           Anxiety over nonperformance       M           25           9         3          12       10.09   .01    .713
           Anxiety over performance          M           26           8         6           9        4.61   .05    .660
           Frequency of performance          M           24          ·3         4          II        8.00   .01    .784
           Frequency of performance          F           23         II          4          IO        4.67   .05    .679
         Obedience
           Reward for performance            F           17         15          2          12       4.56    .05    .744
         Independence
           Anxiety over performance          M           20         15          3          12       4.43    .05    .684
         Nurturant agent
           Constancy of presence of                      16         18         II           I       5.56    .02   -.850
                        Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation            193

based on independent field work by the junior author, work with infor-
mants, and a survey of the specific literature.
   A Filipino psychologist, Jaime Bulatao, using a thematic analysis of
stories collected from 90 subjects, has described four principle values for
the Tagalog: family solidarity, authority, economic sufficiency, and pa-
tience (1962:52-75). Under these values were found recurrent themes
such as the need for parents or older children to make sacrifices for the
younger family members, or the necessity of respecting and obeying
authority figures, although only within limits. When not discussed expli-
citly, responsibility is interwoven in the discussion of family solidarity,
authority, and reciprocity. This is true as well of other studies (such as
those by Hollensteiner 1962 and Lynch 1962a) in the same volume
(Lynch 1962b).
   Clearly, there is an emphasis on responsibility. Guthrie and Jacobs
describe

the whole area of responsibility into which the child is gradually initiated.
Depending on the particular family situation and the age he has reached, there are
always errands to run, household jobs to do, and younger siblings to be cared for.
There are chickens and pigs to feed, goats or a carabao to pasture, yard corners to
weed, dead leaves to sweep up and burn, and water and firewood to carry to the
house ( 1966).

Children who are not old enough to do these chores prepare for them by
playfully imitating their elders (Abasolo-Domingo 1961:150-157).
   When a Tagalog child fails to meet the expectations of his elders in the
performance of these tasks, he can expect a punishment, usually a verbal
one, rarely in the form of nagging. Some of the main verbal punishments
are teasing, joking, and the threat of sundry witches. Tagalog children are
extremely sensitive to ridicule. 9 That these facts are relevant to riddling
seems apparent. It is interesting to note that in nearby Borneo, Dusun
men riddle in a tone otherwise reserved for teasing children (Williams
1963 :97).
   If a culture has (I) an authority system (e.g., high political integration)
and (2) heavy responsibility training, conjoined with (3) oral questioning,
then it has the conditions which favor riddling. That Tagalog culture con-
tains the first two conditions we have illustrated from the literature. It is
more difficult to do this for the third condition. Ethnographic work on the
Tagalog does not differ from other anthropological literature in lacking
discussion of oral questioning. But there are settings in Tagalog culture

   9
     Compare the similar sensitivity to ridicule and use of verbal punishments in other areas
of the Philippines: Ilokos (Nydegger and Nydegger 1966: 167), Leyte (Nurge 1965:79), and
Sulu (Eslao 1962:87). Abasolo-Domingo (1961) supports the conformity of Tagalog prac-
tices to this basic pattern.
     194   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

which might be described as "query rich" (Frake 1964c: 143). A full dis-
cussion of these would likely require monograph treatment. Only a few
can be mentioned here. Our Tagalog informants report that parents often
questioned them on their behavior. When they visited their baptismal god-
parents on the traditional feast days (e.g., Christmas), they were also sub-
jected to many questions. Perhaps more important is the oral interroga-
tion throughout a marriage negotiation, a questioning which is often
couched in metaphoric language and managed by a "go-between" (Malay
 1957:79).
    Most Tagalogs are at least nominally Roman Catholics. Within the con-
text of the Church, oral interrogation exists in association with baptism,
 catechism, and confession. In the baptism ceremony there is ritual inter-
 rogation by the priest of the person being baptized, or in the more
common case of infant baptism, of the infant's godparent sponsors. The
 interrogation associated with catechism is obvious. Perhaps less obvious
is the interrogation in confession, but Hart has provided us with a Filipino
 view in the words of one Cebuano (the same could have been said by a
Tagalog): "Before the wedding ceremony I was led to the confessionario
 and before long the padre began bombarding me with questions" (Hart
 1956:275). Phelan has described the missionary confessors' technique:
 "In order to overcome the Filipinos' fear and embarrassment, the mis-
 sionaries developed a simple question and answer technique. Brief ques-
 tions were phrased . . . , [but], placing no faith in the veracity of their
 parishoners . . . , the confessors asked the same question in a variety of
 ways" (1959:66-67).              .,
    The present Philippine undersecretary of education has pointed out the
 tie between Spanish friar-dominated education and the current practice of
 rote recitation in the schools (Corpuz 1965 :49-50). Beside this form of
 question and answer, there are national examinations and periodic inspec-
 tions in the school system which subject both teachers and pupils to inter-
 rogation.
    The Tagalogs have a rich legal culture which is filled with interrogation.
 Apparently, this was also the case prior to Spanish contact. "In 1599 the
 Audiencia defined as customary law for the whole archipelago Tagalog
 usages as codified by Friar Juan de Plasencia" (Phelan 1959: 129). In
 some ways Tagalog interrogative culture is epitomized in the social role of
 the go-between, a person of great verbal skill. Within this context, the
 political function of the fiscal, a role that might ordinarily be viewed as
 legal, is particularly interesting. When the Spanish introduced the role, the
 fiscal was at the national level a member of the court of the Inquisition,
 and at the local level he was an assistant to the parish priest with the task
 of serving as intermediary between the priest and the people. His special
  duty was drilling of the children in their catechism. Today, the role of the
                     Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation      195

fiscal has been shifted from the arena of religion 1to that of the public
courts and politics. As of the coming of the American system, the fiscal
is the public defender at the provincial level; but in addition, fiscal is a
special title used to honor a politician who functions as oppositionist. All
in all, he must be a man of great verbal skill, adept at questioning and
answering.
   It seems clear that there is formal interrogation of subordinates by
superordinates in Tagalog culture. Now we can turn to Tagalog riddling.
The Filipino folklorist Manuel states,

While the bugtungan [Tagalog term for contest in riddle making] is chiefly the pas-
time of children, adults are not unknown to have indulged in it. In fact it is from
the old folks that boys and girls learn some of the enigmatic riddles. Young women
and men are observed to enjoy it as practised in night vigils over the dead, bap-
tismal parties and other social gatherings (1955:152).

    Although content analysis is a common concern of riddle studies, it is
 not our concern to apply this method to Tagalog riddles. Nevertheless,
before we get too far away from the discussion of query-rich settings, we
wish to mention an observation by Frake in his review of Harts (1964)
analysis. "Certain prominent aspects of Central Philippine cultures are
weakly represented: malevolent supernaturals, politics, birth, marriage,
sickness, crime, and cats" (Frake 1966:245; Hart 1964:70-72). The sub-
ject matter of Tagalog riddles is seldom that of the serious interrogations.
Malevolent supernaturals figure in the interrogations linked with disease
and death. The serious interrogations linked with politics, crimes birth,
and marriage have already been noted. We suspect that the taboo on cats
relates to their part in witchcraft beliefs introduced by the Spanish, but we
may be wrong. It is noteworthy that the intermediary or go-between
serves in all of these situations.
   Against this background then, it was decided to study riddle compe-
tence and associated attitudes possessed by 20 Tagalog informants.
These informants came from the Greater Manila area or from Laguna, a
Tagalog-speaking province south of Manila. All the informants had
spoken Tagalog as their first language; this language was the current lan-
guage of their homes and was the language of their childhood.
   With a Ione exception all our Tagalog informants had engaged in
riddling while in elementary school. Some of them had also heard riddles
at wakes, and three of the better riddlers mentioned using riddles in their
courtship. It would appear, however, that the locus of riddling is steadily
shifting away from the older settings of the wake and courtship and set-
tling in the school. Although interest in riddling may be declining (not one
of our informants engages in riddling now), still riddling remains salient
         196     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

enough in Tagalog culture that our riddling instrument induced nostalgia
and brought tears to the eyes of a number of our informants. Riddles are
still relatively more important than they are in American culture.
   These Taglog informants were given the riddle test discussed here. In
constructing the test 26 riddles were selected from a popular collec-
tion entitled /sang Libo at /sang Bugtong (Santos 1958). This collection
of riddles was read very carefully by an intelligent and highly motivated
bilingual assistant, who selected riddles she felt would have maximum gen-
erality (any Tagalog speaker would feel that he should have known the
answer to a riddle once given it). The maximally general riddles were then
judged for degree of difficulty, and a matching set of easy and difficult
riddles, 26 in all, was chosen. 10
    An example of a riddle (#724) considered easy is

             Aling bunga ang palibot ng mata?             pinya
             Which fruit (is) the one surrounded by eyes? pineapple

An example of a difficult riddle ( #777) is

                 Sapagka't la/wt na ay nakahihipo
                 Since everybody handles it
                  W alang kasindumi't kasimbaho
                  Nothing is dirtier or smellier
                 Bakit malzal nati't ipinakatatago?       salaping papel
                 Why do we love and treasure it?          paper money

   In the interest of approximating the proper setting, the instrument was
administered in the Tagalog language, even though all the informants
were bilinguals. A dcore was computed by giving an informant one point
for each correctly answered riddle. The most successful informant
answered 17 of 26. The least successful answered 7 riddles. The average
for the ·20 informants was 12.3 and the median was 13.
   From this group of 20, all those who had previously played ticktacktoe
( 18) were. given the Tick Tack Toe test described in Sutton-Smith and
Roberts (1967) as a rough measure of strategic competence. 11 Results are
indicated in Table 6. 7.
   Unfortunately, 8 of the 20 informants returned to the Philippines before

   10
      The riddles used in this instrument are to be found as follows in the book by Santos
 (1958) (they are listed in the order in which we presented them): #953, #724, #556, #442,
 #377,#383,#266,#91,#75,#37,#5,#60,#57,#68,#777,#661,#673,#427, #379,
 #277, #497, #418, #323, #314, #324, #295.
   11
      Scores on the first stripe were judged more competent than those on the second, and so
 on. X scores were used for ordering within each stripe. Otherwise no attention was paid to
 the x and y scores in and of themselves (c.f. Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1966).
                    Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation         197

                          table 6. 7
                 Tagalog Riddle and Strategic Competence*
                                       High Strategic   Low Strategic
                                        Competence       Competence

                High riddle competence       8                I
                Low riddle competence .                       6
                         *p < .01.


the study was completed, but the 12 remaining subjects were given the
following questions:
Try to remember, if you will, back to the time in your elementary school when you
were learning the multiplication table. Now imagine that one day the academic
supervisor (a province-level official in the Philippine school system) makes a
surprise visit-and this is one of those rare times when it really catches your
teacher by surprise. The supervisor-and notice well, it is the supervisor and not
your teacher-calls on you to multiply two numbers for him. If your answer is cor-
rect, how HAPPY would you be, giving a score of 1 for completely indifferent and
a score of 7 for very happy?
  Completely Indifferent 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very Happy
How HIYA [ashamed] would you be if you got confused and your answer was
wrong?

   The responses to the two questions were added, and the 12 informants
were ranked in terms of the resultant score. It was thought that those who
scored high on both would have the antecedent conflict necessary for
riddle involvement in that they had both high approach and high avoid-
ance attitudes.
   The basic ranks by informants are given in Table 6.8. It is interesting to
note that the rank order correlation between the ranks of the riddling com-
petence scores and the Tick Tack Toe competence scores was .406, using
Kendall's Tau (p = .033). The rank order correlation between the riddle
competence scores and the interrogational conflict scores was .600 (p =
.004), and the rank order correlation between the Tick Tack Toe test
scores and the interrogational conflict scores was .460(p=.0188). Use of
the Kendall Partial Rank Correlation Coefficient showed that the correla-
tion between riddle competence and interrogational conflict was relatively
independent of strategic competence.
   Riddling in modern Tagalog society, then, conforms with the basic
complex suggested by the cross-cultural study: Riddles are related to
training for responsibility and the maintenance of a complex society with
its associated interrogation. Today, however, the locus of Tagalog rid-
        198   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                         table 6.8
              Rank Order
                                               TTT (Tick Tllck Toe)
              Riddle Rllnk    Question Rllnk          Rllnk

                                                       6.5
                   2                  2.5              2
                   3                 10.5              9
                   4                  2.5              I
                   5.5                5.5              8
                   5.5                5.5             II
                   7                  5.5              3.5
                   8                  9                3.5
                   9                  8                5
                  10                  5.5              6.5
                  II                 12               10
                  12                 10.5             12


dling is shifting from the settings of wakes and courtship to the setting of
schools, and this shift raises the matter of time perspective.
   Over an area of islands in Southeast Asia broader than the Philippines,
and back through time, riddling has been associated with wakes and har-
vests. To answer a riddle at other times meant risking danger from malev-
olent supernaturals. Crops too were subject to such dangers, but rituals
existed for warding off this danger to the spirit of the rice or millet. Perhaps
riddling models success or failure at harvesting. Harvest time provided
the possibility of other successes, for the harvest was a time of opportu-
nity for young men and women to court. Courtship, we have noted,
remains to some extent one of the settings for riddling. And today, as
fewer people are involved in harvesting, more and more the road to suc-
cess in general and the opportunities for courtship has become the school.
It seems not without significance that the setting of riddling has shifted
toward the schools. Clearly, the total pattern is not well understood but
would merit further examination.
   Evans (1951, 1954, 1955) Thomas R. Williams (1963) have reported
differences in male and female riddling for one Southeast Asian group, the
Dusun: Women are reported as showing a preference for those riddles
which use archaic words or syllables not usually meaningful in the lan-
guage, a form suggestive of religious ritual. Men seem not to share the
preference; their riddles are the more simply metaphoric type. Women
too bear the heavier responsibilities for the chores of wakes. Perhaps this
involvement is of significance for explaining the component of obscure
 words in women's riddles. If, however, men are more interested in har-
 vest riddling, this may be related to the possibility that a successful har-
 vest courtship can lead to new chores for men, for bride service is a not
 uncommon prelude to marriage in this area of the world.
                          Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation                   /99·

   In any case, although we have not studied the matter, it seems particu-
larly significant to note the metaphoric nature of most riddle questions
and to consider this in the light of Malay's description of the intermediary:
a person verbally skilled in the use of metaphoric language. We offer the
hypothesis that riddling functions as training for the role of intermediary,
a role of great importance to the maintenance of solidarity in many
Southeast Asian societies.


           The American Study

         The Tagalog study suggests that involvement in riddles might
well be linked with attitudes toward oral interrogation. Some additional
exploratory surveys were made with Cornell students to examine this
relationship in greater detail.
   As a pretest, members of a large undergraduate class in sociology were
asked to estimate their general interest in riddles on a scale ranging from 1
(low interest) to 7 (high interest) and to answer a number of questions
dealing with oral interrogation. The general level of reported interest in
riddles was so low, however, that it was decided to measure this interest
more precisely.
   With the members ofa large undergraduate class in anthropology, a dif-
ferent measure of riddle involvement was used. Here 20 riddles were
selected randomly (through the use of a random number table) from a gen-
eral book on riddles (Withers and Benet 1954). 12 The 20 randomly
selected riddles were then arranged in a random order for presentation in
a written instrument. Each student was asked to judge his interest in each
riddle on a scale of 1 (low interest) to 7 (high interest). An average of the
20 riddle interest scores was used to arrive at the average interest of each
student in riddles. These average scores ranged from 1.00 (the absolute
minimum) to 5.40, with the next highest score being 4.80 (well short of the
7.00 possible highest score). Clearly, the general level of interest was low.
For purposes of the study the 69 students with riddle interest scores of
2.89 or less were placed in a "low riddle interest" group, while the 73
students with scores of 2.90 or higher were placed in a "high riddle inter-
est" group.
   Each student was also asked 4 questions designed to elicit positive atti-

   12
      The specific riddles selected were the following [in each instance the page number in the
Withers and Benet volume (1954) is given together with the number of the riddle counting
from the top of the page; in addition each riddle is lettered in order of presentation in the
test]: p. 14 (4), K; p. 18 (7), D; p. 26 (2), H; p. 28 (6), O; p. 30 (5), T; p. 31 (2), P; p. 44 (5), Q;
p. 45 (I), R; p. 47 (5), M; p. 65 (2), F; p. 76 (6), S; p. 87 (3), G; p. 92 (1), A; p. 92 (2), C; p.
104 (I), I; p. 110 (7), E; p. 111 (6), L; p. 116 (8),j; and p. 118 (5), B.
                                                                                    -   !




         200   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

tudes toward oral questioning and 4 questions designed to elicit negative
attitudes. Each of the 8 questions was preceded by the phrase, "In the
generalized classroom of your childhood (no earlier than the fifth or sixth
grade)." With the exclusion of this phrase, the questions were the fol-
lowing:

1,2.   how (eager) (uneager) were you to answer a question when the teacher
       selected you to answer a moderately difficult oral question in class?
3,4.   how (happy) (unhappy) were you when you answered a moderately difficult
       oral question when it was asked by the teacher in class?
5,6.   how (proud) (ashamed) were you when you (answered) (failed to answer) a
       moderately difficult oral question asked by the teacher in class?
7,8.   how (comfortable) (uncomfortable) were you when you answered an oral
       question correctly which other students in the class had failed to answer?

After each question the student was asked to circle the appropriate
number indicating his attitude ranging from 1 (low) to 7 (high). Hindsight
allows us to say that these questions could have been improved, but still
the 4 positive questions were held to be indicative of approach attitudes
toward oral questioning and the 4 negative question's were held to be
indicative of avoidance attitudes toward oral questioning.
   Various types of analysis were used, But Table 6.9 summarizes the
general findings. The division of the respondents into "high riddle inter-
est" and "low riddle interest" groups has already been described. The dis-
tribution of scores for each of the 8 oral interrogation questions was
plotted, and the responses to each question were divided into a high and a
low group, as nearly in half as the distribution permitted. Each respon-
dent, then, was given a score ranging from O to 4 for the number of
approach questions to which his answers were above the median; simi-
larly, each respondent was given a like score based on the avoidance
items. The distribution of these scores is given in Table 6.9. Note that all
entries to the left of line A fall in the approach < avoidance category; the
entries falling between lines A and B are in the approach= avoidance cat-
egory; and entries to the left of line B are in the approach > avoidance
category.
   It is- our provisional formulation that the greatest competence at
riddling and the greatest interest in riddles should be displayed by respon-
dents falling in the approach < avoidance category, that the intermediate
competence and interest should be displayed by the respondents falling in
the approach= avoidance category, and that the least competence and
interest should be displayed by the respondents falling in the approach >
avoidance category. Subsequent tables, therefore, have been arranged
with the three categories listed in that order, and they have been treated
as an ordinal scale.
                  table 6.9
         Attitudes toward Oral Interrogation and Riddle Interest
                                         Approach < A l'Oidance                                     Approach= A l'Oidance

                                                                                                Line A

                       4   2LoR     2HiR     3LoR          IHiR        ILoR       IHiR   ILoR   OHiRI    OLoR   OHiR
                                                                                                                        Line
                                                                                                                            B

         High          3   2LoR     4HiR     4LoR          3HiR        7LoR       3HiR   3LoR   2HiR     ILoR   3HiR
N
c:,
         Avoidance
......   Score         2   5LoR     OHiR     5LoR          3HiR I 2LoR            7HiR   3LoR   IOHiR    4LoR   6HiR

                       I   2LoR      IHiR    3LoR          2HiR       I 5LoR      5HiR   9LoR   9HiR     3LoR   3HiR
         Line A
                       0   OLoR*     IHiR    ILoR          2HiR        ILoR       3HiR   ILoR   IHiR     ILoR   IHiR
                                                                                                                            --
                              0                       1-          2           2               3              4
                     Approach = Avoidance                                                   Approach > Avoidance
                                                     High Approach Score

                                            Line B
                  * LoR, low riddle interest (2.89 or less); HiR, high riddle interest
                  (2.90 or more).
        202     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  The relationship between high and low riddle interest and the three
approach-avoidance categories can be seen in Table 6.10.

                    table 6.10
          Riddles and Oral Interrogation Attitudes
                                   Approach =       Approach >            Approach <
                                    A l'oidance      A 1•oida11ce          Avoidance

            High riddle interest           12             43                   18
            Low riddle interest            8               29                  32


   x 2 = 7.44, p < .05, G = .352. If approach < avoidance is compared with
the other two categories, G = .451.
   Although these findings indicate that avoidance attitudes are associated
with low interest in riddling, an examination of the male and female dis-
tributions shows that this is largely true of the male, not the female, re-
spondents (see Table 6.11). It should be noted that when males and

              table 6.1 /
   Male and Female Interest in Riddles and
   Attitudes toward Oral Interrogation
                                            Orn/ lnterrouation

                                   Ap=AI'*        Ap>A1•        Ap<A1•              x2 p G

   Male high riddle interest           5            15               7
   Male low riddle interest            2             9              19        x 2 = 7.55 < .05
   Total, male                         7            24              26         G = .598

   Female high riddle interest         7            28              11         non significant
   Female low riddle interest          6            20              .!l
   Total, female                      13            48              24
              • Ap, approach; Av, avoidance.


females are compared without regard to riddle interest in terms of the
approach-avoidance category, as against the other two categories com-
bined, males clearly show relatively more avoidance, x 2 = 3.79, which is
almost significant at the .05 level.
  Each of the respondents was asked to list his favorite game. Later these
games were classified into games of physical skill and strategy and games
of strategy (cf. Roberts, Arth, and Bush 1959). The basic distribution is
given in Table 6.12. Although it was thought that the high riddlers would
favor games of strategy, there is no general relationship of this kind. How-
                       Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation           203

         table 6.12
Male and Female Interest, Oral Interrogation, ,lnd Preferred Game
                                     Female                                  Male
                                                             I
                        Physical Skill      Strategy        Physical Skill          Strategy

                       High      Low      High     Lo11•    High     Low         High      Low
  Orul Interrogation   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle      Riddle    Riddle

Approach = avoidance      4        4       2           2      4        I                       0
Approach > avoidance     15       II       9           7      9        8            6          0
Approach < avoidance      4        3       4           9      2       12            3          6


   ever, males preferring games of physical skill are less likely to have high
   interest in riddles than males preferring games of strategy (G = -.40, p <
   .01). There is a directional relationship between the Ap = Av, Ap > Av,
   Ap < Av ordinal scale and the ordinal scales of physical skill and strategy
   (G = .320), which suggests that relatively more of the strategists are
   avoiders of oral interrogation.
      When the female distributions were plotted, it could be seen that the
    majority of the high riddle interest responses for females preferring games
   of physical skill occurred at four data points (2 Ap, 1 Av), (3 Ap, 1 Av),
   (2 Ap, 2 Av), and (3 Ap, 2 Av). When the distribution of responses in
   these cells ( 15 high and 5 low riddle interest) was compared with all others
   combined (8 high and 13 low interest), it could be seen that the four cells
   mentioned were the locus of high riddle interest (X2 = 4.27, p < .05).
   Notice that in these particular cells there is a balance between ap-
   proach and avoidance, but that all extreme balances are not repre-
   sented. The same comparisons were nonsignificant for female strategists,
   male potent strategists, and male strategists.
      Indeed, the female strategists, male potent strategists, and male strate-
   gists can be combined to produce the same relationship given for males
   (G = 6.02) as far as riddle interest and oral interrogation are concerned.
   Yet there is no obvious reason why the female potent strategists should
   differ from the others. When they are compared with the female strat-
   egists in terms of average responses to the individual questions, the female
   potent strategists display slightly greater approach and slightly lesser
   avoidance than the female strategists, but the differences are not great.
   Clearly, this is a problem for future study.
      Finally, a very small survey was made of the students in an introduc-
   tory linguistics class in which the same instrument was administered
   together with some additional questions. The same relationships of riddle
   interest and oral interrogation appeared to hold. More importantly, how-
   ever, this group was asked the following questions. Each question was
   rated: Very Little 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A Great Deal.
        204    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

Most children are expected to perform certain tasks or chores for which they are
held accountable by adults. These tasks can include things such as performing
homework or doing household chores ranging to such things as milking the cows.
A. What is your estimate of the amount of such work that you were expected to
do as a child?
B. How much importance did the adults who assigned the work place on your
responsible completion of it?
C. To what extent was your performance of these tasks monitored through per-
sistent questioning or nagging by adults?
D. To what extent do you think that you were nagged in general?

The responses to these questions provide new insight into involvement in
riddles.
   Interestingly enough, there was no correlation between the responses
to question A and to question B. Only question B was used, with entries
of 6 and 7 counting as "high importance." The questions C and D were
combined to produce a single nagging score with respondents who had en-
tries of 3 or more for each of the two questions being placed in the high-
nagging group. Table 6 .. 13 shows the results. The same grouping of riddle


                   table 6.13
          Responsibility (Chores), Nagging, and Riddle Interest
                                                          High       Low
                                                         Riddle     Riddle
              Responsibility (chores) and Nagging       Interest   Interest

          High importance of chores with low nagging       9           2
          High importance of chores with high nagging      I'         II
          Low importance of chores with low nagging        3           7
          Low importance of chores with high nagging       3           4


involvement responses into high and low used for the larger survey was
used. Note in this table that there is an association between low nagging
and high riddle interest, X 2 =4.01, p < .05. High riddle interest, how-
ever, is particularly associated with low nagging when chores are impor-
tant (as against the other three categories combined) (X2 = 8. 78, p < .0 I,
G = .868). If we consider only the group with high importance of chores,
there is a definite association of high riddle interest with low nagging
(X 2 = 9.57, p < .00 I, G = .960). There were no sex differences of impor-
tance.
  In the American college student study, high riddle interest was as-
sociated with balanced or positive attitudes toward oral questioning, with
low nagging, and particularly with the high importance of chores con-
                      Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation      205

 { 0 ined with the presence of low nagging. The relationship ofriddle interest
  0 sex and to game involvements is intriguing, but not clear from the
 Present inquiry.


          Discussion

     h      Each of the three successive exploratory studies reported in this
  c apter is too modest to be publishable in its own right, but taken together
  ~ a s~ries of reinforcing and related inquiries, they merit consideration.
      e~tamly, they serve to identify cultural and psychological variables
  ~hich ought to be considered when a general theory of riddles and
  riddling is finally framed. We will now discuss some of these variables.
  b Pattern. This chapter does not deal with the linguistic forms of riddles;
     ut both the Tagalog and American studies suggest the importance of
  ~~c~ analysis. Our collection of Tagalog riddles, e.g., seems to be separa-
  tic~ mto a number of types, at least some of which are marked linguis-                1'
                                                                                       11


  A ally_ by patterns of stress and rhyme. Some exploratory work with the
  h mencan data suggested that the conundrum, in contrast to other riddles,
  t~,s appeal f~r respon?ents with high-.approach-low-avoidance attitud~s
      Ward oral mterrogation and with a slight preference for games of physi-
  cal skill, but this relationship if it exists, must be tested in further
  ~:~earch. In _any event, it is high,ly probable that_rid_dles with ~in:erent. pat-
       ns have different psychological and cultural s1gmficance w1thm a smgle
  CUltu re an d that these differences
                             .           can be mapped with · profit.
      Culture history. Riddles appear to be primarily an Old World phenome-
  non, and such riddles as do occur in the New World may be largely the
  ~~:ult of acculturation. There are undoubtedly cultura! environments in
  bee N_ew World_ where riddles are not found, ?ut where nddles.would ha_ve
  de n accepte? 1f they had diffused there or 1f they ha? been m_vented m-
    ·lendently m these settings. Perhaps there are functional eqmvalents to
  ~ d)es in such settings, and this is a problem which ought to be studied.
     gain, some riddles may be peculiar to single communities or to small
 group~, but others are systemic patterns with very wide cultural and geo-
 graphic a I d'1stributions. The culture history of both types 1s   · mterestmg.
                                                                       ·        ·
  s Pattern load. The patterns of riddles and riddling may be nearly the

 i:
· a~e descriptively in two different cultures without having the same
  8
      ;nee or weight in each. The pattern of riddling is more heavily loaded
 t agalog culture than it is in the United States, although admittedly the
 i Wo Patterns are not the same. The frequency of riddling, intensity of
 tterest and evaluation differing competence, differing behavioral set-
 stgs, and other variable's contribute to differences in pattern loading. The
     Udy of such loading is a task for the future.
        206   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   Culfllral complexity. It would appear that cultures must have attained a
minimal level of cultural complexity if riddling is to exist as a form of
expressive behavior. This conclusion is supported by the associations
reported in this chapter of riddles with the higher levels of political in-
tegration, the number of levels in the jurisdictional hierarchy transcending
the local community, and oaths and ordeals. More indirectly, the links
with games of strategy, large domestic animals, and certain patterns of
child training have a similar significance. It would not be difficult to
produce other associations with traits indicative of cultural complexity. In
complex cultures, too, there is more likely to be institutionalized formal in-
terrogation in the court, schoolroom, temple, and elsewhere. Here su-
perordinates do question subordinates.
   Responsibility. Cross-culturally the presence of riddles is associated
with several child-training variables, but the most striking of these are the
associations with high responsibility training (see Table 6.6). The large-
animal and rote-learning findings are also pertinent. Remarkably enough,
the same variable seems to be relevant at the intracultural level in the
United States (see Table 6.13). Perhaps the responsible performance of
chores may be linked with the responsible answering of questions, both
expressively and nonexpressively. In all probability it is not accidental
that judicial oaths and ordeals also have associations with responsibility
training (Roberts 1965:204). Clearly, the definition and the measurement
of this variable should be improved.
   Oral socialization. Nagging which involves persistent questioning and
scolding must be one form of oral socialization. This study suggests that
high nagging leads to high-avoidance and low-approach attitudes toward
oral interrogation and to a low interest in riddles. A lesser amount of nag-
ging, however, may contribute to the conflict over oral interrogation,
which contributes to high involvement in riddles. Other techniques of oral
socialization, such as teasing, praising, ridiculing, rebuking, and the like,
may be more relevant to a positive interest in riddles. At least teasing is
important in Tagalog culture. Further information is needed on this group
of variables.
   Oral interrogation. The Tagalog study suggests that high-approach atti-
tudes toward oral interrogation balanced by high-avoidance attitudes
toward oral interrogation are linked with high riddling competence. In the
second game study (Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1962) and in the later work
dealing with games and other expressive models, much has been made of
the conflict-enculturation hypothesis for game involvement which has
already been described. This same general hypothesis may hold for com-
petent involvement in such expressive models as riddles.
   A high interest in riddles, however, is not the same as a high compe-
tence at riddling, for a man may enjoy responding to riddles, listening to
                    Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation    207

riddles, and reading riddles without being able to ask riddles effectively in
genuine riddling situations or even to tell them in any number. Admit-
tedly, someone who is highly competent at riddling is likely to be highly
interested in them. In contrast to the Tagalog study, the American inves-
tigation dealt with interest and not with competence. Here, at least, the
conflict-enculturation hypotheses must be modified.
   The American study shows that there is an approach-avoidance field
insofar as attitudes toward oral questioning are concerned. In this field,
despite the scoring used in Table 6.9, there is probably conflict
throughout in that there is always some approach and there is always
some avoidance. Still approach balanced by avoidance is linked with high
riddle interest, as is approach where it is greater than avoidance. When,
approach is less than avoidance, however, there is low riddle interest. In
other words, in addition to the link between conflict over oral interroga-
tion and high riddle interest predicted by the hypothesis, riddle interest is
also found where approach attitudes outweigh avoidance ones. Perhaps
the hypothesis should now be termed the conflict approach and encultura-
tion hypothesis, for two motivational principles seem to be at work: (1)
conflict and (2) simple approach. The extremes may be handled by a
conflict theory, but simple reinforcement may account for lower levels of
motivation.
   Work with the happiness, unhappiness, pride, and shame questions
showed that there was a high conflict group characterized by high
approach and high avoidance (type- I interest) and a low conflict group
characterized by high approach and low avoidance (type-2 interest). The
type-2 respondent seemed to prefer conundrums and games of physical
skill, while the type- I respondent seemed to prefer the other riddles and
games of strategy. Further work must be done here before anything can
be said, but there is a possibility, at least, that two types of interest can be
distinguished. Possibly, the type-I individuals are the active riddlers (i.e.,
players) and the type-2 people are less actively involved (in effect, spec-
tators). This must be tested.
   It would appear in any case that interest in riddles is associated with at-
titudes toward oral interrogation. Also if interest is to be considered
broadly, the narrow interpretation of the conflict-enculturation hypothesis
must be modified.
   Strategy. A strategic component exists in riddles and riddling. Cross-
culturally, there was the predicted association between the presence of
riddles and the presence of games of strategy. Within American culture,
however, it was not determined that people who like games of strategy in
preference to other games of physical skill are also more likely to have a
high interest in riddles. Since most of the games of physical skill listed
were games of the "physical skill and strategy" subtype, it is probable that
        208   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

even those involved with games of physical skill had some interest in
strategy. It may be more interesting to consider the game interest and the
power styles which they indicate. Clearly, the female potent strategist
must be placed in a different category. This power-style question will be
considered in another study.
     Competence. The level of competence among the Tagalog riddlers was
high, and it was obviously lo\V among the American college students. This
variable also merits more quantitative study.
     Enculturation. Again it is argued that participation in riddling as an
expressive activity entails some valuable learning, possibly about how to
handle oneself under interrogation and how to interrogate others. This im-
portant variable was not studied at all.
     Other variables. There were interesting sex differences, and it is certain
that the child training is varied in terms of sex, that game involvement
varies with sex, and that patterns of oral interrogation may vary with sex.
It was not possible in this study to do enough research to say something
meaningful about this variable, but it must be considered in future
research. There are other variables, as well, including those which con-
tribute to uncertainty in interactive situations (is, e.g., teasing more
ambiguous than nagging?), but these will not be discussed here.
     Theory of riddle involvement. We assert here that riddles are expres-
 sive models of oral interrogation. Such models should occur in cultures
 sufficiently complex to provide patterns of formal or serious oral inter-
 rogation to be modeled. Furthermore, there should be high responsibility
 training which both contributes to an individual's caring about his per-
 formance in oral interrogation situations and to his interest in such situa-
 tions (particularly if he is in conflict about responsibility). If with these
 antecedent conditions an individual's attitudes toward oral interrogation
 are balanced between approach and avoidance, or if his attitudes are such
 that approach outweighs avoidance, he is likely to be interested in a repre-
 sentation of the area of conflict (i.e., a riddle), but if avoidance attitudes
 are stronger than approach attitudes, he should not be interested in such a
 model. Possibly, the more nearly approach is balanced by avoidance, the
 more likely he is to be competent at riddling and to have high interest.
  Finally, participation in riddling should provide useful learning to the par-
 ticipants in that they may improve their ability to ask and answer oral
  questions in a variety of situations and they may learn to deal with enig-
 matic situations. In a sense it is to the advantage of the society to provide
  models which assuage conflict-induced motivation and which contribute
  to learning.
      Future research. Additional work is needed, and it is probable that mul-
  ti variant statistical techniques should be used in the data analysis rather
  than the very simple statistics used here. Riddles and riddling must be
                   Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation   209

studied in the field in cultures where they are important, as among the
Tagalog, and at the childhood level within American culture. Additional
research into the theory of expressive models in general should also con-
tribute to our understanding of the place of riddles and riddling in expres-
sive behavior and in expressive culture.
j
part two




      DISCOVERING
           STRUCTURE
              IN
            SPEECH
         7
        On Sociolinguistic Rules:
        Alternation and Co-occurrence                                1

        SUSAN ERVIN-TRIPP




         Susan Ervin-Tripp is a profe;sor in the Department of
         Rh~tori~ and lecturer in psychology at the University of
         Cahforma, Berkeley, and a member of the Committee on
         Sociolinguistics of the Social Science Research Council.
         She received her doctorate in social psychology from the
         University of Michigan, and has done fieldwork on bi-
         lingualism among French residents of the United States,
         the Navaho, and Japanese-Americans in San Francisco.
         She has recently completed a long-term investigation of
         child language development, and is currently engaged in
         the cross-cultural study of language socialization.
            The first two parts of Ervin-Tripp's chapter each deal
         with a major type of sociolinguistic rule. As the terms
         suggest, altemation concerns choice among alternative
         ways of speaking, co-occurrence concerns interdepen-
         dence within an alternative. These two types of rules are
         the sociolinguistic analogues of the paradigmatic and syn-
          tagmatic axes long recognized in linguistics (cf. Jakobson

  1 A longer and slightly different version of this chapter appeared as a paper entitled
"Sociolinguistics" (Ervin-Tripp 1969). I am ·deeply indebted to William Labov, William
Geoghegan, and the editors for detailed commentaries on drafts of this work and to other
members of the Sociolinguistic Committee of the Social Science Research Council and our
work group in Berkeley for discussions which have radically altered my views. Wallace
Lambert and Richard Tucker very generously lent their working tables and draft manu-
scripts. Elizabeth Closs-Traugott was a consultant on British address. Dan Slobin provided
Soviet data. This paper was written with the support of the Institute of Human Develop-
ment and aid from the Language-Behavior Research Laboratory of the University of
California. Student work contributing to generalizations in the text included studies by
Renee Ackerman, Lou Bilter, Camille Chamberlain, Judith Horner, Andrea Kaciff, Jane
Logan, Dana Meyer, Elaine Rogers, Elisabeth Selkirk, and Billi Wooley.

                                           213
214   Discovering Structure in Speech

and Halle 1956). Ervin-Tripp shows that the two princi-
ples, while simple, are of great scope, serving to integrate
a wide variety of studies. She begins with an illustration
of how much can be at stake in the choice of an alterna-
tive in address. The case is not isolated.

The fact that a journeyman artisan accorded a student Er
aroused such protest at the University of Gottingen that a great
part of the student body left town . . . . A similar incident in
Mainz created such disorder that the elector was forced to call
in troops.

   Metcalf (l 938:4) is here referring to the late eighteenth
century, when the third person singular form Er, having
attained a relatively high position as a form of address in
the seventeenth century, first in co-occurrence with titles
and Herr ___ , then independently of them, had gener-
ally sunk again in status, being mainly used to subordi-
nates.
   Ervin-Tripp proceeds to show how a formal analysis
based on the theory of information processing devel-
oped by Wi'lliam Geoghegan ( 1971 a) can serve to make
explicit the involuntary processes underlying selection
rules. In surveying other systems of address, she points
both to specific contrasts (e.g., consequences of added
age, ways of realizing a value) and to universal character-
istics (e.g., the point at which the greatest number of
choices may be found and some of the dimensions that
may underlie choice). Ervin-Tripp's analysis is tentative,
yet it offers highly interesting insights into human inter-
action processes. Note, e.g., the discussion of com-
munication problems arising from the fact that speakers
of the same language may have different sociolinguistic
rule systems and thus may misread each others' inten-
tions. One wonders whether such differences may acer-
bate ethnic tensions in modern contemporary societies.
Kohl's (l 967) and Gumperz and Hernandez (197 l) ac-
count of ghetto children's communication problems in
schools and studies of American Indian children (Polgar
 1960; Philips 1970) suggest that they do. Bateson's work
(Jackson, Haley, and Weakland 1956) on the com-
municative basis of schizophrenia is also relevant here            I"
(1968).                                                            J
   From consideration of rules for specific linguistic alter-
 natives, Ervin-Tripp turns to social variables, such as
on Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation·and Co-occurrence      215

 deference, as a more general starting point. She notes
 that in. both ~espects analyses take the standpoint of
 predicting choice by speaker, and that the relation of this
 to comprehension and interpretation by others largely
 remains to be studied.
       In the second part of the essay two kinds of co-occur-
 rence rules are distinguished, (a) those operating within a
 single (eve!, or sector, of linguistic structure and (b) those
 operating between levels or sectors. The first are termed
  "horizontal," the second "vertical." Thus lexical selec-
  tion would b_e horizontally inconsistent in mixing an in-
  formal form 1?to a formal sequence in "You may rest as-
  sured that His Excellency is most seriously considerin'
  your suggestion." A striking case of vertical selection is
  found in Surinam (former Dutch Guiana), whose two
  main languages are Dutch and the English-based creole,
  Sranan. To speak Dutch with a Dutch pronunciation is
   considered affected, but to speak grammatically and lex-
   ically perfect Dutch with a Sranan pronunciation is
   praised. In some circles, however, to speak Sranan with a
   Dutch pronunciation is prestigious.·.
        Ervin-Tripp points out that the existence of normal co-
   occurrence allows departures from it to take on, or invite,
    social meaning. These questions lead into the very broad
    area commonly designated as that of style. (On work in
    stylistics in relation to literature, but with implications for
    sociolinguistics, see Guiraud (l 96 l) and the collections
    edited by Chatman and Levin ( 1967), Sebeok ( 1960), and
    Steinmann (l 967). The common distinction between
    formal and informal style is discussed with some refer-
    ence to slang, elaboration, and ellipsis. Interpretation of
    the selections made by the speaker implicates the general
    study of linguistic repertoires, the range of alternative
    ways of speaking available, and thus broaches some of
     the questions dealt with in Part Ill.
        The concepts discussed under the heading of switching
     within discourse, particularly speech act and J1111ctio11,
     and also topic and episode, are at the core of modern
     sociolinguistics and are referred to either explicitly or
     implicitly in this volume (see Blom and Gumperz,
     Chapter 14; Friedrich, Chapter 9). Ervin-Tripp first men-
      tions alternation between one situation and another (sit-
      uational shifting). When that to which an alternation rule
      applies is itself defined by co-occurrence rules, one has
216   Discovering Structure in Speech

the relationship singled out in much of the British work in
sociolinguistics by the term register (Halliday, McIntosh,
and Strevens 1964), a register being a way of speaking
that stands in a one-to-one relationship to a situation. By
definition, if the register is different, then so is the situa-
tion, and conversely .. More fundamental is the notion of
metaphoric alternation of ways of speaking within a situ-
ation. It is in such alternations that the meaning of ways
of speaking, and the rule-governed creativity entailed in
their use, are most revealed. Here one requires the notion
of speech act, such that the sequence of conversation can
be identified as a sequence of such acts. Ervin-Tripp
notes that most studies so far have dealt with the more
patent routines that mark the boundaries of conversation
(greeting, taking leave), or with "set pieces," as it were
(narrating a tale, telling a joke, playing the dozens), and
goes on to explore the difficult, yet essential, notion of
topic. Since speakers are able to identify change and
 recurrence of topic within a conversation, it must be pos-
 sible to characterize what is involved in doing so.
    Notice that the focus of concern has shifted. At the
 outset alternation rules concerned particular terms. In
considering entire ways of speaking, one may find alter-
 nation rules at a different level. Not only may alternation
 rules deal with styles themselves defined by co-occur-
 rence rules but one may find rules for choosing between
 different sets of alternations-e.g., choice between the al-
 ternatives of address offered by one language and those
 offered by another, or choice of one language rather than
 another because oneself or one's interlocutor was more
 master of the alternation rules within it.
    Withregard to messages, Ervin-Tripp makes an impor-
 tant distinction between manifest and latent content. It is
 sometimes thought that ~ociolinguistic questions, partic-
 ularly those of function, require one to deal with com-
  munication in its totality, including intent, and thus are
  unmanageable. As if in order to consider some aspect of
  the function of sentences one had to embrace every as-
  pect at once. In fact, reasonably orderly progress is pos-
  sible; in particular, a great deal of work can and must be
  done to identify the speech acts recognized in a commu-
                                                                      r
  nity, work which is formal in the same sense as phonol-         /
  ogy and syntax. Such work makes explicit criteria for
  recognizing recurrences of particular acts of speech or
On Sociolinguistic Rules: Altemation and Co-occurrence     217

  tactics, parallel to criteria for recognizing phonological
  and syntactic sameness or difference; in dealing with this
  additional aspect of the form of an utterance, socio-
  linguistic research begs the question of ultimate intentjust
  as much or as little as phonology and syntax. One can,
  e.g., identify "May I help you?" as, say, interrogative in
  sentence form, in message form, an offer; one may even
  be able to specify (from paralinguistic features, probably)
  that there is a functional component (elocutionary force)
  of ingratiation ("Please let me . . . "), matter-of-fact per-
 formance of duty, warning ("You are not unobserved"),
 or rebuff (" Are you certain you are the sort of person
  who belongs here?"). That is, one can know these things,
 perhaps only from hearing (apart from seeing) the utter-
 ance, through a knowledge of shared means of com-
 munication, without necessarily ascertaining the entire
 intent or state of mind of the speaker (e.g., without acer-
 taining the extent to which there is expression of sponta-
 neous attitude, to what extent a rehearsed manner). In
 sum, there is a shared competence here-it can be
 learned, for example, by actors, imd we can judge how
 adequately an actor manifests it, independently of his
 state of mind while so doing.
    Ervin-Tripp takes the position that a theory of func-
 tions served in speech is itself outside sociolinguistics.
 Her discussion, however, would seem to support the dis-
 tinction between function as private intent and function
 as the communicative status or value that a speech act is
 conventionally recognized as having. She indeed goes on
 to consider criteria for determining functional status, and
 to discuss study of the functional category of what
 Skinner calls mands, in some detail. If sociolinguistics
 must turn to other social-science fields for theories of
 functions (as of institutions, values, and the like), it is
 clear that it must itself develop the connection between
 such theories and specification of their realization in
 speech.
    The essay concludes with recognition of the problem
 of different conceptions of the notion of "rule," and of the
 problem of the relation between behavior and reports of
 behavior, reports themselves being one of the kinds of
 behavior to be studied. One's first impression of this
 survey must be that there is so much to be learned and
      218    Discovering Structure in Speech

       done; sociolinguistics is in its infancy. If one considers
       what was available before, the essay is seen to stand as a
       path-breaking integration of diverse lines of work, and to
       reveal more concretely than ever before the presence of a
       coherent field in which one can identify cumulative lines
       of research. Searle (1969) and Ervin-Tripp (1970a,
       1970b) provide additional related readings. For a more
       recent treatment of Geoghegan's address rules, see
       Geoghegan 1971 b.




        Alternation Rules
 AMERICAN RULES OF ADDRESS

 A scene on a public street in the contemporary United States:


       "What's your name, boy?" the policeman asked.
       "Dr. Poussaint. I'm a physician . . . . "
       "What's your first name, boy?
       "Alvin."
                                             (Poussaint 1967:53)

   Anybody familiar with American address rules can tell us the feelings
reported by Dr. Poussaint: "As my heart palpitated, I muttered in
profound humiliation. . . . For the moment, my manhood had been
ripped from me. . . . No amount of self-love could have salvaged my
pride or preserved my integrity. . . . [I felt] self-hate." It is possible to
specify quite precisely the rule employed by the policeman. Dr. Pous-
saint's overt, though coerced, acquiescence in a public insult through
widely recognized rules of address is the source of his extreme emotion.
    Brown and Ford (Hymes, 1964b) have done pioneering and ingenious
research on forms of address in American English using as corpora Amer-
ican plays, observed usage in a· Boston business firm, and reported usage
of business executives. They found primarily FN (first name) recipro-
 cation, or TLN (title plus last name) reciprocation. However, asymme-
 trical exchanges were found where there was age difference or occupa-
 tional rank difference. Intimacy was related to the use of multiple names.
    Expanding their analysis to account for details from my own rules of
 address, I have found the structure expressed in the diagram in Fig. 7 .1.
 The advantage of formal diagramming is that it offers precision greater
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and C
                                                     a-occurrence   219



                                                                          TITLE
                                                                          + LN




                                                                          MR.
                                                                          + LN




                                                                          MRS.
                                                                          + LN




                                                         ',,,,>
                                                            '             MISS
                                                                          + LN



                                                                           KIN
                                                                          TITLE
                                                                          + FN




                                                                           FN




                          +
                                                                            0



        figure 7.1
American address



than that of discursive description (Hymes 1967). The type of diagram
presented here, following Geoghegan ( 1971 a), is to be read like a com-
puter flow chart. The entrance point is on the left, and from left to right
there is a series of binary selectors. Each path through the diagram leads
to a possible outcome, that is, one of the possible alternative forms of
address.
   Note that the set of paths, or the rule, is like a formal grammar in that it
is a way of representing a logical model. The diagram is not intended as a
model of a process, of the actual decision sequence by which a speaker
chooses a form of address or a listener interprets one. The two structures
may or may not correspond. In any. case, the task of determining the
structure implicit in people's report of what forms of address are possible
and appropriate is clearly distinct from the task of studying how people, in
        220    Discovering Structure in Speech

real situations and in real time, make choices. The criteria and methods of
the two kinds of study are quite different. Just as two individuals who
share the same grammar might not share the same performance strategies,
so two individuals might have different decision or interpretation proce-
dures for sociolinguistic alternatives but have the identical logical struc-
ture to their reports of behavior.
. The person whose knowledge of address is represented in Fig. 7 .1 is as-
 sumed to be a competent adult member of a Western American academic
 community. The address forms which are the "outcomes" to be ac-
 counted for might fit in frames like "Look, ___ , it's time to leave." The
 outcomes themselves are formal sets, with alternative realizations; for ex-
 ample, first names may alternate with nicknames, as will be indicated in a
 later section. One possible outcome is no-naming, indicated in Fig. 7 .1 by
 the linguistic symbol for zero [0].
    The diamonds indicate selectors. They are points where the social
 categories allow different paths. At first glance, some selectors look like
 simple external features, but the social determinants vary according to the
 system, and the specific nature of the categories must be discovered by
 ethnographic means. For. example, "Older" implies knowledge by the
 range of age defined as contemporary. In some southeast Asian systems,
 even one day makes a person socially older.
     The first selector checks whether the addressee is a child or not. In
 face-to-face address, if the addressee is a child, all of the other distinctions
  can be ignored. What is the dividing line between adult and child? In my
  own system, it seems to be school-leaving age, at around eighteen. An
  employed sixteen-year-old might be classified as an adult.
     Status-nwrked situations are settings such as the courtroom, the large
  faculty meeting, and Congress, where statuses are clearly specified,
  speech style is rigidly prescribed, and the form of address of each person
  is derived from his social identity, e.g., "your honor" or "Mr. Chairman."
  The test for establishing the list of such settings is whether personal
  friendships are apparent in the address forms or whether they are neutral-
  ized (or masked) by the formal requirements of the setting. There are, of
   course, other channels by which personal relations might be revealed, but
   here we are concerned only with address alternations, not with tone of
   voice, connotations of lexicon, and so on.
      Among nonkin the dominant selector of first-naming is whether alter is
   to be classified as having the status of a colleague or social acquaintance.
   When introducing social acquaintances or new work colleagues, it is nec-
   essary to employ first names so that the new acquaintances can first-name
   each other immediately. Familiarity is not a factor between dyads of the
   same age and rank, and there are no options. For an American assistant
   professor to call a new colleague of the same rank and age "Professor
          On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence
                                                                                 221
Watkins" or "Mr. Watkins" would be considered strange, at least on the
American west coast.
   Rank here refers to a hierarchy within a working group or t .. k d
                             . I h A            .                ,      o 1an e
statuses like teacher-pup1 1. n t e mencan system, rio distin -                  .
                                  b   d .         .                      c 110n m
address is made to equals or su or mates smce both receive FN Th d" _
 ·
tmction   may be made e Isew h ere m · t h e 1·mgu1stJc
                                                    · · system toi· exa·     e is.
                                                              ,        c mp 1e, 1n
the style of requests used. We have found that subordinates outsid th
family receive direct commands in the fo~m of imperatives more ~fte~
than equals, to whom requests are phrased m other ways, at least in some
settings.
   A senior alter has the option of dispensing the speaker from offering
TLN by suggesting that he use a first name, or tacitly accepting the first
name. Brown and F_or? (Hymes, 1964b) have discus.sed the ambiguity
that arises because 1t 1s not clear whether the supenor, for instance a
professor addressing a doctoral candidate or younger instructor, wishes to
receive back the FN he gives. This problem is mentioned by Emily Post:
"It is also effrontery for a younger person to call an older by her or his
first name, without being asked to do so. Only a very underbred thick-
skinned person would attempt it" (Post 1922:54). In the A~erican
system described in Fig. 7.1, age difference is not significant until it is
nearly the size of a generation, which suggests its origins in the family.
The presence of options, or dispensation, creates a locus for the expres-
sion of individual and situational nuances. The form of address can reveal
dispensation, and therefore be a matter for display or concealment in front
of third parties. "No-naming" or 0, is an outcome of uncertainty among
the options. 2
   The identity set refers to a list of occupational titles or courtesy titles
accorded people in certain statuses. Examples are "Judge," "Doctor,"
"Professor," and so on.:3 A priest, physician, dentist, or judge may be
addressed by title alone, but a plain citizen or an academic person may
not. In the latter cases, if the name is unknown, there is no address form
    2
      Reference rules involve additional considerations such as the relation of the addressee
 and referent. If the addressee is of lower rank or age than both the referent and the speaker,
e.g., then the speaker in Fig. 7.1 employs the addressee's address term-e.g., Mrs. Jones
 may refer to her husband to addressees who know him as '"Charles" to a friend, "Mr. Jones"
 to a servant, or "Daddy" to his young child (Ervin-Tripp 1969).
   " English occupational titles usually neutralize sex. The first woman appointee to the Brit-
ish High Court of Justice produced an address crisis because the traditional occupational
titles contained terms that in other contexts are selected by sex. Mrs. Lane, like the other
justices, were by the lord chancellor's decree to be called '"My Lord" and Mr. Justice
Lane." His lordship, Mr. Justice Lane, is also entitled by ancient judicial tradition to a
bachelor knighthood" (Time, August 27, J 965). Justices in British law wear wigs and robes,
elaborating the status marking of the settings in which they act. The decision shows that to
members the terms are not sex indicators, and that the alternatives, "My Lady" and "Mrs.
 Justice Lane" would be sex marked rather than neutral, just as '"chairwoman" is.
       222    Discovering Structure in Speech

(or zero, 0) available, and we simply "no-name" the addressee. The
parentheses used here refer to optional elements, the bracketed elements
to social selectional categories.
               [Cardinal]: Your excellency
               [U.S. President]: Mr. President
               [Priest]: Father(+ LN)
               [Nun]: Sister(+ religious name)
               [Physician]: Doctor(+ LN)
               [Ph.D., Ed.D.], etc.: (Doctor+ LN)
               [Professor]: (Professor+ LN)
               [Adult] etc.: (Mr.+ LN)
                             (Mrs.+ LN)
                             (Miss+ LN)
    Wherever the parenthetical items cannot be fully realized, as when LN
is unknown, and there is no lone title, the addressee is no-named, by a set
of rules of the form as follows: Father+ 0 - Father, Professor+ 0 - 0,
Mr.+ 0 --0, etc. An older male addressee may be called "sir" if defer-
ence is intended, as an optional extra marking.
    These are my rules, and seem to apply fairly narrowly within the aca-
demic circle I know. Nonacademic university personnel can be heard
saying "Professor" or "Doctor" without LN, as can schoolteachers.
These delicate differences in sociolinguistic rules are sensitive indicators
of the communitation net.
    The ze'ro forms imply that often no address form is available to follow
 routines like "yes," "no," "pardon me," and "thank you." Speakers of
 languages or dialects where all such routines must contain an address
 form are likely in English either to use full name or to adopt forms like
 "sir" and "ma'am," which are either not used or used only to elderly
 addressees in this system.
    One might expect to be able to collapse the rule system by treating kin
 terms as a form of title, but it appears that the selectors are not identical
 for kin and nonkin. A rule which specifies that ascending generation only
 receives title implies that a first cousin would not be called "cousin" but
 merely FN, whereas an aunt of the same age would receive a kin title, as
 would a parent's cousin. If a title is normally used in direct address, and
 there are several members of the kin category, a first name may also be
 given (e.g., Aunt Louise). Frequently, there are additional features
 marked within a given family, such as patrilineal vs. matrilineal, near vs.
 distant. Whenever the address forms for an individual person's relatives
 are studied, this proves to be the case, in my experience.
    Presumably, the individual set of rules or the regional dialect of a reader
 of this chapter may differ in some details from that reported in Fig. 7 .1; or
  a better formulation is possible. Perhaps sociolinguists will begin to use a
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternatio 11      lC
                                                 anc o-occurrence   223

favorite frame of_ li~gu!st~-"!n. my_ dialect we say . . . "-to illustrate
such differences 10 ~ocwlmguisti~ ~ules. For example, I have been told
that in some Amen~an co1!1mumties there may be a specific status of
familiarity bero~d fil st-na~ung, where a variant of the middle name is op-
tl·on·1l
      ' 'among mt1mates. This form then becomes th e norma 1' , or unmar k e d ,
address form to the addressee.

                        "What's your name, boy?"
                        "Dr. Poussaint. I'm a physician ,,
                        "What's your first name boy?" ·
                        "Alvin."               '     ·

   The policeman insulted_ Dr. Poussaint three times. First, he employed a
social selector for race, m addressing him as "boy," which neutralizes
identity set, rank, and even adult status. Addressed to a white man, "boy"
presumably would be used only for a child, youth, or medial regarded as a
nonperson.
   Dr. Poussaint's reply supplied only TLN and its justification. He made
clear that he wanted _th~ officer to suppress the race selector, yielding a
rule like Fig. 7.1. This 1s clearly a nondeferential reply since it does not
contain the FN required by the policeman's address rule. The officer next
treated TLN as failure to answer his demand, as a nonname, and de-
manded FN; third, he repeated the term,"boy," which would be appropri-
ate to unknown addressees.
   According to Fig. 7.1, under no circumstances should a stranger
address a physician by his first name. Indeed, the prestige of physicians
even exempts them from first-naming (but not from "Doc") by used-car
salesmen, and physicians' wives can be heard so identifying themselves in
public so as to claim more deference than "Mrs." brings. Thus the police-
 man's message is quite precise: "Blacks are wrong to claim adult status or
occupational rank. You are children.'' Dr. Poussaint was stripped of all
deference due his age and rank.
    Communication has been perfect in this interchange. Both were famil-
 iar with an address system which contained a selector for race available to
both blacks and whites for insult, condescension, or deference, as needed.
 Only because they shared these norms could the policeman's act have its
 unequivocal impact.


   COMPARATIVE RULE STUDIES
   The formulation of rules in this fashion can allow us to contrast one
 sociolinguistic system with another in a systematic way. We can assume
 that a shared language does not necessarily mean a shared set of socio-
        224   Discovering Structure in Speech

linguistic rules. For instance, rules in educated circles in England vary. In
upper-class boarding schools, boys and girls address each other by last
name instead of FN. In some universities and other milieux affected by
the public school usage, solidary address to male acquaintances and col-
leagues is LN rather than FN. T9 women it is Mrs. or Miss+ LN by men
(not title + LN), and FN by womeµ. T,hus sex of both speaker and
addressee is important.                      ·
    In other university circles the difference from the American rule is less;
prior to dispensation by seniors with whom one is acquainted, one may
use Mr. or Mrs. rather than occupational title as an acceptably familiar
but deferential form. Note that this is the usage to women by male
addressees in the other system. The two English systems contrast with
the American one in allowing basically three, rather than two, classes of
alternatives for nonkin: occupational title+ LN, M + LN, and FN/LN.
M + LN is used for in.termediate cases, the familiar person who must be
deferred to or treated with courtesy.
    Two Asian systems of address have been described recently. The
pioneering work of William Geoghegan ( 1971 a) describes the naming
system of a speaker of Bisayan, a Philippine language. As in most
systems, children routinely receive the familiar address form. The Bi-
sayan system, like the American and English, chooses on the basis of rela-
tive rank, relative age, and friendship. But there are important differences.
 In the United States, all adult strangers are addressed with deference; in
 the Bisayan system, social inferiors do not receive titled address. In the
 American system for nonkin, added age, like higher rank, merely in-
 creases distance or delays familiar address; in the Bisayan system in-
 feriors or friends who are older receive a special term of address
 uniting informality and deference.
     The Korean system is more unlike the American (Howell 1967). In
 Korea, relative rank must first be assessed. If rank is equal, relative age
 within two years is assessed, and if that is equal, solidarity (e.g., class-
 mates) will differentiate familiar from polite speech. This system differs
:both in its components and its order from the American and Bisayan
 rules. Both inferiors and superiors are addressed differently from equals.
 Many kinds of dyads differ in authority-husband-wife, customer-
 tradesman, teacher-pupil, employer-employee. In each case, asymme-
 trical address is used. Addressees more than two years older or younger
 than the speaker are differentially addressed, so that close friendship is
 rigidly age graded. Solidary relations arise from status, just as they do
  between equal colleagues in the American system, regardless of personal
  ties. There are more familiar address forms yet to signal intimacy within
  solidary dyads. If the English system has three levels, there are even more
  in the Korean system. Since the criteria were multiple in the Howell
  study, not a single frame, the comparison is not quite exact.
         On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence                225

  As Howell points out, the Korean system illustrates that the dimension
of approach that Brown and Gilman (1960) called solidarity may in fact
have several forms in one society. In the Korean system intimacy is sepa-
rable from solidarity. This separation may also exist in the American
system, but in a different way. One is required to first-name colleagues
even though they are disliked. As Brown and Ford (Hymes 1964b)
showed, however, nicknames may indicate friendship more intimate than
the solidarity that requires or is shown by FN. They found that various
criteria of intimacy, such as self-disclosure, were related to the number of
FN alternates, such as nicknames and sometimes LN, used to an ad-
dressee, and proposed that greater intimacy creates more complex and
varied dyadic relations which speakers may opt to signal by a greater
number of address variants. Thus in the American system two points of
major option for speakers exist: the ambiguous address relation between
solidary speakers of unequal age or status and intimacy. We can expect
that systems will vary in the points where address is prescribed or where
options exist; Brown and Ford suggest a universal feature, however, in
saying that in all systems relatively more frequent interaction should be
related to more address variation. This they suggest is related to a
semantic principle of greater differentiation of important domains. 4


   TWO-CHOICE SYSTEM

   The brilliant work of Brown and Gilman which initiated the recent
wave of studies of address was based on a study ofT and V, their abbrevi-
ation for familiar vs. formal second person verbs and pronouns in many
European languages. In English the same alternation existed before
"thou" was lost. The contrast is realized in German by du and sie, in
French by tu and vous, and in Russian by ty and vy.
  One might expect two-choice systems to be somewhat simpler than a
system like Bisayan, which in Geoghegan's (1971 a) description gives
nineteen output categories. 5 But the number of outcomes can be few,
though the number of selectors is many or the kinds of rules relating them

   ,, In the system shown in Fig. 7.1, it is possible to create asymmetrical address by using
FN to a familiar addressee who cannot reciprocate because of rank or age difference and
lack of dispensation, e.g., a domestic servant. E. Hughes has noted a shift from TLN to FN
by physicians whose patients moved from private fees to Medicare. This usage is hard to
accommodate in Fig. 7.1.
  ' William Geoghegan has pointed out that in the community he studied in the Philippines,
there was probably a higher degree of familiarity than that reached by Brown and Ford's
students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In this condition, shifts were not
realized lexically, so he would not expect extreme familiarity to be related to multiple
address, only moderate familiarity. Note that extreme familiarity makes available interpre-
tability of paralinguistic and other subtle cues, which are particularly likely to be employed
for signalling emotion and function shifts in "restricted code" groups (Bernstein 1964a).
        226   Discovering Structure in Speech

complex. Figure 7.2 gives a description of the nineteenth-century rules of
the Russian gentry, as I derive them from the excellent analysis by
Friedrich (Chapter 9), which gives sufficiently full detail to permit resolu-
tion of priorities. Special statuses refers to the tsar and God, who seem
not to fit on any status continuum. Status-marked settings mentioned by




                                      +                            +




                                                                        V



                                                                    +




        figure 7.2
Nineteenth-century Russian address



 Friedrich were the court, parliament, public occasions, duels, and exami-
 nations. Rank inferiors might be lower in social class, army rank, or ethnic
 group or be servants. Solidarity applied to classmates, fellow students,
 fellow revolutionaries, lovers, and intimate friends. Perhaps it is more
 properly called familiarity or intimacy since there does not seem to be the
 prescription present in the Korean and American solidary relation. A fea-
 ture of the system which Friedrich's literary examples illustrate vividly is
 its sensitivity to situational features. Thus T means "the right to use ty"
 but not the obligation to do so. Within the kin group, household is of con-
 siderable importance because of the large households separated by dis-
 tance in traditional Russia.
    A slightly later eastern European system described by Slobin (1963) is
 given in Fig. 7.3. The Yiddish system, as described by immigrants, is
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence   227




         E




         figure 7.3
Yiddish address




 somewhat more like the American than like the Russian system in that
 deference is always given adult strangers, regardless of rank. However,
 an older person received deference, despite familiarity, unless he was a
 member of the kin group. In the American system familiarity can neutral-
 ize age.
    How have these systems changed? We have some evidence from the
Soviet Union. The Russian revolutionaries, unlike the French, decreed
V, implying that they wanted respect more than solidarity. The current
system is identical to the old with one exception: Within the family, asym-
metry has given way to reciprocal T, as it has in most of western Europe,
at least in urbanized groups. For nonkin in ranked systems like factories,
superiors receive vy and give ty:
    When a new employee is addressed as "ty," she says, "Why do I call
you 'vy' while you call me 'ty'?" "Kormilitzyn gleefully shoots back a
ready answer:" "If I were to call everyone 'vy' I'd never get my plan ful-
filled. You don't fulfill plans by using 'vy'" (Kantorovich 1966:30).
    Evidently, the upper-class habit of using vy until familiarity was es-
tablished (a system reflecting the fact that the T/V contrast itself came in
from above as a borrowing from French) has seeped downward. "A half-
century ago even upon first meeting two workers of the same generation
would immediately use 'ty.' Today things are different. Middle-aged
workers maintain 'vy' for a long time, or else adopt the intermediate form
which is very widespread among people within a given profession: 'ty'
combined with first name and patronymic" (Kantorovich 1966:81).
        228    Discovering Structure in Speech

   Kantorovich, true to the 1917 decree, complains about three features of
the current system: ty to inferiors regardless of age, ty to older kin, and
first names alone among young acquaintances. Thus he favors the more
deferential alternative in each case. Social change in Russia has been rela-
tively slow in sociolinguistic rules, has affected family life more than
public life, and has spread the practices of the gentry among the workers.
   The Puerto Rican two-choice system shown in Fig. 7.4 is quite simple,



                                                                  T




        E




                                                                  V




                                                                  T



         figure 714
Puerto Rican address



either because it is a system of children or because my analysis is based
on statistical tables not individual interviews. The data were generously
supplied by Wallace Lambert and his collaborators from a large-scale
study of comparative address systems in several cultures. Elementary and
high school students filled in questionnaires about the forms of address
given and received. In this chart, interlocale and intersubject differences
have been suppressed. The striking feature of this system is that it
requires only three discriminations. It is likely, of course, that adult infor-
mants would elaborate further details. Intimacy in this system refers to
close ties of friendship, which can occur with others of widely varying
age, e.g., with godparents, and is quite distinct from solidarity, which
arises from status alone. Adolescent girls, for example, do not give tu to a
classmate unless she is a friend.
   Lambert and his collaborators have collected slightly less detailed data
from samples of schoolchildren in Montreal, from a small town in
Quebec, from Mayenne, France, and from St. Pierre et Michelon, an
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence
                                                                         229

island colony with close ties to France, much closer than to nearby
Canada.
    The system  . of kin address varies considerably
                                            .            · In both M ayenne an d S t.
Pl ·erre   all km and   godparents     receive   tu. In Quebec     the urb        "ddl
         '          . h" d"        .     b                      '          an m, e
c lass  is moving   m  t  1s
                    . h. d .  irect10n,  . ut the  urban  lower  class ,and  th c rma. 1
r egions   from  wh,c    1t  enves   retam   an address  system   like Pue  t   R"    ,
                         • J d"         ) ·                                r O !CO S
in which distance ( m_c ~ mg age_ with the family is impor'tant. In some
families, even_ older s1?lmgs receive vous. For kin address, of course, the
sanctions are mt~afam1I~' so one would ~xpect between-family differences
to be greater dunng social change than m nonkin address. Generally, "in-
timate" means _Parents,. the~ aunts, uncl_es, and godparents, then grand-
parents. Some mterfam~ly ~1fferences might be accounted for by finding
which family members hve m the household, which nearby, and which far
away.
    Sex of address_e_e_appea~s ~o be a feature of adult systems, or may influ-
ence the probabil!tles of mt1?"1acy where there is a selector. In Quebec,
adults generally give tu to children and young men regardless of familiar-
ity. In St. Pierre (except_ ~ith upper-~lass girls,. who are less likely to
receive tu under any cond1t1ons) acquamtance legitimizes tu and is neces-
sary even in addressing children. In Mayenne, middle-class little boys
said they received tu from everyone (and reported often reciprocating to
strangers), but otherwise familiarity seems to be required, as in Puerto
Rko, in the Mayenne system. Boys generally receive T from employers,
and in the country and the urban lower class they receive T from service
personnel. It should be noted that the analysis from the children's stand-
point of what they think they receive is an interesting reflection of the fact
that people know what they should say themselves, and they also expect
some standard form from others. In analyzing the adult rule systems,
however, the children's data are not the best; the adults of rural or lower-
class background may have different rules (e.g., service personnel?) than
others.
    Elsewhere Lambert (1967b) has discussed the development of address
rules with age. There are several interesting problems in the learning of
these systems, such as the visibility of the various social selectors. One
can assume the rank gradations in an adult system might be learned late
(at least in terms of generalizability to new addressees), as would genera-
tion differentiations not highly related to age.
    A second problem emphasized by Lambert is the structure of alterna-
tion itself. Children in most language communities learn fairly early to
employ the asymmetry of first and second person (for a case study, see
McNeill 1963). Thus if they always received T and gave V, there might
be less difficulty; however, they see others exchanging reciprocal V and T
as well as asymmetrical address, and they give T to some alters. Compar-
        230    Discovering Structure in Speech

ative research should be done in natural language communities where the
language structure provides different category systems and social se-
lectors (Slobin 1967).
   The compressed presentation here of Lambert's work has indicated
several directions for research on social criteria of address selection.
Lambert has shown that these rules are sensitive indicators of differences
between social groups, and of social change. One must look beyond the
address system for independent social features correlated with address
systems of a defined type. In order to do such studies, a clear-cut formal
system for typologizing properties of address systems (like language
typologies) is necessary.
   Brown has already suggested that the dimensions of power and solidar-
ity are likely to be present in all address systems since they are the basic
dimensions of social behavior. If these are universals, we can look else-
where for ways of typologizing systems, as suggested here, according to

        I. The order of universal selectors in the rule
        2. The location of personal options (such as dispensation, located
        at rank in the rule on Fig. 7. I)
        3. Outcome types (for a given social selector, what linguistic or
        paralinguistic features most commonly realize the contrast?)
        4. Formal features of the informational system (e.g., the relation
        of input alternatives to outcomes, or the amount of neutralization)
        5. Formal type of rule for realizing insults, condescension, defer-
        ence, and so on by operations on the output of rules for normal,
        unmarked address (or on the rules themselves) (see the last sec-
        tion of this chapter)

   SOCIALIZATION
    Adults entering a new system because of geographical or occupational
 mobility may have to learn new sociolinguistic rules. A contrastive analy-
 sis of formal rules, in combination with a theory of social learning, would
 allow specification of what will happen.
    First, we can predict what the speaker will do. We can expect, on the
 basis of research on bilinguals, that the linguistic alternatives will at first
 be assimilated to familiar forms, to "diamorphs." Thus a Frenchman in
 the United States might start out by assuming that monsieur = Mr.,
 madame= Mrs., and so on.
    However, the rules for occurrence of these forms are different in
France. In polite discourse, routines like "merci," "au revoir," "bon-
jour," and "pardon" do not occur without an address form in France,
although they may in the United States. One always uses "Au revoir,
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence    231

  1nadmne" or some alternative address form. Madarne differs from "Mrs."
  in at least two ways. Unknown female addressees of a certain age are nor-
  mally called madame, regardless of marital status. Further, Mrs.+~= ,0;
  mada,ne + ~ = madame. As a matter of fact, the rule requiring address
  with routines implies that when LN is not known, there cannot be a "zero
  alternant"-some form of address must be used anyway, like the English
 "sir." As a result of these differences in rules, we can expect to hear el-
 derly spinsters addressed: "Pardon me, Mrs."
     How do listeners account for errors? Shifting at certain points in
 sociolinguistic rules is regularly available.as an option. Normally, it is in-
 terpreted as changing the listener's perceived identity, or his relation to
 the speaker. The result may be complimentary, as "sir" to an unknown
 working-class male, or insulting, as "Mommy" to an adolescent male. If
 the learner of a sociolinguistic system makes an error that falls within this
 range of interpretable shifts, he may constantly exchange predictably
 faulty social meanings. Suppose the speaker, but not the listener, has a
 system in which familiarity, not merely solidarity, is required for use of a
first name. He will use TLN in the United States to his new colleagues
and be regarded as aloof or excessively formal. He will feel that first-
name usage from his colleagues is brash and intrusive. In the same way,
encounters across social groups may lead to misunderstandings within the
United States. Suppose a used-car salesman regards his relation to his
customers as solidary, or a physician ,so regards his relation to old pa-
tients. The American using the rule in Fig. 7'. l might regard such speakers
as intrusive, having made a false claim to a solidary status. In this way,
one can pinpoint abrasive features of interaction across groups.
    Another possible outcome is that the alternative selected is completely
outside the system. This would be the case with "excuse me, Mrs.,"
which cannot be used under any circumstances by rule 1. This behavior
is then interpreted by any additional cues available, such as the face,
dress, or accent of a foreigner. In such cases, if sociolinguistic rules are
imperfectly learned, there may be social utility in retaining an accent;
wherever the attitude toward the group of foreigners is sufficiently be-
nign, it is better to be so designated than to risk insulting or offending
addressees.

  INTEGRATED SOCIOLINGUISTIC RULES
   The rules just given are fractional. They are selective regarding the
linguistic alternations accounted for. They define only specific linguistic
entries as the universe of outcomes, to be predicted. If one starts from
social variables, a different set of rules might emerge. This is the outlook
of William Geoghegan (1971 a), Ward Goodenough (1965a), and Dell
        232   Discovering Structure in Speech

Hymes (1964b), who suggests taking "a specific or universal function,
such as the distinguishing of the status or role of man and woman, deroga-
tion, respect, or the like, and investigating the diverse means so organized
within the language habits of the community, . . . [rather than] looking
for function as a correlative of structure already established." This is the
point of view taken in the last section of this paper.
   Using such an approach, Goodenough examined behavior toward a
range of statuses and found that it was possible to rank both the statuses
and the forms of behavior into Guttman scales and equivalent classes,
grouped at the same scale point (1965a). In this way, various kinds of
verbal and nonverbal behavior can be shown to be outcomes of the same
social selectors.
   Deference, the feature studied by Goodenough, may be indicated by
pronoun alternations, names or titles, tone of voice, grammatical forms,
vocabulary, and so on (Capell 1966: 104ff; Martin, in Hymes 1964d).
Rubin suggests even language change may serve the same purpose
(1962). Deferential behavior as in the Spanish-Guarani choice in Para-
guay may in some systems only be realized in special situations such as
in introductions or in making requests. If one compares an isolated seg-
ment of two sociolinguistic systems, it cannot legitimately be concluded
that a given social variable is more important in one system than the
other. It may simply be realized through a different form of behavior.
   It is not clear'how the different realizations of social selectors might be
important. Language, address, terms, pronominal selection, or consistent
verb suffixing (as in Japanese) can be consciously controlled more readily,
perhaps, than can intonation contours or syntactic complexity.
Frenchmen report "trying to use tu" with friends. Such forms can be
taught by rule specification to children or newcomers. Forms which allow
specific exceptions, or which have options so that too great or too little
frequency might be conspicuous, cannot be taught deliberately so easily.
Such rules can be acquired by newcomers only by long and intense ex-
posure rather than formal teaching.
   Some alternations are common and required; others can be avoided.
Howell reports that in Knoxville, Tennessee, Negroes uncertain whether
or not to reciprocate FN simply avoided address forms to colleagues
(Howell 1967:81-83),just as Brown and Ford noted in the academic rank
system. In a pronominal rank system, like French or Russian, such avoid-
ance is nearly impossible. Among bilinguals, language switching may be
employed to avoid rank signaling (Howell 1967; Tanner 1967). The
avoidable selector can be considered a special case of the presence of op-
tions in the system. Tyler (1965) has noticed that morphological defer-
ence features (like the Japanese) are more common in societies of particu-
lar kinship types, such as lineage organization.
         On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence            233

   This description is primarily made from the standpoint of predicting a
speaker's choice of alternatives in some frame. It is also possible to exam-
ine these rules from the standpoint of comprehension or interpretation, as
have Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14) in their discussion of social
meaning. Just as one can comprehend a language without speaking it, as
actors we can interpret the social meaning of the acts of' others without
necessarily using rules identical to our own. The relation between produc-
tion and comprehension rules remains to be studied.


          Co-occurrence Rules 6

   TYPES OF RULES
    "How's it going, Your Eminence? Centrifuging OK? Also have you
 been analyzin' whatch'unnertook t'achieve?" The bizarreness of this
 hypothetical episode arises from the oscillations between different
 varieties of speech. It violates the co-occurrence rules that we may as-
 sume English to have.
    In the preceding section, we were concerned with the selection of lex-
 ical items, pronouns, or inflectional alternatives. We conceived of each in-
 stance as involving social selectors. Once a selection has been made,
 however, later occurrences within the same utterance, conversation, or
even between the same dyad may be predictable. Whenever there is
 predictability between two linguistic forms, we can speak of co-occur-
 rence rules (Gumperz 1967).
   Co-occurrence rules could be of two kinds. The instance of predict-
ability through time might be called horizontal since it specifies relations
between items sequentially in the discourse. Another type might be called
vertical, specifying the realization of an item at each of the levels of struc-
ture of a language. For instance, given a syntactical form, only certain lex-
icon may normally be employed, and a particular set of phonetic values
may realize the lexicon. If one has learned political terms in New York
and gardening terms in Virginia, the phonetic coloring of the lexicon may
reflect their provenance in the individual's history. The most striking case
lies in the well-practiced bilingual who uses French syntax and pronuncia-
tion for French vocabulary and English syntax and pronunciation for
English vocabulary.
   In the example, the following are violations of vertical co-occurrence:


   6 Many of the concepts covered in this and the preceding section were discussed from a

slightly different perspective by Gumperz (1964b).
        234   Discovering Structure in Speech

        a. "How's it going" is a phrase from casual speech, but the suffix
        "-ing" is used, rather than "-in'," which is normal for casual
        speech
        b. An elliptical construction is used in the second utterance,
        which contains only a participle, but the formal "-ing" appears
        again
        c. A technical word, "centrifuge," is used in the elliptical con-
         struction
        d. The "-in'" suffix is used with the formal "analyze"
         e. Rapid informal articulation is used for the pedantic phrase
         "undertook to achieve"

   Horizontal co-occurrence rules refer to the same level of structure, and
might be lexical or structural. The vocabulary in the example oscillates
between slang and technical terms, the syntax between ellipsis and paral-
lel nonellipsis. In bilingual speech one may find structural predictability
independent of lexicon, as in an example of Pennsylvania German:

                         Di kau ist over di fens jumpt.

Here the syntax and grammatical morphemes are German, lexicon
English. Horizontal ~o-occurrence rules governing selection of grammatical
morphemes .are common, with lexical switching and phrase switching
allowed. Diebold (l 963) also gives examples in which Greek-Americans
who can speak both Greek and English with "perfect" co-occurrence
rules, if they employ English loan words in the Greek discourse, realize
them in the Greek phonological system. This would suggest that for these
speakers horizontal, or syntagmatic, phonological rules override vertical
realization rules.
   One of the startling aberrations in the example is the use of slang to a
cardinal. We would expect to find that deferential address forms would be
co-occurrent with formal style. One pictures a cardinal in a microbiology
laboratory addressed by a janitor who knows technical terms but cannot
fully control formal syntax and phonology! Like ungrammatical sen-
tences, sociolinguistically deviant utterances become normal if one can
define setting and personnel to locate them. This, of course, is the point.
Wherever there are regular co-occurrences, deviant behavior is marked
and calls attention to its social meaning.
   The most extreme forms of sanctions for co-occurrence specification
are likely to be found in ritualized religious speech in traditional societies.
Here it would be blasphemous to utter the wrong speech. Indeed, Gum-
perz has suggested that linguistics first began with the Sanskrit scholars'
efforts to identify the formal features of religious texts and transmit them
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence     235

unchanged. Th~; from the}pecial social constraint on alternations sprang
the concept of language.               .
  At the opposite ~xtreme are the conditions in American college lec-
turing, where technical ~en1:s, slang, and informal and formal syntax alter-
nate to s~me_ extent. Fne?nch als_o gives examples (Chapter 9) of delicate
commumcat10n of changmg relationships by shifts within conversations.


  STYLE

   Formal Style. Style is the term normally used to refer to the co-occur-
rent changes at various levels of linguistic structure within one language.
The vertical properties of such shifts have been pointed out by Joos
( 1962). Hymes ( 1964d) has commented that probably every society has at
least three style levels: formal or polite, colloquial, and slang or vulgar.
    If Hymes is right about a polite style which contrasts with the un-
marked or "normal" colloquial, it might be proposed that this is the style
preferred in public, serious, ceremonial occasions. Co-occurrence restric-
tions· are particularly likely because of the seriousness of such situations.
The style becomes a formal marker for occasions of societal importance
where the personal relationship is minimized. We would expect that the
distant or superior form of address and pronoun is universally employed
in public high style. In Fig. 7.1 and 7.2 "status-marked situations" which
call for titles and V may also call for polite style. Thus speakers who
 exchange colloquial style normally might change to this style in certain
public occassions such as funerals or graduation ceremonies.
    It might in general be the case in English that in otherwise identical situ-
 ations, an alter addressed with TLN receives polite style more than one
 addressed with FN. Howell (1967:99) reported such correlations in
 Korean.
    In Geertz' (1960) analysis of prijaji speech etiquette in Java, a distinc-
 tion is made between affixes and function morphemes controlled by co-
 occurrence rules, and honorific vocabulary (like "sir"), which is sporadic
 and which is governed in effect by rules of frequency rather than categori-
 cal co-occurrence. Since a single selection is made in the first case, he
 refers to a "styleme."
    Formal lexicon and "-ing" should be related. Fischer (Hymes 1964d)
 found that criticizing, visiting, interesting, reading, and correcting and
 flubbin', punchin', swimmin', chewin', and hittin', occurred in a single
 speaker's usage. It is not clear here whether it is lexical style or topic that
 is at issue since there were no examples of denotative synonyms realized
 through different vocabulary. Such examples, of the sort given in
 Newman (Hymes 1964d) and found plentifully in English lexicon for
          236         Discovering Structllre in Speech

body functions (e.g., urinate vs. weewee), provide clearer evidence for co-
occurrence restrictions between lexicon and structure.
  Labov (1966b) did include the "-ing" vs. "-in"' variation in his study of
style contrasts in different social strata, and found it worked precisely as
did the phonological variables. Polite style in a speaker might require a
certain higher frequency (Figs. 7 .5 and 7 .6) of postvocalic [r], or [l'5] rather


                 OO (th) Index
             1
                                 SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS




                 00
                   Casual         Careful     Reading        Word
                   speech         speech       style         lists


           fiiure 7.5
 Class and style stratification of 'th' in 'thing,' 'three,' etc., for adult
 native New York City speakers (Labov 1966).



 than [d] in, e.g., "this," and of "-ing." While the variables differentiating
 polite from casual style tended to be the same in different classes, the
 precise frequency reached for each variable was a function of class too
 (Labov 1966). Thus his evidence suggests co-occurrence rules for gram-
 matical morphemes and phonology. Labov (1966b) and Klima (1964)
 consider the formal description of phonological and syntactic style fea-
 tures, respectively.                  ·

    Informal Style. In trying to sample different styles while interviewing,
 Labov made the assumption that speakers would use a more formal style
 during the interview questioning than at other times. He used several
 devices for locating such shifts contextually: speech outside the interview
 situation, speech to others usually in the family, rambling asides, role
 playing (specifically, getting adults to recite childhood rhymes), and/-
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence             237

                  (r) Index
             80
                                  SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS




             oo~=:::::=:==----'--~
              Casual          Careful   Reading   Word    Minimal
              speech          speech     style    lists    pairs

          figure 7.6
Class stratification of 'r' in 'guard,' 'car,' 'beer,' 'beard,' etc., for
native New York City adults (Labov 1966).



answers to a question about a dangerous experience. He found that when
"channel cues" (changes in tempo, pitch range, volume, or rate of
breathing) indicated a change to casual or spontaneous speech within a
speech episode, the phonological features changed. In the examples illus-
trating the shifts, lexicon and syntax changed too.
   It is commonly the case that as one moves from the least deferent
speech to the most, from the informal to the ceremonial, there is more
structural elaboration and less abbreviation. Probably, this difference is a
universal, for two reasons. One is that elaboration is a cost, and is
therefore most likely in culturally valued situations or relationships
(Homans 1958). The other is that a high degree of abbreviation is only
possible in in-group communication. While ceremonials may be confined
to a sacred few, wherever they have a public function and must com-
municate content, we assume that this principle of elaboration holds.
Elaboration could be defined with respect to a surface structure, or to the
complexity of imbedded forms in the syntax, or some such criteria. A
very brief poem might, in fact, in terms of rules and "effort" of compres-
sion, be more complex than a discursive report of the "same" content.
Some forms are unambiguous: suffixed versus unsuffixed forms, as in Jap-
anese honorifics or polite verb suffixes; titles versus nontitles; and so on.
   From a formal grammatical standpoint, ellipsis is more complex than
nonellipsis since the grammar must contain an additional rule. It is not
       238    Discovering Structure in Speech

clear how ellipsis might be handled in a performance model. However,
ellipsis in the syntactical sense is clearly more common in informal
speech.
   From Soskin and John's (1963) text of a married couple we find the fol-
lowing:

                        Bet you didn't learn it there.
                        Your name?
                        Want me to take it . . .
                        Wanna take your shoes off?
                        Not that way!
                        Directly into it.

The formal rules for sentence contractions and ellipsis are readily written.
  Another form of ellipsis is that used in conversational episodes in
second-speaker forms or to complete one's own earlier utterances. From
Soskin and John (1963):

                             That fish, Honey.
                             Like this?
                             Undulating!
                             Towed!
                             With both of them!
                             Well, I could.

   These forms of ellipsis are learned. Brent and Katz (1967) found that
anaphoric pronominalization is rare in young children; it is obligatory in
second-speaker rules. Bellugi ( 1967) found also that contractions occur
later than uncontracted forms in children, except as unanalyzed mor-
phemes.
   Semantic compression is also available, in casual speech among in-
timates (see Ervin-Tripp 1968). In slang the alternates are primarily lex-
ical. As Newman (Hymes 1964d) has pointed out, the actual forms used
are not necessarily different, but in sacred or slang contexts they take on a
different meaning, so in speaking of slang vocabulary one must include
both form and its semantic features. Since slang is highly transitory bY
definition, it will be understood and correctly used only within the group
or network where it developed or to which it has moved at a given time.
Thus one might predict that the selection rules for slang should restrict it
to addressees to whom one claims a solidary relation. Thus a college lec-
ture laced with slang is a claim on the identification of the audience.
   Phonetically, a form which occurs in casual speech more than in polite
 styles is rapid speech, which entails horizontal changes.                /
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Altemation and Co-occurrence    239

                  What are you doing?   [hw ddar ju 'duwilJ]
                  Whaddya doing?        [hwddji 'duwil)]
                  Whach <loon?          [wdc 'dun]

 There are regular phonetic alternations related to rate, e.g.,

          l. Retention of syllable of major stress and peak pitch
         2. As degree of speeding increases, loss of weakest stress
         3. Loss or assimilation of semivowels
             [r] in postvocalic position lost
             [d] + [y] - [j]     e.g., Whadja do?
             [t] + [y] - [c]     e.g., Whaca doin?
         4. Possible loss of marginal phonological distinctions like /hw/
         vs. /w/, perhaps as part of casual speech style
         5. Centralization of unstressed vowels

   There is a reverse set of rules available to speakers used to these alter-
nations. The extra-slow style may be employed in sounding out for a dic-
tionary or over the telephone. Thus normal "school" may become slow
[sikuwil]. Many of these rules derive from the rules of English stress
(Chomsky and Halle 1968).

    Styles Related to Occupation. Language changes related to work arise
 for three reasons. One is that any activity brings with it objects, con-
 cepts, and values which are talked about by specialists in that activity,
and indeed may be known only to them. Another is that whatever soli-
darity an interacting work group may achieve, or whatever identification a
reference group (e.g., psychologists or transformational linguists) may
stimulate, it can be alluded to by selection of appropriate alternatives in
speaking or writing. Many instances of abbreviations in factories, or of
work-group slang, or of technical terminology synonymous with collo-
quial vocabulary, must have this second feature. Further, the particular
communicative conditions might give rise to some features-signal tower
communication, headline style, the special syntax of short-order restau-
rant speech. While the slang and lexical features of restaurant speech can
be found in kitchens, fast unambiguous oral communication needed
between waiter and cook alone may lie behind the special syntax Brian
Stross reported (see Ervin-Tripp 1969). Examples are the structure
(number)+ (category)+ (modifier) which he found in such orders as "two
bacon and" for bacon and eggs and "LT plain" for lettuce and tomato
sandwich. Virtually all registers, including that of social-science writing,
have syntactic as well as lexical features. The details of the co-occurrence
rules for such styles remain to be studied.
        240   Discovering Structure i11 Speech

   Baby Talk. In many languages a special style is employed in talking to
infants, which changes its features with the age of the child. A cross-
linguistic comparison has been made by Ferguson (1964b). In English,
baby talk affects all levels of structure.
    Most speakers are likely to be conscious of baby-talk lexicon, as they
often are of the lexical features of styles. Baby lexicon includes words
like potty, weewee, bunny, night-night, mommy, and daddy. Many other
words in adult speech become appropriate for speaking to infants when the
suffix "-ie" is added. Drach and liis colleagues ( 1969) found that speech to
children is syntactically simpler and more repetitious, and contains fewer
errors and hesitation pause and more ellipsis resulting in shorter sen-
tences than speech to adults.
    Phonological effects and paralinguistic features are especially conspic-
 uous. Samples of talk to infants show certain general phonetic changes
 such as palatalization. Most striking is the higher pitch the younger the in-
 fant, and the use of a singsong, wide-ranging intonation. Observations of
 the social distribution of this style show it more common in addressing
 other people's children than one's own. For instance, nurses use the
 paralinguistic features at least in persuading children; and in cooperative
 nurseries, comparison of own-child and other-child addressees indicates a
 distinct shift to more age attribution with own child.
    Children themselves use many of the features of adult baby talk very
 early. In address~ng younger siblings they may adopt lexical and para-
 linguistic features of the adult baby talk as early as age two. In role play
 they use phrases and address terms from baby talk, e.g., "Goo-goo, little
 baby," and freely employ the sing-song intonation in addressing "babies."
  In other respects their role play is stereotyped rather than strictly imita-
 tive, for example in the frequent use of role names, and it may be that the
 use of the intonational and lexical features of baby talk may function sim-
  ply as role markers in their play.

  Linguistic Repertoire. Co-occurrence rules refer to the selection of al-
ternates within the repertoire of a speaker in terms of previous or con-
comitant selections. The range of possible alternates should be known in
such a study. In an American monolingual, the range is likely to include
the styles just discussed, and perhaps an occupational register. Labov has
pointed out, however, that it is rare to control a very wide stylistic range
unless one is a speech specialist and that upwardly mobile persons usually
lose the "ability to switch 'downwards' to their original vernacular"
(1964b:92).
   In many parts of the world, a code that is relatively distinct from the
casual vernacular is used in formal situations. This condition, called
"diglossia" in Ferguson's (Hymes 1964d) classic article, may, because of
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence   241

  the greater code difference, be accompanied by more co-occurence
  restriction than is style shifting, where the common features of the styles
  may outweigh their differences. Examples where the codes are related are
 Greece, German Switzerland, Haiti, and Arab countries. Standard lan-
 guages coexisting with local dialects are somewhat less perce1,'tually sepa-
 rable; historically, the dialect does not usually maintain itself except pho-
  netically, though there may be ideological resistance to borrowing from
 the standard (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). Differential access to the
 everyday use of the standard, in combination with valued social meanings
 of a dialect, as in the case of nonstandard urban English or creoles such as
 those of Hawaii and Jamaica, may preserve variation.
    Where diglossia takes the form of bilingualism (Fishman 1967), one
 might at first assume that the co-occurrence rules would primarily govern
 situations requiring the high form. Such a condition exists in many Ameri-
 can bilingual communities, with English as the high form. However, these
 are not usually pure cases since English is the vernacular if there are cas-
 ual contacts outside the immigrant community. Under these conditions
 there can be considerable interpenetration (Gumperz 1967).
    Co-occurrence rules in common-sense terms refer to "language
 mixing." Some bilingual communities have strong attitudinal opposition
 to switching (usually they mean lexical co-occurrence). Blom and Gum-
perz (Chapter 14) found that in a Norwegian village speakers
were unconscious of the use of standard forms and were very upset to
hear tapes showing lack of co-occurrence restrictions in behavior. In
practice, the maintenance of coordinate or segregated systems depend
on social factors. Coordinate bilingualism is possible if there is a complete
range of equivalent lexicon in both systems, and social support for the
bilingualism. If this is not the case, some topics cannot be discussed, some
emotions cannot be conveyed, and borrowing, perhaps surrounded by a
routine disclaimer frame, will occur. The other social condition permitting
such segregation in diglossia are the closed network circumstances re-
ported by Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14) where certain topics and
transactional types simply would not occur in casual discourse. Thus
American researchers can find rich grounds for the study of behavioral
support or loss of co-occurrence rules, either in English style, registers,
dialects, or multilingualism.



       Shifting within Discourse

  Situational Shifting. The social features alluded to in the alternation
rules so far discussed have primarily been features of situations or per-
         242     Discovering Structure in Speech

sonnel present. Sociolinguistic alternations based on these kinds of "sit·
uational shifting" (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14) can be seen in the
two-year-old's use of baby-talk intonation to his baby sister, the mul-
tilingual child's selection of language for a new servant, the slum Afro·
American child's loss of classroom copulas when on the playground, the
Hawaiian college boy's selection of standard lexicon when a mainland
stranger arrives, and replacement, in addition, of the creole's intonation if
the stranger is a girl. These consistent behavioral shifts may or may not be
related to normative rules of the type shown in Figs. 7 .1 to 7.4 derived
from informant's reports.·

   Speech Acts. In addition, however, such shifts can occur within oc·
casions. They might be related to functions, speech acts, or topics. "What
did he say?" "He asked her for a match." "Why did he do that?" "J-le
wanted to meet her, talk with her." The first characterization describes a
speech act, request. The second refers to the function of the act. We as·
sume that all members of social groups can identify speech acts, that theY
are units in the cultural system. "What are you talking about?" "We were
just saying hello." HWe were telling jokes." "I was introducing Joe.''
Saying hello, telling jokes, and introducing are speech acts subordinate to
organized exchanges like parties and joint work, often located within
them by sequencing rules (Schegloff, Chapter 12) or rules of proprietY
(e.g., one introduces guests at a formal dinner, but not the waitress),
   In these examples, the speech acts are labeled units. It is possible that
some consistencies in rules of behavior imply the existence of a unit,
though it may not appear in the folk taxonomy of speech acts. For ex·
ample, suppose that one cannot say to a stranger on the street, "My name
is George Landers. What time is it?" or "Hello, sir. Where is the post of·
flee?" Then to formulate the rule, one needs a category of information
requests addressed to strangers in order to indicate that greetings and self·
introductions are excluded. Another indication that such units may exist
is that they commonly occur in bilingual interaction; there may be a tan·
guage shift between two different speech acts.7
   There is no reason to assume that speech acts are the same everywhere,
Certain special forms of discourse, like poetry and speechmaking, rnaY
have components known only to specialists. Whether and why there are
labels used in the teaching of these performances is itself an interesting
cultural study.
   Speech acts in English include greetings, self-identification, invitations,
rejections, apologies, and so on. The ones identified so far tend to be rou·

   7 Recent work in transformational grammar has specified certain speech acts as perfor!11~~

tive verbs in the deep structure of sentences. Then the syntactic rules would have to contat
the rules for neutralization or ambiguity I allude to later.
          On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence         243

  tines, b~t we can expect to find other more abstract units as research
  Proceeds .

     . Topics. When conversations have an explicit message with informa-
   honal content, they can be said to have a topic. "What are you talking
   ~bout?" "Nothing." "Gossip." "Shop talk." "The weather." ",The war."
    .We were having an automobile discussion about the psychological mo-
   tives for drag racing in the streets." In everyday discourse, the question of
  topic is most likely to occur in invitations or rejections so that the answers
  are such as to exclude a new arrival or give him enough information to
  Participate. Besides selecting personnel for participation, topics may be
  governed by a continuity rule. In a formal lecture in a university there is a
  ~onstraint on continuity and relevance, just as there is in technical writ-
  Ing, Where editing can enforce the constraint. Evidences of constraint are
 ~Pologies for deviation: "That reminds me . . . " "Oh, by the way . . . "
    l'o get back to the question . . . " "To change the subject . . . " Cul-
 tural rules regarding speech events may include constraints as to the
 grounds for relevance.
      lqolseth (1967) has found in analysis of some group interaction that
 topical episodes are key factors in speakers' tactics.

  A Performer's tactic may be to direct his episode as a probe into the preceding epi-
  sode. In contrast, in another situation his tactic may be to extend and elaborate
 some antecedent episode. On still another occasion his tactic may be to close off
 ~nd limit a previous episode . . . . These tacticaltypes are based on, or defined in
   erms of, two qualities abstracted from the performances: (a) the episode locus of
 ;~leva?ces drawn from the existent conversation resource, and (b) the purpose of
    e episode with respect to surrounding episodes .

  . l'he three examples given by Kjolseth would involve topical continua-
 tion, recycling, or change, respectively. These general features of speech
 events require that members be able to identify relevance but not neces-
 s ·1                                                                     ,
  an Y to label topics.
 B?here is yet a third form of evidence that topic ma~ be a cultu~al u.nit.
    linguals can frequently give reliable accounts of topical code sw1tchmg,
;n? their behavior often corresponds in general to their accounts (Ervin-
   flpp 1964).
. We can thus argue that topic, like speech act, must be a basic variable in
1
 nterac t·ion on the grounds that speakers can 1denh
                                                  ·     'fy top1ca
                                                               · l c hange as
;enerating code shift that speakers can sometimes report what they are                    pi

n~king about, and th~t topical continuity, recycling, a11d change may be                  'I
                                                                                         'J

    rrnative features of speech events, or at least relevant to values about
good conversations One might in fact find that there are rules for topic
Sel ·                 '           '       '
    ection just as there are for address.
        244   Discovering Structure in Speech

    Messages. The analysis of messages refers to two-term relationships,
whereas topic is a single term allowing for simple taxonomies. Here we in-
tend to refer only to the manifest or explicit message. Our reason for the
distinction is that latent content categories typically refer to intent (see,
e.g., Dollard and Auld 1959; Katz 1966; Leary 1957; Marsdo 1965). Our
position here is that intent or function is part of the constellation of social
features out of which inter~ctiqn is generated. It can be realized in a vari-
ety of ways, of which verbal interaction is only one. We seek regular rules
by which one can relate underlying categories to their formal realizations,
 or the formal features of interaction with their social meanings. Failure to
 discover such rules has led to considerable discouragement with the evi-
 dent arbitrariness of content classifications in studies of natural discourse.
    The manifest message, however, is the product of the social features of
 the situation as well as of intent, and is therefore inseparable from the in-
 teraction product. All the selections made in realization of the functions
 of communication can carry some kind of information, whether about the
 speaker, the situation, the hearer, or the topic. In detail, given alternations
 cannot do all at once, though they may be ambiguous as to which is in-
 tended. In this case, we intend the message only to refer to what is said
 or implied about the topic. There have been numerous summaries of ways
 of classifying messages (e.g., Pool 1959). A recent innovation is logical
  analysis (Verori et al. 1965). The underlying structure of logical linkages
  between terms in utterances was analyzed, then semantic relations were
  described in terms of logical relations between pairs of units (e.g., equiva-
  lence, inference, conjunction, specification of conditions, sequential rela-
  tions, explanation, opposition, causes, . . . ). A Markov semantic analysis
  revealed very large and consistent differences between subject groups,
  which were, in the study reported, clinical categories, but could be texts in
  a different society.

   FUNCTION OF INTERACTION

    Criteria. If sociolinguistic alternation rules have intents or functions as
 their input, then one strategy in identifying such rules is to isolate a func-
 tional category and examine its realizations. We assume that the theory of
 functions itself must lie outside of sociolinguistics, in another social sci-
 ence. However, an examination of the various functions realized by
 speech is of considerable importance in view of the evidence that these
 functions change with age and vary with culture.
     Firth (Hymes 1964d) was among many who sought to identify the func-
  tions of speech. He included phatic communion (creating solidarity or
  alluding to it); pragmatic efficiency (accompanying work); planning and
  guidance; address; greetings, farewells, adjustment of relations, and so
        Oil So ciolinguistic Rules: A ltemation a,zcl Co -oc· currence   245

  on; Sp eech as a commitment,
                          .         (courts·, promises) · Pri'm any,
                                                                 ·i h'1s view
                                                                          .   of
        tion was the social value of the act.
  f unc             · I     b ·      db
      Function.is hke ~ to ~ viewe Ya psychologist from the standpoint of
  the interacting parties, either the sender or the receiver. Soskin has played
  tapes to listen~rs and.asked them to report what they would say and what
  they would tfunk. This method assumes that function is effect. It is close
  to Blom and Gumper~' (Chapter 14) criterion of social meaning.
      A second method 1s to analyze actual instances of acts and infer
  whether the. receiver's resp~ns~ sati~fied the speaker, eith~r from his
  overt behavior or     ?Y   que~tiom~g him. This method includes action,
· response, and reaction. _It 1s d.enved from Skinner's (195 7) theory that
  speech is operant behav10r which ~ffects the speaker through the media-
  tion of a hearer. Feedback and audience consistency presumably "shape"
    tfective speech in the normal person. In this method, function is iden-
  ;ified by classes of satisfactory listener responses.
      If intent is imputed to a speaker on the basis of some features of the
   content or form of his speech, a third form offunctional analysis appears.
  This of course, is the method of latent content analysis (e.g., Katz· 1966).
      A ~et of function categories was devised to account for the initiation of
   dyadic interaction, _on the ~asis . of a corpus of instances of action,
                                               !
   response, and react1?n (Erv1~-Tr~pp ~64). The list includes eliciting
     oods services, and mformat10n; 1mphc1t requests for social responses;
   g       '             .      .            .
     ffering of information or mterpretahons; expressive monologues; rou-
   ~nes, and speech to avoid alternative activities.

   Mands. One of the simplest functional categories to examine is one
 which Skinner ( 1957) called the mand since it is defined by the fact that
 normally it elicits goods, services, and information. One could broaden
 the definition by specifying that the intent is to obtain these since it is
 clear that under some conditions, the actor does for himself.
   Soskin and John (1963) devised a category system, intermediate
 between the strata suggested here, which will serve to illustrate the
 breadth of possible realizations of mands. Suppose the actor wants the
 loan of a coat:
                "It's cold today" (structone).
                "Lend me your coat" (regnone).
                "I'm cold" (signone).
                "That looks like a warm coat you have" (metrone).
                "Br-r-r" (expressive).
                "I wonder if I brought a coat" (excognitative).

  It is immediately obvious that these ways of getting a coat are socially dis-
  tributed in a nonrandom way and would be quite ineffective under many
  circumstances.
        246     Discovering Structure in Speech

    If we look at the category which most explicitly realizes a mand, and
can be said to be pragmatically unambiguous, the regnone, we find that
there are a variety of speech acts that might be regnones, including
requests and orders: "Ask him to close the window" vs. "Tell him to
close the window." "Shut the window!" vs. "Would you mind closing the
window?"
    At a lower stratum, the syntactical, the request often involves some
kind of speech act neutralization. For example, one can joke by misin-
terpreting a speech act, by saying "yes" to "Would you mind closing the
 window?" or to "Do you have a match?" or "Do you know where the
 post office is?" or to "Is George there?" on the phone, and doing nothing
further. In each of these cases, the request is realized through a yes/no
 question. From the standpoint of syntax, such a response is quite
 appropriate. Under specifiable social conditions, however, these become
 the normal, unmarked form for realizing requests in the mature speaker.
 When one does not in fact want to speak to George but merely to know
 whether or not he is home, some other form must be chosen, or a fast foot-
 note added.
     These instances are highly stabilized cases of an apparent neutral-
 ization which has become the normal form for request and therefore
 would in fact be described by many speakers as "asking X to close the
 window" and so on, if they were told to convert these into indirect speech.
     In addition, one finds many instances of the selection of the normal
 form for realization for some other function to represent a mand. Quite
  possibly, of course, in closed networks these become as usual as the
  "asking" examples.
     In a term paper, Bessie Dikeman and Patricia Parker ( 1964) found that
  within some families mands were neutralized between equals most of the
  time, less than half the time from seniors to juniors, and in a minority of
  cases when juniors spoke. Examples from their papers were these

 "Where's the coffee, Dremsel?" (it is visible) (to wife) [gloss: bring me the coffee].
 "Is that enough bacon for you and Thelma?" (to husband) [gloss: save some for
 Thelma].
 "It's 7: 15 (to daughter) [gloss: hurry up].
 "Mother, you know I don't have a robe. Well, we're having a slumber party
 tomorrow night" [gloss: buy me a robe].
 "Oh dear, I wish I were taller" (to adult brother) [gloss: get down the dishes].

   In factory settings, subordinates usually received commands, some-
 times requests. Carol Pfuderer (l 968) found that in a university office
 commands were reserved for familiar peers. Within this category of
 addressee, however, if the speaker was within the territory of the re-
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Altenfation and Co-occurrence   247

 ceiver, requests were used instead. If distance separated them, a com-
 mand might be altered by a tag question making it a request ("Ask Marcy,
 why don't you?"), "please," address terms, or rising pitch. If the addressee
  was not a peer, requests, pragmatic neutralizations, or displacement of
 addressee occurred. Pragmatic neutralizations included information ques-
 tions ("Has anyone gone to the accounting this week?" "Whose turn is it
 to make coffee this week, Ruby?") and statements "(It's stuffy in here."
 "Someone has to see Dean Smith."). In cases where the obvious receiver
 was much higher in rank, there might be displacement to a peer addressee
 but use of a highly deferent request form ("Joan, would you please get the
 stapler for me?"). In this example the nearest person to the stapler was a
 standing senior professor, not Joan, who was seated farther away.
    Mands require action on the part of the alter so that the obligations and
 privileges inherent in the social relations of the personnel are likely to
 result in different linguistic realizations of the same function. We might
expect displacement where possible in cases of extreme deference,
perhaps pragmatic neutralization allowing the receiver an option of in-
terpretation. In situations of high mutual nurturance where intimacy
makes interpretability likely, as in many families, the basis for pragmatic
neutralization may be quite different, perhaps serving to mask mands out-
side the normal duties of the receiver. In the same way, Stross (1964)
found that "please" was used only for requested acts extraneous to
duties.
   We can expect that where variant address forms exist, they might alter-
nate in minds. Milla Ayoub (1962), in a discussion of bipolar kin terms in
Arabic, points out that in addition to proper names, a mother can call her
son by either of two terms that also can mean "my mother." When a
parent wishes to cajole or placate a child, but not command him, he uses
these bipolar terms. This is particularly the case with sons. They are
never used in direct commands.
   In discussing current address practices in the Soviet Union, Kan-
torovich ( 1966) mentions that friends might switch from ty to vy with first
name and patronymic when help is asked for.

   Episodes. Watson and Potter ( 1962) used the term episode as a unit of
analysis, which can terminate whenever there is a change in the major
participants, the role system of the participants, the focus of attention,
and the relationship toward the focus of attention. This term, rather than
topic, was chosen to differentiate cases where a similar apparent topic
might be within a person's own experience, part of an ongoing activity, or
an abstract referential category, as in a discussion.
  The different episodes that Watson and Potter's units identify probably
will find some reflections in formal changes. These shifts arise from:
        248   Discovering Structure in Speech

        a. Sequencing rules concerning speech acts within a speech
        event.
        b. Changes in the activity, if any, accompanying the interaction
        (e.g., a ball game or dinner preparation).
        c. Disruptive events such as the arri.val of new personnel, ac-
        cidents like bumps or sneezes, and phone calls which require rou-
        tines to right the situation.
        d. Shifts arising from unexpected responses of alter, leading to
        changes in function.
        e. Function satiation. Presumably, functions oscillate in pat-
        terned ways in stable groups.
        f. Topic-evoked shifts in functions. Under the impact of instruc-
        tions or of associative dynamics, the topic may change in the
        course of the conversation. These changes can alter the available
        resources for ~he participants and thereby change their intent. If
        the topic shifts from child rearing to economics, e.g., a bachelor
        may find he has greater resources for displaying knowledge and
        receiving recognition. He may speak more, use more technical
        vocabulary, perhaps even to the point that listeners do not under-
        stand. There were many such instances in studying the speech of
        bilinguals, in which topic and language were controlled by in-
         structors (Ervin 1964; Ervin-Tripp 1964, 1967).

   Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14) found that among university-trained
villagers, many features of standard Norwegian appeared when topics
shifted from local to nonlocal. In the offering of information, speakers
with a large repertoire of speech alternatives can maximize credibility by
adopting the most suitable role. Thus discussion of university structure
might elicit use of more standard Norwegian forms than would gossip
about instructors, where student speech features would be adopted, es-
pecially those shared with addressees.
   As functions change, address too may change through a conversation.
David Day described in a term paper changes when an argument oc-
curred in a class regarding an instructor's views of a student's beliefs.
Address progressed from FN to Dr. .LN to Professor LN. In comments
with other students as addressee, LN was used in reference to the in-
structor, in front of him. Concurrently, slang decreased.
   When there is agreement about the normal, unmarked address form to
alters of specified statuses, then any shift can convey intent. Friedrich
(Chapter 9) gives convincing cases of momentary shifts at times of per-
sonal crises. He points out that in a public setting friends would mask
their intimacy with V; in talking of personal topics they would invoke
their friendship with ty and remove it for impersonal topics with VY·
          On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence          249
                                                                I

     Kantorovich (1966:43) gives similar examples in current practice:

   I say "ty" to my subordinates, but certainly don't do this in order to belittle them.
   I know that they'll answer me with "vy," but this isn't grovelling-it's a mark of
  respect. . . . Somebody I call "ty" is somehow closer to me than someone I have
  to call "vy." . . . If I get mad at one of my workers, and he needs a bawling out, I
  frequently switch to "vy." When cursing, many people who customarily use "ty"
  suddenly switch to "vy," and many who are on a mutual "vy" basis switch to "ty"
  (Kostomarov 1967).

    In systems with age or rank asymmetries of address, the use of the
 more deferential form to an equal or subordinate can either mean that they
 are receiving respect or being put off at a distance. To account fully for
 the interpretation of such actions by the receivers, we need to know the
 other signals, such as tone of voice, other address features, and the avail-
 able ambiguities of the relationship. In the case of courtship, e.g., the im-
 portant dimension is closeness or distance, and address changes would be
 so interpreted .

    . Rules for Switching. I have emphasized throughout this chapter that
   1!nguistic interaction is a system of behavior in which underlying func-
   h.ons are realized through an organized set of output rules within a social
   situation. If the function requires conveying an explicit message with in-
   for~ational content, some semantic information is presented in the alter-
   natives selected. Other alternatives require the representation of social in-
  formation.
      In address~e-dominated rules like those in Figs. 7.1 to 7.4, effects of
  function switching can be represented as transformations upon the un-
  marked outputs of the addressee rules. They may take the form of simple
  replacements, e.g., if familiarity exists, different names may be employed
 as a direct representation of varied functions. Thus a node or selector for
 familiarity and for function is added to the branching rules. Tyler's ( 1966)
 rules are of this type.
     ~lorn and Gumperz (Chapter 14) have suggested that metaphori~al
 switching simply consists of treating the addressee as though his social
 features were different. In this case, the rule acts upon the selection
 Points. In the case of Dr. Poussaint, hostile intent was represented in the
Selection of "adult"-rather than "adult +"-at the first selection point.
;.resumably, this possibility suggested itself by the existence of a tradi-
  tonaJ southern system of address to Blacks in which all but the very ol_d
(aunty) were addressed as children. When Harvey Sacks asked his
l?CLA students to play the role of boarders with their families in vaca-
tion, their silence, politeness of address and requests, and withdrawal
       250    Discovering Structure in Speech

from gossip and semantic ellipsis in conversation were interpreted by
their families as evidence of sickness or hostility.
   The Russian example implies that a simple transformation upon the
output forms can express hostility; however, the inversion may be a
consequence of transformation of selection features, making the friend a
nonfriend, and the formal associate an inferior. Such general rules are a
necessity if familiarity is absent since they permit the interpretation of
new instances on the basis of the hearer's general knowledge of the
system of sociolinguistic rules.
   "Rules" could refer to structures for generating or interpreting speech,
to reports of beliefs about practices, or to standards of correctness. We
have given examples of all three kinds of rules, not always clearly distin-
guishing them. Labov's (1966b) index of linguistic insecurity compared
the last two.
   Behavioral rules and reports about behavior are likely to be systemat-
ically different. If the norms contain a probability or frequency factor,
speaker's beliefs are, instead, categorical (Labov 1966b). Beliefs about
the social selectors in sociolinguistic rules are more likely to include fea-
tures of personnel, since categorization devices realize these (Sacks in
press) features, than to note functional variation. Syntactical variables
are not remembered (Sachs 1967) beyond the time needed for decoding
unless they are markers, helping us classify the speaker. In multilingual
 communities phonological, syntactic, and semantic shifting is often not ob-
 served (Gumperz 1964a, 1967). Even borrowed vocabulary is unnoticed
 by members if values oppose borrowing (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter
 14). Some speakers cannot remember the language in which they just
 spoke, let alone report it to an interviewer.
    These phenomena are not merely grounds for distrusting members'
 reports. Just as reference to a relative (Tyler, Chapter 8) is affected by
 more than the semantic dimensions of reference, so the act of describing,
 even to oneself, is a product which could realize a variety of functions.
 Member's reports are likely to be as sensitive to social variation as any
 speech act mentioned in this chapter, and therefore prove as amenable to
 study. We expect then that rules based on report will have a systematic
 relation to behavioral consistencies, but not a one-to-one correspondence.
          8

         Context and Alternation
         in Koya Kinship 'T enninology'
         STEPHEN A. TYLER




          Stephen A. Tyler is associate professor of anth
                           .    .                         ,    ropo 1ogy
          at Tulane Umvers1ty.
                         .   .          He received his doct ora t e f rom
          Stanford Umvers1ty and has taught at Tulan . d h
              .    .    f C .,,       .                       e an t e
          Umvers1ty o a 1horma, Davis. The present ch t ·
            · 1        · d          .                          ap er 1s a
          slight y revise version of an original paper first             b-
          lished in the American Anthropologist (Tyler 1966{:nd
          draws on several
                      .       years
                                  ,     of fieldwork among the K oya, m  ·
          central India. Tyler s current interests center on formal
          analysis of culture, kinship, language, and social structure.
             Tyler himself puts his chapter in context in the follow-
          ing words:

          "The a~alysis of kinship terminologies has traditionally operated
          only with the genealogical denotata of the nominal stems of kin
          terms, with little reference to the social and linguistic contexts
          in which kin terms are used. Such analysis has usually resulted
          in the delineation of a single, unitary structure. Problems of

          Revision of "Context and Variation in Koya Kinship Terminology" by
          Stephen A. Tyler. Reproduced by permission of the American Anthro-
          pological Association from the American Anthropologist, Vol. 68, pp.
          693-707 (June, 1966).

   1 The research on which this chapter is based was carried out in India in 1962-1963, sup-
ported by a Foreign Area Training Fellowship from the Ford Foundation. An earlier version
of this chapter was presented at the Timber Cove Conference on "Approaches to Inter-
personal Relations in South and Southeast Asia," April 9-12, I 965, sponsored by the Insti-
tute of International Studies, University of California, Berkeley. It has benefitted from the
conference discussion, and from specific suggestions made by David M. Schneider, Ge_ne
Hammel John Gumperz, and Alan Beals. Yehudi Cohen and David Olmsted read earlier
drafts and provided useful comments, and some suggestions by Dell Hymes are incorporated
in the present formulation, revised from the original paper (Tyler 1966).

                                            251
252   Discovering Structure in Speech

alternation are seldom systematically accounted for; one reason
for this failure is that an explanation of it requires information
on the social and linguistic environments as well. Focusing on
alternation indicates that there is no single, unitary structure of
kin terms defined solely on the basis of genealogical compo-
nents. This implies that typological analysis or formal analysis
is based on genealogical criteria (Hammel 1965) alone is apt to
obscure important data. It also indicates that the traditional
"genealogical method" is an inadequate field method-if the
ethnographic aim is to predict "who will be called what" (ab-
stract provided with the original publication).

This is a point which has been made by several social
anthropologist critics of the earlier componential analyses
(Schneider 1968, 1969).
   This chapter thus focuses on the speech event as
source of data for analysis and on the rules of alternation.
The subject matter is central to social life, and to social
anthropology. Formal analysis of kinship terminology
(often called componential analysis) is a subject of con-
troversy to those who equate it with a highly abstract
linguistic approach that neglects social realities. Tyler
shows here that there need be no conflict. Indeed, he
adapts a standard device of formal analysis in linguistics
(use of rules involving a slant line to indicate the par-
ticular environment in which a form or structure occurs)
in order to deal with social diversity in use of terms.
Formal analysis is a way of being explicit and succinct.
Tyler shows that because of their explicitness and suc-
cinctness, the operations involved in such analysis may
lead to unanticipated discoveries. Whether the final
 analysis is adequate or not depends on the adequacy of
 the elicitation questions and on the use of data obtained
 by the investigator who employs it. An interest in
 context-sensitive rules (as the kind of statement em-
 ployed by Tyler is known in linguistics) is indeed likely to
 be a major avenue for more adequate integration of lin-
 guistic and social analysis. Geoghegan ( 1970) provides a
 similarly ethnographically realistic formal analysis of
 address terminology.
   Tyler cites variations in kinship terminology that can
 be ascribed to dialect differences but focuses on alternate
 terms which, although pertaining to two different lan-
 guages, are part of the repertoire (Gumperz 1964a) of a
      Context and Alternar·10      . K
                                11 111   oya Kinship Terminology   253
     single speaker The erro f 1. . .                                .
     of a smg          ·
              · 1e 1anguag       · r1o 1m1tmg analysis to a matena
                                                                 .     1
         I  .     h"
     re atJons 1p betwe    '   e Is c
                                    h  ear from. the outset. Nor 1s the
       .                       en t e terms m the two languages a
     simple one of use                f
                     .       , now o one language now of the other.
     Rat h er choice of t             f              '
               .'        . . erms rom one language or the other
     (and, m certain interesting cases, choice of semantic
     st~ucture) depends more specifically on social features; in
     this case, on the religious, as well as ethnic, identity of the
      speaker and hearer.
          Within any one language's set of terms there are al-
      ternative subsets of terms, depending upon' such features
      of context as formality, co residence in a patrilaterally
      extended household, and intimacy; and choices apply not
      only to the part of the term that designates a relative but
      also to pronouns and suffixes that occur with it. Among
       the contextual factors determining choice are joking re-
       lationships, composition of audience (e.g., presence or
       absence of the one referred to), major cultural scenes
       such as weddings and festivals, and a particular genre of
       wedding songs sung in competing rounds between the
       parties of bride and groom. Age of the speaker, use in the
       home, relative status, and friendship are also noted. The
       derivative suffixes are closely tied to formality and re-
        spect. Interesting here are the correlation of frequency of
        use with those audiences containing the relatives most
        likely to be critical of lack of respect, and the tying of
        formal behavior to only certain phases and participants in
        a wedding. As Tyler observes, a complete analysis would
        entail analysis of all those conditions that define scenes
        and relationships as formal, etc. (see Frake, Chapter 3).
        The present chapter serves to show that formal analysis
         of terms can be extended into a systematic relationship
         between the full range of cultural contexts. Additional
         related readings are provided by Romney and D' Andrade
         (1964), Tulisano and Cole (1965), Geoghegan (197 la),
         and Pas sin ( 1966).


        Kinship terminologies, like most other linguistic phenomena, are
  ually analyzed as a single unitary structure. Alternate forms may not be
~~together excluded, but they are ~eldom explained, either formally or
functionally. The following is a typical example:
        254    Discovering Structure in Speech

the language is particularly prolific in terms of endearment . . . for the formal
"father," Sinhalese has appa, appocci, and tatta as alternatives for piyc1 . . . .
When complications of this sort are ignored, the structural pattern of Sinhalese
kinship terminology is identical to that of the Tamil . . . . Practical usage does
not correspond strictly to this formal design . . . the terms ayiyii (elder brother)
 and malli (younger brother) may be used indiscriminately, even of individuals
 who should, according to formal principles, be classed as nwssina (cross-cousin)
 (Leach 1960: 125-126, English italics mine).

   There is no mention of the environment in which these alternate forms
occur, nor is there any indication that the kin types denoted by these
alternate forms are structurally equivalent. Aside from notable exceptions
(Schneider 1953, 1955; Frake 1960; Fischer 1964), anthropologists seem
to have remained content with the simple environmental differentiation of
terms of reference and terms of address. Other than this rather rudimen-
tary classification, interest in alternate forms has been expressed in terms
of historical reconstruction (Spoehr 1947) or culture change (Bruner
 19 5 5). This is not to denigrate these approaches; for as long as one is con-
cerned only with typology, historical reconstruction, or culture change,
 the methods may be adequate. But in the realms of functional and formal
 analysis many significant data are neglected by these methods. For ex-
 ample, it is the boast of formal analysts that formal analysis will provide
 the minimum information for deciding "who will be called what" in any
 given kinship system (Lounsbury 1964:352). Yet I know of no formal
  analysis that has dealt adequately with the problems of alternate usage.
 To be sure, problems of synonymy and homonymy have been discussed
  (cf. Wallace and Atkins 1960:64-65, 67-68), but no system has been
  fully analyzed to account for these factors. To some extent this failure
  may be attributed to the fact that most formal analysis has been concerned
  with lexical items or, more appropriately perhaps, with the nominative
   stems of kin terms. It is my contention that, so construed, formal analysis
   does not provide the minimum information for deciding who will be called
   what in any kinship system (cf. also Swartz l 960:397; Hymes l 964a:26;
    l 964b:97-98).
       Elsewhere I have argued that a part of the variation occurring in kinship
    terminologies can be explained by the contradictions entailed in the role
    systems of the class of kinsmen denoted by a given term (1967; cf. also
    Schneider 19 5 5: 17). In this chapter I want to explore further implications
     of role specificity for variations in terminology. Specifically, I will attempt
     to relate terminological variation to the contexts in which terms of refer-
     ence are used. In essence, the problem of variation here is the same as
     that, for example, in phonology. What are the restrictions on the occur-
     rence of a given form, and/or in what environments does a given form
         Context and Alternation in Koya Kinship Terminology         255

occur? My general aim is to provide a statement of the contexts in which
variant forms occur, and thus to fulfill one part of the minimum require-
ment of the ethnography of kinship-the prediction of who will be called
what.


        The Ecology of the Speech Community

          Following Gumperz (1961, 1964b), the delimitation of the
"natural unit" to be used is based on patterns of communication. Within
any given geographical area it is possible to arrive at any number of such
units, depending on the level of abstraction desired; but for the purposes
of this chapter the communication matrix is limited to direct face-to-face
contacts among people who are socially defined as kinsmen. Justification
for this procedure lies in the fact that such a limitation partially obviates
the necessity for a rigorous definition of communication networks on the
basis of frequency counts.
    Starting from any ego in a Kaya village it is possible to trace a widely
 ramifying group of people who are classed as kinsmen (cuTTaaku). 2 In
 this particular region the class of kinsmen may include people who are
 non-Kaya. It may include members of various Telugu-speaking castes
 and Koya- and Telugu-speaking members of the Christian caste.
    Members of all these groups are resident in villages along the banks of
 the Godavari River and in close proximity to the road from Bhadrachal-
 lam to Nugur. Within the villages, it is common for each group to be
 physically separated into distinct hamlets, which are named for the sub-
 group occupying them. All the constituent groups of the population are
 further segmented by occupational specializations and kin-group align-
  ments. Occupational specialists include blacksmiths, stoneworkers, and
  religious performers and practitioners; kin-group alignments include
  clans, lineages, phratries, and castes.


          Types of Alternation

          At the level of abstraction that refers to the whole Koya tribe, it
  is possible to demonstrate that alternations in the use of terms of refer-
  ence for kinsmen occur at the phonological, morphological, and lexical
  levels. For example, the term aaN e (sister's son) among the Gommu

    2
      The transcription is broadly phonetic. Long vowels are marked by double vowels,
  retroflex consonants by upper case letters.
        256   Discovering Structure in Speech

Koyas is realized in another dialect area as aaN De. In still other area
there is an isogloss D/R, especially in pronominal endings. Thus, GuTTa
Koya has eelaaRi (younger sister) and Gommu Koya has eelaaDi. Other
variants occur in morphology, particularly with reference to the distribu-
tion of plurals. More important, however, for present purposes, are the
variations occurring within a communication network where dialect dif-
ferences are minimal.
   Within a group of socially defined kinsmen and, further, within the
subset that interacts with some frequency, there exist lexical and morpho-
 logical variations inexplicable by simple reference to dialect differences.
 Table 8.1 records a set of alternate lexemes used by a single informant for
 the group of people classed by him as kin.


        Lexical A lternation-1

         Taken in traditional terms, the items in list 1 are Telugu and the
items in list 2 are Koya. Isolating the terms in this fashion, however, is
misleading, for all forms occur in the linguistic repertory of a single
speaker. Considered as such, certain complications arise. For almost the
entire set of kinsmen there would appear to be alternate lexemes. The
problem would be simple_ if a bilingual Koya used items from list l when
speaking Telugu and items from list 2 when speaking Koya. We would
then have a simple case of code switching in which a Koya speaker em-
 ploys the Koya terms when speaking to a Telugu. Since most Telugus
 know little if any Koya, the relationship would be asymmetrical. In a
 given linguistic interchange involving the use of kin terms, the speaker's
 choice of the appropriate term would be determined by: ( 1) the kin relation
 obtaining between the speaker and hearer (or between the speaker or
 hearer and the person referred to), and (2) the linguistic repertoires of
 both speaker and hearer. Thus, given a Koya speaker and a Telugu hearer,
 the term chosen would be Telugu. Such switching would be facilitated if
 the semantic structures of the two codes were identical. The situation to
 be described, however, is somewhat more involved.
     The semantic distance between the two kinship codes is relatively slight.
  A componential analysis reveals the structure of the two codes, outlined
  in Table 8.2. The components are: (l) sex; (2) generation; (3) cross versus
  parallel; (4) relative age. For convenience, the component of relative sex
  of speaker is omitted and the relative age of linking relative is subsumed
  under relative age. The relative effectiveness of each component is indi-
  cated in the preceding table. It will be noted that the parallel-cross distinc-
  tion does not obtain in the Telugu system at the +2 and-2 generations. In
         Context and Alternation in Kaya Kinship Terminology                 257

         table 8.1
          Generation                      Telugu          Kaya

Grandparental (+2)
    FaFa                            taata              daadaal
    MoFa                            taalll             taataa/
    FaMo                            avva               emma
                                    avva               kaako

Parental (+ 1)
    Fa, FaBr, MoSiHu                ayya,               eyya,
                                      taNDri,             tappe
                                      nayana,
                                    /1(/{l/1(/

    MoBr, FaSiHu, WiFa, HuFa maama                      maamaal
    Mo, MoSi, FaBrWi           aama,                    evva,
                             talli                        talluru
    FaSi, MoBrWi, WiMo, HuMo atta                       pooye
Own (0)
   EBr, Emale parallel cousin       ll/111{1            enna
   Emale cross cousin, ESiHu    baava                   baaTaal
   ESi, Efemale parallel cousin akka                    ekka
   Efemale cross cousin, EBrWi  vodina                  enge
   YBr, Ymale parallel cousin   tammuDu                 tammuNDu
   Ymale cross cousin YSiHu     baamaaradi              eruNDu
   YSi, Yfemale parallel cousin cel/elu,                eelaaDi
                                  celli
    Yfemale cross cousin, YBrWi marada/11               eendaaDi
 Children's (-1)
     So, (x)BrSo, (o)SiSo            koDuku,            marri
                                       kummaruDu,        peeka
                                       abbayi
     (x)SiSo, DaHu, (o)BrSo          alluDu             aaNe
     Da, (x)BrDa, (o)SiDa            ammayi,            mayyaaDi
                                        k11t11ru,       piikiDi
                                     biDDA
     (x)SiDa, SoWi, (o)BrDa          kooDa/11           koDiyaaDi
 Grandchildren (-2)
     SoSo                            ma11amaD11          tammuNDu
     DaSo                            manamaDu            eruNDu
     xDaDa                           manamaraal          eelaaDi
     SoDa                            manamaraal          eendaaDi
          Note: These are minimal ranges of application of the terms to kin. For a fuller
          treatment, as well as formal analysis and discussion of morphology, see Tyler
          1964, 1965, 1967. (x) indicates male speaker; (o) indicates female speaker. E and
          Y denote elder and younger respectively. The remaining abbreviations are stan-
          dard: Br Brother, Da Daughter, Fa Father, Hu Husband, Mo Mother, Si Sister,
          So Son, Wi Wife. A parallel cousin is a child of one's mother's sister (MoSi) or
          father's brother (FaBr); a cross cousin is a child of one's mother's brother (Mo Br)
          or father's sister (FaSi); i.e., in the chain of consanguineal kin through whom one
          is related, the sex of the links remains the same ("parallel") or changes ("cross").
           258       Discovering Structure in Speech

            table 8.2
Telugu
                         Male                                     Female

       Parallel                     Cross         Parallel                        Cross

+2                    taata                                    avva
+I   ayya                           amma       mawna                            atta
      llllllll                      akka       baava                            voe/in a
 0
      tamm11D11                     cellelu    baamaaracli                      maraclal11
-I    koD11k11                      kuturu     all11Du                          ko0Dal11
-2                     manamaDu                                mwzamaraal

Koya


+2     claaclaal                    taataal     emma                            kaako
+I     eyya                         maamaat     evva                            pooye
       enna                         baaTaal     ekka                            enge
 0
       taam11ND11                   eruND11     eelaaDi                         eenclaaDi
-1     marri                        aaNe        mayyaaDi                        koDiyaaDi
-2     tamm11NDu                    er11NDu     eelaaDi                         eendaaDi
             Note: Certain aspects of morphology have been omitted. For details, see Tyler
             1967. In Koya tamm11N D11 in O and -2 generations is analyzed as a pair of hom-
             onyms, and similarly for the other pairs (eruNc/11, eelaaDi, eendaaDi) in the
             younger sibling/cousin and grandchild generations (cf. Tyler 1964). As indicated
             with Table 8.1; "parallel" indicates that the consanguineal links in the relation-
             ship are all of the same sex, and "cross" that this is not so; thus ayya (Fa, FaBr,
             MoSiHu) is +I, Male, Parallel; amnw (Mo, MoSi, FaBrWi) is +I, Female,
             Parallel; maama (MoBr, FaSiHu, WiHu, HuFa) is+ I, Male, Cross; etc.


all other respects, the two systems are coordinate. Hence, in terms of
semantic structure, the transform (for a Koya speaker) from one system
to the other is fairly simple. It entails only the following rules. 3

                 1. [Koya] {FaFa
                            MoFa

                 2. [Koya] {FaMo
                            MoMo
                                         --       [Telugu] Parent's Fa

                                                  [Telugu] Parent's Mo

                 3. [Koya] foSo
                            DaSo

                 4. [Koya ] {SoDa
                             DaDa
                                          --      [Telugu] Child's So

                                                  [Telugu] Child's Da

   3
     The notation system used is that developed by Romney (1964). m indicates male,ffe-
 male, a any sex, ± an ascendant link, -a descendant link, o a sibling link. Since grandson is
 the reciprocal of grandfather, the reciprocal operation (*) says to read * as±. The first mem-
 ber of an expression is ego; e.g., English father would be a+ m.
         Context and Alternation in Koya Kinship Terminology     259

These relationships can be restated in a notation system developed by
Romney (1964), in which the first member of any expression is ego; a
indicates person of any sex; m indicates male, f female; + indicates an
ascending link, - a descending link, and O a sibling link. English father
would thus be a+ m, daughter a - f.

        I. {a+ m+ m

        2.
            a+f+m
           {a+ m+ f
                           --     a+a+m

                                  a+a+f
            a+f+f
        3. {a- m- m
            a-f-m
        4. ra-f-f
            -m-f
                          --      a-a-m

                                  a-a-f

The individual rules show little or no advantage to the formal notation
system. An advantage does appear, however, when we try to state the
generalization that underlies the individual rules. Notice that the rules
apply just in the case of relatives two generations removed from the
speaker (ego). Rules l and 3, and likewise rules 2 and 4, thus could and
should be united. In words,

5. [Koya] male lineal relative, two generations removed, through
a male link, and male lineal relative, two generations removed,
through a female link [Telugu] male lineal relative, two genera-
tions removed.
6. [Koya] female lineal relative, two generations removed,
through a male link, and female lineal relative, two generations
removed, through a female link [Telugu] female lineal relative,
two generations removed.

Since grandson and grandfather are reciprocals of each other, that is, the
same except for the direction in which generatio·n is counted, it is possible
to define a symbol, *, for a reciprocal operation (that is, read * as±), and
to state the generalizations of 5 and 6 much more economically and
clearly:

        5. {a* m*m
            a* f * m
        6. {a* m * f
             a* f * f
                          --     a* a* m

                                 a*a*f

The simplification takes advantage, not only of reciprocal * but also of the
symbol a, representing either sex. Indeed, taking further advantage of a,
- - -., ., _-_ _. ., .~. ._-, ~,. .,. . y.---


                                     260        Discovering Structure in Speech

                    all the rules can be expressed in a single succinct statement:

                                        a* m * a
                                     7 {                          a* a* a
                                      · a* f * a -

                    In words, wherever two terms for a lineal relative two generations re-
                    moved are differentiated in Koya by the sex of the lineal link, they are
                    not so differentiated in Telugu.
                      To complete the statement of the rules, it is necessary to provide data
                    on the environment in which this transform is permissible. Since we have
                    said that such a transform occurs when a Koya speaker refers to a kins-
                    man in a linguistic interchange with a Telugu-speaking kinsman, this can
                    be formulated as follows: 4

                                         a* m * a
                                                                  [a * a * a/K - T]
                                     8. {a * f * a        -
                    This is to be read: the kin types comprise under a * m * a and a* f * a are
                    realized as a * a * a in the environment of a Koya speaker and Telugu
                    hearer.
                      For all significant environments, the distributional statement is:

                                     9. [a* m * a]            _        a*a*a          -T
                                         a*f*a                         a*a*a
                                                                   {   [:: r* */J -
                                                                       a *m *a
                                                                                         t
                                                                                      elsewhere
                                                                       a* f * a

                    That is, to take the particular case of reference to a grandfather (a+
                    a+ m), the kin types father's father and mother's father are realized as
                    parent's father in the environment of a Kaya speaker and Telugu hearer;
                    they are realized as either parent's father or as father's father and mother's
                    father (separately) in the environment of a Kaya speaker and a Telugu
                    Christian hearer; in all other environments they are realized as father's
                    father and mother's father (separately). (The parallel statement, mutatis
                    mutandis, would hold for grandmother (a+ a+ f), grandson (a - a - m),
                    and granddaughter (a - a - f).

                         4
                             The notation / denotes "in the environment of." Thus,
                                                    a + f + m-a + a + m/k-t
                                                    a+m+m
                     indicates that a + m + m and a + f + m are both realized as a + a + m in the environment
                     of a Koya speaker and a Telugu hearer.




                                                                                                            rd
            Context and Alternation in Koya Kinship Terminology   261

       The added variation with regard to -t requires a further restriction of
    the social environment. To my knowledge, this alternation occurs only
    Where a Kaya Christian male is married to a Telugu Christian female. In
    these cases, the linguistic repertories of husband and wife in kinship
    terminology tend toward isomorphy, and code switching probably occurs
   only when the presence of his wife's relatives, for example, the husband
   Would use the appropriate Telugu term in speaking to her.
      In general, at the level of semantic structure these two transform rules
   plus the accompanying distributional statement enable one to predict the
   appropriate denotata of a term. Once these operations have been per-
   f?rmed, the lexical realization of the remaining categories involves only a
  simple process of substitution, or word-for-word translation, for example,
  a~N e-aalDu/k - T. Realization of the appropriate lexeme can be pre-
  dicted on the basis of the foregoing rules, with the exception of a Koya
  Christian speaking to another Christian (k - k, k - t). For k - k, the
  following additional statements are necessary:

                        a - f- m-manamaDu /k _ k
                        a - f - f-manamaraal

   That is, when referring to a daughter's child (son or daughter), Koya
   Christians use the term from the Telugu list in Table 8.1.
      Lexemic realization for these categories when a Koya Christian's
   addressee is a Telugu Christian (k - t) is dependent on the transform
   occurring in rule 9, above:
     The rules are to be read: (l) when father's father and mother's father
   are merged as parents' father, and son's son are merged as child's son,
   one's daughter's son is called manamaDu in the environment of a Koya
   Christian speaker and a Telugu Christian hearer; under the same cir-
  cumstances one's daughter's daughter is called manamaraal; when the
  merger does not occur, then (in the same environment) one's daughter's
  :on is called eruNDu, one's daughter's daughter_koDiyaaDi. That is, in
   he _one case a Telugu, in the other a Koya term 1s used.
     Smee Koya and Telugu are both Dravidian languages, many of the kin
- terms are cognate. Some are related by quite simple sound changes, for
  etxample, Telugu a-, Koya e- (avva, evva); Telugu -D, Koya -ND-
 ihanzmuDu, tammuNDu). Note, however, that the semantic :ange of
    ese cognate forms varies. amma in Telugu denotes Mo, while Kaya
 enzma denotes FaMo; Telugu taata denotes FaFa amd MoFa, while
 Koya taataal denotes only MoFa. Given the phonological similarity of
 these terms, one might expect a certain amount of inte1ference. This does
 not seem to be the case here-although it could ·be argued that in other
 areas, where differences occur in the extent to which Koyas dominate the
        262    Discovering Structure in Speech

ecology of the speech community, interference stemming from these
sources could be a cause of changes in the terminological system. This,
however, is outside the domain of this chapter.


        Lexical Alternation-I I

         The second type of lexical alternation relates more to situational
alternates within a kinship code than it does to varieties of codes. In the
preceding schedule of terms, it will be noted that within each of the codes
certain categories have alternate lexemes. These occur with terms for
father, mother, younger sister, son, and daughter in the Telugu code, and
for father, mother, son, and daughter in the Koya code. There are two
problems involved here: (1) Are the denotata of all variant forms equival-
ent; (2) if so, are there environments that limit the distribution of some
variants?
   In the case of taN DRi/ nayana/ ayya/ naana, the first two denote father
and father's brothers, with appropriate morphemes denoting relative age,
that is, a+ m(om) 0 • 1• 5 naana, however, denotes only an actual father
(a+ m), and ayya denotes father's brothers (a+ mom), but not father.
In summary:

              taN DRi/nayana denotes a+ m(om) 0 •1          [Fa(FaBr)]
              naana          denotes a + m                  [Fa]
              ayya           denotes a + mom                [FaBr]

Since ayya and naana are not structually equivalent to the other terms,
they need no longer concern us here. taN DRi is generally regarded as the
more formal and respectful term; nayana is less respectful and more in-
formal. The major variable for these two then is the extent to which one
wishes to confer respect on the referent. In summary statement:

                              a+ m(om) 0 •1//F/taNDRi
                                           //If/ nayana

  F indicates formal and If informal. The set of situations in which in-
formality is permissible for this range is unrecorded.

            For eyya/tappe:      eyya denotes a+ m(om)         Fa (FaBr)
                                 tappe denotes a + m           Fa
            For evva/talluru:    evva denotes a+ f(of)         Mo (MoSi)
                                 talluru denotes a+ f          Mo

  5 Parentheses indicate an optional expansion; superscript numbers indicate the number of

times the expansion may be employed. Thus a+ m(om)0 •1 will generate a+ m and a + mom.
          Context and Alternation in Kaya Kinship Terminology          263

   For anna/talli I have been unable to isolate significant differences in
either denotata or environment, other than a general impression that talli
more frequently denotes a+ f and may be more formal than amma. For
lack of better data, these two will be considered synonymous in the do-
main of kinship reference.
   It should be noted that all these structural differences have the effect of
transforming the system at the + I consanguineal level from bifurcate
merging to bifurcate collateral.
   cellelu/celli differentiate at both structural and environmental levels.
cellelu denotes younger sister and younger female parallel relatives (fY) 5
that is a(+a 1) 0 •1 o(aj-)0 •1fu, (i = j), while ce/li denotes only YOUNGER
SISTER (aofY) unless one's female parallel relatives reside in the same
patrilaterally extended household. In this case the structural differentia-
tion is negated. celli in reference to a younger sister is further differentiated
from cellelu as "sweet" (tiyyani) usage. I have little data on the specific
environments in which "sweet" usage is permissible, but believe its use is
restricted to the home among consanguineal kin. In terms of the speaker's
intention, celli denotes an intimate relation between speaker and younger
sister. These distributions are formulated as:

                     a(+a;) 0 •1 o(aj-) 0 •1f 11   celli/In
                                                   celli/PEH
                                                   celli/H
                                                   cellelu/elsewhere

  PEH indicates patrilateral extended household, In intimacy, Hin the
home. The ordering of rules is as given. Both parenthetical expressions
must be expanded or not expanded together.
  Note that the highest frequency of alternation occurs among categories
of kin who are apt to be members of the same household. This is in line
with the general expectation that maximum differentiation occurs in areas
of high interest and interaction. Further, for the population being dis-
cussed, it is precisely between the reciprocals Fa/Ch and Mo/Ch that the
greatest role inconsistencies occur. (For further discussion of this point,
see Tyler 1964.)


        Morphological Variation

         Both in Koya and Telugu, the referential use of kin terms in-
volves not only the selection of the appropriate noun stem but also the
selection of appropriate possessive pronouns and derivative suffixes.
(Thus, in Koya and Telugu a kin term may consist of possessive pronoun
+ noun stem ± derivative suffixes.) It can be argued that this is in the
         264     Discovering Sti·ucture in Speech

domain of syntactic function, but it is easier in the present context to
treat the whole problem under morphology. Whether syntactic or mor-
phological, the main point is that the mere knowledge of the appropriate
noun stern and its denotata is not sufficient to generate acceptable state-
ments of kinship reference.
   The distribution and use of possessive pronouns and derivative suffixes
in first person reference have previously been discussed for Koya (Tyler
1967). The first and second person possessive pronouns in Koya and
Telugu do not differ. They are: maa- "our, my" formal; naa- "my" in-
formal. Second person possessive pronouns are nii- "your" informal,
mii- "your" formal. The derivative suffixes occurring with kin terms for
Telugu are: -ayya, "sir"; -gaaru, "sir, madam"; for Koya: -aal, "mature
rnale." 6 Table 8.3 indicates the distribution of first person possessives
and derivative suffixes for Telugu.


         Possessive Pronouns

         For Koya, the distribution of possessives is similar to that in
Table 8.3 with the exception that maa- and naa- alternate for elder female
relatives.
  The alternation of naa-/maa- for baava and vodina is paralleled in
Koya, and the reasons for the alternation seem to be identical. On the
one hand, these are 'elder relatives whom one should respect, but on the
other hand, they are people with whom a joking relation is permissible.
Since a female is given somewhat more latitude in a joking relation, sex of
speaker is a determinant. The next determinant is audience composition.
This involves two factors: (1) The presence or absence of the referent,
and (2) the presence or absence of the speaker's elder consanguineal
relatives and/or the presence or absence of non-kin. If the referent is
absent, maa- is used; if present, naa-. The latter is abandoned when the
speaker's elder consanguineal relatives or elder non-kin are present. The
major situational determinants are weddings and a festival, the Bhitna
paN Dum. One phase in a wedding ceremony involves a form of group
singing in which the bride's party and the groom's party sing competing
rounds. As the songs frequently refer to the sexual attributes of a baava
or vodina, these terms occur in the songs with the informal possessive
naa-. Since Christians no longer use the Koya ceremony, the significant
environments for this variation are K - T and, with the appropriate
semantic transform, K - K. During the Bhirna festival a mock marriage
  6
    There are others, for example, -Du, -Di, -a(a)/(11), and so forth; but for the most part
these are not optional in the same sense as -aa/, -gaam, -ayya. The English glosses are only
handy approximations.
                                                                                               ,--
                                                                                           /
                Context and Alt        . .
                                  ernatwn 1t1 Kaya Kinship Terminology             265
               table 8.3

                               First Person Possessive                     Derivative Suffix
(Tel11R11) Stem

 taata*
 avva
 naana
                         -     maa-

                                 +
                                 +
                                                  /l{l(l-



                                                    +
                                                    +
                                                                     -ayya

                                                                       +
                                                                                         -gaaru

                                                                                               +
                                                                                               +
 nayana                          +                                     +
                                 +                                                             +
 taNDRi                                                                                        +
 ayya                            +
                                 +                                                             +
 amma                                                                                          +
 tal/i                           +
                                 +                                                             +
 maama                                                                                         +
 atta                            +                                     +                       +
 llfl/l{I                        +                                                             +
 tammuDu                         +                                     +                       +
 baava                                              +
 vodina                          +                  +                  +                       +
 akka                            +                  +                                          +
 celle/u                         +                                     +                       +
 baamaaradi                                         +
 maradalu                                           +
 koDuku                                             +
 abbayi                                             +
 kummaruDu                       +                  +
 ammayi                                             +
 kuturu                          +                  +
 biDDa                                              +
 alluDu                                             +
 kooDalu                                            +
 manamaDu                                           +
 /ll(//l(/Jn(//'{/(1/                               +
                                                    +
               * Where maa-and naa-alternate derivative suffixes do not occur when naa-
               is used. This differs substantially f~om the system in T-T and t-t, and wherever
               T-to t-is speaker. In these cases maa-does not alternate with 1uw-.


is performed. At this time the distribution of maa-/naa- is the same as for
a real wedding.
   These distributions may be formulated as:

                         a+ aioa1 - ae, (i ~ j), PP 1 naa-/f
                                                            naa-/R
                                                            naa-/WS
                                                            ,naa-/elsewhere

f denotes female speaker, R referent present, WS wedding songs, and PP 1
first person possessive pronoun.
        266   Discovering Structure in Speech

   Alternation of maa-/naa- with terms in the +2 generation is largely a
function of the age of the speaker. Between grandparents and grand-
children there is usually a close, intimate relationship. The care of children
is frequently entrusted to elder grandparents who are no longer able to
work actively in the fields. Consequently, young children use naa- when
referring to these relatives. The social setting and audience composition
may also be important here. It js my general impression that mature
 speakers use naa- in reference to-these kinsmen in the home among other
 household members. My principal informant asserted that this was the
 case, but since my access to Kaya homes was limited, I have little to
 substantiate this. These rules may be summarized as:

                             PP 1   naa-/1
                                    naa-/H
                                    naa-/elsewhere

 I denotes an immature speaker, H inside the home.
    The alternation of maa-/ naa- for ammayi and abbayi is unexplained.
    The use of possessive pronouns in second person kinship reference, un-
 like that in first person reference, confers status or respect on the hearer,
 not on the referent of the term. The pronouns in question are: mii- "your"
 formal; nii- "your"' informal. The pronouns are the same for both Telugu
 and Koya. The following example should indicate the process involved
  here.
     K-T: mii tammuDu ee pani ceestunnaaDu, "what work is your younger
  brother doing (now)?" Since a younger brother is low status, one might
  expect agreement between the possessive pronoun and the noun stem,
  that is, nii tammuDu rather than mii tarnmuDu. Because nii tammuDu oc-
  curs in other situations, nii- and mii- are not inalienable in the sense that
  ,wa- and maa- are. The important variable here concerns the relative
  statuses of speaker and hearer. Briefly, the sources of status are educa-
  tion, wealth, occupation, categorical membership in kin groups, and per-
  sonal characteristics. Since all sources of status are not isomorphically
   distributed in specific population segments or kin categories, the use of
   possessive pronouns in second person reference cannot be predicted
   simply on the basis of categorical membership in K, k, T, t groups or from
   knowledge of the kin relation obtaining between speaker and hearer. The
   precise details of this system cannot be delineated in this brief discussion.
   Suffice it to say that when the speaker's status is lower than the hearer's,
   mii- occurs; when higher, nii- occurs. If the status of speaker and hearer
   are approximately equivalent, mii- and nii- are in free variation. Between
   old or ritual friends, nii- is used irrespective of status differences. This;'
   may be formulated as:                                                      ,
        Context and Alter/lat·1011..
                                   111
                                         Koya Kinship Terminology   267

                               PP 2/mii-/       L-H
                                   /11ii-/      H-L
                                   /nii-/       F-F
                                   /nii-, mii-/ E-E

L indicates low status H h · h
ppz second person     ' , ,·'g status, E equivalent status, F friends, and
                    possessive pronouns.


        Derivative Suffixes


          D_erivative suffixes in Koya and Telugu differ in the lack of a
Koya eqmvalen_t for -gaaru. Where -gaarn occurs for females in Telugu,
Koya h~s <P: W~th ~he ~xception of its occurrence with Esi, Telugu -ayya
is identical m d1stnbution to Koya -aal.
    Unfortunately, data are not at all certain here, but the most important
variable seems to be the definition of the situation. In part, this is deter-
 mined on the basis of audience composition. First, if the referent of a
given term is present, derivative suffixes are used; when the referent is
 absent, they are used less frequently. Second, if the audience consists of
 people whom the speaker wants to impress by his knowledge of respectful
 behavior, the derivative suffixes will be used. The strength of this situa-
 tion is such that one of the most disparaging comments one can make
 about another is that he is not respectful. Since one of the most critical
 audiences consists of one's elder affines, the presence or absence of elder
 affines is usually sufficient to predict the appropriate use of derivative
 suffixes. Further, among affines, those who are related to ego by only a
 single affinal link (in contradistinction to those with whom a series of such
 affinal links may be traced) are apt to be more critical. These distributions
  may be formulated as follows:

                                OS           OS/R
                                             OS/A 1
                                             </>, OS/A2
                                             cp/elsewhere

 DS denotes derivative suffixes, R referent present, A 1 single link affines,
 A2 multiple link affines, and <jJ no DS.
   In more general terms, certain social gatherings are considered t_o be
 more formal than others. Marriages, for example, are formal occas10ns.
 Formal behavior, however, is required only in specific phases of the
 wedding ceremony, or only from the central actors. The rules of formal
        268   Discovering Structure in Speech

behavior are not enjoined for peripheral actors-in fact, the reverse is usu-
ally the case. Analysis of these situations is too complex for brief sum-
mary, but enough has been said to indicate that a general rule may be
formulated:

                            DS     /DS/F
                                   cp/elsewhere

F denotes a formal situation.


        Conclusion

         This paper does not conclude that the rules presented are suf-
ficient to predict who will be called what in entirety. There are too many
gaps, both in data and in analysis. Yet, sketchy and incomplete as this
analysis is, it should at least indicate that the appropriate use of Koya kin
terms cannot be predicted solely on the basis of a formal analysis pre-.
dieted on the assumption of genealogical reckoning. There are many
contextual factors to be taken.into consideration. Among these are: social
setting, audience composition, sex and age of speaker/hearer, linguistic
repertoires of speaker/hearer, and-most difficult of all-something that
might be called the speaker's intention. Many of these and others have
been previously discussed (Ervin-Tripp 1964:86-94; Gumperz 1964b:
 143-147; Hymes 1964e:15-25) and need not receive further comment
 here. The important point is that this chapter demonstrates the possibility
of extending formal rules to these contextual factors. It is not an argument
 against the validity of formal analysis; rather, it is an argument for the
 extension of formal analysis to include extra-genealogical factors.
    Even though the Koya case may seem rather extreme, it should demon-
 strate that less complex types of variation can probably be easily handled
 by analysis of the sort used in this chapter. In addition, it should empha-
 size that problems of variation (or of general ethnography) call for some-
 what different field techniques than those that have traditionally been
 used. There must, for example, be a greater emphasis on the recording of
 kin terms as they are used in concrete and/or simulated ethnographic
 situations (cf. Conklin 1964; Hymes l 964e: 11). The anthropologist
 armed only with a genealogy and an informant or informants and using
 traditional methods of questioning cannot hope to cope with the problem
 of variation. This is not intended as a blanket condemnation of such
 methods. They are useful in collecting some kinds of data and can provide
 a base of information on which it is possible to build, but it should be
 abundantly clear from other publications (e.g., Frake 1962; Metzger and
                                                                               f-
                                                                           l
        Context and Alternation in Kaya Kins/zip Terminology   269

Williams 1963) that if our aim is ethnographic description, then field
methods must be adequate to the task. -
   Finally, these data show that much of what has usually been simply
regarded as unimportant variations on the basic structural pattern of a
terminological system consists of highly important differentiations, not
only in denotata but in role expectations as well. The structural pattern of
a system emerges as an ordered relation between these differentiations
and contextual features.
9

Social Context and Semantic Feature:
Cf he Russian Pronominal Usage
PAUL FRIEDRICH




Paul Friedrich is professor of anthropology at the Uni-
versity of Chicago. He received an M.A. degree in Rus-
sian at Harvard before taking his doctorate at Yale, and
has since taught structural linguistics and cultural anthro-
pology at Harvard, the University of Michigan, and the
University of Pennsylvania. In addition to two years of
fieldwork among the Tarascan Indians of Mexico, he has
done research on Russian semantics, on the Malayalam
language (along the Malabar coast in India), and in the
reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European semantic
systems.
    Friedrich himself sums up neatly the interest of pro-
nominal usage: "Just two short words, operating in all
speech events that involve two interlocutors, signaled the
relative position of each pole in hundreds of dyadic rela-
tionships." There is good precedent for use of a his-
torical-philological approach in anthropology, but its ap-
plication to a major literary tradition may seem unusual.
Literature, however, is well established as a source for
analysis of address (see Metcalf 1938; Brown and Ford
 1961 ), and Friedrich makes clear the value of nineteenth-
century novels in particular. Not only are they rich in in-
dications of common usage but they also bear witness to
dynamics of use and implicit meanings. Friedrich points
 to a conscious awareness in Russian society of ex-
 tralinguistic signaling as sharing the same dimensions as
 pronouns, for example, the seduced girl whose eyes say
 ty while her words are vy (in Tolstoy's Resurrection).
 Here, as so often where the two conflict, the nonlinguistic
 modality overrides the linguistic (see the concluding
                            270
                  Social Context and Semantic Feature    271

   remarks on "latent ty"). And, Friedrich suggests, use of
   such data, by grappling with inner as well as overt
   speech, may enable one better to understand personal
  strategies and to anticipate linguistic change (cf. Howell
   1968).
     The pronouns are linked with other sets of terms which
  would have to be taken into account in a complete study
  of address. Pronominal selection is therefore merely a
  special case of the type of sociolinguistic selection dis-
  cussed by Ervin-Tripp (Chapter 7), Blom and Gumperz
  (Chapter 14), and Passin (1966). As Friedrich points out,
  however, focus on pronouns is nevertheless specially ad-
  vantageous. They are as frequent, easily noted, obliga-
  tory categories linking grammar with social categories.
  Here in address, he suggests, may be a surer connection
  of grammar with culture than in attempts to link grammar
  with world view.
     Ten components serve to indicate the features neces-
  sary to account for the Russian usage: social context (set-
 ting, scenes); characteristics of participants, i.e., age,
 generation, sex, genealogical distance, relative authority,
 group membership; the tone (or key) underlying a rela-
 tionship or brought to expression in it (principally soli-
 darity but also, later, sarcasm and iron:y); topic of dis-
 course; and language variety itself, i.e., dialect. The same
 discriminations underlie the symbolism of kinship termi-
 nology and, one may suspect, the other forms of socio-
 linguistic choice and switching within the society. Fried-
 rich suggests that some six to a dozen such components
 may be found to underlie all such systems; he implies that
further research might establish such a limited set of
 dimensions or universals for sociolinguistic symbolism
(social meanings) generally (see Buchler and Freeze
 1966). The present dimensions meet the test of account-
ing for nearly all the Russian evidence and of predicting
the usage in new texts.
    Notice that the discriminations are made with regard to
the social situation and relationship with which the pro-
nouns are used. The two pronouns themselves are dia-
critic directly of social distance (its presence or absence,
or greater or lesser degree). Whether the absence of
social distance signaled by ty is affectionate or contemp-
tuous, whether the presence of social distance signaled
        272   Discovering Structure in Speech

        by vy is respectful or rejecting, emerges from the interac-
        tion between the meaning of the pronoun and the
        meanings of pronouns in the twin contexts of previous
        discourse and present event (including, as noted, facial
        and paralinguistic accompaniment).
           The Russian usage is presented first from the stand-
        point of patterns of exchange within dyadic relationships
        rather than, as with the Koya in the preceding chapter,
        from the standpoint of rules for a given speaker. (But no-
        tice that to specify interlocutors, or their relevant charac-
        teristics, in the context to which rules are sensitive, can
        accomplish the same thing). After symmetrical and asym-
        metrical patterns for both vy and ty are described, Fried-
        rich turns to the dynamics of what he felicitously calls a
        stable though not static system. Having observed earlier
        that context may determine usage, but that usage may
        also define context, he presents several instances of
        pronominal "switching" and "breakthrough," including
        temporary and persistent deviance, and covert attitudes.
         Paralinguistic signaling aside, the pronominal system it-
        self provides for an expressive counterpoint within rela-
        tionships.
           This and the preceding chapter complement each
        other, each broaching an essential aspect of research into
         rules of use. Both are concerned with the social context
         of linguistic forms, the one to bring it within the scope of
         formal rules, the other to interpret the texture of use as
         well. Additional related readings are provided by Conklin
         (1962), Friedrich (1964, 1966), Goodenough (1965b),
        Hymes (1964c), Hymes (typescript), Jain (1969), Martin
        (l 964), and Nuestupny (l 968).


         Introduction

           Studies in the relation between language and culture have some-
. times focused on how a way of life is categorized through words. The
  results are often of enormous value, as in the case of a dictionary of con-
  textual definitions. But lexicographical inventories typically lack theoreti-
  cal explication.
     A second kind of study may focus on the connections between obliga-
  tory grammatical categories in the linguistic system and axiomatic distinc-
  tions in the abstract thought of a people. Controlled demonstrations are
  sometimes possible, and the conclusions may be intellectually
  challenging, but one often finds on closer inspection that the causal rela-
             Context and Alternation in Kaya Kinship Terminology                  273

  tionships are little more than suggested or asseverated (Jakobson
  1959: 142-43).
     In short, language and culture studies tend to oscillate between compar-
  atively descriptive correlations of "words and things" and comparatively
  tenuous correlations between grammar and metaphysics. Just as fruitful
  as the lexicographic and philosophical extremes have been the attempts to
  relate either speech behavior or the inferred linguistic structure to either
  the societal regularities or the patterns of a culture. 1 In what follows I
  shall attempt to demonstrate how speech usage is determined by cultural
  principles. More concretely, I shall try to show how second person pro-
  nouns were selected and understood in nineteenth century Russia. To do
 this I will first evaluate the evidence for pronominal usage. Then I will
 show how pronominal usage covaried with genealogical distance, emo-
 tional solidarity, and eight other variables. The patterns governing the
 three types of symmetrical and asymmetrical usage of the pronoun will be
 considered in detail, leading directly to five cases of pronominal switching
 and what I call "breakthrough," notably in Crime and Punishment. A
 final section deals with the expressive and latent functions of the pronoun
 ty. The conclusions concern the relative advantages and disadvantages of
 this kind of semantic analysis.


           Background

         The evidence on the society and culture of the Russia of the last
century happens to be excellent, largely due to three brilliant magna
opera of one to two volumes each, composed by three very different men:
a German baron and economist (von Haxthausen), a French sociologist
and man of letters (Leroy-Beaulieu), and a peripatetic Scotch journalist
(Wallace). Their picture is rounded out by other sociological, eth-
nographic, and belletristic articles and books written over the past
hundred years.
   The information on pronouns is similarly full. But first a historical note.
Until about 1700 only ty had been employed, whereas " . . . the French
manner of address to one person in the plural number appeared in eigh-
teenth century and rapidly became current among educated circles"
(lsachenko 1960:414). 2 By the Napoleonic era French was already a
passport to high society. The use of Russian vy as a formal and respectful
singular had become firmly established and launched on its independent

  1 "Society" in this slightly technical sense refers to the regularities that may be observed,

measured, or otherwise determined as relating the individuals and groups of some bounded
population. "Culture," on the other hand, refers to the structured set of historically derived
explicit and implicit norms, values, attitudes, feelings, and ideas that are shared and trans-
mitted by the members of a society.
   2 References for Russian literature cited are appended at the end of this chapter.
         274     Discovering Structure in Speech

course, although subsequently reinforced and subtly influenced by the
pervasive French bilingualism of the upper classes and their constant ex-
posure to the tu/vous system of French novels and plays.
    The Russian realistic novel gives full and balanced evidence on pro-
nominal usage. For example, Tolstoy depicts the high aristocracy, Dos-
tojevsky, the patterns of the intermediate urban classes. Gorki unfolds a
panorama of proletarian and artisan customs, Leskov covers the clergy,
and Zlatovratsky and Sh.olokhov provide truly ethnographic detail on the
peasants and Cossaks, respectively. All authors-particularly Tolstoy
and Dostojevsky-include contacts between persons of diverse back-
ground; their status conflicts and rapidly fluctuating emotions are often
symbolized through pronominal usage, which, needless to say, is one of
the serious losses in any English translation. The Russian novel was real-
istic, not only in its concern with status differences, with burning moral
 issues, and with human nature but because it referred to the culture of the
 readers themselves, or to that of groups such as the peasantry which they
 had come to know through personal experience; ethnographic accuracy
 was an aesthetic imperative. 3 In the Russian novel and any similar text
 the pronouns are both frequent and very free in their distribution; in mY
 sample of over eight thou.sand pages the pronoun must at least be implied
 every time a verb refers to an addressee. Pronouns belong to what
 linguists of the Prague School call "background phenomena," and cannot
 be artificially employed any more than any other grammatical paradigm;
 no matter how original his wording or syntax, a creative writer must use
 the obligatory, covert categories of language and culture in conformity
  with the generally held norms. The figures in Gogol and Chekhov, for all
  their uniqueness, do not jar the reader in their use of pronouns qua pro-
  nouns. In fact, the originality of a protagonist cannot be evaluated without
  reference to the larger context of cultural norms and values.
     The second person pronouns functioned, not in isolation, but in-
  terrelated with other sets, notably kinship terms, proper names, official
  ranks, words reflecting occupation, relative age, and similar categories.
  Numerous kinship terms of address and many other quasi-kinship terms
  such as kum (ritual co-parent) were frequent in conversation, particularlY
  among the peasants. All classes of Russians interjected "brother," "little
   mother," and other terms when consciously or subconsciously trying to
  create an informal, congenial atmosphere with non-relatives. And there
   were numerous combinations of proper names, ranging from nicknames,
   to diminutives, to the first· name alone, to the first name plus a fixed

    3
      As Gerald Kelly has pointed out in a personal communication, this contrasts with the
 United States, where much of the literature functions to inform the reader, to create expec·
 tations of usage and behavior in subcultures not known through personal experience. The
 critical notion of "realism" is hardly adequate as a cover term for the Russian novel. In the
 present context, suffice it to say that the literature did provide a wealth of insight into societY
 and character.
                              Social Context and Semantic Feature            275

epithet ("Mikhail the Wolf'), to the.name plus an informal or formal pa-
tronymic (lvanych as against Ivanovich), and so on up the line. These
means of address had to be calibrated with each other. For example,
"A ren't ty joking, Foma?" "In the first place, I am not ty . 1• • but vy, and
don't forget it; and not Foma, but Foma Fomich" (Dostojevsky,
S~epanchikovo Village, 472). Finally, all the terms of address covaried
With the partly independent and equally copious terms of reference. The
total number of combinations was astronomical. Gogol was literally cor-
rect when he wrote facetiously in Dead Souls (35-36):
 It should be said that if we in Russia have not yet caught up with the foreigners in
8
 ?me things, we have long overtaken them in the means of address. It is impos-

r
sible to count all the shades and niceties of our means of address. The Frenchman
    the German will never grasp or understand all the particularities and dif-
 e'.e~ces; with almost the same voice and language he will start to speak with a
Intlltonaire, and with a petty tobacco vendor although, of course, in his soul he is
?Propriately base to the first. It is not like that with us. Among us there are wise
 ellows who will speak altogether differently with a landlord having two hundred
:~rfs th.an with one who has three hundred, and with one who has three hundred
h e~ Wtll not speak as they would with one having five hundred, and with one
 ;ving five hundred, again, not as with one having eight hundred; in a word,
a though you go to a million, they will always find shades (or difference) .

  . Second person pronouns have been analyzed from various points of
View. Social psychologists have shown' how pronominal usage is con-
ne~ted with attitudes and behavior (Brown and Gilman 1960). Philol-
ogists have produced accurate and carefully documented histories of the
t~age. in German, French, and other langu~ge_s (~.g., F~y 1918-20).
b ngu1sts such as Jesperson have inferred the _d1stmctive attnbutes.sh~red
/ Pronouns, such as their degree of abstract10n and freedom of d1stnbu-
 ion. In fact, the second person pronouns are of singular theoretical inter-
est because they link the abstract properties of a basic grammatical
b a ct·1gm to a second matrix of culturally specific components that are
Par
  0
    th very frequent and of major emotional and social significance. In
~ther Words, pronominal usage affords us an analytically accessible link
  ~t~een the obligatory categories of grammar and a second domain of
0
  . hgatory semantic categories related to the social culture: second person
~Ionouns occupy a boundary zone between "deep grammar" and the
  eep levels of attitude and norm by which a society is organized. For this
~e;son their study may emerge as a comparatively fruitful ground, a
be icitous case, for explorations of the hypotheses advanced by von Hum-
  oit, Boas, Wharf, Sapir, and others. 4
r01'. Norman McQuown has been emphasizing the sociolinguistic significance of substitutes
0th sev~ral years. I have profited from several discussions with him on this subject.
rela~~Wise, I retain h~pe but extreme skepticism about demonstrating any _pervasive ca~sal
Who fn between social structure and grammatical patterns (e.g., Russian aspect), a la
     r.
          276     Discovering Structure in Speech


         Discriminations Underlying
         Pronominal Usage

          Cultural systems are roughly of two kinds: those which are
explicit and understood by the native speaker, as against those primarily
inferred and understood by the analyst. It is true that most Russians oc-
casionally would have to hesitate or reflect over their usage and that
exceptionally sophisticated persons such as Leo Tolstoy were largely
aware of the basic determinants. But in general it seems that the discrimi-
nations underlying pronominal usage were subconscious and were not
conceptualized as a system by the Russian. This was even more true of
the evaluation which had to intervene between the discriminations and
one's pronominal response, and between one's hearing of a pronoun and
one's classification of the speaker's discriminations. Such evaluation was
largely subconscious. 5 In sum, what follows is a system that has been in-
ferred by one analyst.
   The ten components symbolized by Russian pronominal usage were:
the topic of discourse, the context of the speech event, then age, genera-
tion, sex, and kinship status, then dialect, group membership, and relative
jural and political authority, and, finally, emotional solidarity-the sympa-
thy and antipathy between the two speakers.
    First, two discriminations are implied by all acts of speech. The speaker
had mentally to associate the selection of pronouns with the topic of dis-
course; two officers might exchange vy while discussing military tactics,
but revert to ty when chatting about women back in their quarters. A large
number of such culturally defined topics-kinship, former school ex-
periences-tended to suggest informality, whereas business and profes-
 sional affairs and certain lofty (torzhestvennyje) themes would encourage
one to select vy. Of course, many subjects were relatively neutral and did
 not predispose the speaker in any particular direction. 6
    Pronominal usage was also determined by the context, especially the
 social context of the speech event; an august judge would use vy to a
 tramp during proceedings in court. The social context and the topic of dis-
course were logically related and are often hard to separate analytically.

  5 I am indebted to Larry Krucoff for this point.

  " In the transliteration of Russian words and passages the apostrophe stands for a "soft
sign" (softening or palatalization of the preceding consonant); kh stands for a letter in the
Russian alphabet that, in turn, stands for a sound that resembles the final ch of German ac/1;
zh is similarly related to a sound that resembles the middle consonant in English azure;j is so
related to the y-like front semi-vowel called "short i" and to the initial element of the so-
called "soft vowels"; e initially is so related to a hard front mid vowel, but elsewhere to a soft
front midvowel. The names of familiar authors and books have been transliterated less ex-
actly and more or less in accordance with the conventions in English language sources.
                          Social Context and Semantic Feature     277

 Nonetheless, instances of clearly independent variation are not too hard
 to find; a daughter might use vy to her mother during a masked ball, but
 revert to ty when whispering about the same boy later in her mother's
 bedroom.
    Next come four discriminations that are "biological" in a sense,
 although defined in terms of the culture. Relative age within the same gen-
 eration was not too important, but could tip the scales between distant
 blood relatives, or in cases where relative authority and affection led to
 ambiguity. Relative generation, on the other hand, was frequently deci-
 sive, as in the automatic asymmetry between any two gentryfolk relatives
 separated by one or more generations. Relative sex could also decide
 usage in the sense that two speakers of the same sex were normally more
 prone to use familiar terms, whereas speakers of the opposite sex would
 exercise greater restraint. Finally, genealogical distance, of which all
 Russians were keenly aware, provided highly specific rules and many gen-
 eral ones, such as that siblings of the same age at all social levels recipro-
 cated ty. Age, generation, sex and genealogical distance were also impor-
 tant components underlying the use of Russian kinship terms.
    The third set of discriminations includes various social and group phe-
 nomena. To begin with, relative authority depended on differences in the
 distribution of rights and obligations; for example, the father or house
chief held many economic and legal rights, whereas the position of the son
could be largely defined through his obligations in this patriarchal culture.
Such jural relationships, since they involved individual statuses, could
and often did vary independently of group membership. In other cases,
the relative authority had to be backed by the ability or readiness of the
individual to exercise the raw power available. Relative authority often
represented the resolution of conflict between several sets of dimensions-
above all, between the formal authority of the bureaucracy as against the
local leadership and political values of the peasants and Cossaks. Clearly,
relative authority and other discriminations had many more specific jural
and political implications.
   Group membership subsumed, above all, the notion of household; for
instance, cousins or affines of about the same age would exchange ty if
they were residing in the same household but would not necessarily do so
if they were living widely separated. The prestige of a family name also
influenced pronominal usage among the gentry. Village membership could
be decisive for the peasants, as in the regions where the elders addressed
each other informally but used vy to elders from other villages. Finally,
class or caste membership determined usage; workers, peasants, and
Cossaks of about the same age normally employed ty even at the outset of
a conversation, whereas two gentrymen would have to begin with vy.
   Di"alect refers to grammatical and semantic patterns marking a particu-
lar variety of Russian. Dialect lines were not clear among many merchant
           278    Discovering Structure in Speech

families and members of other transitional classes, but thick bundles of
isoglosses did distinguish the gentry from the workers, Cossaks and
peasants; all of the latter lived in what amounted to a quasi-familial ty
universe. The comparative homogeneity of the lower classes, while not
congruous with the many divergences in their way of life, did reflect their
 constant interaction and the recency of their diffel'entiation. The in-
 dependence of dialect as a variable was demonstrated neatly when, for
 example, a bilingual, blue-blooded aristocrat became so inured to vy that
 he used it even to peasant children, although receiving ty from their
 parents (Tolstoy 1960a Resurrection:218-20).
     Finally, there is the psychological dimension of "solidarity," of emo-
 tional affinity or antipathy. Emotional distance and certain negative feel-
 ings went together with the formal pronoun. Contrariwise, close friends,
 lovers, and persons joined in some common purpose would tend to use ty,
  and ty in some contexts could symbolize the dislike or deprecation bred of
  familiarity. In brief, the correlation between pronouns and solidarity was
  complicated, and difficult to predict in terms of a simple continuum
  between the ty of "like-mindedness" (Brown and Gilman 1960) and the vy
  of weak solidarity.
      The foregoing summary suggests the conclusion that pronominal usage
  implied complex concatenations of discriminations that reinforced each
   other often enough to make speech predictable. The rough breakdown of
   the society inferred from such usage is congruous with the sociological
   map arrived at by external criteria. In a larger, cross-cultural sense, the
   ten components inferred for Russian probably underlie most usage in
   other languages where second person pronouns are differentiated by
   authority and solidarity; they may be as universal for pronominal usage as
    Kroeber's nine components have turned out to be for kinship nomencla-
    tures (Kroeber 1909).
       Let us now turn to the types of dyadic relationship, beginning with the
    symmetrical use of vy.


             The Dyadic Pairs:
             The Symmetrical Vy

         Vy was mandatory in certain unambiguously formal occasions.
  Thus, elder peasants of probity and worth (blagomyslennyje) would
  exchange the formal pronoun when meeting on the street after Sunday
  mass, and peasant parents and matchmakers would tend to the same
  usage during the formalities of negotiation and the wedding. 7 But such

     7
         In both cases, there would be a greater use of the name plus patronymic (poimenovat' po
   otechestv11; Zlatovratsky 1947: 153).
                              Social Context and Semantic Feature
                                                                             279

o b]l·gatory reciprocation
                      . .         was largely confined to non -pe·tsa   , , n t s. F or ex-
.arn pie , all part1c1pants
                    .     . h .. used  the -formal
                                             h        pronoun  in   a large  ca. t egory of
 pu b   lic   occas10ns
                  .    .  m t  e cities,
                              . . . , .  sue    as  a  parliamentary   meet' mg, a com·t
      , ,
 sess 1 , · on university  exctmmations,    01, for  that matter , an open , pu bl'1c a Iter-
 cation between a factory 1?anag.er and leaders of the workers (Gorki
 1946 , Mother:134). A sp.ecial po1gnan.cy _could be created when, for ex-
 ample, former comrades-m-arms or dn.nkmg partners switched to formal
     rms during the challenge and execution of a duel (Lermonto 1948 A
 ~~ ero of Our Time: 192-210). While usage was. thus dictated b~ cont:xt,
 the process of_feedback c~mmon to all communication also meant that the
 usage itself might symbolize an augus~ and ceremonial atmosphere (torz-
 1tt,stvennost'). By the       same token, obligatory usage could create peculiar
    tresses or types of amb"igmty     . wh en t he speaker was conversing     '      with a
  s lose friend. In such cases, vy might signal the artificiality of the social
  ~istance being maintained.                    .
       In the second place, vy was reciprocated between any two persons
  desiring to show respect ~r d~ference, regardless of their relative status.
  While such personal motivation was secondary or redundant to many
   ,ocially determined usages, it also functioned independently in other
  s ases where asymmetrical or even informal usage might have been ex-
  ~ected, or at least permitted. Thus, at one point a student and a policeman
  offer to help a young woman, very drunk, who has apparently been
  violated or mistreated and is stumbling through the streets (Dostojevsky
   J 951, Crime and Punis/zment:57); th~ir sympathy and pity is partly con-
   veyed by vy. In ~nother case, a Russrn_n officer and a surgeon of German
   background decide to room together 1~ a resort town in the Caucasus.
   They become confidants and good fnends. Their elective affinity-to
   translate Goethe's precise phrase-is congruous with a continued recip-
   rocation of an affectionate but respectful vy.
        The role of pronominal signals for the individual's self-image is brought
   out in the following exchange between a proud young worker and an arro-
   gant officer who is leading a search party (Gorki 1946: 127). The officer
   begins with:

    "This is ty, Andrew Nakhodka."
    "I "answered Nicholas, moving forward. Andrew stretched out his hand, took
  Nicholas by the shoulder, and thrust him backwards.
    "He made a mistake! I am Andrew!"
    The officer, raising his hand and threatening Vesovshchik with his finger, said:
    "You look out with me!"
    He began to dig in his papers.
    "Nakhodka, were ty ever brought before an inquiry on political grounds'?" he
  asked.
    "I was summoned in Rostov, and in Saratov . . . only there the policeman said
  vy to me."
           280    Discovering Structure in Speech

  The officer winked his right eye, wiped it and, baring his small teeth, began to
say:
  "But isn't it known to vy, Nakhodka, precisely to vy, just who are the rascals
who are distributing criminal proclamations in the factory, aah?"

   Here we see a factory worker insisting-with admittedly ambiguous
success-that an inspecting officer show him the proper personal respect.
   This and other cases in my data point to important discriminations not
covered by my system: those of sarcasm and irony. Under certain circum-
stances the opposite of the expected usage could confuse, humiliate, or
affront an addressee. Such inverse usage was especially devastating
before a group of people who were more aware even than the victim of the
disparity between the verbal symbolism and the underlying social real-
ities. This is illustrated by a passage from the twentieth chapter of Tol-
stoy's Childhood.

  Grandmother had a singular gift of expressing her opinion about people under
certain circumstances by using the plural and singular pronouns of the second
person together with a certain tone of voice. She used vy and ty contrary to gen-
eral custom, and on her lips these shades of meaning acquired an entirely different
significance. When a young prince walked up to her she said a few words calling
him vy and looked at him with an expression of such contempt that if I had been in
his place I would have become utterly confused . . . .

(An ancient countess would normally use ty to a young prince.) In con-
trast to sarcasm, humor does not appear to have been significantly related
to pronominal usage.
   We have discussed formal occasions and the particular needs to show
or receive deference. Vy, in the third place, was determined by a large set
of contexts that can be defined exclusively through the relative status of
the participants within the larger context of the society. The higher the
individual in the social system, the more he tended to both receive and use
vy with persons of lower standing, including lackeys. Such usage to al-
most all except one's siblings and spouse was largely a carry-over from
the patterns of the French high aristocracy, probably the most formal in
Europe. Such bilingual blue-bloods lived in what approximated a vy-
universe.8
   Relative status within the larger society was also symbolized by auto-
matic formality on first encounter or casual acquaintance between all of-
ficials and gentryfolk who were not lovers, close friends, or certain types
of kinsmen. In one novel a petty official receiprocates vy with a long series

  8
      Roger Brown, writing in 1960, reported a French aristocrat who could remember using
111 only to an old woman who had been his nurse (Brown and Gilman 1960:270).
                          Social Context and Semantic Feature     281

 of rustic landlords with whom he is often cordial or even pseudo-intimate
 (Gogol 1947, Dead Souls:102-103). Russian officers and non-coms
 usually stayed on formal terms, just as did gentryfolk with the tutors and
 governesses of their children, and also prison officials with political pris-
 oners of the educated classes. Moving yet further down the ladder, a
 wealthy peasant would normally exchange vy with older peasants in the
 village he was visiting (Zlatovratsky 1947, The Foundations:459), and
 elders from neighboring villages might do the same under certain circum-
 stances. In all the instances just discussed, we find formality between
 persons who do not know each other well and whose social status was felt
 to be significantly coordinate.
   Among the gentry, at least, the formal pronoun was enjoined between
 certain categories of actual and potential relatives, such as a man and the
 consanguines of a girl he was wooing (Dostojevsky 1951 :218), and
 between cousins who were strangers, and between parents-in-law and
their children-in-law. Man and woman held to vy during a formal court-
ship until entering upon marriage, or sexual relations, or some com-
parably intense experience. Women tended to use vy more than men,
among the gentry because of their greater concern for propriety, among
all classes because of their partially subordinate status. In one intriguing
case that cuts across class lines, two women held to the formal term while
they passed through three relative statuses: landlord's niece as against the
same landlord's maid, a provincial actress as against the landlord's con-
cubine, and finally, a broken prostitute as against the village wanton. The
persisting use of vy despite considerable emotional affinity and, toward
the end, approximately equal power, lends unique flavor to this evolving
bond (Saltykov-Shchedrin 1958, The Golovlyov Family:265, 289)-
social status proving dominant over both personal feelings and the general
situation.


        The Asymmetrical Relationship

         In the patriarchal society of Russia deference and obedience
were widely accorded to age. Among the gentry, a child would recipro-
cate ty with the mother until about school age, but older children and ado-
lescents used the formal pronoun to their parents. These patterns did not
hold for some aristocratic families, and there may well have been marked
differences between parents, with less formality toward the mother, par-
ticularly between mother and daughter. Similarly asymmetrical were the
ties between married daughters and either parent, and between such dis-
tant consanguines as a man and his cousin's son's wife (Aksakov 1958, A
Family Chronicle:82, 157, 188). Step-relatives and affines separated by
one or more generations were also on vy/ty terms. Two concrete ex-
         282    Discovering Structure in Speech

amples must suffice for genealogical distance. In one case, an adult
prince received ty from an aunt thirty years his senior, although both were
exchanging the French vous. In another, singular instance, an elderlY
landlord and his niece retained the asymmetrical terms even after he had
become a psychotic and disreputable miser and she had returned home
from a career as an actress and prostitute, broken through drink and
tuberculosis (Saltykov-Shchedrin 1958: 181, 267). At one point the miser
even suggests that his niece become his mistress. Among the gentry and
wealthier merchant classes, then, usage was necessarily asymmetrical
between relatives of any sort, including those by adoption, who were sep-
arated by one or more generations.
   Among peasants and Cossaks asymmetrical usage was occasional or
regional, but was not generally obligatory between the household head
and his younger house-mates, with one major exception: in most of the
larger households of the urban lower classes and of the peasants of the
central "industrial" zones, the household head normally received vy and
addressed all as ty; these were precisely the two social groups and the
geographical area where Great Russian patriarchy reached its acme, and
where the influence of the vy-using gentry was most deeply felt. Asymme-
trical usage also set off a peasant from his parents-in-law, particularly a
girl from her father-in-law. In sum, asymmetrical usage tended to emerge
between two peasants when they were separated by two or more dimen-
sions, such as generation, community, extreme authority, or the solemnitY
of the situation.
    Superior and inferior authority within the established officialdom was
 pronominally symbolized in the relation between a teacher and pupils, laW
 officers and criminal prisoners, and officers or non-commissioned officers
 with their soldiers; the last of these three usages was congruous also with
 the gentry or middle class origin of almost all officers, as against the prole-
 tarian or peasant background of almost all soldiers. The Cossaks, despite
 their strong egalitarianism, reflected their common experience as
 members of a military caste by scrupulously using vy to non-coms, of·
 ficers, gentryfolk, and all government officials. 9                           d
    One well-known short-story of Pushkin's illustrates how pronouns coul
 symbolize authority. A young hussar feigns illness while en route in ordeJ
 to seduce the adolescent daughter of a fifty-year-old stationmaster an
 war veteran. The brokenhearted father makes his way into the large house
 in the capital where his daughter is being kept as a mistress, but, during a
 final, climactic scene, is literally thrown out by th~ irate young aristocrat,

   " One of the first acts of the Provisional Government in 1917 was. to force all com~~;
sioned officers to use vy to privates, but the Red Army reintroduced ty, eventually extend!
it to all subordinates.
                                Social Context and Semantic Feature       283

        Neither man ever deviates from asymmetrical usage. Thus, a low-ranking
        official could be subordinate to any member of the high aristocracy. The
       frequency with which social differences over-rode age demonstrates the
       strength of class cleavage in the first part of the century.
          Perhaps of greater psychological interest than the school, prison, army,
       td officialdom were the domains such as the gentry household and the
        anded estate where asymmetry was enjoined and often automatically
      as_cribed for the members of an entire group. Any patriarch or matriarch
      With the abilities and motivation to realize his or her power would eventu-
      ~lly use _ty to all, and receive vy from all except the spouse (Saltykov-
        hchednn 1958:6, 15, 71), and sometimes even from the spouse; such                   :
                                                                                          . '

      ~entry patterns emphasizing the formal or secular aspect of the father's or           I
                                                                                            I
     hUsband's authority, became models for the peasant and lower class
       ouseholds mentioned above. As a rule, landlords and their estate manag-
     er~ Were on vy/ty terms, although both kinds of symmetrical relationship
     Il1Ight occur for personal reasons. Country squires usually remained on a
     ~Ylty ?asis with their peasant concubines, although genuine affection and
     Isolation could lead to a mutual ty within the rustic privacy of the home.
        _Pronominal usage between peasants and other classes entailed sur-
    Prises. For example, a wealthy, respectable, and urbanized serf in Mos-
    cow Would still use vy and receive ty from the dissolute and disgraced
    :on of his distant proprietor, ascribed status taking precedent over both
   hge and actual power. In a second case, a fuIIy mature huntsman and
   1ouse serf would be pronominally subordinate to the little son of his
    anctlord. A third instance comes from the Childhood of Tolstoy, always
   so sensitive to status. As a boy he was cared for by a beloved elderly
   Peasant woman who, incidentally, was on vy/ty terms with his mother. At
   r~e Point this nurse scolded him, saying, "Don't ty soil the tablecloth."
  . Ittle Tolstoy gets furious and exclaims sputtering, "How ... Natal'ja
  Is say,·n
  da    '                                       '    ·
             g ty. to me. . . . " at which she ap0Io~1zes    · h , "Th a t' s enoug h ,
                                                          "'.''t
  smddy [ba~us!!lw], don't vy cry. . . . " at which ~e 1s ~omforted. Here a
       all boy 1s literally calling an elderly woman mto lme on her usage.
      Other, obvious differences in social rather than administrative status
 could determine usage. With the exceptions already noted, all persons
 Used ty to small children and would use ty and expect vy with pre-adoles-
 cent children. Any member of the gentry tended to use ty to a lower-class
 servant, typically the valet or lackey or the waiter in a tavern. The
 Stre                              ,    '     '                     .
       ngth of the combination of age and class differences 1s shown by a
~entlernan-landlord and his peasant boarder, who automatically entered
dPon an asymmetrical relationship and held to it even when the youth was
8 emanding the return of a large sum that the old codger had borrowed and
n{Uandered (Zlatovratsky J947:288, 350). Ty was used downwards to the
   embers of minority groups whose poverty and ethnic status were clear,
          284     Discovering Structure in Speech

as between a middle-aged landlord and a Jewish watchman (Dostojevsky
1951 :544-45). Any person with education and with civil or military rank
would immediately enter into vy/ty terms with some irregular semi-legal
person, such as a professional thief, a gypsy, a beggar, or a criminal. In
sum, asymmetrical relationships were automatic when social differences
were wide and mutually felt.


         The Symmetrical Ty
         Within and between all social classes children under about age
eleven or twelve exchanged ty. In one delightful scene, an aloof, isolated,
and already psychotic eight-year-old is approached by three adventurous,
arrow-shooting little "Mahicans" who are also on vacation, and immedi-
ately begin using ty (Sologub 1961, In Bondage:241-243). The apparent
assumption was that children were essentially equal and potentially
solidary. The status of child overwhelmed or obscured that of class.
Childhood informality also created the frequent comradeship between the
offspring of peasants and landlords, and contributed to the peculiar nos-
talgia for an irretrievable past that was felt by so many of the gentry in
their adult years. 10
   Second, the informal pronoun was exchanged with certain non-humans,
such as God, the Devil, demons, and other objects, animals, spirits, and
essences that might be addressed; the folklore and the texts containing
fantasy show that the usage was returned. The conversations between
Gorki's grandmother and God reveal the intimacy of such relations with
non-humans and the supernatural.
   In the third place, all members of the lower classes strongly tended to
reciprocate ty, even among total strangers. In one case, a proletarian
woman exchanges the informal pronoun with an elder peasant from
another community, whereas her son and the same man are on formal
terms. In a second instance, a wealthy kulak and his impoverished body
servant express through ty their sense of common peasant origin and their
personal affinity (Zlatovratsky 1947:520). In some northern, northeast-
ern, and Siberian regions, lacking landlords and far from the urban
centers, ty was probably the only functional pronoun.11
   Membership in the same community was often decisive. Thus rela-
tions-irrespective of age-were mutually informal between proletarian


   10
      It is psychologically intriguing that the ty was primarily associated with infant expeii-
ences and, for the aristocracy, was a symbol of intimate personal identity; in psychiatric
terms, it may correspond to the so-called "ego-id" (Silverberg 1940:511 ).
   11 I am indebted to Howard Aronson for this point.
                             Social Context and Semantic Feature           285

neighbors in the squalid factory. tow~s. The villages of Cossaks and Great
Russian peasants were pron~mmal m-groups of a sort, the members con-
ce1·vi'ng of each other as. relatives and addressing even th e v1.11 age e Id er m-
                                                                                 .
formally. In on: revealmg ca~~· _the peasants in a sm'all commune start on
formal terms _with a. you~g v1s1ting Muscovite, but after they have ascer-
tained his fnendsh1~ with. a local son their whole attitude and their
prOn ominal usage shift,
                      f . asdi 1s summed. up by. one
                                                 ,, matron , "S o IY, my d e,ar
(kinsman), ar~ on nen Y terms with him (Zlatovratsky 1947 : 153 ).
   Until the m1d?le of .the century, peas.ants usually said ty to the landlord,
but not to his wife; th1_s was part of their ~endency toward informality but,
in a perhaps more important sense,. It symbolized their conceptual
grouping of persons of supreme. authonty; the landlord's rights over his
serfs included purchase and manta! .arrangements. With the partial excep-
tion noted above, the household chief, the landlord, Tsar, and God were
all addressed with ty and the quasi-kinship term, batjushka ("little
father"). Thus a striking feature of authority in Russia as against the West
was that vy generally did symbolize greater power, but that when the
greatness passed a certain poin.t th~ speaker sv.:itched back to what might
be called the ty of total subordmat10n or of an mtimacy that could not be
jeopardized. 12 From another point of.vi~w, ty to God, Tsar, and squire
emphasized the father!~ aspect o~ th~1r JU:al authority.
   In addition to the social categonesJust discussed, pan-Russian patterns
enjoined a mutual ~y between brothers and sisters. This was related to the
norms of cooperat10n and loyalty between brothers and, in addition, was
extended to many kinds of comrades and associates. Peasants, Cossaks,
and artisans banded together into brotherhoods, and there was consider-
able overlap both in sentiment and usage between the words for commune
(mir) and cooperative (artel'). In addition, ritual brotherhood, sealed by
exchanging crosses worn around the neck, was important at all levels.
Students, officers, and other members of the educated classes had a ritual
of "drinking to ty," but this foreign brudershaft appears to have been rare
in the last century and is not evidenced in my texts. In any case, fraternal
solidarity of many kinds was a pervasive and integrating theme in Russian
 culture and was partly symbolized by the reciprocal ty.
   The informal pronoun was usual between spouses at all social levels, as
would be congruous with the balance of rights between man and woman
that underlay the symbols of male dominance. In many merchant families
and lower-middle class families, however, the wives addressed their hus-
 bands with vy plus the name and patronymic. Among the bilingual gentry
                                                 t,

  12 As Julian Pitt-Rivers points out, total subordination implies intimacy whereas formal
social usage implies social distance which obtains where respect might conceivably be
denied.'·
         286    Discovering Strncture in Speech

the mutual informality ran counter to pressures toward a reciprocal vy on
the model of French. 'a And conjugal usage could be poignantly ambigu-
ous, as when estranged or even hostile spouses persisted with ty. Even
among the high aristocracy, lovers held to informal terms long after the
liaison had cooled (Lermontov 1948: 141).
   Aside from siblings and spouses, ty was reciprocated between more dis-
tant kinsmen under certain conditions; for example, gentryfolk cousins
who knew each other reasonably well would be on informal terms. Sec-
ond degree relatives through marriage, such as the spouse's siblings or the
sibling's spouses, would usually reciprocate ty with a speaker of about the
same age, although this could produce conflicts if they were personally
antipathetic; in one case, a man and his sister's husband "tried to use ty"
after the sister's marriage, "but remained on vy terms" (Tolstoy
I 960a:332). In general, usage between affines varied considerably. As a
final point, the growth of the individual at all social levels was critically af-
fected by the grandmother, who was both a nurse, and a storyteller, and a
repository of norms and traditions; she varied from the peasant babushka
of Gorki's Childhood to the august and matriarchal babushka of Leo Tol-
stoy. Throughout life most Russians remained on informal terms with at
least one grandmother, although among the high aristocracy she might be
addressed with vy, while a peasant nurse filled many of the more intimate
and homely roles.
    The informal pronoun was also reciprocated between members of the
gentry who had been joined through shared experiences, such as regular
 participation in card games or a common revolutionary ideology. Class-
 mates from the same secondary school and alumni of the same privileged
 school, such as the Corps of Pages, were formally linked by ty. As a rule,
 men who had moved in the same circles as university students would con-
 tinue with ty throughout life, although reunion with an old chum might en-
 tail conflicts and pronominal gaucherie. In one case, a prince and an old
 army comrade use ty although the former is embarrassed by the implied
 closeness he no longer feels (Tolstoy I 960a:245-246). 14 The informal
 usage between friends and students generally expressed a certain affec-
 tion or esprit de co,ps, but at a more profound level it was the felt exten-
 sion of a kinship bond just as, conversely, the use of vy within the peasant
 village-which was an extended kinship group-was often associated
 with the introduction of external standards by government bureaucrats.


   "' Indeed, one of the most fascinating problems, barely hinted at in this chapter, was the
degree of congruity between French and Russian usage; both languages functioned as
largely independent systems for classifying the same set of actual and potential addressees.
   11
      This contrasts with many other languages, such as German, where the Du to a former
classmate is clearly not felt to necessarily imply anything more than the former group mem-
bership.
                         Social Context and Semantic Feature    287


         The Dynamics of Pronominal
         V sage: Eight Cases of "Switching"
         and "Breakthrough"

         Crucial to linguistics and social anthropology is the distinction
between studies of synchronic systems as they presumably operate in the
mind of speakers during at least one generation, as against the study of
historical sequences and cultural evolution. But despite the value of
keeping the two approaches apart to some extent, they can be rigidly sep-
arated only at great cost to our understanding. This is because the second
or "diachronic" framework always sheds light on the synchronic system;
by following replacement, loss, and rearrangement through time the
dynamic relations of units can be inferred. In addition to historical and
evolutionary change, any synchronic system shows alternation, variation,
and various kinds of rapid and often erratic option which can lead to infer-
ences about the functional and hierarchical relations between elements.
Let us review eight extended cases of pronominal "switching" and
"breakthrough" with the end of indicating and illustrating some of the
more obvious dynamic relationships.


  COMRADESHIP BETWEEN
  PECHORIN AND MAXIM MAXIMYCH
  IN LERMONTOV'S
  A HERO OF OUR TIME

   An arrogant, aristocratic lieutenant and a grizzled, older captain find
themselves thrust together as the only officers on an isolated outpost in
the Caucasus. Reciprocal formality at first seems appropriate to both. But
while the latter is sitting on the young lieutenant's bed and discussing a
confidential matter he switches to ty. When the lieutenant appears to
suggest insubordination, however, the captain reverts to vy as he issues a
peremptory demand; for the older man, the power of military rank is in
delicate balance with the emotions uniting the two lonely comrades in the
Caucasus.
   In the following scenes the lieutenant uses vy at all times, partly
because he is almost thirty years younger, partly because he comes from
the high aristocracy, partly because, as is borne out by several episodes,
he is emotionally incapable of warm, positive attachments to other peo-
ple; as is so often the case, the relative power of the three determinants
cannot be ascertained. On the other hand, I would deduce that in some
contexts the young lieutenant would have used ty or that at least after
their separation the older man thought of him as employing the more in-
        288   Discovering Structure in Speech

timate pronoun. During the final scene the two friends accidentally meet
again at an inn. The affectionate and simple-hearted captain rushes
forward impulsively, but is countered with, "How delighted I am, dear
Maxim Maximych! Well, how are vy?" (Lermontov 1948:88).
   "'But . . . ty . . . vy?' muttered the old man with tears in his eyes."
   The wrenching quality of the passage turns on the binary and here
ironic choice between two pronouns.


  CHICHIKOV AND KOROBOCHKA
  IN GOGOL'S DEAD SOULS

    Chichikov, a well-bred, petty official, gets lost at night in a snow storm,
and finally knocks on the door of the unknown proprietress of a small es-
tate. Both he and the maid at first use ty, reflecting their mutual surprise
and the spontaneity of the situation. But after hearing a few words, she
switches her pronouns, apparently in reaction to his urban accent: "But
who are vy?"
    Later that night Chichikov and the proprietress reciprocate vy as they
converse over tea, although repeatedly interjecting the kinship terms, ma-
tushka (derived from "mother"), and batjushka. The proprietress
switches to the informal ty when expressing sympathy over his carriage
accident, and when bidding him goodnight she calls him not only bat-
jushka but literally "my father" (moj otets), and tenderly offers to scratch
his heels, a soporific comfort her deceased husband had habitually
required (1947:34). By this time both Chichikov and his hostess feel
 themselves to be approximately on a par.
    The following day finds our guest, who is about forty, addressing his
 hostess in familiar terms; because of her seemingly small estate, "he
 didn't stand at all on ceremony." He soon inquires after her last name,
 and is told, "Korobochka (the wife of), a collegiate secretary," and that,
 on further inquiry, her name and patronymic is Nastas'ja Petrovna. The
 official title impresses Chichikov, and from then on he is careful to
 address her respectfully. He begins to importune her to sell him the title of
 such of her serfs as have passed away since the last census. As soon as
 this extraordinary intention becomes clear, Koroboc.hka switches from vy
 to ty. By this time (pp. 37-42) the asymmetrical relationship is coming to
 symbolize their mutuai and increasingly clear-cut awareness that she is an
 established owner of serfs and land, a true pomeshchitsa, whereas he is
  materializing into a rather suspicious sort of solicitor. The function of ty
 as an expression of Korobochka's growing wariness comes out in several
 strongly felt utterances: "What are they (the dead souls) to ty?" or "Are
  ty deceiving me, batijushka?" or "What terrible things ty say!" The
  unequal quality of the relationship is underscored by his combination of
  vy plus Nastas'ja Petrovna, whereas she mentions no proper name at all
                         Social Context and Semantic Feature      289

       I because he had dodged he        · ·         .
(part_ Y to interlard kinsh· t . r ongmal question about it). But both
  ont 1nue                   1p e1 ms.
c Chichikov fim!lly p~rsuades Korobochka to sell her dead souls by
irnplying that ~~ is takmg ; 0 vernment contracts and may be in a position
10 bUY some,? her ve?e~'l Jes. In the last scene, after a rich dinner for the
"contractor, s e s':"'itc es to vy when asking if he will buy some pork
Jard, _b~t then ~ot)s nght back to ty when discussing his carriage and road
conditions (p.      .
   In ten of the most masterful pages in Dead Souls the dyadic rela-
tionship evol~es _from vy/vy, to ty/vy to vy/vy to ty/vy to vy/vy and finally
to tyI vY· This illustrates the . frequ ency an d rap1d1ty
                                                       · ·    of 'pronomma
                                                                         · J
switching as total stran_gers adJust~d !o each other. More particularly, it
illustratt;; !he ~omplexi,~y of covariation ?etween pronouns and various
sorts of kmship terms. Thus, ty plus a kmship term of address occurred
quite normal_ly a~ong the gentry. But less redundant and more interesting
was the conJunct.10 n of the formal pronoun with a kinship term such as
  zatjushka, enablmg the speaker such as Chichikov to partially cross the
;ap between himself and his interlocutor.


  A PROLETARIAN MOTHER, HER SON,
  AND HER SON'S FRIENDS   .
  (GORKI'S MOTHER)

   After the death of her brutal husband, a mother somewhere in her
forties is left with an adolescent son who soon turns to private study and
underground revolutionary activities. More and more books appear on his
shelves and, to signal his growing cultivation, " . . . he said vy to her and
called her mamasha, but sometimes, suddenly, he would address her ten-
derly:                                                                     , ,,
   'TY, mother, please don't worry. I will be coming home late . . .
(Gorki 1946: 113). And later:
   "He said 'mother' and 'ty' to her, as was his wont only when he drew
closer to her. · · · "
   About the time of the conversations just described, the son brings home
a worker about twenty-eight years old to live with the family. At first the
mother calls him vy plus the respectful name plus patronymic (Andrej
Anisimovich), plus the respectful and affectionate kinship term that liter-
ally means "dear little father" (batjushka). But they grow more intimate
as the weeks pass, as is clear from the following scene.
   "Andrjusha, you ought to mend your shoes, or you will catch cold." To
which he responds, "You are almost like a true mother to me" (a, mozhet,
vy i est' rodnaja mat' moja). They remain on a formal basis, while
exchanging the "kinship terms," batjushka and 11e11ka. But after the young
        290   Discovering Structure in Speech

friend confesses to the murder of a political informer (pp. 166, 168), the
mother switches to ty although he continues with vy. At this point her son
actually comments on the pronominal usage:
   "'Ty know, ty did well, that ty began to say 'ty' to him after that.' She
looked at him with surprise and said. 'Yes, but I didn't even notice how it
happened! He has become so close to me-I can't say how!'"
   The mother's relations to her son's other revolutionary friends were
generally formal, even in the case of women, such as her son's sweetheart,
whom she got to know rather well. She remained on formal terms with an
educated school teacher though living in her house, and emotionally very
close (p. 247). The main exception to such reciprocal formality was the
relation between the mother and a young revolutionary in his thirties
before the hour of his death, when she becomes a loving nurse to him and
he is a hero to her (p. 20 l). But I hasten to add that even in such critical
relations between two proletarians fused by a common ideology, one
could not predict a switch to ty with absolute certainty.


  THE PRINCE AND THE PROSTITUTE
  IN RESURRECTION
   The heroine of Tolstoy's novel Resurrection (1960a) was born the
daughter of a wandering gypsy and the village wanton. She was then
adopted and reared in the cultivated home of an elderly, aristocratic lady.
When the eighteen-year-old nephew of her patroness comes home from
school on vacation, he unselfconsciously starts out using ty. She responds
with the respectful vy (p. 47), except when he steals a kiss from her during
a game, and even then her vat tebe raz is part of a fairly frozen, exclama-
tory expression. The contrast between their asymmetrical address comes
out neatly when he is leaving for the university and they bid farewell:
Proshchaj, Katjusha, as against, Proshchajte, Dmitryj lvanovich. During
their first, idyllic acquaintance their usage reflects caste status more or
less as one would predict.
   Three years later the prince returns as a pleasure-seeking officer. She
still uses vy (p. 54), whereas he vacillates before finally settling on the
same form. Both the· young people are soon in love, but continue on
formal terms; when they meet after the moving Easter service their usage
is apparently reinforced by the solemnity of the occasion (p. 60). But a
few hours later on the same Sunday he switches to ty while trying to
embrace her in a corridor, and this is conjoined with the diminutive of her
first name. She sticks to vy and the congruously respectful first name plus
patronymic, as above. During the physical seduction that evening he
 repeatedly says ty, whereas she says vy while her eyes say ty, "I am yours
(tvoja)"; the physical conquest of a woman appears to have been insepa-
                          Social Context and Semantic Feature     291

  rably connected with a switch to ty, at least by the i;nan; the woman might
 use vy, while her gestures, intonation and so forth indicated that she was
 thinking and feeling ty.
    Twelve years later the same prince finds himself in the juror's box and
 asked to pass judgment on an attractive, young prostitute who has been
 accused of poisoning and robbing a client. He recognizes her as the village
 girl he seduced long ago. Feeling remorse about his role in precipitating
 her downfall, he visits her later in jail. As he begins to speak (p. 1953) he
 uses ty, possibly in recognition of the enormous social distance between
 them, possibly to express his impulsive love toward her. But following an
 interruption in the conversation, he reverts to vy as part of the desire to
 increase the propriety of their relationship.
    Soon afterwards he returns to the jail and declares his resolve to marry
 her. At this her instant reaction is to recall the degrading scene the morn-
 ing after the seduction when he tried to thrust one hundred rubles into her
 hand. With a sort of ironic reference she therefore erupts with: "There is
 your (tvoja) price." The prince also switches pronouns with, "I won't
 leave tebja!" For a brief period thereafter she reiterates a ty of anger and
contempt: "Ty are a prince . . . (ty) go away!" (pp. 173-74). But after a
second, brief interruption by the warden she returns to vy although the
prince continues with ty, as in, "Ty don't believe me." As the interview
draws to a close both interlocutors grow colder, and he finally switches
back to vy himself, saying, "Vy think it over." Here we see the pronoun
functioning as a so1t of exclamatory particle, a two-phoneme signal of
rapid emotional shifts.                                   ,
    Shortly afterwards, Kat'ja is convicted. When the ill-matched couple
meet again they at first reciprocate vy, but when he proposes to her for the
second time, it is with, "I am asking tebja to marry me." She rejects him
using the formal pronoun, and he almost immediately switches back to vy
himself. Eight pages later, when he dreams of her, she says, "I am a
female convict, but vy are a prince."
    Later the prince returns from St. Petersburg after an unsuccessful at-
tempt to appeal her sentence. He is chagrined to learn that she has been
accused of gratifying one of the sergeants and, as a result, has been fired
from an advantageous job in the prison hospital. During the ensuing dia-
logue he feels ambivalent, and Kat'ja is mortified. Both use vy and they
never deviate from it for the rest of the story, during their long trek to
Siberia (pp. 357, 406), nor at their last meeting (p. 453), when her moral
redemption has been largely achieved.through the influence of the politi-
cal prisoners, to one of whom, a psychotic terrorist, she is already
promised in marriage.
   The particular value of the Resurrection lies in the interaction between
persons from opposite ends of the social continuum. In Prague School
           292    Discovering Structure in Speech

terms, at either end of the continuum one of the two pronouns was un-
marked, while the second was marked and conveyed more precise infor-
mation. Thus, for a prince vy was the more frequent and the less marked
pronoun, whereas for a prostitute ty was comparatively unmarked; in
either case a switch to or a maintenance of the marked pronoun implied
special hostility, affection, or ambivalence. 15

  RASKOLNIKOV AND SON'JA IN
  CRIME AND PUNISHMENT

    Raskolnikov, an undernourished and idealistic student in his early
twenties, is obsessed with the theoretical implications of willfully
breaking a fundamental moral law. He is living in a small garret that ad-
joins a room filled with two half-crazed parents and their hungry children.
One daughter, a shy, nervous girl of about eighteen, has turned as incon-
spicuously as possible to ·prostitution in order to help support her impov-
erished but originally upper-class family.
    These two young people reciprocate vy during their casual first con-
 tacts. But after his brutal ax-murder of the old usuress and her niece,
 Raskolnikov is torn by guilt and needs a confidant. He goes to visit the girl
 in her lodgings. As the conversation develops, they increasingly sense
 their need for each other. His voice becomes "quiet and tender." But
 Son'ja remains formal while talking about the suffering of her family, and
 even her first professional experiences; once she affixes the hyperre-
  spectful particle /-s/. As they continue to draw closer, Raskolnikov real-
 izes with more terrible clarity the conflict between her degrading profes-
  sion and her innocent, generous nature. He falls to his knees and kisses
 her feet (nogi). Son'ja cries out, "What are vy doing?" (precisely: chto vy,
  chto vy eto! Peredo mnoj!), and Raskolnikov immediately arises and
  answers, "I did not bow down to ty, I bowed down to all human suffering"
  (Dostojevsky 1951 :343). This scene, deservedly one of the most re-
  nowned in all Russian literature, owes its drama in no small measure to the
  profound, kaleidoscopic reorganization within Raskolnikov's mind;
  Son'ja is elevated to a vast ·symbol, an abstract, metaphysical idea, and
  her shift in status is signaled at the critical moment by a switch in pro-
  nouns.
     But let us continue. The asymmetrical relationship is held during a
  subsequent discussion and while Son'ja is reading the story of Lazarus:
  ". . . I am the resurrection and the life. . . ." and then ". . . the stub
  was already burning low in the candleholder, murkily lighting up in a
  beggarly room the murderer and the prostitute who had been strangely
   15
        lam grateful to Milka Ivie for this point.




                                                                                 _J
                           Social Context and Semantic Feature       293

   ·ted through a reading of the Holy Book" (p. 350). Raskolnikov,
  , lizing that S on ,.Ja 1s
uni                       . a Iso h a If.msane, asks her to go with him "along the
rea e road," and announces that he has chosen to tell her who murdered
sam
 h niece of th e usuress. S on ,.Ja, tern·fi1ed b y h.1s wild-eyed
                                                           ·       conduct, and
t ~ understanding his motives, persists with vy, and so they part.
00
    ShortlY afterwards, in a humiliating scene, Son'ja is accused of theft,
, d stoutly defended by Raskolnikov. He again visits her lodgings, and
a: y start out reciprocating vy. Their relationship soon grows very tense
t eRaskolnikov poses a terrible if hypothetical moral question, and Son'ja
~:eaks down, sobbing.~nd ap~ealing to P~ovidence_: ". . . did you indeed
    me only to torture? at which Raskolmkov, feeling a burst of remorse,
co itches his· pronouns, wh"lI e answenng,   .    "B ut o f course ty are right,
sW              i'
son'ja" (a vet Y prava . 1s v01ce weak ens " an d his
                   t       )  H"      .     "                   . entire manner
, lters as he confesses that he has come to ask her forgiveness. They sit
: gether on her bed and he gradually begins his confession, at first by
 ~ving her hints and asking her to guess. (At one point she fleetingly
gi minds him of the murdered niece.) Son'ja finally gets his message, that
~: himself was the ax-murderer, and recoils in horror, and then throws
herself to her knees before him and cries out, "Vy, what have vy done to
  ourself!" (chto vy, chto vy eto nad soboj scielali). Raskolnikov responds
~ith, "How strange you are!" (strannaja kakaja ty). It is at this critical
·uncture that Son'ja at last switches her pronouns, "No, there is no one in
{he entire world more unhappy than ty" (p. 439); (net, net tebja nes-
 ·hastnee nikogo v tselom tsvete), and she immediately repeats ty in sev-
~ral sentences while venting her own compassion, and pledging her
willingness to follow him anywhere. Son'ja's pronominal switch, just like
her kneeling, exactly parallels the earlier scene, and is reminiscent of the
eruption of tu at the most climactic moments in Phedre and other plays of
 Racine.
    After her rush of commiseration, however, Son'ja thinks of the murder,
 of the fact that Raskolnikov has bludgeoned her friend, the niece of the
 usuress. She pulls away, and also switches back to vy, "Yes, but what are
 vy (p. 440; Da kak vy, vy takoj). Raskolnikov then explains that he may
 have killed in order to steal, at which Son'ja's love comes flooding back,
 with a switch to ty, "Ty were hungry. Ty . . . in order to help your
 mother. . . . " But when he denies this, Son'ja, again horrified, reverts
 back to vy: " . . . how do vy give away your last money, but kill . . . ?"
 At this point Raskolnikov is torn between his growing affinity and sympa-
 thy for Son'ja and his desperate need to be frank about his own cynicism
 and immorality. He becomes agonized, wonders out loud why he has
 come to confess at all, and exclaims that they are two very different (roz-
 nyje) people. Here Son'ja, again seeming to sense his loneliness and des-
 pair, switches back to the pronoun of intimacy with "(Ty) speak, speak!"
        294    Discovering Structure in Speech

(p. 442). This exhortation precipitates Raskolnikov into his theory of the
Napoleonic hero: would Napoleon have murdered in defiance of the
moral law? Son'ja, confused and irritated, switches back again to the
formal pronoun, "Vy better speak to me plainly, without examples" (p.
443). At this Raskolnikov launches into a third line of explanation: he
might have murdered to help his mother and sister, but the genuine reason
was that he wanted to dare (osmelit'sja). Son'ja is yet more estranged and
cries out, "Vy have left God, and he has struck you down" (ot boga vy
otoshli, i Vlts bog porctzil) and "Vy be quiet! Don't vy dare, blasphemer"
(p. 446), and "Do vy have the right to kill?" Raskolnikov, persisting in the
exposition of his philosophy, states that he just wanted to try something
out (poprobovat'), but soon realizes the hollowness of his position. Heap-
peals to her for advice. True to her character, Son'ja responds to him, and
changes pronouns for the seventh and last time in only nine pages of dia-
logue, "(Ty) rise up . . . (ty) bow down at the crossroads . . . (ty)
confess to all the world" (p. 448). This unforgettable scene of the gradual
union of two human beings ends with Raskolnikov's agreement to go to
the police eventually, and of Son'ja's gift of a cross to be worn around the
neck (natel'nyj krest), which had been presented to her by the murdered
niece. As when urging him to confess at the crossroads, Son'ja's offer of
the cross, a symbol of ritual siblinghood, links this novel of intellectuals
and outcasts to some of the most enduring and profound dimensions of
Russian peasant culture. Just as in The Idiot and The Brothers Kara-
mazov, the theme of solidarity between brothers and ritual siblings un-
derlies much of Dostojevsky.
    Toward the end of the book (e.g., pp. 556-558), the two young people
use only ty to one another. Thus, an elective affinity gradually guides them
through many stages of pronominal usage with a frequency and rapidity of
change that is at times difficult to follow. Starting fairly close, as destitute
and demoralized individuals of good family, they have been drawn yet
closer, as a guilt-ridden murderer and an unwilling prostitute, and, at last,
as husband and wife about to share the rigors and deprivation of a pro-
tracted exile in Siberia. Their relation differs profoundly from that de-
 picted in Resurrection between a status-conscious blue-blood and a prac-
 ticed whore.


         A Special Kind of Switching:
         The Expressive and the Latent Ty

        The present study, while primarily concerned with the cognitive
aspects of culture, also touches at many points on sentiment and feeling,
both as they were regularly patterned, and in their idiosyncratic manifes-
                            Social Context and Se1namic Feature      295

   tations. Some mood, whim, or mental state could make the speaker play
   with or altogether ignore the usual rules, depending, of course on his
   emotional makeup and social sensitivity. In such instances the ;ronoun
   often had latent or purely expressive functions.
      To begin with, the second ~erson pr~n~uns-notably when in rapid-fire
   alternation-could express idiosyncratic impulses or the peculiarities of a
   situation. The shift to ty, both more frequent and more charged with emo-
   tion, was often an unconscious slip or outburst that, because of its transi-
   tory or covert character, did not necessarily evoke or reflect a mutual re-
   structuring of the relationship. For example, ty was simply part of many
   petrified phrases of surprise, fear, or ot~e.r _strong emotion; thus, a country
  squire on fairly formal terms with a v1s1tlng gentleman, might burst out
  momentarily with a grateful, "Ah, t~ are my benefactor" (Gogol
   1947:89). A maid normally on asymmetnc_al terms with her master might
  cry out, on bumping into him in a dark corridor, "Ty, my lord, watch out!"
  The informal pronoun was part of many frozen expressions such as "The
  devil take you (tebja)!" Such exclamations often did little mor~ than
  express the speaker's sentiments about a touchy or startling situation but,
  at another level of contrast, they at least implied a fleeting and superficial
  shift in his relation to his interlocutor.
     In the second place, personal derangement was also signaled by the ex-
  cessive use of ty. Many persons when drunk grew familiar to all and
  sundry. In one striking scene from Lermontov a drunken and berserk
  Cossak ty's an officer while cutting him down with a saber. More perma-
  nent disorganization was often associated with a readiness to use ty. An
'aristocratic woman, the daughter of a general, is gradually dying of
 tuberculosis in a squalid one-room apartment, surrounded by her starving
 children. Half-crazed and hysterical, she turns on the companion of her
 alcoholic husband with, "From the tavern! Ty were drinking with him!
 (Ty) get out!" (Dostojevsky 1951 :32). Later, at the husband's funeral,
 both go back to their usual vy. But a few pages later her maternal instincts
 are exacerbated by the guilt she feels over her daughter's condition
 (p. 421 ), and she lashes out with ty no less than six times on half a page, and
 many times more if one counts the verbal forms that imply the pronoun.
 When she is lacerating a vicious gentleman who has accused her daughter
 of theft, she goes, "Ty look then! (Ty) look, (ty) look, now (ty) look!"
These exclamatory pronouns symbolize her abject despair. The extreme
use of the ty of pronominal instability was part of hysteria, or, in Prague
School terms, the onset of insanity was signaled by a neutralization or
canceling out of the distinction that set off the two pronouns from each
other. I accept as apparently sound the theory of Jakobson ( 1942:83) that
in aphasia, extreme senility, and so forth, individuals generally revert to
the unmarked, generic form of their childhood years.
        296   Discovering Structure in Speech

    The informal pronoun could also serve as the unilateral, one-sided
expression ofan extreme ideology which, from one point of view, is a lack
of contact with "reality." One handsome and egregiously chaste young
woman "was on ty terms with everybody" (Tolstoy 1960a:416) as part of
her revolutionary posture. An old wanderer and anarchist, who had been
jailed once for "insanity," "believed only in himself' and used ty to all
(Tolstoy 1960a: 437-438). Speaking more generally, the exclusive use of
the informal pronoun often symbolized an outlook on man and society
characteristic of the insane, the senile, hermits, and extreme revolution-
aries, notably terrorists.
    The "second person singular" was also used by normal persons in
 normal states to express involuntary or transient feelings of contempt,
 hostility, and the like, often quite independent of the social class of the
 speakers. In one instance, a poor village priest consistently reciprocates
 vy with the niece of a powerful landlord until questioning her about life as
 an actress, when he says ''; .. sometimes with a spitty snout-one ought
 to be forbidden to even look at him-but ty have to proffer your lips." His
 switch of pronouns here was apparently unintentional, but the effect on
 his listener of the message and the pronoun itself was devastating. In
 another case, a doorman thinks to himself while turning away an un-
 desirable gentleman, "Just the same, if they chase ty away from the
 threshold, then ty must be some sort of rascal" (Gogol 1947:153).
 Similarly, a young lackey, when nagged at about fixing some blinds, thinks
 to himself with reference to the princess, "But the devil take ty if I know
 what ty need" (Tolstoy 1960a: 100). Finally, Gorki's grandmother does
 use vy to her husband, the patriarch, but during crises such as the great
 and ruinous fire she switches to ty. Later, when he is losing relatives and
 sinking into abject poverty, she uses nothing but the informal pronoun.
     Such shifts in pronouns could explicitly mark a shift toward contempt
 coupled with vilification. The big trading houses had special agents known
 as "nephews" to make false bids at auctions, among other things. When a
 nephew fell into disfavor an.d was about to be booted downstairs, "the
 director would begin to interlard his speech ever more with the pronoun
 ty, and with polite epithets in the nature of 'rascal,' 'good-for-
 nothing' . . . " (Zlatovratsky.1947:297). In another, better known case, a
 young woman, finding herself locked in a man's room, shifts to ty: "(Ty)
 open the door immediately, immediately, base man . . . so this (means)
 rape!" Later she draws a miniature revolver and accuses her tormentor of
 having poisoned his wife: "Ty! Ty hinted it to me yourself; ty spoke to me
  of the poison . . . I know, ty made a trip to get it . . . ty had it
  ready . . . it was ty . . . it was decidedly ty, lout!" (Dostojevsky
  1951 :528). Here the pronoun is repeated seven times in two and a half
  lines of Russian, illustrating how a woman might switch to ty as a partial
  expression of her terror, or contempt, or some other underlying antipathy,
                         Social Context and Semantic Feature    297
                                                           1
and more generally, how a pronoun could function as an exclamation and
a symbol of feelings about the addressee. In another case, a housemaid
has been forced into concubinage. She directs her frustrated emotions
into maternal love for an illegitimate child, until it is torn away and sent
off. From then on she thinks only ty to her master, although sticking to vy
in face-to-face conversations (Saltykov-Shchedrin 1958:232). Let us take
a last example. Toward the close of the famous cross-examination Ras-
kolnikov's interrogator, who had never deviated from the formal pronoun,
thinks ty toward the man whom he has broken with his questions. In sum,
a low opinion or even hatred could be mentally expressed through an
unarticulated and therefor,e unreciprocated ty.
   Affection and love could also be related to the covert or idiosyncratic
thinking of ty. For instance, one aristocrat, when passing through the ini-
tial stages of what might become a liaison with a seductive St. Petersburg
lady, finds himself conversing with ty "in the language of the eyes. The
eyes said, 'Can ty love me?' and the answer was 'Yes'" (Tolstoy
l 960a:265, 300, 314). A woman might be the first to make the shift with
her eyes, although a man would normally take the initiative with the artic-
ulate form. Such intuitions, shared by all normal Russians, were made
delightfully explicit by Pushkin in a verse entitled "Ty and Vy."

                       rrpe.n; neii aa.n;yM•rnbo CT010;
                       CbecTH o•rnii: c nee HeT cmu,1;
                       II robopm eii: RaR bLI MHJILI!
                       H MLICJIIO : 1m1, Te6n: mo6mo !

   This last quatrain may be translated as:

                     Pensive I stand before her now
                     And cannot tear my eyes away.
                     "How dear vy are," I say,
                     And think, "How I do love tebja."

Practically all Russians, particularly of the gentry class, were potentially
or mentally on ty terms with a larger number of persons than could be
deduced from their overt linguistic behavior.
   Such latent usage also mattered among the lower classes, except,
perhaps, for the peasants in their communes. In one instance, a proletar-
ian mother in her forties says, "Farewell," to a young female worker, but,
looking after her from the window, she thinks, "Comrade! . . . ah, you
dear, may God give tebe an honorable (clzestnogo) comrade for all your
life" (Gorki 1946: 153). The same proletarian mother-image regularly
thinks ty but says vy to her son's sweetheart, an educated girl of vaguely
middle-class background. She "felt a desire to say to her, '(Ty) my dear,
         298    Discovering Structure in Speech

  indeed, I know that you love him . . . . ' But she could not make up her
  mind to it" (ne reshalas'). And then later, "she pressed the extended hand
  and thought, '(Ty) my unhappy one.'" But soon thereafter she says aloud,
  "Vy speak truly" (Gorki 1946: 196).
    The foregoing data demonstrate some of the functions of the latent or
 mental ty, and this relates to a mote general point. One of the fallacies of
 behavioristic descriptive linguistics and of behavioristic social psychol-
 ogy is that, by a sort of convention, the evidence is artificially limited to
 the overt, actually articulated forms. Such an approach,. while usually
 valid for phonemics or many kinds of sociometrics, is apt to lead to distor-
 tion in semantics, because so much of meaning is private and never made
 explicit during the act of speech. On the one hand, such inner life is often
 maximally expressive, although barely reciprocated unless the addressee
 picks up the cue of gesture, intonation, and so forth. On the other hand,
 some of the most trenchant communication involves the combination of
one spoken pronoun with paralinguistic features of body movement and
intonation that would normally accompany the covert unspoken pronoun;
thus, an explicit vy combined with paralinguistic ty (warmness of tone,
and so forth), could often signal a felicitous union of personal respect and
an affection whose strength was not mitigated by overt restraint; spoken
vy when conjoined with the modulations and gestures usual for certain ty
bonds could often signal revilement and disgust in the most painful
manner. Unfortunately, the evidence being considered here does not
permit many inferences of this sort, but, by the same token, the singular
value of novels is that, unlike plays or psychological experiments, or most
field work, they do provide evidence of what speakers would think in a
variety of situations and status relationships.


        Conclusions

          Pronouns display unusual properties of emotional expres-
siveness, logical abstraction, and frequency in dialogue. Pronominal sets,
like those of kinship terminology, are Janus-faced because linked into
both the linguistic matrix of grammatical paradigms and the cultural ma-
trix of social statuses and group categories. Among the many symbols of
status in Russian, the second person singular pronouns were the most per-
vasive, frequent, and profound in their implications. Just two short words,
operating in all speech events that involved two interlocutors, signaled the
relative position of each pole in hundreds of dyadic relationships. Analy-
sis of a representative sample of pronominal usage leads to the inference
of a relational system of positional slots in the status system, and of other
culturally specific categories. For Russian the categories which have to be
postulated in order to predict pronominal usage more or less correlate
                                Social Context and Semantic Feature     299

        with those inferred on the basis of external sociocult~ral evidence. The
        same, ego-oriented analysis of pronominal usage leads to the inference of

I       discriminations or components that had to be controlled by the Russian in
        order to speak and understand. In the nineteenth century, at least, ten dis-
        criminations underlay the overwhelming mass of pronominal usage: topic
        of discourse, the context of the speech event, then age, generation, sex
I       and kinship status, then dialect, group membership, and relative jural and
        political authority, and finally, emotional solidarity. All these discrimi-
        nations, in modified form, also underlay the equally important symbolism
        of the kinship terminology. Such overlap of components in even these two
       semantic subsystems suggests that a continuing analysis of social struc-
       ture would lead to an ever diminishing margin of discoveries of discrimi-
       nations, which are probably quite limited in number. Also, about six to a
       dozen such discriminations probably underlie most systems with two pro-
       nouns. The ten discriminations with their patterns of combination consti-
       tute the stable-though not static-system that accounts for nearly all the
       evidence and predicts with accuracy the usage in new texts.
          The Russian usage was further characterized by a great deal of
       switching, by sudden changes of pronoun during a conversation or new
       encounter. Precisely because it depends on addition, loss, or realignment
      of discriminations, switching gives invaluable evidence on relative or hier-
      archical order. But while many important relationships between discrimi-
      nations can be inferred, the total network is less accessible. This is partly
      just because some evidence is lacking. Moreover, a decision as to the rela-
      tive status of any two discriminations can only be made within realistic
      contexts that involve several others; the total number of such possible
      combinations is very high. In addition, graphs of the relations between
      discriminations would only be valid if made for precisely defined dyadic
     pairs in precisely defined contexts; the axes would have to specify many
     subdivisions of the ten discriminations used above.
         Switching and what I have called "pronominal breakthrough" was
     interesting also because motivated by an interplay of the aforementioned
     cultural principles with what were essentially psychological forces of hos-
     tility, affection, ambivalence, mental derangement, and the like; the role
     of emotion was comparatively great in Russian life. Insight into the psy-
    chology of pronominal usage may be had, not only from switching, but
    from the expressive or latent use of ty, particularly when the speaker
    reverts to the informal pronoun. In many cases provided by the realistic
    novel and experienced by any normal Russian, the informal pronoun was
    encoded mentally, often embedded in phrases of love or hate, even while
    the formal pronoun was being articulated in a more or less different con-
    text. I take this to be but an accessible instance of the more general phe-
    nomenon whereby people think or feel one continuous message while
    enunciating a second string of overt forms. The content of the two mes-
        300     Discovering Structure in Speech

sages can range from virtual identity to total divergence. A linguistic
theory which boldly exploits all available evidence and intuitions about
such concomitant inner speech and other "psychological" phenomena
will not only have grappled with some of the most challenging experience
but be capable as well of predicting future events more fully and realis-
tically.16

         References to Russian Sources
Akskov, Sergej T., 1958, Semejnaja Khronika ("A Family Chronicle"). Mos-
         cow: Gos. lz. Khud Lit.
Dahl, V., 1880-1882, Tolkovyj So/var' Russkogo Jazyka. Petersburg, Moscow.
Dostojevsky, Fedor M., 1951, Prestuplenije i N akazanije ("Crime and· Punish-
         ment"). Sela Stepanchikogo i ego Obitateli ("Stepanchiko Village"),
         pt. I. Cambridge: University Press.
Gogol, Nikolaj V., 1947, Mertvyje Dushi ("Dead Souls"). Poema. Moscow: Ogiz
         Goslitizdat.
Gorki, Maksim, 1947, Detstvo ("Childhood"). Moscow, Leningrad: Gos. Iz. Det.
         Lit.
- - - , 1946, I zbrannyje S ochinenija ("Selected Works," including "Mother").
         Moscow: Ogiz. Gos. Iz. Khud. Lit.
Isachenko, A. V., 1960, Mo,fologiclzeskij Stroj R11sskogo Jazyka, vol. II. Bra-
         tislavo.
Lcrmontov, Mikhaj!Ju., 1948, Geroj Naslzego Vremeni ("A Hero of Our Time").
         Moscow, Leningrad: Gos. Iz. Det. Lit.
Pushkin, Aleksandr S., 1949, 'Stantsionnyj Smotritel' ("The Station Master"), pp.
       · 86-97 in Polnoe Sobranie Sochinenij v slzesti tomakh. Moscow: Gos. Iz.
         Khud. Lit.
Saltykov-Shchedrin, M. E., 1958, Gospoda Golovlevy ("The Golovlyov Fam-
         ily"). Moscow: Gos. Iz. Khud. Lit.
Sholokhov, Mikhajl, 1959, Tikhij Don ("The Quiet Don"). 2 vols. Moscow: Gos.
         Iz. Khud. Lit.
Sologub, Fjodor, 1961, V Plenu ("In Bondage"). In Russian Stories-Russkije
         Rasskazy, Gleb Struve (ed.). New York: Bantam Books.
Tolstoy, Lev, 1960a, Voskresenije ("Resurrection"). Moscow: Gos. Iz. Khud.
         Lit.
- - - , 1960b, Detstvo. Ostroc!zestvo. Junost' ("Childhood," "Boyhood,"
         "Youth"). Leningrad: Gos. lz. Det. Lit.
Zlatovratsky, N N., 1947, /zbra.nnyje Proizvedenija ("Selected Works"). Mos-
         cow: 0. Giz.

  "' I stand gratefully indebted to Roger Brown and Albert Gilman, whose brilliant article
(Brown and Gilman 1960) inspired the present effort, and to Joshua Fishman for valuable
points of method, to Marlys Wendell for stylistic criticisms, and to Gertrude Vakar for many
comments on both style and content. Above all, I wish to thank Julian Pitt-Rivers,and
Nicholas Vakar for their pervasive comments at all levels. Earlier versions of this chapter
were presented to the Chicago Society for Slavic and South Asian Linguistics and Poetics,
to Milton Singer's class on the Philosophy of Culture, and to the Los Angeles Conference on
Sociolinguistics; many persons in these audiences provided helpful points. Finally, the
present research was partly supported by a grant from the Department of Health, Education
and Welfare under the National Defense Education Act.
           10

           Remarks on Ethnomethod0Iogy                                      1


           HAROLD GARFINKEL




          Harold Garfinkel is a professor of sociology at the Uni-
          versity of California, Los Angeles. He res;eived his doc-
          torate from Harvard University. His research for many
          years has been concerned with "common sense" knowl-
          edge of social structure, and with practical reasoning, as
          found in a variety of experimental and institutional set-
          tings. The material discussed here is drawn from a paper,
          much of which is incorporated in the first chapter of his
          book Studies in Et/znometlwdology (1967). It outlines
          some of the basic assumptions about communication and .
          social science methodology which underlie the work of
          Sacks and Schegloff in the following two chapters.
             As the first part of the name suggests, eth-
          nomethodology has ties both with ethnology and
          linguistics and with philosophy. In some respects, it is the
          counterpart within sociology of ethnographic semantics
          and ethnoscience (see Frake, Chapter 3; Sturtevant
          1964; Colby 1966; Tyler 1969). The second part of its
          name indicates the point of difference. Ethnography and
          ethnomethodology share a methodological stance in that
          both give primacy to explicating the competence or
          knowledge of members of a culture, the unstated assump-
          tions which determine their interpretation of experience.

   1 The investigations were supported by Senior Research Fellowship SF-81 from the U.S.
Public Health Service, Grant Q-2 from the Research Section of the California State Depart-
ment of Mental Hygiene, and project AF-AFOSR-757-65 of the Behavioral Sciences
Division of the Air Force Office of Scientific Research. I am indebted to Michael Mend and
Patricia Allen, graduate students, for their aid with the clinic studies; to Eleanor B. Sheldon
for suggesting the format of and for her interest in the reliability study; and to Lindsey
Churchill and Harvey Sacks for conversations about these materials. Obviously, they are
not responsible for the chapter's deficiencies.

                                             30/
302   Discovering Structure in Speech

Like the descriptive linguists of the 1930s or 1940s, both
insist on the need for more intensive and systematic
empirical research into the nature of basic cognitive
processes, and by implication they are critical of social
science measurement which neglects to show how the
researcher's categories relate to the actor's perceptions
of what takes place. But whereas ethnographic seman-
ticists deal with members' knowledge primarily through
folk terminologies (as does Frake in Chapter 3), Gar-
finkel takes a much broader and, consequently, also less
formal approach to communicative acts. His main con-
cern is with the interpretative processes which underlie
these acts, be they verbal or nonverbal. Meaning for him
is "situated meaning," that is, meaning constructed in
specific contexts by actors who must actively interpret
what they hear for it to make sense. Garfinkel points out
that humans everywhere, whether in foreign cultures or
our own, whether laymen or social scientists, rely on the
fundamental 'procedures he illustrates. Methodology for
him, therefore, is more than the way the study is done; it
is part of what there is to study as well.
   The two case studies, each concerned with demon-
strating a kind of impossibility, make the distinctive char-
acter of ethnomethodology clear. In one sense, the first
 study, concerned with coding procedures in a psychiatric
clinic, is a straightforward study in ethnographic se-
 mantics. What are the categories by which those in the
 clinic, as well as those studying the clinic, segment the
 universe in question; what are the criteria by which in-
 stances are assigned to the categories? For Garfinkel, the
 essential point is that the categorization is not automatic
 but an open-ended process that entails operations not
 provided for in the classification or, indeed, in any stated
 set of procedures for using. the classification. These ap-
 parently "ad hoc" operations (called here "ad hoeing")
 are commonly invoked unconsciously. When they are
 brought to attention, the ordinary response is to consider
 them defects to be remedied or removed. (The clinic was ·
 distressed at the investigation's resulting specification of   r'
 procedures actually used in classifying patients, and          J
 would not allow it to be reproduced as part of the study,
 except with a clear warning on its cover that it was not
 the official specification, and not to be consulted in place
                       Remarh 011 Eth110111ethodology 1 303

of it). Garfinkel contends that the ad hoc operations
cannot be remedied or removed (although they can be ig-
nored). Similarly, those engaged in coding from the clinic
records (i.e., translating the language of these records
into social science categories suitable for formal statis-
tical analysis), found it impossible to follow their coding
instructions without resorting to ad hoeing.
   The second study set students the task of explaining a
brief conversation reported by one of them. The students
became convinced that each successive attempt at de-
scription was insufficient and, finally, that no total
description could be made. Again there is a tie with
ethnography, specifically the ethnography of speaking;
Garfinkel explains that the students found the task
impossible because, as would most social scientists, they
took the task to be one of remedying the sketchiness of
the conversation by elaborating its contents, by appealing
outside the speech event to what became, under prod-
ding, an infinite regress of context. Their error was to as-
sume a theory of signs in which the way something is said
is divorced from what is being said (form vs. content),
and in concentrating on the "what," neglecting the
"how." In fact, the conversation (like any conversation)
was an instance of one or more alternative ways of
speaking; it was intelligible to its participants not because
of some shared infinity of substantive knowledge as to
what was being talked about but in the first instance
because they agreed at the time on how the talking was
being done and how it was to be interpreted. The fact that
such momentary agreements can be reached, however,
does not mean that content can be reconstructed later
under different conditions.
   The insistence that speaking has a form beyond that of
grammar; that a simple semantic, or referential, perspec-
tive is inadequate to explaining intelligibility; that in-
telligibility depends upon the way in which something is
said, inseparable from what is being said; in short, that
members of a speech community share knowledge of
ways of speaking as well as of grammar, that com-
munication requires sociolinguistics as well as se-
mantics-all this is common ground. Garfinkel, however,
again goes beyond an ethnographic approach. While
recommending the study of ways of speaking (and listing
    304   Discovering Structure in Speech

    illustrations, such as narrating, lying, and gossiping), he
    does not stop to consider them in detail. For him the es-
    sential point is that rules of speaking also ultimately run
    afoul of "the essential incompleteness of any set of in-
    structions." Common understanding is never simply rec-
    ognition of shared contents or rules, but it is always
    open-ended, brought about in any given case because
    participants bring it about as their "artful (if unconscious)
    accomplishment." Ad hoeing remains the ultimate con-
    cern. People understand each other because "for the
    while" they assume the reasonableness of each other's
    statements and impute and construct reasonableness,
    where needed, out of often fragmentary data.
        Here is the fundamental contention of Garfinkel's
    work: that the orderliness, rationality, accountability of
    everyday life is, as he puts it, a "contingent, ongoing ac-
    complishment," a kind of "work," or "doing." Any oc-
    casion ·whatsoever provides material. "Methodology"
    thus refers to modes of practical reasoning used by
    researcher and subject alike. It is these modes of rea-
     soning that should be the first order of business in social
     research. The basis of culture, Garfinkel suggests, is not
     shared knowledge, but shared rules of interpretation; not
     common substantive information, already acquired, but
     "common sense" knowledge of what can count as rea-
.    sonable, factual, related, and the like. [Cf. Wallace's
     ( 1961) related view of culture as not "replication of
     uniformity" but "organization of diversity." See also
     Goodenough 1964]
        The emphasis on culture as interpretative rules shows
     a certain parallel. to transformational-generative
     grammar, a parallel which is made explicit by Cicourel
     (1970), who sees social structure as akin to deep struc-
     ture (see also Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). Just as
     speakers are held to be masters of a grammatical knowl-
     edge that they employ, fluently and largely unwittingly, a
     kind of "rule-governed creativity," largely free from
     stimulus control (Chomsky 1968), so here speakers are
     held to be masters of a speaking knowledge, employed
     fluently, unwittingly, and creatively. For Garfinkel, in-
     deed the common sense knowledge with which he is con-
     cerned is that of "members," member being used as a
     technical term to refer to mastery of a natural language,




                                                                    d
                             Remarks on Ethnomethodol,ogy       305

      where language includes not only grammar but also its
      use. And, just as for Chomsky, the resolution of other
      questions in linguistics is held to depend on character-
      izing the grammatical competence of speakers, if not, in
      fact, on discovering its basis in universal human nature.
      Garfinkel's project might be said to be the discovery of
      the human world view, at least its epistemological com-
      ponent.
        There are differences from generative grammar as well.
      Ethnomethodology might agree that the partial or
      "degenerate" nature of much of the speech encountered
     by the child argues against sheer learning as an explana-
     tion of the child's rapid acquisition of grammatical struc-
     ture; it would agree in rejecting the empiricist or descrip-
     tivist view that "text signals its own structure"; but it
     would not see the ancillary character of speech as merely
     an obstacle but rather as part of the knowledge the child
     must acquire. What, for grammarians, may be data not
     worth saving-clipped, elliptical, incomplete sentences-
     may be for the ethnomethodologist the precise way of ac-
     complishing some particular thing that is being said. One
     reason for this is the ethnomethodologists' contextual
     emphasis (i.e., the concern with the dependence of data
     on contexts created both by participants and by the in-
     vestigator, which is lacking in most linguistics). For an
     anthropological view of communication akin to that of
     Garfinkel, see Bateson's Cybernetic Explanation (1967).
        A further difference, between this approach and
     linguistic and ethnographic theory, may lie in the relation
     between particular studies and universal properties. At
     the particular level a parallel would hold, as we have
     seen, inasmuch as the data are understood as underlaid
     by mental capacities of the participants, and as being the
     product of these capacities. In linguistic theory, the ade-
     quacy of particular descriptions is tied to the adequacy of
     a general theory of the nature of language ["explanatory
     adequacy" (Chomsky 1965)]. Ethnomethodology also
     bases itself in a conception of the nature of language
     (recall the definition of the key term members), but it is
     not clear, at least at this time, that for it the study of uni-   I;
                                                                       I
     versal properties might undergird particular studies, con-
     straining the number of alternative analyses possible, and
     even deciding among them-in short, discovering behind
I




..
I
306   Discovering Structure in Speech

 the infinity of possible sentences and the diversity of lan-
 guages a finite mechanism. The universality envisaged in
 ethnomethodology would seem to underlie particular
 studies in two not clearly compatible ways.
    On the one hand, it is argued that investigators them-
 selves make unwitting use of processes that are intrinsic
 to that which they study. The recommendation here
 would seem to be that to avoid a vicious circularity, one
 must make ways of speaking and practical reasoning ob-
jects of explicit simultaneous study. Ethnographers, for
 example, obtain and interpret information by learning
 ways· of communicating appropriately in a community.
 Those ways of speaking are normally regarded as means
 to an end and forgotten, except in anecdotes, but should
 be described. Rather than take what is said only as a sign
of a content somewhere else (in some ethnological cate-
gory), ethnographers should learn the lesson of Gar-
finkel's students and study the ways of speaking on which
their verbal information depends. One might envisage
some general theory of ways of speaking to which eth-
nographers would contribute and on which they would
draw.
   However, the universality and ubiquity of methodolog-
ical phenomena leads to the view that it is not possible
to remedy or repair the presence of practical reasoning in
investigations. One gains the impression that all the in-
vestigator can do is to collect and exhibit instances. Quite
possibly, this posture of extreme empiricism-reminis-
cent of the descriptive linguists-is merely a passing
phase, which will disappear with the accumulation of
more properly documented case studies.
   While pointing out, on the one hand, that the task of
formulating ways of speaking is infinite, Garfinkel calls
attention, on the other hand, to some highly general and
most probably universal processes through which
meaning is conveyed in natural conversation. These are:
that ways of speaking are essentially indexical (like pro-
nouns), in the sense that part of their meaning and in-
telligibility always will lie in the situation in which they
occur and in the association this situation evokes in the
participants' minds; they are reflexive, in the sense that
the operations in question are part of all speaking and
making sense, so that an inquiry into them is itself always
                          Remarks on Ethnomethodolo,gy      307

     a new, as yet unanalyzed instance-the student of the
     "glossing practices" of others himself must employ
    some; and they are open-ended in that the sense that
    what is happening now can always be taken to depend
    upon, be revisable in the light of, what happens later. In-
    stances of this last property, indeed, are favorite "rep-
    resentative anecdotes" to use Kenneth Burke's
    (1945:59-61, 323-325) apt term; e.g., "Rose's gloss": In
    this practice Professor Rose, visiting a city for the very
    first time, while being driven from the airport by his host,
    "does" [looking ahead] and [watching something go by],
    and then remarks, "It certainly has changed." His host's
    reply tells Rose what he has been talking about. [The
   quotation marks and brackets adapt conventions es-
   tablished by Garfinkel and Sacks (1969)]. Analogous
   practices indeed are known in the interpretation of litera-
   ture, as in I. A. Richard's (1955:17-56) proposal that
   question marks be used to bracket some initial piece of
   talk or text (e.g., ?analogous practices?) as indication that
   how it is to be comprehended is to be left for decision or
   review later. A related practice is known in biblical
   studies as typology, referring to the procedures by which
   New Testament writers interpret the Old Testament past
  in the light of the present, "for now they see clearly the
  true significance of what had formerly been discerned
  only dimly," and by v.•hich Old Testament writers as well
  "had interpreted the meaning of God's action in the past
  in the light of their understanding of later events"
 (Richardson 1964: 178-179). For ethnomethodology,
 this family of practices is essential to the rationality of
 everyday life.
      The spirit of ethnomethodology is exactly that of the
                                                                    :i
 sociolinguistics with which we are concerned in many                !
 respects-the insistence that the number and kinds of
 ways of speaking are problematic and to be discovered;
 that analysis begin within the data of speech events them-
 selves; and that a person's speaking competence is not pas-
sive or mechanical, but part of strategies for the encom-
passing of situations (cf. Burke 1941 ).
     Garfinkel's ultimate concern with common sense
knowledge and practical reasoning is invaluable in
making one realize that the study of speaking entails
issues central to contemporary philosophical perspec-




                                                                   J,d
308   Discovering Stmcture in Speech

tives. It is work stimulated by phenomenology through
Alfred Schutz ( 1962, 1966, 1967), and has recognized af-
finity with the later Wittgenstein (l 953), as well as with
the late Scot philosopher Sinclair (l 951), who has also
influenced Kenneth Pike's ( 1967) approach to an in-
tegrated view of language as part of behavior. The con-
cern with what is known and the conditions of knowing it
in the human sciences is of a kind with methodological
questions raised from a variety of starting points-or-
dinary language philosophy [e.g., Hare 1963; Hampshire
 1967; cf. 114, 234; Marxist existentialism (or existen-
tialist.Marxism) in Sartre 1963 (and cf. LeFebvre 1966);
 Protestant and Catholic theology (Ebeling 1966; Kaspar
 1969; Mascall 1968)]. Each shares with eth-
nomethodology a concern to deal with human thought
and action as concrete, situated, yet going beyond the sit-
uation; each examines received categories and practices
found inadequate to human experience; but each, while
recognizing human experience as necessarily outrunning
determinate knowledge, is concerned with a structure of
 knowledge that can be established, as, in its own field, is
 sociolinguistic study of ways of speaking.
    Rose's gloss provides an illustration. Whether or not
 it is an adequate "representative anecdote," it is clear
 that it would not work in the same way in all situations.
 In some, as in the one described, it would pass unre-
 marked; in some, it would be remarked as unusual, odd,
 or specially expressive; in some it would not be regarded
 as interpretable at all-at least it would be taken as not
 related to the situation at all. In the first case, it would be
 odd to remark on what had been said; in the second, what
 has been said would be literally remarkable (i.e., worth
 retelling); in the third, response might range from open
 questioning to silent head shaking. A fourth possibility,
 of course, is absence of response because the remark,
 being uninterpretable, goes unnoticed. (These categories
 are adapted from work of William Labov.) Even if the
 remark could always be potentially "glossed" [given the
 (good) will], by finding some explanation for an unre-
 lated or uninterpretable remark to have been made, exis-
  tence of the possibility does not mean it will be acted
  upon.
    To pass over these four kinds of relation between
                                        Remarks on Ethnomethodology             309

            speaking and situation is to overshoot the heart of sociol-
            inguistic research into the structure of discourse. It is in
            terms of such research, indeed, that recourse to a particu-
            lar glossing practice, e.g., one of last resort ("Well, he
            must have some reason for saying that, though now's no
            time to ask what it is"), could be accounted for. Two
            things must be stressed: ( 1) Rules of interpretation (in-
           cluding glossing practices) can always be used to tran-
           scend determinate rules of speaking in the narrower
           sense, but need not be; and it is essential to discover
           where the boundary lies in a community, such that to find
           some particular thing interpretable in part puts one out-
           side the community's norms of interpretation, (2) Rules
           of interpretation apply through, or incorporate, determi-
           nate rules of speaking, and use of one is not intelligible
           without knowledge of the other. In short, eth-
           nomethodology goes beyond most sociolinguistic re-
           search, but presupposes and stimulates it, as Sacks and
           Schegloff(Chapters 11 and 12) will show. Though its no-
           tion of social categories is akin to semantic rules, it also
           offers a potentially highly useful methodological frame-
           work for integrating linguistic and social phenomena.
           Additional related readings are provided by Duncan
           (1968), Hill and Crittenden (1968), Postal (1968), Sapir
           (1949c), Kramer, Goldstein, Israel, and Johnson (1956),
           and Quentin Skinner ( 1970).




         I use the term ethnomethodology to refer to various policies,
methods, results, risks, and lunacies with which to locate and accomplish
the study of the rational properties of practical actions as contingent
ongoing accomplishments of organized artful practices of everyday life.
Given strongly enforced limitations of space and stronger ones on pa-
tience, I found the peaks of recommending these studies with detailed,
descriptive arguments beyond my skill. I therefore took as the limited
purpose of this chapter to characterize ethnomethodology. 2 I have done
this by presenting two studies and a concluding recitation of policies. It is


  2 For detailed studies, see Garfinkel ( 1967), and Garfinkel and Sacks (in press); a further
characterization of ethnomethodology, with introduction to detailed studies, is in Garfinkel
and Sacks ( 1969).
         310     Discovering Structure in Speech

possible to develop the central theme if the reader treats each section as a
guide to deepen and point up the others. The first study deals with follow-
ing coding instructions; the second with common understanding.


          Fallowing Coding Instructions

         Several years ago we undertook to analyze the experience of the
UCLA Outpatient Psychiatric Clinic in order to answer the question:
"By what criteria are its applicants selected for treatment?" To formulate
and answer this question, we used a variation of a method of cohort analy-
sis that Kramer and his associates (1956) had recommended to describe
load and flow characteristics of patients in mental hospitals. Successive
activities of "contact," "intake interview," "psychological testing," "in-
take conference," "in-treatment," and "termination" were conceived
with the use of the tree diagram of Fig. 10.1. Any path from first contact


                                                     IN-TREATMENT

                                          INTAKE
                                          CONFERENCE

                             PSYCHOLOGICAL                          TERMINATION
                             TESTING

                 INTAKE
                                                          TERMINATION
                 INTERVIEW


                                                TERMINATION
           FIRST
           CONTACT
                                  TERMINATION


                     TERMINATION
           figure JO.I
 Career paths of patients of a psychiatric clinic.



 to termination was called a "career." We wished to know what character-
 istics of patients, of clinic personnel, of their interactions, and of the tree
 were associated with which careers. Clinic records were our sources of
 information, the most important of which were intake application forms,
 and contents of case folders. In order to obtain a continuing record of pa-
 tient-clinic transactions from the time of a patient's initial contact until he
 terminated, a "Clinic Career Form" was designed and inserted into case
                                 Remarks on Etlznometlwdology      311

  folders. Because clinic folders contain records that clinic personnel
  provide of their own activities, almost all of these sources of data were the
  results of self-reporting procedures.
    Two graduate students in sociology at UCLA examined some 1500
 clinic folders for the information to complete the items of a coding sheet.
  A conventional reliability procedure was designed and run with the aim of
 determining the amount of agreement between coders and between suc-
 cessive trials of their coding. According to conventional reasoning, the
 amount of agreement furnishes one set of grounds for lending credence to
 coded events as actual events of clinic activities. A critical feature of con-
 ventional reliability assessments is that the agreement between coders
 consists of agreement on the end results.
    To no one's surprise, preliminary work showed that in order to ac-
 complish the coding, coders were assuming knowledge of the very
 organized ways of the clinic that their coding procedures were intended to
 produce descriptions of. More interestingly, such presupposed knowledge
 seemed necessary and was most deliberately consulted whenever, for
 whatever reasons, the coders needed to be satisfied that they had coded
 "what really happened" regardless of whether or not they had encoun-
 tered "ambiguous" folder contents. Such a procedure undermined any
 claim that actuarial methods for interrogating folder contents had been
used, no matter how apparently clear coding instructions were. Agree-
ment in coding results was being produced by some other contrasting
procedure with unknown characteristics.
    To find out more about it, the reliability procedure was treated as a
 problematic activity in its own right. The "reliability" of coded results
was addressed by asking how the coders had actually brought folder con-
tents under the jurisdiction of the coding sheet's item. Via what practices
had actual folder contents been assigned the status of answers to the
researcher's questions? What actual activities made up coders' practices
called "following coding instruction"?
    A procedure was designed that yielded conventional reliability informa-
tion so that the original interests of the study were preserved. At the same
time the procedure permitted the study of how any amount of agreement
or disagreement had been produced by the actual ways that the two
coders had gone about treating folder contents as answers to the ques-
tions formulated by the coding sheet. But, instead of assuming that
coders, proceeding in whatever ways they did, might have been in error,
in greater or lesser amount, the assumption was made that whatever they
did could be counted correct procedure in some coding game. The ques-
tion was, what were these "games"? How ever coders did it, it was suf-
ficient to produce whatever they got. How did they do it to get what they
got?
         312     Discovering Structure in Speech

    We soon found the essential relevance to the coders of such consider-
ations as: "et cetera," "unless," "let it pass," and "factum valet. " 3
    For convenience call these considerations "ad hoc," and call their use
in the coder's work of interrogating contents for answers to their ques-
tions "ad hoeing." Coders used these same ad hoc considerations in order
to recognize the relevance of the coding instructions to the organized
activities of the clinic. Only when this relevance was clear were the
coders satisfied that the coding instructions did analyze actually encoun-
 tered folder contents in such a way as to permit the coders to treat folder
 contents as reports of "real events." Finally, ad hoc considerations were
 an invariant ineradicable part of "following coding instructions." At-


                                                                                                        II
 tempts to suppress them while retaining an unequivocal sense to the in-
 structions produced coders' bewilderment.
     Various facets of the "new" reliability study were then developed, at
 first, in order to see if these results could be firmly established, and after it
 was clear, to my satisfaction, that they could, to exploit their con-
 sequences for the general sociological character of the coders' methods of
 interrogation (as well as contrasting methods) as well as for the work that
  is involved in recognizing or claiming that something had been done by
  rule-that an action had followed or had been "governed" by instructions.
     Ad hoc considerations are invariably relevant considerations in de-
  ciding the fit between what could be read from the clinic folders and what
  the coder inserted into the coding sheet. No matter how definitely and
                                                                                                        '
     3
        These considerations are quite generally found when professionals-sociologists,
 anthropologists, linguists, whosoever-make use of instructions, formulas, rules, and the
 like. There is always an implicit additional section to such statements, one that might be
 headed: "practical advice to whomsoever might seek to insure the usefulness of the instruc-
 tions (formulas, etc.) to analyze the situations." Professionals in effect claim the right to
                                                                                                        I
  make out a situation so as to see that a rule, or description, or the like is right. They claim
 such rights and assign them to each other by reason of common membership in a profession.
 This implicit practical advice consists of the things that need not be stated, yet are expected,
  and which to ask about may define one as not a member of the profession, the things that
  anyone (in the profession) knows.
                                                                                                        I
       "Et cetera" refers to the piece <1f implicit practical advice that runs: "Read it like this,
  ' .. .' and so forth", i.e., to see the rule, if you understand the rule, you presumably can
  recognize other circumstances and cases of its application without all of them being stated
  here. "Unless" refers to a second piece of advice: "Read the rule so as to include, as part of
   what it is talking about, any and all considerations of unless, considerations which any
   member knows need not and cannot be cited before they are needed, though no member is at
   a loss when the need is clear. That is, you presumably can recognize circumstances and
   cases to which no one in their right (professional) mind would take the rule as applying,
   though not stated." "Let it pass" refers to the advice that runs: "In the course of seeing that
    a rule applies, the use of and so forth and unless can introduce any matter whatsoever,
    thereby raising questions of where any of it ought appropriately to begin or end. Read the
    rule, therefore, with the proviso, 'Let it pass,' or 'Enough is enough, as anyone knows,' we
    have to get done." Finally ,fac/11111 valet is·, I understand, a medieval term that means that an
    action that is otherwise prohibited by a rule is to be treated as correct; it happens neverthe-
    less. (Based on Garfinkel 1966.)
                                   Remarks on Ethnomethodology           313

elaborately instructions had been written, and despite the fact that strict
actuarial coding rules 4 could be formulated for every item, and with which·
folder contents could be mapped into the coding sheet, insofar as the
cl· irn had to be advanced that coding sheet entries reported real events of
th'~ clinic's activities, then in every instance, and for every item, "et ce-
tera,, "unless," "let it pass," and "factum valet" accompanied the
cod~r's grasp of the coding instructions as ways of analyzing actual folder
contents. Their use made it possible as well for the coder to read a folder
 content as a report about the events that the coding sheet provided and
 fonnulated as events of the processing tree.
     ordinarily researchers treat such ad hoc procedures as flawed ways of
 writing, recognizing, or following coding instructions. The prevailing view
 holds that good work requires researchers, by extending the number and
 explicitness of their coding rules, to minimize or even eliminate the oc-
 casions in which "et cetera" and the others would be used.
     To treat instructions as though ad hoc features in their use was a
  nuisance, or to treat their presence as grounds for complaint about the in-
  cornpleteness of instructions, is very much like complaining that if the
  walls of a building were only gotten out of the way, one could see better
  what was keeping the roof up.
     our studies show that ad hoc considerations are essential features of
  coding procedures. Ad hoeing is required if the researcher is to grasp the
  relevance of the instructions to the particular and actual situation they are
  intended to analyze. For every particular and actual occasion of search,
  detection, and assignment of folder contents to a "proper" category-
  which is to say, over the course of actually coding-such ad hoc consider-
  ations have irremediable priority over the usually talked about "necessary
   and sufficient" criteria. Rather than it being the case that the "necessary
   and sufficient" criteria are procedurally defined by coding instructions,
   and rather than it being the case that ad hoc procedures are controlled in
   their presence, use, number, or occasion of use by making coding instruc-
   tions as definite as possible, ad hoc considerations are consulted by
   coders, and ad hoeing practices are used in order to recognize what the in-
   structions are definitely talking about. Ad hoc considerations are con-
   sulted by coders in order to recognize coding as "operational definitions"
   of coding categories. They operate as the ground for and as methods to
   advance and secure researchers' claims to have coded in accordance with
    "necessary and sufficient" criteria.
      We do not have strong evidence, though we do have some demonstra-
    ble grounds for pursuing the hunch, that the work of ad hoeing occurs
    without possibility of remedy whenever the coder assumes the position of

    • David Harrah's (1961) model of an information-matching game was taken to define the
   meaning of "strict actuarial method for interrogating."
        314    Discovering Structure in Speech

a socially competent member of the arrangement that he seeks to as-
semble an account of, and from this "position" treats actual folder con-
tents as standing in a relationship of trusted signification to the "system"
in the clinic activities. We think that it is because the coder assumes the
"position" of a competent member to the arrangements that he seeks to
give an account of, and that he can "see the system" in the actual content
in something like the way that we must know the orderly ways of English
usage in order to recognize an utterance as a work-in-English or know the
rules of a game to make out a move-in-a-game-given that alternative
ways of making out an utterance or a board play are always imaginable.
Thereby the coder recognizes the folder content for "what it actually is,"
or can. "see what a note in the folder is really talking about."
   Given this, then the coder, ifhe has to be satisfied that he has detected a
real clinic occurrence, must treat actual folder contents as standing proxy
for the social-order-in-and-of-clinic-activities. Actual folder contents
stand to the socially ordered ways of clinic activities as representations of
them; they do not describe the order, nor are they evidences of the order.
It is the coder's use of folder documents as sign functions to which I mean
to be pointing in saying that the coder knows the order of the clinic's
activities that he is looking at to be able to recognize the actual content as
an appearance-of-the-order. Once the coder can "see the system" in the
content, it is possible for the coder to extend and to otherwise interpret
the coding instructions-to ad hoc them-so as to maintain the relevance
of the coding instructions to the actual contents, and in this way to
formulate the sense of actual content so that its meaning, even though it is
transformed by the coding, is preserved in the coder's eyes as a real event
of the clinic's actual activities.
   There are several important consequences of this.
    1. Characteristically, coded results are treated as if they were disinter-
ested descriptions of clinic events, and coding rules are presumed to back
up the claim of disinterested description. But if the work of ad hoeing is
required to make such claims intelligible, it can always be argued-and so
far I do not see a defensible reply-that the coded results consist of a per-
suasive version of the socially organized character of the clinic's opera-
tions regardless of what the actual order is, perhaps independently of
what the actual order is, and even without our having detected the actual
order. This is to say that instead of our study of patients' clinic careers, as
well as the multitude of studies of various social arrangements that have
been carried out in similarly conventional ways, having described the
order of the clinic's operations, the account may be argued to consist of a
 socially invented, persuasive, and proper way of talking about the clinic
as an orderly enterprise since "after all" the account was produced by
"scientific procedures." The account would be itself part of the actual




                                                                                  _}
                                Rernarks on Ethnomethodology      315

 order of the clinic's operations in much the same way that one might treat
 a person's report on his own activities as a feature of his activities. The
 actual order would remain to be described.
   2. Another consequence arises when we ask what is to be made of the
 care that nevertheless is too assiduously exercised in the design and use
 of coding instructions for interrogating actual contents and transforming
 them into the language of the coding sheet? If the resulting account is a
feature of the clinic's activities, then one ought not perhaps to read the
coding instructions as a way of obtaining a scientific description of the
clinic's activities since this assumes that the coding language, in what it is
talking about, is independent of the interests of the members that are
being served in using it. Coding instructions ought to be read instead as
consisting of a grammar of rhetoric; offurnishing a "social science" way
of talking to persuade consensus and action within the practical circum-
stances of the clinic's organized daily activities, a grasp of which
members are expected to have as a matter of course. By referring to an ac-
count of the clinic that was obtained by following coding instructions, it is
possible for members with different interests to persuade each other and
to reconcile their talk about clinic affairs in an impersonal way, while the
matters that are really being talked about retain their sense for the "dis-
cussants" as a legitimate or illegitimate, a desirable or undesirable, an
advantaged or disadvantaged state of affairs for the discussants in their
occupational lives. It furnishes an impersonal way of characterizing their
affairs without the members relinquishing important organizationally
determined interests in what the account, in their eyes, is "after all" all
about. What it is all about is the clinic order whose real features, as any
member knows that "anyone knows," are always none of somebody-
else-in-that-organization 's business.


        Common Understanding and
        Ways of Talking
          Sociologists distinguish the "product" from the "process"
 meanings of a common understanding. As "product," a common under-
 standing consists of a shared agreement on substantive matters; as
 "process," it consists of various methods whereby something that a
person says or does is recognized to accord with a rule. With his concepts
of Begreifen and Verstehen, each with its distinct character as method
and knowledge, Weber provided sociologists an authority for this dis-
tinction.
   An analysis of students' experiences in reporting commonplace conver-
sation suggests that for either case, for product or process, a common un-
        3 I6   Discovering Structure in Speech

derstanding consists of an inner-temporal course of interpretive work.
Their experiences suggest some strange consequences of the facts that in
either case a common understanding has necessarily an operational struc-
ture. (See the last paragraph of this section.)
   Students were asked to report common conversations by writing on the
left side of a sheet what the parties actually said and on the right side what
they and their partners understood that they were talking about. A
student reported the following colloquy between himself and his wife:

HUSBAND:         Dana succeeded in putting       This afternoon as I was bring-
                 a penny in a parking meter      ing Dana, our four-year-old
                 today without being             son, home from the nursery
                 picked up.                      school, he succeeded in
                                                 reaching high enough to put a
                                                 penny in a parking meter when
                                                 we parked in a meter zone,
                                                 whereas before he had always
                                                 had to be picked up to reach
                                                 that high.
WIFE:            Did you take him to the         Since he put a penny in a
                 record store?                   meter that means that you
                                                 stopped while he was with
                                                 you. I know that you stopped
                                                 at the record store either on
                                                 the way to get him or on the
                                                 way back. Was it on the way
                                                 back, so that he was with you
                                                 or did you stop there on the
                                                 way to get him and somewhere
                                                 else on the way back?
HUSBAND:         No, to the shoe repair shop.    No, I stopped at the record
                                                 store on the way to get him
                                                 and stopped at the shoe repair
                                                 shop on the way home when
                                                 he was with me.
WIFE:            What for?                       I know of one reason why you
                                                 might have stopped at the
                                                 shoe repair shop. Why did you
                                                 in fact?
HUSBAND:         I got some new shoe laces       As you will remember I broke
                 for my shoes.                   a shoe lace on one of my
                                                 brown oxfords the other day
                                                 so I stopped to get some new
                                                 laces.
                                  Remarks on Ethnomethodology        317

 WIFE:             Your loafers need new          Something else you could
                   heels badly.                    have gotten that I was thinking
                                                  of. You could have taken in
                                                  your black loafers which need
                                                  heels badly. You'd better get
                                                  them taken care of pretty soon.

     Students filled out the left side of the sheet quickly and easily, but found
  the right side incomparably more difficult. When the assignment was
  made, many asked how much I wanted them to write. As I progressively
  imposed accuracy, clarity, and distinctness, the task became increasingly
  laborious. Finally, when I required that they assume I would know what
  they had actually talked about only from reading literally what they wrote
  literally, they gave up with the complaint that the task was impossible.
     Although their complaints were concerned with the laboriousness of
 having to write "more," the frustrating "more" was not made up of the
 large labor of having to reduce a mountain with buckets. It was not their
 complaint that what was talked about consisted of bounded contents
 made so vast by pedantry that they lacked sufficient time, stamina, paper,
 drive, or good reason to write "all ofit." Instead, the complaint and its cir-
 cumstances seemed to consist of this: If for whatever a student wrote I
 was able to persuade him that it was not yet accurate, distinct, or clear
 enough, and if he remained willing to repair the ambiguity, then he re-
 turned to the task with the complaint that the writing itself developed the
 conversation as a branching texture of relevant matters. The very way of
 accomplishing the task multiplied its features.
     What task had I set them, such that it required that they write "more";
 such that the progressive imposition of accuracy, clarity, and literalness
 made it increasingly difficult and finally impossible; and such that the way
 of accomplishing the task multiplied its features? If a common under-
 standing consisted of shared agreement on substantive matter, their task
 would have been identical with one that professional sociologists sup-
posedly address. The task would have been solved as professional
sociologists are apt to propose its solution, as follows:
    Students would first distinguish what was said from what was talked
about, and set the two contents into a correspondence of sign and refer-
ent. What the parties said would be treated as a sketchy, partial, in-
complete, masked, elliptical, concealed, ambiguous, or misleading version
of what the parties talked about. The task would consist of filling out the
sketchiness of what was said. What was talked about would consist of
elaborated and corresponding contents of what the parties said. Thus the
format of left- and right-hand columns would accord with the "fact" that
the contents of what was said were recordable by writing what a tape
        318   Discovering Structure in Speech

recorder would pick up. The right-hand column would require that some-
thing "more" be "added." Because the sketchiness of what was said was
its defect, it would be necessary for students to look elsewhere than to
what was said in order (a) to find the corresponding contents, and (b) to
find the grounds to argue for-because they would need to argue-the
correctness of the correspondence. Because they were reporting the
actual conversation of particular persons, they would look for these fur-
ther contents in what the conversationalists had "in mind," or what they
were "thinking," or what they "believed," or what they "intended."
   They would need further to be assured that they had detected what the
conversationalists actually and not supposedly, hypothetically, imagin-
ably, or possibly had in mind, which is to say that they would need to cite
observed actions-observed ways that the parties conducted themselves
-in order to furnish grounds for the claim of "actually." This assurance
would be obtained by seeking to establish the presence in the conversa-
tionalists' relationship of warranting virtues such as their having spoken
honestly, openly, candidly, sincerely and the like. All of which is to say
that students would invoke their knowledge of the community of under-
standings, their1knowledge of shared agreements, in order to recommend
the adequacy of their accounts of what the parties had been talking about,
i.e., what the parties understood in common. Then, for anything the
students wrote, they could assume that I, as a competent comember of the
same community (the conversations were after all commonplace) should
be able to see the correspondence and its grounds. If I did not see the cor-
respondence or if I made out the contents differently than they did, then
as long as they could continue to assume my competence-Le., as long as
my alternative interpretations did not undermine my right to claim that
such alternatives needed ·to be taken seriously by them and by me-I
could be made out by the students as insisting that they furnish me with
finer detailing than practical considerations required. In such a case, they
should have charged me with blind pedantry and should have complained
that because "anyone can see" when, for all practical purposes, enough is
enough, none are so blind as those who will not see.
   This version of their task accounts for their complaints of having to
write "more." It also accounts for the task's increasing laboriousness
when clarity and the like were progressively imposed. But it does not ac-
count very well for the final impossibility, for it explained one facet of the
task's "impossibility" as students' unwillingness to go any further, but it
does not explain an accompanying sense, namely, that students somehow
 saw that the task does not explain at all their complaint that the way ofac-
                                                                         1
complishing the task multiplied its features.                            ·
   An alternative conception of the task may do better. Although it may at
first appear strange to do so, suppose we drop the assumption that in
order to describe a usage as a feature of a community of understandings,
                                  Remarks on Ethnomethodology      319

   we must at the outset know of what the substantive common under-
   standing consists. With it, drop the assumption's accompanying theory of
   signs according to which a "sign" and "referent" are, respectively, prop-
   erties of something said and something talked about, and that in this fash-
   ion proposes sign and referent to be related as corresponding contents.
   By dropping such a theory of signs we drop thereby as well the possibility
   that an invoked shared agreement on substantive matters explains a
   usage.
      If these notions are dropped, then what the parties talked about could
  not be distinguished from how the parties were speaking. An explanation
  of what the parties were talking about would then consist not of an ac-
  count of what the parties had intended and not said entirely of describing
  how the parties had been speaking; of furnishing a method for saying
  whatever is to be said, like talking synonymously, talking ironically,
  talking metaphorically, talking cryptically, talking narratively, talking in a
  questioning or answering way, lying, glossing, double-talking, and the
  rest.
     In the place of, and in contrast to, a concern for a difference between
  what was said and what was talked about, the appropriate difference is
  between a speech-community member's recognition that a person is
  saying something, i.e., that he was speaking, on the other hand, and how
  he was speaking, on the other. Then the recognized sense of what a
 person said consists only and entirely in recognizing the method of his
 speaking, of seeing how he spoke.
     I suggest that one not read the right-hand column as corresponding con-
 tents of the left, and that the students' task of explaining what the conver-
 sationalists talked about did not involve them in elaborating the contents
 of what the conversationalists said. I suggest instead that their written
 explanations consisted of their attempts to instruct me in how to use what
 the parties said as a method for saying what the conversationalists said. I
 suggest that I had asked the students to furnish me with instructions for
 recognizing what the parties were actually and certainly saying. By per-
 suading them of alternative "interpretations," by persuading them that
ambiguity remained, I had persuaded them that they had demonstrated to
 me only what the parties were supposedly, or probably, or imaginably, or
hypothetically saying, wlziclz they took to 111ean that their instructions
were incomplete; that their denwnstrations failed by the extent to which
their instructions were incomplete; and that tlze difference between claims
of "actually" and "supposedly" depended 011 the co111plete11ess <~f the in-
structions.
    We now see what the task was that required them to write "more," that
they found increasingly difficult and finally impossible, and that became
elaborated in its features by the very procedures for doing it. I had set
them the task of formulating these instructions so as to make them
               Discovering Structure in Speech
        320

   .       , ingly" accurate, clear, distinct, and finally literal where the
"1ncreas  . gs of "increasing · 1Y" an d of c1 ·
                                              anty, accuracy, d' ·
                                                                1stmctness, and ·  ht-
mefntn s were supposedly explained in terms of the properties of the in-
era n;s ns themselves and the instructions alone. I had required them to
           10
struc the impossible task of "repairing" the essential incompleteness of
t'1ke
  '       ont of instructions no matter how carefully or elaborately wntten.      they
aT       ~~be. 1 had required them to formulate the method that the parties had
 m gd ·n speaking as rules of procedure to follow in order to say what the
 us\ \ said. The rules were thus rules that would withstand every ex-
         1
 ?ar \ of situation, imagination, and development. I had asked them to
 1dgen~ibe the parties' methods of speaking as if these methods were
  . esc orphic with                    · comp 1·mnce wit
                        acttons ·m stnct
                            ·                           · h a ru Ie of proce d ure that
  isom
  f       ulated the met h o d as an mstructa
                                        ·        bl e matter. T o recogmze· w I zat 1s
                                                                                     ·
    0
       ~d means to recognize how a person is speaking, e.g., to recognize that
       1
  :~ wife, in saying, "Your shoes need heels badly," was speaking narra-
     . e ly or metaphorically, or euphemistically, or .double-talking.
   t1ve ,
        They stumbled over the fact that the question of how a person is
   speaking, the task of describing a per~on's method of sp~aking, is not sat-
    . fled by and is not the same as showmg that what he said accords with a
    ~:le for demonstrating consistency, compatability, and coherence of
    meanings.
         For the conduct of their everyday affairs, persons take for granted that
     what is said will be made out according to methods that the parties use to
     make out what they are saying for its clear, consistent, coherent, under-
     standable, or planful character, i.e., as subject to some rule's jurisdiction
     -in a word, as rational. To see the "sense" of what is said is to accord to
     what was said its character "as a rule." "Shared agreement" refers to
     various social methods for accomplishing the member's recognition that
      something was said according to a rule and not the demonstrable
      matching of substantive matters. The appropriate image of a common un-
      derstanding is, therefore, an operation rather than a common intersection
      of overlapping sets.
          A person doing sociology-lay or professional-can treat a common
      understanding as a shared agreement on substantive matters by taking for
      granted that what is said will be made out in accordance with methods
       that need not be specified, which is to say that need only be specified on
       "special" occasions.
          Given the discovering character of what the husband and wife were
       talking about, its recognizable character for both entailed the use by each
       and the attribution by each to the other of work whereby what was said is
        or will have been understood to have accorded with their relationship of
        interaction as invokable rule of their agreement, as an intersubjectively
        used grammatical scheme of analyzing each other's talk whose use
                                      Remarks 011 Ethnomethodology
                                                                              32]
provided that they would understand each other in ways th t
be understood. It provides that neither one was entitled to a \~ey Would
other to specify how it was being done, i.e., without either;~ Upon the
to claim that the other needed.to "explain" himself.             emg entitled
   In short, a common understanding, entailing as it does an ...
poral course of interpretive work, has necessarily an oper /nner" tem-
ture. To disregard its operational structure is to use commona tonal struc-
edge of the society in exactly the way that members use it Whsense knowl-
decide what persons are really doing or really "talking about~~ _they must
                                                                    1
common sense knowledge of social structures as both a\ ·~·· to use
resource of inquiry. An alternative is to assign to the study of t~pic and a
of concerted actions and methods of common understandin e meth~ds
 priority. Not a method of understanding but immensely Vario g exclusive
 of understanding are the professional sociologist's proper and ~~t:ethods
                                                                    1
 studied and critical phenomena. Their multitude is indicated . ~rto un-
 less list of ways that persons speak. Some indication of thei~n ~ e end-
 and their differences occurs in the socially available glosses of a c ~r~cter
 of sign functions as when we take note of marking, labeling, sym~u t.it~de
                                                                        112mg
 emb1 ·     ·
       em1zmg,    cryp t ograms, ana1 ·
                                      og1es, anagrams, .mdicating o .       . •
      ·
 turizmg,   · ·   ·
            1m1tatmg,    moc k'mg-up, ·
                                      s1mu1a t'mg-m· Short, in reco• . .mmia-
 using, and_ producing the orderly ways of cultural settings from ..~~~:~:
 those settmgs. 5


           Ethnomethodology

           That practical actions are problematic in ways not so far s                       .
 fzow they are problematic; how to make them accessible to study· ;~~~
 we might learn about them-these are proposed tasks. I use the ter~ et~-
 nomethodology to refer to the study of practical actions according to
 policies such as the following, and to the phenomena, issues, findings, and
 methods that accompany their use.
    1. An indefinitely large domain of appropriate settings can be located
 if one uses a search policy that any occasion whatsoever be examined for
 the feature that "choice" among alternatives of sense, facticity, objec-
 tivity, cause, explanation, and communality of practical actions is a pro-
 ject of members' actions. With its use, inquiries of every imaginable kind
 from divination to theoretical physics thereby claim our interest as

    r. This note was touched off by Monroe Beardsley's remark ( 1962) to the effect that we do
  not decide that a word is used metaphorically because we know what a person is thinking;
  rather we know what he is thinking because we see that a word is used metaphorically.
  Taking poetry for his case, Beardsley points out that "the clues to this fact must somehow be
  in the poem itself, or we should seldom be able to read poetry."
        322    Discovering Structure in Speech

socially organized artful practices. That the social structures of everyday
activities furnish contexts, objects, resources, justifications, problematic
topics, etc., to practices and products of inquiries establishes the eligibil-
ity for our interest of every way of doing inquiries without exception.
    None can be excluded no matter where or when they occur, no matter
how vast or trivial their scope, organization, cost, duration, con-
sequences, whatever their successes, whatever their repute, their practi-
tioners, their claims, their philosophies or philosophers. Procedures and
results of water witching, divination, mathematics, sociology-whether
done by lay persons or professionals-are addressed according to the pol-
 icy that every feature of sense, of fact, of method for every particular case
of inquiry without exception is the managed accomplishment of organized
 settings of practical actions, and that particular determinations in
 members' practices of consistency, planfulness, relevance, or reproduci-
 bility of their practices and results-from witchcraft to topology-are
 acquired and assured only through particular, located organizations of
 artful practices.
    2. Members to an organized arrangement are continually engaged in
 having to decide, recognize, persuade, or make evident the rational, i.e.,
 the coherent, or consistent, or chosen, or planful, or effective, or methodi-
 cal, or knowledgeable character of such activities of their inquiries as
 counting, graphing, interrogation, sampling, recording, reporting, plan-
 ning, decision making, and the rest. In order to describe how actual inves-
 tigative procedures are accomplished as recognizedly rational actions in
 actual occasions, it is not satisfactory to say that members invoke some
 rule with which to define the coherent or consistent or planful, i.e.,
 rational, character of their actual activities. Nor is it satisfactory to
 propose that the rational properties of members' inquiries are produced
 by members' compliance to rules of inquiry. Instead, "adequate demon-
 stration," "adequate reporting," "sufficient evidence," "plain talk,"
 "making too much of the record," "necessary inference," "frame of
  restricted alternatives," in short, every topic of "logic" and "methodol-
  ogy," including these two titles as well, are glosses for organizational phe-
  nomena. These phenomena are contingent achievements of organizations
  of common practices, arid as contingent achievements, they are variously
  available to members as norms, tasks, and troubles, and only in these
  ways rather than as invariant categories or as general principles do they
  define "adequate inquiry and discourse."
     3. Thus, a leading policy is to refuse serious consideration to the
  prevailing proposal that efficiency, efficacy, effectiveness, intelligibility,
  consistency, planfulness, typicality, uniformity, reproducibility of ac-
  tivities-i.e., rational properties of practical activities-be assessed, rec-
  ognized, categorized, described by using a rule or a standard obtained
                                  Ifemarks 011 Etlznometlzodology   323

  from somewhere outside actual settings within which such properties are
  recognized, used, produced, and talked about by settings' members. All
  procedures whereby logical and methodological properties of the prac-
  tices and results of inquiries are assessed in their general characteristics
  by rule are of interest as phenomena for ethnomethodological study but
  not otherwise. Instead, structurally differing organized practical activities
  of everyday life are to be sought out and examined for the production, ori-
  gins, recognition, and representations of rational practices. All "logical"
  and "methodological" properties of action, every feature of activity's
  sense, of its facticity, of its objectivity, of its accountability, of its com-
  munality, without exception is to be treated as a contingent accomplish-
  ment of socially organized common practices. In short, they are not given,
  but accomplished.
    4. The policy is recommended that any setting be viewed as self-
 organizing with respect to the intelligible character of its own appearances
 as either representations of or as evidences-of-a-social-order. Any setting
 organizes its activities to make its properties as an organized environment
 of practical activities detectable, countable, recordable, reportable, tell-a-
 story-aboutable, analyzable-in short, accountable.
    Organized arrangements consist of various methods for accomplishing
 the accountability of a settings' organizational ways as a concerted under-
 taking. Every claim by practitioners of effectiveness, clarity, consistency,
 planfulness, or efficiency, and every consideration for adequate evidence,
 demonstration, description, or relevance, obtains its character as a plze-
 nornenon from the corporate pursuit of this undertaking and from the
 ways in which various organizational environments by reason of their
 characteristics as organizations of activities "sustain," "facilitate," "re-
 sist," etc., these methods for making their affairs accountable-matters-for-
 all-practical-purposes.
    In exactly the ways that a setting is organized, it consists of members'
 methods for making evident that settings' ways as clear, coherent, planful,
consistent, chosen, knowable, and uniform, with reproducible connec-
tions-i.e., rational connections. In exactly the way that persons are
members to organized affairs they are engaged in the serious and practical
work of detecting, demonstrating, persuading through displays in the ordi-
nary occasions of their interactions the appearances of consistent, coher-
ent, clear, chosen, planful arrangements. In exactly the ways in which a
setting is organized, it consists of methods whereby its members are
provided with accounts of the setting as countable, storyable, proverbial,
comparable, picturable, representable-i.e., accountable-events.
   5. Every kind of inquiry without exception consists of organized, artful
practices whereby the rational properties of proverbs, partially formu-
lated advice, partial description, elliptical expressions, passing remarks,
        324   Discovering Structure in Speech

fables, cautionary tales, and the like are made evident, are demonstrated.
   The demonstrable rationality of occasional expressions and occasional
actions is an ongoing achievement of the organized activities of everyday
life. Here is the heart of the matter. The managed production of this phe-
nomenon in every aspect, from every perspective, and in every stage re-
tains the character for members of serious, practical tasks, subject to
every exigency of organizationally situated conduct.
 11

On the Analyzability
of Stories by Children
HARVEY SACKS




  Harvey Sacks is an associate professor of sociology t
  the University of California, Irvine. He received his do a_
  to rate from the University of California, Berkeley, and h~s
  taught at the University of Cali~ornia, Los Angeles. His
  research has been concerned with natural conversation
 analyzed to discover how its structure and resource~
  reflect speakers' social knowledge. In the present
 chapter, which contains material to be incorporated in
 more detailed form in his recent book (Sacks 1971 ), he
 develops a conceptual apparatus for the empirical study
 of the specific ways in which what Garfinkel calls prac-
 tical reasoning is used in everyday discourse.
    The initial observation is quite like that of grammar:
 We understand sentences rapidly and unreflectingly in
 terms of relationships that are not overtly expressed.
There must, therefore, be implicit kinds of knowledge in
 terms of which this ability can be explained. Sacks deals
 with material on which linguists have also worked-the
coherence of texts [how it is that sentences are heard as a
connected text and not as an arbitrary list (Hassan 1968)]
and the delimitation of semantic fields. But unlike the
linguists, who in their concern with literary style tend to
be concerned with texts per se, Sacks focuses specifically
on verbal exchanges between speakers. He studies the
semantic and theoretical strategies by which speakers
identify themselves or react to others, his analysis concen-
trates on the use of particular nouns or verbs such as
'mother,' 'baby,' 'shortstop,' 'baseball team,' 'hairstylist,'
or activities such as 'crying,' 'doing fashions,' or 'having
sexual problems,' which serve as markers of social rela-
                            325
326   Discovering Structure in Speech

tionships. His aim is to show how listeners must utilize
their own knowledge of the social system to interpret the
juxtaposition of these terms in conversation. Members
are seen as using social knowledge in three ways: (a) to
 recognize particular strings of sentences as possible or
 potentially valid instances of descriptions, stories, con-
 versations, etc.; (b) to achieve certain social effects: to
 elicit a response, to get the floor, to induce somebody to
 gain a favor, etc.; (c) to communicate affect such as
 praise, criticism, humor, etc.
     Notice two points of perspective shared with
 linguistics and ethnoscience. There is, first, the view that
 analysis of human sciences need not wait for results from
 other sciences and that communicative sequences can be
 analyzed as entities in themselves without reference to
 actual events depicted therein. Sacks argues that
 members can identify "possible descriptions" solely on
 the basis of formal features such as those he describes.
 What is rejected here are views like that of Bloomfield
 (1933), who holds that semantic analysis had to wait for
 other sciences to analyze those phenomena to which
 words referred, as if description of meaning was the same
 as description of denotata. Only with recognition that one
 could, and must, deal with meaning independently, pro-
 ceeding in terms of just those attributes of phenomena
  relevant (criteria!) for members of the language commu-
  nity, could the recent development of semantic analysis
  take place (see Haugen 1957; Weinreich 1963, 1968).
  The issue is the same as with the beginnings of modern
  phonology. Phonology began with the realization that
  one could, and must, analyze speech sounds in terms of a
  level of features criteria! for members of the language
  community, beyond that of a purely physical (phonetic)
  description (see. Sapir 1949g). Second, there is the recog-
  nition of a qualitative structure in the stream of behavior,
  as implied by the distinction between "items" and "slot,"
  and the singling out, as a key feature, the possibility of
  validly specifying that something is absent, has not oc-
  curred. The importance of this is brought out in detail by
  Schegloff (Chapter 12).
     Sacks characterizes the differences between his own
   approach to social norms and those of most of his col-
   leagues as follows:
            On the Analyzability of Stories by Children     327

In the sociological and anthropological literature, the focus on
norms is on the conditions under which and the extent to which
they govern, or can be seen by social scientists to govern, the
relevant actions of those members whose actions they ought to
control. While such matters are, of course, important, our
viewer's maxim suggests other importances of norms, for
members. Viewers use norms to provide some of the orderli-
ness, and proper orderliness, of the activities they observe.

    It has been common social-science practice to assume
 that social norms, like jural rules, exist somewhere out-
 side communicative acts. Many investigators accept
 norms as given and consider actions simply from the
 standpoint of whether their content conforms to or de-
 viates from independently given norms. For this point of
 view, Sacks' choice of data seems trivial: Ifit is a social
 norm that mothers should pick up babies, there is nothing
 remarkable in a mother who does just that-though if a
 mother did not, there might be a cause to seek out. Sacks,
 however, is not at all concerned with the "why" of the ac-
 tion in question, but with how the action is made in-
 telligible and interpretable in the first place. Social
 norms to him are part of the co1nmunicative code which
governs our perception of events in sornewhat the same
 way as grammar governs our perceptions -,f ·speech.
Other social scientists accept without question that the
two sentences that Sacks quotes will be understood in the
same way by everybody, whereas Sacks makes these
processes of comprehension problematical. He argues
that it is our knowledge of social structure which makes
such passages intelligible. To the extent that Sacks suc-
ceeds, his work is crucial for the study of cross-cultural
communication problems raised by Ervin-Tripp in
Chapter 7.
    A precondition for the study of social categories along
Sacks' lines is a knowledge of lexical systems. It is neces-
sary to be familiar with the total range of alternate terms
that the speaker has available for expressing a certain
kind of message in order to evaluate the significance of
his choice. Sacks' analysis therefore bears some similar-
ity to ethnoscience (see Frake, Chapter 3). However, in
attempting to relate lexical domains to the use of specific
terms in conversations, Sacks goes considerably beyond
normal ethnoscience practices. He points out, e.g., that
328   Discovering Structure in Speech

words such as "baby" can form part of two "category
collections" or semantic domains: "stage of life" and
"family." Additional relevance rules are needed to
specify which one of the possible categories applies in this
particular case. These relevance rules have functions
similar to some linguists' semantic rules. They determine
which of a number of possible interpretations holds in a
particular instance. But whereas the linguists' rules apply
only to relationships within sentences, Sacks' rules typi-
cally apply to the semantic ties between terms in different·
sentences, or sometimes, as in the passage quoted in foot-
note 2, between two sections of conversation which are
separated by long intervening passages.
   Further points of interest are that the rules of interpre-
tation go beyond speech. There is a viewer's maxim
precisely the same as the hearer's maxim. Interpretation
is also related to the structuring of narrative genres in
terms of proper beginnings and endings, a feature of natu-
ral conversation which is examined in more detail by
Schegloff in the following chapter.
    Sacks' analysis may seem to proceed overlaboriously
 for the material at hand. Yet although only two sentences
 are subjected to detailed analysis, the apparatus devel-
 oped (specifically, such concepts as categorization de-
 vice, duplicative organization, category-bound activity,
 consistency rules, etc.) is a highly general one and prom-
 ises to be applicable to analysis of all verbal interaction.
 lfwe want to understand what a speaker seeks to achieve
 with a particular utterance (as apart from the overt con-
 tent of what he says), it is necessary to be familiar with
 the social categories he uses and the cultural associations
 they carry for him. Assigning others to these categories,
 and ascribing to them certain category-related activities,
 are important ways of expressing his intention.
   The Turkish verbal dueling described by Alan Dundes
 (Chapter 4) forms a case in point. The strategy of these
 duels is to assign the opponent either to the social cate-
 gory of passive homosexual or to the category of a person
 who allows his mother or sister to undergo sexual attack.
 Both of these categories carry cultural connotations of
 cowardliness and lack of manliness and inferiority in
 comparison to the speaker, who is presumably the at-
 tacker. The end effect is that of a put down, but a put
                    On the A na/yzability of Stories by Children
                                                                   329
         down which is understandable only to one who know
         the relevant Turkish social categories and their cultura~
         implications. The referential meaning of a word here i
         less important than the associations it conveys through it!
         membership in a culturally determined category collec-
         tion. Apparently, in this verbal dueling context, words
         such as 'cow' and 'donkey' are both part of the category
         collection passive homosexual, whereas words such as
         'cowboy,' or expressions such as "my father's hairy roof."
         are part of the category collection associated with ma~-
         liness.
            Of special importance from the standpoint of socio-
        ·linguistic analysis is the view that social phenomena are of
         the same order as linguistic phenomena. The same
         linguistic corpus can be used for both the analysis of
         linguistic form and the analysis of social categories, and
         instead of attempting to correlate linguistic forms with
         social information collected elsewhere, the choice of
         linguistic forms can be seen simply as a realization of the
         social meanings and categories in somewhat the same
         way the pronunciation of a word is a realization of its
         semantic structure. Additional related readings are pro-
         vided by Frake (1964c), Gunter (1966), Halliday
         ( 1967-1968), Labov and Waletsky (1967), Wheeler
         (1967). For an application of Sacks' approach to
         problems of urban education, see Gumperz and Her-
         nandez ( 1971 ).



         In this chapter I intend, first, to present and employ several of the
more basic concepts and techniques which I shall be using. Since most of
those I shall use at this point may also be found in the paper "An Initial
Investigation of the Usability of Conversational Data for Doing Sociol-
ogy" (Sacks 1970), the discussion here may be seen as reintroducing and
extending the results developed there.
   Second, I shall focus on the activity "doing describing" and the correla-
tive activity "recognizing a description," activities which members may
be said to do, and which therefore are phenomena which sociologists and
anthropologists must aim to be able to describe. It will initially be by ref-
erence to an examination of instances of members' describings that my at-
tempts to show how sociologists might solve their own problem of con-
structing descriptions will be developed.
         330     Discovering Structure in Speech

   Proceeding in the fashion I have proposed will permit a focus on sev-
eral central and neglected issues which social science must face, most par-
ticularly, the problem of members' knowledge and the problem of rele-
vance. Let us then begin.


         Problems in Recognizing
         Possible Descriptions

          The initial data are the first two sentences from a "story" offered
by a two-year-and-nine-month-old girl to the author of the book Children
Tell Stories. 1 They are: "The baby cried. The mommy picked it up." I
shall first make several observations about these sentences. Before doing
so, however, let me note: If these observations strike you as a ranker sort
of subjectivism, then I ask you to read on just far enough to see whether it
is or is not the case that the observations are both relevant and defensible.
When I hear "The baby cried. The mommy picked it up," one thing
I hear is that the 'mommy' who picks the 'baby' up is the mommy of
that baby. That is a first observation. (You will, of course, notice that the
second sentence does not contain a genitive. It does not read, "Its
mommy picked it up," or variants thereof.) Now it is not only that/ hear
that the mommy is the mommy of that baby, but I feel rather confident
that at least many of the natives among you hear that also. That is a sec-
ond observation. One of my tasks is going to be to construct an apparatus
which will provide for the foregoing facts to have occurred; an apparatus,
i.e., which will show how it is that we come to hear the fragment as we do.
   Some more: I take it we hear two sentences. Call the first S 1 and the sec-
 ond S2 ; the first reports an occurrence 0 2 and the second reports an
 occurrence 0 2 • Now, I take it we hear that as S 2 follows S 1 , so 0 2 follows
 0 1 • That is a third observation. And also: We hear that 0 2 occurs because
of 0 1 :i.e., the explanation for 0 2 occurring is that 0 1 did. That is a fourth
observation. I want the apparatus to show how we come to hear those
facts also.
    If I asked you to explain the group of observations which I have made,
 observations which you could have made just as well-and let me note,
 they are not proposed as sociological findings, but rather do they pose
 some of the problems which social science shall have to resolve-you
 might well say something like the following: We hear that it is the mommy
 of the baby who picks the baby up because she's the one who ought to
 pick it up, and (you might eventually add) if she's the one who ought to

   1
     Pitcher and Prelinger, Children Tell Stories: An Analysis of Fantasy. (New York: Inter-
 national Universities Press, I 963.)
                      On the Analyzability of Stories by Children.   331

  pick it up, and it was picked up by somebody who could be her, then it
  was her, or was probably her.
    You might go on: While it is quite clear that not any two consecutive
 sentences, not even any consecutive sentences that report occurrences,
 are heard, and properly heard, as reporting that the occurrences have oc-
 curred in the order which the sentences have, if the occurrences ought to
 occur in that order, and if there is no information to the contrary (such as
 a phrase at the beginning of the second, like "before that, however"), then
 the order of the sentences indicates the order of the occurrences. And
 these two sentences do present the order of the occurrences they report in
 the proper order for such occurrences. If the baby cried, it ought to have
 started crying before the mother picked it up, and not after. Hearing it that
 way, the second sentence is explained by the first; hearing them as con-
 secutive or with the second preceding the first, some further explanation
 is needed, and none being present, we may suppose that it is not needed.
    Now let me make a fifth observation: All of the foregoing can be done
 by many or perhaps any of us without knowing what baby or what
 mommy it is that might be being talked of.
    With this fifth observation it may now be noticed that what we've es-
sentially been saying so far is that the pair of sentences seems to satisfy
what a member might require of some pair of sentences for them to be rec-
ognizable as "a possible description." They "sound like a description,"
and some form of words can, apparently, sound like a description. To
recognize that some form of words is a possible description does not
require that one must first inspect the circumstances it may be character-
izing.
   That "possible descriptions" are recognizable as such is quite an impor-
tant fact, for members, and for social scientists. The reader ought to be
able to think out some of its import for members, e.g., the economies it af-
fords them. It is the latter clause, "and for social scientists," that I now
wish to attend to.
   Were it not so both that members have an activity they do, "de-
scribing," and that at least some cases of that activity produce, for them,
forms of words recognizable as at least possible descriptions without
having to do an inspection of the circumstances they might characterize,
then it might well be that social science would necessarily be the last of
the sciences to be made do-able. For, unless social scientists could study
such things as these "recognizable descriptions," we might only be able to
investigate such activities of members as in one or another way turned on
"their knowledge of the world" when social scientists could employ some
established, presumptively correct scientific characterizations of the phe-
nomena members were presumably dealing with and knowing about.
   If, however, members have a phenomenon, "possible desc1iptions"
        332   Discovering Structure in Speech

which are recognizable per se, then one need not in the instance know
how it is that babies and mommies do behave to examine the composition
of such possible descriptions as members produce and recognize. Sociol-
ogy and anthropology need not await developments in botany or genetics
or analyses of the light spectra to gain a secure position from which
members' knowledge, and the activities for which it is relevant, might be
investigated.
   What one ought to seek to build is an apparatus which will provide for
how it is that any activities, which members do in such a way as to be rec-
ognizable as such to members, are done, and done recognizably. Such an
apparatus will, of course, have to generate and provide for the recogniz-
ability of more than just possible descriptions, and in later discussions we
shall be engaged in providing for such activities as "inviting," "warning,"
and so forth, as the data we consider will permit and require.
    My reason for having gone through the observations I have so far made
was to give you some sense, right off, of the fine power of a culture. It
does not, so to speak, merely fill brains in roughly the same way, it fills
 them so that they are alike in fine detail. The sentences we are considering
 are after all rather minor, and yet all of you, or many of you, hear just
what I said you heard, and many of us are quite unacquainted with each
 other. I am, then, dealing with something real and something finely power-
 ful.


         Membership Categorization Devices

          We may begin to work at the construction of the apparatus. I'm
going to introduce several of the terms we need. The first term is menz-
bership categorization device (or just categorization device). By this term
I shall intend: any collection of membership categories, containing at least
a category, which may be applied to some population containing at least a
member, so as to provide, by the use of some rules of application, for the
pairing of at least a population member and a categorization device
member. A device is then a collection plus rules of application.
   An instance of a categorization device is the one called 'sex': Its collec-
tion is the two categories (male, female). It is important to observe that a
collection consists of categories that "go together." For now that may
merely be seen as a constraint of the following sort: I could say that some
set of categories was a collection, and be wrong. I shall present some rules
of application very shortly.
   Before doing that, however, let me observe that 'baby' and 'mommy'
can be seen to be categories from one collection: The collection whose
device is called 'family' and which consists of such categories as ('baby,'
                        On the Analyzability of Stories by Children
                                                                           333
 ' mommy, , 'd add y, , . . .) where b Y " . . . " we mean that there 'l.
but not any others, e.g., 'shortstop.'                                      'ie others,
    Let me introduce a few rules of application. It may be observed th .
 member uses a single category from any membership categ . at ~fa
device,· then t h ey can b e recogmze    · d to b e d · omg adequate ,.,,re. onzation
                                          .      .         .            "J' 1ence to a
 person. We may put the observation ma negative form: It is no·t
sary that some mu 1hp e o categories rom categorization de . neces-
                           . 1     f           .      f
employe d for recogmtlon  · · t h at a person 1s   · bemg
                                                        . referred to, to bevicesd be  .
single category will do. (I do not mean by this that more cannot bma e, a
only that for reference to persons to be recogmzed             .   more need e used '
used.) W 1t t at o servat10n we can 1ormu1ate a "reference s· not
           . h  h       b        ·                  c
                                                                                  t' f be
toriness ru e, w 1c we ca t e economy ru e. t holds: A sing! is ac-
     ·   "    1    h'   h         II " h                 1   "   I             ct
                               .            . . d .                             e cate-
gory from any members h1p categorizat10n ev1ce can be referentially ade-
quate.
    A second rule I call "the consistency rule." It holds: If some popul t·
of persons 1s. bemg
                  . categorize   . d , an d 1'f a category f rom some device'sa ion
Jection has been used to categorize     .
                                             a fi1rst member of the population th    co1-
that category of other categories of the sa~e collection may be us,ed ~~
categorize further members of the populat10n. The former rule was a
reference satisfactoriness" rule; this latter one is a "relevance" rule
(Sacks, in press).
    The economy rule having provided for the adequate reference of 'baby ,
tbe consistency rule tells us that if the first person has been categorized
as 'baby,' then further persons may be referred to by other categories
of a collection of which they are a member, and thus that such other cat-
egories as 'mommy' and 'daddy' are relevant given the use of 'baby.,
    While in its currently weak form and alone, the consistency rule may
exclude no category of any device, even in this weak form (the "may"
form-I shall eventually introduce a "must" form), a corollary of it will
prove to be useful. The corollary is a "hearer's maxim." It holds: If two or
more categories are used to categorize two or more members of some
population, and those categories can be heard as categories from the same
collection, then: Hear them that way. Let us call the foregoing "the con-
sistency rule corollary." It has the following sort of usefulness. Various
membership categorization-device categories can be said to be ambigu-
ous. That is, the same categorial word is a term occurring in several dis-
tinct devices, and can in each have quite a different reference; they may or
may not be combinably usable in regard to a single person. So, e.g., 'baby'
occurs in the device 'family' and also in the device 'stage oflife' whose cat-
egories are such as 'baby,' 'child,' . . . 'adult'). A hearer who can use the
consistency rule corollary will regularly not even notice that there might
be an ambiguity in the use of some category among a group which it can
be used to hear as produced via the consistency rule.
        334    Discovering Structure in Speech

    It is, of course, clear that the two categories 'baby' are sometimes com-
binably referential and sometimes not. A woman may refer to someone as
"my baby" with no suggestion that she is using the category that occurs in
the 'stage of life' device; her baby may be a full-fledged adult. In the case
at hand that problem does not occur, and we shall be able to provide the
bases for it not occurring, i.e., the bases for the legitimacy of hearing the
single term 'baby' as referring to a person located by reference both to the
device 'family' and to the device 'stage of life.'
    With this, let us modify the observation on the consistency rule as
follows: The consistency rule tells us that if a first person has been cat-
egorized as 'baby,' the further persons may be referred to by categories
from either the device 'family' or from the device 'stage of life.' However,
if a hearer has a second category which can be heard as consistent with
one locus of a first, then the first is to be heard as at least consistent with
the second.
    Given the foregoing, we may proceed to show how the combined refer-
ence of 'baby' is heard for our two sentences, and also how 'the mommy'
is heard as 'the mommy of the baby.' We shall deal with the latter task
first, and we assume from now on that the consistency rule corollary has
yielded at least that 'baby' and 'mommy' are heard as from the device
'family.' We assume that without prejudice to the further fact that 'baby'
is also heard as 'baby' from the device 'stage of life.'
    The device 'family' is one of a series which you may think of by a proto-
 typical name 'team.' One central property of such devices is that they are
 what I am going to call "duplicatively organized.'' I mean by the use of
 that term to point out the following: When such a device is used on a pop-
 ulation, what is done is to take its categories, treat the set of categories as
 defining a unit, and place members of the population into cases of the unit.
 If a population is so treated and is then counted, one counts not numbers
 of daddies, numbers of mommies, and numbers of babies but numbers of
 families-numbers of 'whole families,' numbers of 'families without
 fathers,' etc. A population so treated is partitioned into cases of the unit,
 cases for which what properly holds is that the various persons partitioned
 into any case are 'coincumbents' of that case.
     There are hearer's maxims which correspond to these ways of dealing
 with populations categorized by way of duplicatively organized devices.
 One that is relevant to our current task holds: If some population has
 been categorized by use of categories from some device whose collection
 has the "duplicative organization" property, and a member is presented
 with a categorized population which can be heard as 'coincumbents' of a
 case of that device's unit, then: Hear it that way. (I will consider the
  underscored phrase shortly.) Now let it be noticed that this rule is of far
  more general scope than we may seem to need. In focusing on a property
  like duplicative organization it permits a determination of an expectation
  (of social scientists) as to how some categorized population will be heard



                                                                                   j
                     On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   335

independently of a determination of how it is heard. It is then formal and
predictive, as well, of course, as quite general.
  Now, by the phrase "can be heard" we mean to rule out predictions of
the following sort. Some duplicatively organized devices have proper
numbers of incumbents for certain categories of any unit. (At any given
time a nation-state may have but one president, a family but one father, a
baseball team but one shortstop on the field, etc.) If more incumbents of a
category are proposed as present in the population than a unit's case can
properly take, then the 'can be heard' constraint is not satisfied, and a
prediction would not be made.


         Category-Bound Activities

          The foregoing analysis shows us then how it is that we come to
 hear, given the fact that the device 'family' is duplicatively organized, and
 the "can be heard" constraint being satisfied, 'the mommy' to be 'the
 mommy of the baby.' It does, of course, much more than that. It permits
 us to predict, and to understand how we can predict, that a statement such
 as "The first baseman looked around. The third baseman scratched him-
 self." will be heard as saying "the first baseman of the team on which the
 third baseman is also a player" and its converse.
    Or, putting the claim more precisely, it shows us how, in part-"in
 part" because for the materials at hand it happens that there are other
 means for providing that the same hearing be made, means which can
 operate in combination with the foregoing, otherwise sufficient ones, to
 further assure the hearings we have observed. That will be done in the
 next section. Let us now undertake our second task, to show how 'the
 baby' is heard in its combined form, i.e., as the category with that name
 from both the 'stage of life' device and from the 'family' device.
    Let me introduce a term which I am going to call category-bound activi-
 ties. While I shall not now give an intendedly careful definition of the
 term, I shall indicate what I mean to notice with it and then in a while
 offer a procedure for determining that some of its proposed cases are
 indeed cases of it. By the term I intend to notice that many activities are
taken by members to be done by some particular or several particular cat-
egories of members where the categories are categories from membership
categorization devices.
    Let me notice then, as is obvious to you, that 'cry' is bound to 'baby,'
i.e., to the category 'baby' which is a member of the collection from the
'stage of life' device. Again, the fact· that members know that this is so
only serves, for the social scientist, to pose some problem. What we want
is to construct some means by reference to which a class, which propos-
edly contains at least the activity-category 'cry' and presumably others,
may have the inclusion of its candidate-members assessed. We will not be
         336     Discovering Structure in Speech

claiming that the procedure is definitive as to exclusion of a candidate-
member, but we will claim that it is definitive as to inclusion of a can-
didate-member.
   It may be observed that the members of the 'stage of life' collection are
'positioned' ('baby' . . . 'adolescent' . . . 'adult' . . . ), an observation
which, for now, we shall leave unexamined. I want to describe a proce-
dure for praising or degrading members, the operation of which consists
of the use of the fact that some activities are category bound. If there are
such procedures, they will provide one strong sense of the notion "cat-
egory-bound activities" and also will provide, for any given candidate
activity, a means for warrantably deciding that it is a member of the class
of category-bound activities.
   For some positioned-category devices it can be said as between any
two categories of such a device that A is either higher or lower than B,
and if A is higher than B, and B is higher than C, then A is higher than C.
   We have some activity which is a candidate-member of the class 'cat-
egory-bound activities' and which is proposedly bound to some category C.
Then, a member of either A or B who does that activity may be seen to be
degrading himself, and may be said to be 'acting like a C.' Alternatively, if
 some candidate activity is proposedly bound to A, a member of C who
 does it is subject to being said to be acting like an A, where that assertion
 constitutes "praising."
    If, using the 'stage of life' categories, we subject 'crying' to such a test,
we do find that its candidacy as a member of the class "category-bound
 activities" is warrantable. In the case of 'crying' the results are even
 stronger. For, it appears, if a 'baby' is subject to some circumstances
 which would for such a one warrant crying, and he does not, then his 'not
 crying' is observable, and may be used to propose that "he is acting like a
 big boy," where that assertion is taken to be "praise." 2
    The foregoing procedure can, obviously enough, be used for other
 devices and other candidate activities. Other procedures may also be
 used; e.g., one way to decide that an activity is category bound is to see
 whether, the fact of membership being unknown, it can be "hinted at" by
 naming the activity as something one does. 3

   2 Consider e.g., the following: "These children are highly aware that they have graduated

from the rank of 'baby' and are likely to exhibit considerable scorn of babies, whether a
neighbor's child or a younger sibling. This feeling of superiority is the residue of the parents'
praise for advance behavior and their inciting the child by remarks like "Only babies do
that. You're not a baby." The frequency of these remarks at this age, however, suggest that
in adult minds, at least, there is concern lest the children lapse into babyish ways" (Fischer
and Fischer in Whiting 1963 :949).
   3
     The following data is from a telephone call between a staff member (S) and a caller (C)
to an emergency psychiatric clinic. Note the juxtaposition of "hair stylist" in item 4 with
suspected homosexuality in the last item.
                        On the Analyzability of Stories by Children
                                                                               337

    Having constructed a procedure which can warrant the ca d'd
 some activity as a member of the class "category-bound acti~7ti~s~~y of
 which warrants the membership of 'cry' and provides for its be'                     b
                                                                                   and
 to 'baby,' i.e., that category 'baby' which is a member of the 'st·mg o~nd
 collection, we move on to see how it is that 'the baby' in our saget ofhfe'
 heard m. the combmed .    reference we have proposed.                    en ence rs ·
   We need, first, another "hearer's maxim." If a category-bound                . .
is asserted to have been done by a member of some category Whe activity       'f
category rs· am b'1guous ('1.e., rs
                                 · a mem b er o f at 1east two different re,d 1 . that
but where, at least for one of those devices, the asserted activity ,evrces)
                                               .
                       .
gory boun d tot h e given   category, t h en h ear t hat at least the categ rs fcate-
the device to which it is bound is being asserted to hold.                 ory rom
   The foregoing maxim will then provide for hearing "The baby cri d ,,
referring to at least 'baby' from the 'stage of life' device. The resu~t · ~s
tained from the use of the consistency rule corollary, being independ s ~ ;
that, are combinable with it. The consistency rule corollary gave eun °t
least that 'the baby' was the category from the device 'family.' The co;b~-
nation gives us both.
   If our analysis seems altogether too complicated for the rather simpl
facts we have been examining, then we invite the reader to consider tha~
our machinery has intendedly been "overbuilt." That is to say it may turn
out that the elaborateness of our analysis, or its apparent elaborateness
                                                                                            '

S:     So, you can't watch television. Is there anything you can stay interested in?
C:     No, not really.
S:     What interests did you have before?
C:     I was a hair stylist at one time. I did some fashions now and then. Things like that
S:    Then why aren't you working?                                                          ·
C:     Because I don't want to, I guess. Maybe that's why.
S:     But do you find that you just can't get yourself going?
C:     No. Well, as far as the job goes?
S:     Yes.
C:    Well, I'll tell you. I'm afraid. I'm afraid to go out and look for a job. That's what
       I'm afraid of. But more, I think I'm afraid of myself because I don't know. I'm just
      terribly mixed up.
S:    You haven't had any trouble with anyone close to you?
C:    Close to me. Well, I've been married three times and I'm-Close, you mean, as
      far as arguments or something like that?
S:    Yes.
C:    No, nobody real close. I'm just a very lonely person. I guess I'm very-
S:    There's nobody who loves you.
C:    Well, I feel that somebody must someplace, but I don't know where or who.
S:    Have you been having some sexual problems?
C:    All my life.
S:    Uh huh. Yeah.
C:    Naturally. You probably suspect-as far as the hair stylist and-either go one way
      or the other. There is a straight or homosexual, something like that. I'm telling you,
      my whole life is just completely mixed up and turned over and it's just smashed
      and I'm not kidding.
        338    Discovering Structure in Speech

will disappear when one begins to consider the amount of work that the
very same machinery can pe1form.
  In the next section I will attempt to show that the two sentences "The
baby cried. The mommy picked it up." constitute a possible description.



        Identifying Possible Descriptions

          I shall focus next on the fact that an activity can be category
bound and then on the import of there being a norm which provides for
some second activity, given the occurrence of a first, considering both of
these with regard to the "correctness," for members, of "possible
description."
   Let me for· the moment leave aside our two sentences and consider
some observations on how it is that I see, and take it you see, describable
occurrences. Suppose you are standing somewhere, and you see a person
you don't know. The person cries. Now, if I can, I will see that what has
happened is that a baby cried. And I take it that you will, if you can, see
that too. That's a. first pair of observations. Suppose again you are
standing somewhe{·e and you see two people you don't know. Suppose
further thatone cries, and the other picks up the one who is crying. Now,
if I can, I will see that what has happened is that a baby cried and its
mother picked it up. And I take it that you will, if you can, see that too.
That's a second pair of observations.
   Consider the first pair of observations. The modifying phrases, to deal
with them first, refer simply to the possibility that the category 'baby'
might be obviously inapplicable to the crier. By reference to the 'stage of
life' collection the crier may be seen to be an adult. And that being so, the
'if . . . can' constraint wouldn't be satisfied. But there are certainly other
possible characterizations of the crying person. For example, without
respect to the fact that it is a baby, it could be either 'male' or 'female,' and
nonetheless I would not, and I take it you would not, seeing the scene,
see that "a male cried" if we could see that "a baby cried."
   The pair of observations suggest the following "viewer's maxim": If a
member sees a category-bound activity being done, then, if one can see it
being done by a member of a category to which the activity is bound,
then: See it that way. The viewer's maxim is another relevance rule in that
it proposes that for an observer of a category-bound activity the category
to which the activity is bound has a special relevance for formulating an1
identification of its doer.                                                     /
   Consider the second pair of observations. As members you, of course,
know that there is a norm which might be written as: A mother ought to
try to soothe her crying baby. I, and you, not only know that there is such
                       On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   339

      a norm but, as you may recall, we used it in doing our he~ring of "The
      ~aby cried. The mommy picked it up." In addition to the fact of duplica-
      tive organization, the norm was relevant in bringing us to hear that it was
      the mommy of the baby who did the picking up. While we would have
      heard that it was the mommy of the baby for other pairs of activities in
      which the two were involved (but not any pair), the fact that the pair were
      relatable via a norm which assigns the mother of the baby that duty may
     have operated in combination with the duplicative organization to assure
     our hearing that it was she who did it.
        Leaving aside the hearing of the sentence, we are led to construct
     another viewer's maxim: If one sees a pair of actions which can be related
     via the operation of a norm that provides for the second given the first,
     where the doers can be seen as members of the categories the norm
    provides as proper for that pair of actions, then: (a) See that the doers are
     such members and (b) see the second as done in conformity with the
    norm.
        This second viewer's maxim suggests an observation about norms. In
    the sociological and anthropological literature, the focus on norms is on
    the conditions under which and the extent to which they govern, or can be
    seen by social ·scientists to govern, the relevant actions of those members
   whose actions they ought to control. While such matters are, of course,
   important, our viewer's maxim suggests other' importances of norms, for
   members.
       Viewers use norms to provide some of the orderliness, and proper
   orderliness, of the activities they observe. Via some norm two activities
   may be made observable as a sequentially ordered pair. That is, viewers
  use norms to explain both the occurrence of some activity given the occur-
   rence of another and also its sequential position with regard to the other,
  e.g., that it follows the other, or precedes it. That is a first importance.
  Second, viewers use norms to provide the relevant membership cat-
  egories in terms of which they formulate identifications of the doers of
  those activities for which the norms are appropriate.
      Now let me observe, viewers may use norms in each of the preceding
 Ways, and feel confident in their usage without engaging in such an inves-
 tigation as would serve to warrant the correctness of their usages. This
 last observation is worth some further thought.
      We may, at least initially, put the matter thus: For viewers, the usability
 of the viewer's maxims serves to warrant the correctness of their observa-
 tions. And that is then to say, the usability of the viewer's maxims
Provides for the recognizability of the correctness of the observations done
via those maxims. And that is then to say, "correct observations" or, at
least, "possible correct observations" are "recognizable."
     (Members feel no need in warranting their observation, in recognizing
its correctness to do such a thing as to ask the woman whether she is the
         340     Discovering Structure in Speech

mother of the baby ,4 or to ask her whether she picked it up because it was
crying; i.e., they feel no such need so long as the viewer's maxims are
usable.)
  In short: "Correctness" is recognizable, and there are some exceed-
ingly nice ties between recognizably correct description and recognizably
correct observations. One such tie which is relevant to the tasks we have
undertaken is: A string of sentences which may be heard, via the hearer's
maxims, as having been produced by use of the viewer's maxims, will be
heard as a "recognizably correct possible description."


         Sequential Ordering

           The rest of this chapter will be devoted to two tasks. I shall try to
  develop some further rewards of the analysis so far assembled, some
  consequences it throws off; and to show also how it is that the two sen-
  tences ("The baby cried. The mommy picked it up.") can warrantably be
  said to be from "a story." I start with the latter task.
     It ought to be apparent that the fact that the children whose talk is
  reported in Children Tell Stories were asked to tell a story is not definitive
  of their having done so. It is at least possible that the younger ones among
  them are not capable of building stories, of building talk that is recogniz-
  able as a "story," or, at least, as a "possible story."
     It happens to be correct, for Western literature, that if some piece of
  talk is a possible description it is also, and thereby, a possible story or
  story part. It appears, therefore, that having established that the two sen-
  tences are a possible description, I have also, and thereby, established
  that they are possibly (at least part of) a story. To stop now would, how-
  ever, involve ignoring some story-relevant aspects of the given sentences
  which are both interesting and subjectable to analysis. So, I go on.
     Certain characteristics are quite distinctive to stories. For example,
· there are characteristic endings ("And they lived happily ever after") and
  characteristic beginnings ("once upon a time"). I shall consider whether
  the possible story, a fragment of which we have been investigating, can be
  said (and I mean here, as throughout, "warrantably said") to close with
  what is recognizable as "an ending" and to start with what is recognizable
  as "a beginning."
     In suggesting a difference between "starts" and proper "beginnings,"
  and between "closes" and proper "endings," I am introducing a distinc-
  tion which has some importance. The distinction, which is by no means
   4
     "A late child was at times embarrassing to one woman who, while enjoying him, found
 that in public places she often overheard people saying, 'They must be his grandparents"'
 (Fischer and Fischer in Whiting 1963:934).
                       On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   341

original, may be developed by considering some very simple observation.
   I. A piece of talk which regularly is used to do some activity-as
"Hello" is used to do "greeting"-may not invariably be so used, but may
do other activities as well-as "Hello" is used to check out whether
another with whom one is talking on the phone is still there or has been
cut off-where it is in part its occurrence in "the middle" and not "the
start" of a conversation that serves to discriminate the use being made of it.
  2. Certain activities not only have regular places in some sequence
where they do get done but may, if their means of being done is not found
there, be said, by members, to not have occurred, to be absent.
  For example, the absence of a greeting may be noticed, as the following
conversation, from field observation, indicates. The scene involved two
adult women, one the mother of two children, ages six and ten. The kids
enter and the following ensues:

WOMAN:           Hi.
BOY:            Hi.
WOMAN:          Hi, Annie.
MOTHER:         Annie, don't you hear someone say,hello to you?
WOMAN:          Oh, that's okay, she smiled hello.,
MOTHER:         You know you're supposed to greet someone, don't you?
ANNIE:          [Hangs head] Hello.

   3. Certain activities can only be done at certain places in a sequence.
 For example, a third strike can only be thrown by a pitcher after he has
 two strikes on a batter.
   Observations such as these lead to a distinction between a "slot" and
 the "items" which fill it, and to proposing that certain activities are ac-
complished by a combination of some item and some slot.
   The notion of slot serves for the social scientist to mark a class of rele-
vance rules. Thus, if it can be said that for some assertable sequence there
is a position in which one or more activities properly occur, or occur if
they are to get done, then: The observability of either the occurrence or
the nonoccurrence of those activities may be claimed by reference to
having looked to the position and determined whether what occurs in it is
a way of doing the activity.
   An instance of the class of relevance rules might run: To see whether a
conversation included "greetings," look to the first utterance of either
party and see whether there occurs in it any item which passes as a greet-
ing; items such as ('hello,' 'hi,' 'hi there,'. . . ). The fact that the list con-
tains the ellipsis might be deeply troublesome were it not the case that
while we are unable to list all the members of the class "greeting items,"
we can say that the class is bounded, and that there are some utterables
which are not members of it, perhaps, for example, the sentence now
        342    Discovering Structure i11 Speech

being completed. If that and only that occurred in a first utterance, we
might feel assured in saying that a greeting did not occur.
    Consider just one way that this class of relevance rules is important.
Roughly; it permits the social scientist to nontrivially assert that some-
thing is absent. Non trivial talk of an absence requires that some means be
available for showing both the relevance of occurrence of the activity that
is proposedly absent and the location where it should be looked for to see
that it did not occur. Lacking these, an indefinite set of other activities
might equally well be asserted to be absent given some occurrence, and
the assertion in question not being discriminable from the (other)
members of that indefinite set, it is trivialized.
    It does seem that for stories it is correct to say that they can have begin-
nings, and we can then inspect the items that occur at their start to see
whether they can be seen to make a beginning. Given further that stories
can have endings, we can inspect the items that occur at their close to see
whether they can be seen to make an ending.
    While my main interest will be with the story's start as a possible proper
beginning, let me briefly consider its close: "She went to sleep." With this
the speaker would seem 'to be not merely closing but closing making a
 proper ending. It so seems by virtue of the fact that such a sentence
 reports an occurrence, or can be heard as reporting an occurrence, which
 is a proper ending to something for which endings are relevant and stand-
 ardized, that very regularly used unit of orientation, the day. A day being
 recognized as ending for some person when they go to sleep, so a story
 may be recognized as closing with an ending if at its close there is a report
 of the protagonist's having gone to sleep. This particular sort of ending is,
 of course, not at all particular to stories constructed by young children; it,
 and other endings like it, from "the last sleep" death unto the shutting
 down of the world, are regular components of far more sophisticated ven-
 tures in Western literature.
     Let me turn then to the start, to consider whether it can be said to be a
 beginning. l shall attempt to show that starting to talk to adults is for small
 children a rather special matter. I shall do that by focusing on a most char-
 acteristic way that small children, of around the age of the teller of the
 given story, characteristically open their talk to adults, i.e., the use of such
 items as "You know what?" l shall offer an analysis of that mode of start-
 ing off, which will characterize the problems such a start can be
  seen to operate as a methodical solution to.
     The promised analysis will warrant my assertion that starting to talk is,
 for small children, a special matter. That having been established, I shall
  turn to see whether the particular start we have for this story may be seen
 as another type of solution to the same problem that I will have shown to
  be relevant.
                     On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   343

     If I can then show that another solution is employed in our problematic
  utterance (the sentence "The baby cried"), I will have shown that the story
 starts with something that is properly a beginning, and that therefore, both
 start and close are "proper" beginning and end. Such, in any event, are
 my intentions.
    I begin, roughly and only as an assumption (though naively, the matter
 is obvious), by asserting that kids have restricted rights to talk. That being
 the case, by assumption, I want to see whether the ways that they go
 about starting to talk, with adults, can be most adequately seen to be solu-
 tions to the problem which focuses on needing to have a good start if one
 is going to get further than that. Starts which have that character can then
 be called beginnings.
    Now, kids around the age of three go through a period when some of
 them have an almost universal way of beginning any piece of talk they
 make to adults. They use things like: "You know what, Daddy?" or "You
 know something, Mommy?"
    I will introduce a few rules of conversational sequencing. I do that
 without presenting data now, but the facts are so obvious that you can
check them out easily for yourself; you know the rules anyway. The
sequencing rules are for two-party conversation; and, since two-party
conversation is a special phenomenon, what I say is not intended as
 applying for three- or more party conversation.
    One basic rule of two-party conversation concerns a pair of objects,
questions and answers. It runs: If one party asks a question, when the
question is complete, the other party properly speaks, and properly offers
an answer to the question and says no more than that. The rule will need
considerable explication, but for now, it will do as it stands.
    A second rule, and it's quite a fundamental one, because by reference to
it the, in principle, infinite character of a conversation can be seen as: A
person who has asked a question can talk again, has, as we may put it, "a
reserved right to talk again," after the one to whom he has addressed the
question speaks. And, in using the reserved right he can ask a question. I
call this rule the "chaining rule," and in combination with the first rule it
provides for the occurrence of an indefinitely long conversation of the
form Q-A-Q-A-Q-A-. . . .
    Now, the characteristic opener that we are considering is a question
(e.g., "You know what?"). Having begun in that way, a user who did not
have restricted rights to talk would be in a position of generating an indefi-
nite set of further questions as each question was replied to, or as the
other otherwise spoke on the completion of some question.
   But the question we begin with is a rather curious one in that it is one of
those fairly but not exceptionally rare questions which have as their
answer another question, in this case the proper and recurrent answer is
        344   Discovering Structllre in Speech

"What?". The use of initial questions of this sort has a variety of
consequences. First, if a question which has another question as its
proper answer is used and is properly replied to, i.e., is replied to with the
proper question, then the chaining rule is turned around, i.e., it is the ini-
tial answerer and not the initial questioner who now has the reserved right
to speak again after the other speaks. The initial questioner has by his
question either not assumed that he can use the chaining rule or has
chosen not to. (Note that we are not saying that he has not chosen to in-
voke the chaining rule but rather that he has instead given the choice of in-
voking it to the initial answerer. There are two different possibilities in-
volved.)
   Second, the initial questioner does not only not make his second speech
by virtue of the chaining rule but he makes it by virtue of the first
sequencing rule, i.e., by reference to the fact that a person who has been
asked a question properly speaks and properly replies to it. His second
speech is then not merely not made as a matter of either the chaining rule
or his choice by some other means of making a second speech but it is
something he makes by obligation, given the fact that he has been asked a
question and is therefo~e obliged to answer.
   Third, the question he is obliged to answer is, however, "an open one"
in the sense that what it is that an answer would be is something that its
asker does not know, and further is one that its answerer by the prior
sequence should know. What an answer is then to the second question is
whatever it is the kid takes to be an answer, and he is thereby provided
with the opportunity to say whatever it is he wanted to say in the first
place, not now, however, on his own say-so but as a matter of obligation.
   In that case then-and the foregoing being a method whereby the
production of the question "You know what?" may be explicated-we
 may take it that kids take it that they have restricted rights which consist
of a right to begin, to make a first statement and not much more. Thereaf-
 ter they proceed only if requested to. And if that is their situation as they
 see it, they surely have ev6lved a nice solution to it.
    With the foregoing we can say then that a focus on the way kids be~in t_o
 talk is appropriate, and we can see whether the beginnings of stones, if
 they are not made of the culturally standardized beginnings (such as
 "once upon a time"), might be seen to be beginnings by virtue of the
 special situation which kids have vis-a-vis beginning to talk.
    We may arrive at the status of "The baby cried" as a proper beginning,
 in particular as a start that is a beginning by virtue of being a proper
 opener for one who has restricted rights to talk, by proceeding in the ~ol- )
 lowing way. Let us consider another solution to the problem of starting
 talk under restricted rights. I'll begin by introducing a word, 'ticket.' I can
 show you what I mean to point to with the word by a hypothetical ex-
 ample. Suppose two adults are copresent and lack rights to talk to each




                                                                               d
                      On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   345
                                                                          1


   other; e.g., they have never been introduced, or whatever. For any such
   two persons there are conditions under which one can begin to talk to the
   other. And that those conditions are the conditions used to in fact begin
   talk is something which can be shown via a first piece of talk. Where that
   is done we will say that talk is begun with a ticket. That is, the item used
   to begin talk is an item which, rights not otherwise existing, serves to war-
  rant one having begun to talk. For example, one turns to the other and
  says, "Your pants are on fire." It is not just any opening, but an opening
  Which tells why it is that one has breached the correct silence, which war-
  rants one having spoken. Tickets then are items specially usable as first
  items in talk by one who has restricted rights to talk to another. And the
  most prototypical class of tickets are "announcements of trouble relevant
 to the other."
     Now it is clear enough (cf. the discussion of norms earlier) that the
 occurrence of a baby crying is the occurrence of a piece of trouble rele-
 vant to some person, e.g., the mother of the baby. One who hears it gains
 a right to talk, i.e., to announce the fact that it has occurred, and can most
 efficiently speak via a ticket, i.e., "The baby cried." That being so, we can
 see then that the opener "The baby cried" is a proper beginning, i.e., it is
something which can serve as a beginning for someone whose rights to
talk are in the first instance restricted.
    With the foregoing we have established that the story we have been ex-
amining has both a proper beginning and a proper end, and is thus not only
a story by virtue of being a possible description but also by virtue of its
employing, as parts, items which occur in positions that permit one to see
that the user may know that stories have such positions, and that there are
certain items which when used in them are satisfactory incumbents.
        12

        Sequencing in Conversational
        Openings1
        EMANUEL A. SCHEGLOFF




        Emanuel A. Schegloff is an assistant professor of sociol-
        ogy at Columbia University. He received his doctorate
        from the University of California, Berkeley. His research
        has concentrated on rules of everyday behavior, es-
        pecially as disclosed in natural conversation.
           In this chapter Schegloff begins with an American
        answer to a universal communicative problem: who
        speaks first, and what does the first speaker say? Less
        crudely, the question is, what rules govern conversa-
        tional openings, and, as Schegloff puts it, secure "coor-
        dinated entry" (i.e., what rules determine the orderliness
        and intelligibility of what takes place)? The opening seg-
        ment of conversation is perhaps everywhere especially
        advantageous for sociolinguistic research, being con-
        tinually in evidence and continually revealing. What one
        can say to anyone, and how one must deal with anyone
         with whom one speaks, may imply fundamental assump-
        tions about the rights and obligations mutually felt by
        Reproduced by permission of the author and the American Anthropo-
        logical Association from American Anthropologist, Vol. 70, No. 6,
         1968.

  1 The research on which the present discussion is based was supported in part by the Ad-

vanced Research Projects Agency, Department of Defense, through the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research under contract number AF 49 (638)-1761. I want to acknowledge, as
well, the assistance of the Bureau of Applied Social Research, Columbia University, and its
director, Allen Barton. For much of the general approach taken here I am indebted to
Harold Garfinkel and Harvey Sacks, and for specific suggestions, doubts, critical remarks,
and suggestive additions I am grateful to Erving Goffman, Alan Blum, Michael Moerman,
and especially to David Sudnow and Harvey Sacks. Responsibility is, of course, entirely
mine.
   This discussion is a shortened and modified version of chapters two and three of the
                                            346
                                                                              · · · ~




                                   Sequencing in Co11versatio11al Openings
                                                                                       347

                  members of a society-perhaps any human beings -are
                  felt to owe to each other. (In parts of Africa whole 1•
                                                .                            cln-
                  guages may be evaluated m terms of the greeting pat-
                  terns.)
                     Work such as Schegloff's calls attention to the possib"l-
                  ity and necessity of deriving a formal analysis of su~h
                  sequences (closings would be also important). Cross-cul-
                  tural work is needed to place the American rules in per-
                  spective. No one is able now to say what is universal 0
                  what is culturally specific. Nor can we do more now tha~
                  guess as to the evolutionary and historical factors that
                  ~xplain the ~ir_tual _absence of_ ste~eotyped verbal greeting
                  m some soc1eties, its elaboration mothers, or the particu-
                 lar form it takes if any.
                    The nature of the argument in Schegloff's discussion is
                 important. Familiar in linguistics, it is unusual in sociol-
                 ogy. Faced with an exception among some hundreds of
                 cases, Schegloff neither dismisses it nor explains it ad
                 hoc. He reconsiders his previous analysis in the light of
                 the exception, seeking a deeper generalization that will
                 account for both. A "distribution rule" for question-
                 answer sequences is incorporated in a more general rule
                 that treats the opening of telephone conversations in
                 terms of rules for summons-answer sequences; and this
                 rule is "structural" in the sense of being qualitative rather
                than quantitative, being usually out of awareness, yet
                deeply binding.
                    This kind of reasoning is in the spirit of Sapir's pioneer-
                ing conception of the unity of patterning in all behavior,
                verbal and nonverbal (I 949). As with Sacks' analysis of
                hearer's and viewer's maxims, Schegloff's analysis of
                summons and answer comprises nonverbal as well as
                verbal phenomena-most centrally here, the ringing of
                the phone itself as a summons, but notice also the con-
                trast between summons and greeting that depends upon

     author's Ph.D. dissertation (Schegloff 1967). It is based on the analysis of tape-recorded
     phone calls to and from the complaint desk ofa police department in a middle-sized Midwest-
     ern city. References to the "data" in the text should be understood as references to this
     corpus of materials. Names have been changed to preserve anonymity; numbers preceding
     citations of data identify calls'within the corpus. I wish to thank the Disaster Research
     Center, Department of Sociology, The Ohio State University, for the use of this recorded
     material, which was obtained in connection with studies of organizational functioning under
     stress, especially disaster conditions. The views expressed and the interpretations of the data,
     of course, are those of the author and not necessarily those of the center.




i
I.
348   Discovering Structure in Speech

whether a term of address is not, or is, accompanied by a
wave.
  The findings bring out an essential methodological
point. Analysis of speech acts, or, more generally, com-
municative acts, is not at a level super-added and simply
parallel to the more familiar levels of phonology and
syntax. Communicative acts cut across the familiar
levels, showing new relationships among their contents,
and showing relationships between their contents and
other modalities of communication, such as gesture, the
ringing of a phone, knocking on a door. A level of com-
municative acts is necessary to account for some of the
properties of purely linguistic elements, as in the different
distribution of proper names when serving as terms of
address and when serving as summons, and their dif-
ferent consequences, regarding recycling, for sentence
sequence (points 1 and 3 under the section "Summons-
Answer Sequences"). At the same time act categories
unite quite diverse linguistic material (Schegloff notes
that a turn may range from a single "mm" to a string of
complex sentences), and, as we have seen, nonlinguistic
material as well.
   Notice that Scheglotrs central body of data allows him
to control for the nonverbal modalities involved, here,
exclusively the telephone ring, while his deeper general-
ization depends upon including that nonverbal signal in
the sequence analyzed. It would be most unfortunate if
sociologists, discovering the fascination of verbal data,
were to forget such points, and to become as word bound
as most linguists.
   As does Sacks, Schegloff relates his formal analysis of
a portion of "social syntax" to norms of interaction, and
to the strategies of interaction persons employ (this time,
e.g., mothers' strategies vis'-a-vis children in employing
them). Structure, interpretation, and use are united in one
analysis.
   Schegloff himself brings out the close relation of his
work to that of Goffman and Sacks. Besides references
cited with Sacks (Chapter 11) there are several observa-
tions of interest in Kiparsky ( 1968) and a body of impor-
tant work with conversations from a people of northeast-
ern Thailand in Moerman (in press) and Douglas (1971 ).
                         Sequencing in Conversational Openings      349
                                                         I




          "And He said, Abraham; and he said, Behold, I am here."
          Genesis XXII: I

   My object in this paper is to show that the raw data of everyday conversa-
  tional interaction can be subjected to rigorous analysis. To this end, I
  shall exhibit the outcome of one such analysis, confined to one limited as-
  pect of conversation. The aspect is sequencing, in this case sequencing in
  two-party conversations, with attention directed to the opening of such
  conversations (although only one kind of opening is considered). The
  chapter proceeds by suggesting a first formulation-referred to as a "dis-
  tribution rule"-to analyze materials drawn from telephone conversation.
 The first formulation is found deficient, and the search for a more ade-
 quate analysis leads to a second formulation not limited to telephone con-
 versations alone, but able to deal with them, and subsuming the "distribu-
 tion rule" as a special case. Some properties of the second formulation-
 called "summons-answer sequences"-are detailed, and consideration is
 given to the uses of the interactional mechanism that has been analyzed.
     This work may have relevance for anthropologists for several reasons.
 First, there is a possible direct interest in the materials under investiga-
 tion; second, the developing interest in the ethnography of com-
 munication (Gumperz and Hymes 1964); and third, what I take to be a
 prevailing interest of anthropologists in the possibility of direct analysis of
 the "stuff of everyday life" so as to discover its orderly or methodical
character.
    I cannot say for what domain my analysis holds, but, as the biblical cita-
tion in the heading and references to settings other than the contemporary
United States should indicate, I do not think the findings are limited to
America today. Since cross-cultural variability and invariance are of
abiding interest to anthropologists, information on this question will have
to be sought from them. Whether this sort of analysis is possible or prac-
tical on materials from societies of which the analyst is not a member is
also not clear, and again it may remain for anthropologists to supply the
answer. [See, for example, Moerman (I 968b).]


        Introduction
          I use "conversation" in an inclusive way. I do not intend to
restrict its reference to the "civilized art of talk" or to "cultured in-
terchange" as in the usages of Oakeshott ( 1959) or Priestly ( 1926), to in-
sist on its casual character thereby excluding service contacts (as in
Landis and Burtt 1924), or to require that it be sociable joint action, iden-
tity related, etc. (as in Watson and Potter 1962). "Dialogue," while being
         350    Discovering Structure in Speech

a kind of conversation, has special implications derived from its use in
Plato, psychiatric theorizing, Buber, and others, which limits its useful-
ness as a general term. I mean to include chats as well as service contacts,
therapy sessions as well as asking for and getting the time of day, press
conferences as well as exchanged whispers of "sweet nothings." I have
used "conversation" with this general reference in mind, occasionally
borrowing the still more general term "state of talk" from Erving
Goffman.
  It is an easily noticed fact about two-party conversations that their
sequencing is alternating. That is to say, conversational sequence can be
described by the formula ababab, where "a" and "b" are the parties to the
conversation. [I am indebted to Sacks (n.d., ms.) for suggesting the signif-
icance of this observation, and some of its implications.] The abab
formula is a specification, for two-party conversations, of the basic rule for
conversation: one party at a time. The strength of this rule can be seen in
the fact that in a multi-party setting (more precisely, where there are four
or more), if more than one person is talking, it can be claimed not that the
rule has been violated, but that more than one conversation is going on.
Thus, Bales can write:

The conversation generally proceeded so that one person talked at a time, and all
members in the particular group were attending the sanze conversation. In this
sense, these groups might be said to have a "single focus," that is, they did not in-
volve a number of conversations proceeding at the same time (Bales et al.
1951:461).

When combined with an analytic conception of an utterance, the abab
specification has a variety of other interesting consequences, such as
allowing us to see how persons can come to say "X is silent," when no
person in the scene is talking. (For a psychiatric usage, see Bergler 1938.)
   The problem I wish to address is the following: the abab formula
describes the sequencing of a two-party conversation already underway.
It does not provide for the allocation of the roles "a" and "b" (where "a"
is a first speaker and "b" is a second speaker) between the two persons
engaged in the conversation. Without such an allocation, no ready means
is available for determining the first speaker of the convention. The abab
sequence makes each successive turn sequentially dependent upon the
previous one'; it provides no resources when who the first speaker might
be is treated problematically. I should like to examine the ways in which
coordinated entry by two parties into an orderly sequence of conversa-
tional turns is managed. (This general area has been considered from a
somewhat different perspective in Goffman 1953, Chapter 14; see also
Goffman 1963:88-95).
   Notice that I do not mean to identify a "turn" necessarily with any syn-
                                                    ------=~-.~"":.---=~-:...•:.._.. ::..-:~--••H~-- •-' ;••

                                                                                                ----._-:--~.




                           Sequencing in Conversational Ope ·
                                                      ,    /J/ngs           35 J
  tactic or grammatical unit or combination of units, nor w·th
                                                                  1
  In the former case, it should be clear that a turn may             a?y activity.
  from a single "mm" (or less) to a string of complex sco~tam anything
  latter, it is crucial to distinguish a single turn in whi"ch tewn ences. In the
  accomplished from two turns by the same party without 0 c'lCf            . ·
                                                                       • IVIhes are

  turn of the other. An example of the latter occurs when 'l q an ~ntervening
  repeated before it is heard or answered; an example of thue~ti~n m~st be
 line, following the inquiry "How are you," "Oh I'm fine He 01 mer 1s the
 A "turn," as I am usmg    . t he term, 1s. t hus not the same as. wh
                                                                    ow care yo u . "
 refers to as a "natural message," which he describes as "the . at Goffman
 of a sender during the whole period of time through Which sr~n behavior
 tention is continuously directed at him" (Goffman I 953: 165~ ~chus of at-
 of course, other views of the matter, such as using a period ·f ·tre are,
 "appreciable pause" to mark a boundary (as in Stephen ~ lr ~~ce or
 I 952:600 or Steinzor 1949: I 09). But unanalyzed pauses and s~l              rshler
      ·
 ambiguous              ·
               (theoretically)  as to whether t hey mark the boundary I ences are
                                                                           f,      .
         . 1ud e d m
 or are me          . 1t
                       . (as t he very t erm " pause " suggests).        o cl unr t '


          Telephone Conversation:
          The Distribution Rule

           A first rule of telephone conversation, which might be call d ,
  "distribution rule for first utterances," is: the answerer speaks
  Whether the utterance be "hello," "yeah," "Macy's," "shoe dep~:t~
                                                                                   fi. /
  ment," "Dr. Brown's office," "Plaza 1-5000," or whatever, it is the one
  who picks up the ringing phone who speaks it.
    This rule seems to hold in spite of a gap in the informational resources
 of the answerer. While the caller knows both his own identity and
 typically, that of his intended interlocutor (whether a specific person or a~
 organization is being phoned), the answerer, at least in most cases, knows
 only who he is and not specifically who the caller is. That is not to say that
 no basis for inference might exist, as, for example, that provided by time
 of day, the history of a relationship, agreed upon signaling arrangements,
 etc. To the question "whom are you calling?" a caller may give a defini-
 tive answer, but to the question "who's calling?" the answerer, before
picking up the phone, can give only a speculative answer.
    Without developing a full analysis here, the import of the gap in the
answerer's information ought to be noted. If, in this society, persons
uniformly used a single-standardized item to open a conversation without
respect to the identity of the other party or the relationship between the
two, then the informational lack would have no apparent import, at least
for the opening. This, however, is not the case. A variety of terms may be
        352    Discovering Structure in Speech

used to begin conversation and their propriety is geared to the identity,
purposes, and relationships of either or both parties. Intercom calls, for
example, are typically answered by a "yeah" or "yes" while incoming
outside calls are seldom answered in that way (In citations of data in
which the police receive the call, "D" refers to the police "dispatcher"
and "C" refers to the caller.):

#68
D:     Yeah.
C:     Tell 85 to take that crane in the west entrance. That's the only entrance
       that they can get in.
D:     0.K. Will do.
C:     Yeah.
#88
D:     Yes.
C:     Uh Officer Novelada.
D:     Yes, speaking.
C:     Why uh this is Sergeant - -
D:     Yes Sergeant.
C:     And uh I just talked to [etc.]

#123
D:     Yeah.
C:     If you can get ahold of car 83, go'm tell him to go to [etc.]

Full consideration of the problem that this answerer's information gap
presents, and some solutions to it, requires reference to aspects of conver·
sational openings other than sequencing, and cannot be adequately dis-
cussed here (see Schegloff 1967, Chapter 4).
   It may help to gain insight into the working of the distribution rule to
consider, speculatively, what might be involved in its violation, and the
reader is invited to do so. (For the illumination of normal scenes produced
by considering disruption of them, I am indebted to Harold Garfinkel; see
Garfinkel 1967 .) O~e possible violation would involve the following: The
distribution rule provides that the answerer normally talks first, immedi-
ately upon picking up the receiver. To violate the rule and attempt to have
the other person treated as the one who was called, he would not talk, but
would remain silent until the caller spoke first. Suppose after some time
the caller says "Hello?" This might be heard as an attempt by the caller
to check out the acoustic intactness of the connection. In doing so, the
caller employs a lexical item, and perhaps an intonation, that is standardly
used by called parties in answering their home phones. This would
provide the violator (i.e., the answerer acting as a caller) with a resource.
                                     Sequencing in Conversa~ional Openings                 353

         Given the identity of the lexical items used by persons to check out and to
         answer in this case, the violater may now treat the checking out "hello" as
         an answering "hello." Continuing the role reversal, he would be required
        to offer a caller's first remark.
           We may note that, without respect to the detailed substance of their
        remarks, it is a property of their respective utterances that the answerer
        typically says just "hello," whereas the caller, if he says "hello," typically
        ~hen adds a continuation, e.g., "this is Harry." Our hypothetical violator,
       m having to make a caller's first remark to achieve the role reversal, must
       then say "hello" with a continuation.
          To be sure, a caller might say only "hello," so as to invite the called
       person to recognize who is calling. This is a common attempt to establish
       or confirm the intimacy or familiarity of a relationship. To cite one in-
       stance from our data, in which a police complaint clerk calls his father:
       #497
       OTHER:        Hello
   POLICE:           Hello
   OTHER:            Hello, the letter, you forgot that letter
   POLICE:           Yeah but listen to me, the _ _ just blew up, [etc.]

      The "intimacy ploy." however, is available only to a "genuine" caller,
   and not to the hypothetical violator under consideration. If the violator
   says it, the genuine caller might hear it as a correct answerer's first remark
   that was delayed. The attempted violation would thereupon be frustrated.
      In saying "hello" with a continuation, however, the would-be violator
  Would encounter trouble. While trying to behave as a caller, he does not
  have the information a genuine caller would have. In having to add to the
  ''hello" to play the caller's part, the choice of an appropriate item depends
 on his knowing (as a genuine caller would know) to whom he is speaking.
 We may give three examples of what this bind might consist of:
     1. One common addition to a caller's "hello" involves the use of a term
 of address, for example: Answerer: "Hello?"; Caller: "Hello, Bill." Not
 ~nowing to whom he is speaking, the violator can obviously not employ
 such an addition.
    2. Another frequent addition is some self-identification appended to
the "hello." Self-identification involves two parts: (a) a frame and (b) a
term of identification. By "frame" is meant such thing~ as _'~this_ is
- - , " "my name is---," or "I am - - . " 2 Terms of 1dent1ficat1on
   2
      The latter framing item "I ·im          "is not normally used on the telephone as the frame
                            ~ be used
 for a name, alt.hough it may     '   · in· a· next item, as whe_n an or~amz~!IO~~
                                                                           · · 1.affil'  t'    · f
fer                                                                                  1 Ia \?~ '.s o -
    ~d to Provide further identification. In face-to-face mteract10n, fhis is · · · 15 not
~Ypical!y used for self-identification but only for introducing a third party. "My name is · · ·"
15
   usable in both face-to-face and in telephone interactions.
        354    Discovering Structure in Speech

include, among others, first names, nicknames, or title plus last name. We
may note that the choice both of appropriate frames and appropriate self-
identification terms varies with the identity and relationship of the two
parties. For example, the frame "My name is - - - " is normally used
only in identifying oneself to a stranger. Similarly, whether one refers to
oneself as Bill or Mr. Smith depends upon the relationship between the
two parties. Our imagined violator would not have the information requi-
site to making a choice with respect to either determination. Although
these two examples are not exhaustive of the variety of caller's continua-
tions, a great many calls proceed by use of one or more of them, and in
each case a masquerading caller, not having the simple information a gen-
uine caller would have, would have trouble in using such a continuation.
    3. An alternative continuation for a caller, whether used in combina-
tion with one of the foregoing continuations or as the caller's next turn,
suggests another rule of opening conversations: the caller provides the
first "topic" of conversation. This rule would confront a violator with the
 problem of formulating a topic of conversation that could serve appropri-
ately without respect to to whom he is speaking. Whether there are such
topics is unclear. A promising candidate as a general first topic might
 seem to be the ritual inquiry "How are you?" or some common variant
thereof. This inquiry is usable for a very wide range of conversational
 others, but not for all conversational others. For example, telephone
 solicitors or callers from the Chamber of Commerce would not be
 typically greeted in this way. As formulated here, the rule "The caller
 provides the first 'topic'" is not nearly as general as the di,stribution rule.
There are obvious occasions where it is not descriptive, as when the
 "caller" is "returning a call." A formulation that would hold more gener-
 ally might be "The initiator of a contact provides the first topic." But this
 alternative is no better in providing a continuation to "hello" that is usable
 for all conversational others. (It may be noted here that much of the anal-
 ysis in this section will be superseded below.)
    Other violations of the distribution rule are readily imaginable, and
 need not be enumerated here. My interest is chiefly in exploring the
 operation and constraints provided by the distribution rule, as well as the
 resources it provides for keeping track of the developing course of a con-
 versation. I found, in attempting to imagine violations, that without the
 proper operation of the simple distribution rule, it was difficult to keep
 track of who was who, who the genuine caller and who the violator, the
 order of events, what remarks were proper for whom, etc. Although I
 have attempted to describe the hypothetical violation clearly, I fear, and
 trust, that the reader will have been sore-pressed to follow the "play-by-
 play" account and keep the "players" straight. It may be noted, then, that
 not only does the distribution rule seem to be routinely followed in the
                         Sequencing in Conversational Openings   355

 actual practice of telephone conversationalists but it provides a format by
 which observers maintain a grasp of the developing activity.
    Finally, consider as evidence of the binding character of the distribu-
 tion rule the following personal anecdote recounted by a student. At one
 time, she began receiving obscene phone calls. She noted that the caller
 breathed heavily. She, therefore, began the practice of picking up the
 receiver without speaking. If she heard the heavy breathing, she would
 hang up. The point she wanted to make in relating this anecdote was that
she encountered considerable irritation from her friends when it turned
out that it was they calling and she had not made a first utterance upon
picking up the receiver. She took this to be additional evidence for the
correctness of the rule "the answerer speaks first." However, she has
supplied an even more pointed demonstration than she intended. It is no-
table that she could avoid hearing the obscenities by avoiding making a
first utterance; however obscene her caller might be, he would not talk
until she had said "hello," thereby obeying the requirements of the dis-
tribution rule.

     A DEVIANT CASE
   The distribution rule discussed above holds for all but one of the
roughly 500 phone conversations in the entire corpus of data. In the vast
majority of these, the dispatcher, when calls were made to the police, or
others, when calls were made by the police, spoke first. In several cases
the tape recordings contained instances of simultaneous talk at the begin-
ning of the interchange (often because the caller was still talking to the
switchboard operator when the dispatcher "came on the line"). In these
cases, a resolution occurred by the callers withdrawing in favor of the
called. That is, either the caller stopped and the dispatcher continued, or
both stopped and the dispatcher went on.
#364
D:     P?lice _Desk. .       } Simultaneous
C:     First aiders with me.
D:     Police Desk.
C:     Hello?
D:     Yes.
C:     Uh this is [etc.]
#66
D:     Police Desk.
C:     (Simultaneously giving phone number in background to operator)
D:     Hello
C:     I am a pharmacist. I own [etc.]
        356    Discovering Structure in Speech

#43
D:    Police Desk.
                                                             } Simultaneous
C:    Say, what's all the excitement .
D:    Police Desk?
C:    Police Headquarters?
D:    Yes.
C:    What's all the excitement [etc.]

   Simultaneous talk is of special interest because it is the converse of
abab, which requires that only one party talk at a time. If simultaneous
talk could be shown to be regularly resolved via the distribution rule, at
the beginning of telephone conversations, then its status as a solution to
the problem of coordinated entry would be more general. A fully adequate
demonstration might involve giving somewhat stronger explication of the
notion of one party's "withdrawal," perhaps by reference to some utter-
ance unit, e.g., a sentence, begun but not finished. (For this last point, I
am indebted to Harvey Sacks.)
   One case clearly does not fit the requirements of the distribution rule:

#9 (Police make call)
(Receiver is lifted, and there is a one second pause)
POLICE:       Hello.
OTHER:        American Red Cross.
POLICE:       Hello, this is Police Headquarters ... er, Officer Stratton [etc.]

In this case the caller talks first, while the distribution would require that
the first line be "American Red Cross," the statement of the called party.
   While indeed there is only one such violation in my data, its loneliness
in the corpus is not sufficient warrant for not treating it seriously. Two al-
ternatives are open. We might focus exclusively on this case and seek to
develop an analysis particular to it that would account for its deviant
sequencing. This would constitute an ad hoc attempt to save the distribu-
tion rule, using a technique commonly used in sociology-deviant case
analysis. Alternately, \.\'e might reexamine the entire corpus of materials
seeking to deepen our understanding of the opening sequencing. We might
ask: Is this best treated as a deviant case, or would a deeper and more
general formulation of the opening sequencing reveal properties of the ini-
tiation of talk that the distribution rule glosses over. Analysis of the case
reveals that the distribution rule, while it holds in most cases, is in fact
best understood as a derivative of more general rules. As we shall see, the
additional sequencing rules, which this case forces us to examine, clarify
properties of talk in nontelephone communication as well as in telephone
communication. The rules discussed below do not make the distribution
                              Sequencing in Conversational Openings               357

 rule superfluous, but concern more finely grained aspects of the opening
 sequence. They require that we analyze aspects of the opening structure
 that the distribution rule does not handle. The distribution rule is but one,
 if indeed a most typical, specification of the formulation to follow, and the
 deviant case is another specification. As Michael Moerman has
 suggested, the distribution rule is no less a "special case" for having many
 occurrences, nor the latter more so for having only one (in my corpus of
 materials). Not number of occurrences but common subsumption under a
 more general formulation is what matters. It will be shown that, in
 broadening the formulation of the opening sequence, a set of more inter-
 esting and formal properties of the opening sequencing structure are ex-
 posed.

           Summons-Answer Sequences,

          Originally we spoke of two parties to a telephone interaction, a
 caller and an answerer. The distribution rule held that the answerer spoke
 first. One of the activities in the material under examination seems to be
 "answering," and it is appropriate to ask what kind of answering activity
 is involved and what its properties are.
    Let us consider for a moment what kinds of things are "answered." The
most common item that is answered is a question, and a standardized
exchange is question-answer. At first glance, however, it seems incorrect
to regard the "called" party as answering a question. What would be the
question? A telephone ring does not intuitively seem to have that status.
Other items that are answered include challenges, letters, roll calls, and
summonses. It seems that we could well regard the telephone ring as a
summons. Let us consider the structure of summons-answer sequences.
    It can be noted at the outset that a summons-often called an "at-
tention-getting device" -is not a telephone-specific occurrence. Other
classes besides mechanical devices, such as telephone rings, include:

          I. Terms of address (e.g., "John?," "Dr.," "Mr. Jones?,"
          "waiter," 3 etc.)
   3 We may note here several special classes of occupational titles. Most occupational titles

cannot be used as terms of address or to summon persons of whom they are descriptive. So,
for example, one would not introduce into a sentence as a term of address, nor seek to get at-
tention via the term "secretary." There is a small collection of occupational titles that can be
used, under appropriate circumstances, as terms of address or to summon their possessors.
For example, one may either address or summon by way of"Doctor," "Rabbi," "Oflicer,"
"Nurse," etc. There is a still smaller class of occupational titles which, while not usable as
terms of address, are usable as summons items. For example, "cabby," or "ice cream man,"
etc. About this collection we may note that aside from their referential uses, e.g., "He is a
cabby," they seem to be used only as summons items.
          358     Discovering Structure in Speech

          2. Courtesy phrases (e.g., "Pardon me," when approaching a
          stranger to get his attention)
          3. Physical devices (e.g., a tap on the shoulder, waves of a hand,
          raising of a hand by an audience member, etc.)

   It is to be noted that a summons occurs as the first part of a two part
sequence. Just as there are various items that can be used as summonses,
so are there various items that are appropriately used as answers, e.g.,
"Yes?," "What?," "Uh huh?," turning of the eyes or of the body to face
the beckoner, etc. Some typical summons-answer sequences are: tele-
phone ring-"hello"; "Johnny?"-"yes"; "Excuse me"-"Yes";
"Bill?"-looks up.
   The various items that may be used as summonses are also used in
other ways.- "Hello," .for example, may be used as a greeting; "Excuse
me" may be used as an apology; a name may be used as a term of address
only, not requiring an answer. How might we differentiate between the
summons uses of such terms and other uses? Taking as an example items
whose other use is as terms of address, it seems that the following are
ways of differentiating their uses:
   I. When addr~ssing, the positioning of a term of address is restricted. It
may occur at the beginning of an utterance ("Jim, where do you want to
go?"), at the end of an utterance ("What do you think, Mary?") or
between clauses or phrases in an utterance ("Tell me, John, how's Bill?").
As summons items, however, terms of address are positionally free within
an utterance. [This way of differentiating the usages has a "one-way"
character; that is, it is determinative only when an item occurs where
terms of address (as nonsummons items) cannot. When it occurs within
the restrictions on placement of terms of address, it clearly is nondifferen-
tiating.] As a mere address term, an item cannot occur between a preposi-
tion and its object, but as a summons it may, as in the following telephone
call from the data:

#398
C:      Try to get out t'-Joe?
D:      Yeah?
C:      Try to get ahold of [etc.]

   2. Summons items may have a distinctive rising terminal juncture, a
raising of the voice pitch in a quasi-interrogative fashion:' This seems to

   • Bolinger ( 1958). We say, with Bolinger, "quasi-interrogative" because there is in Ameri-
can English apparently no definitive interrogative intonation, such that anything so intoned
is a question, or if not so intoned cannot be a question.
                             Sequencing in Conversational Openings
                                                                              359
  be typically the case when a summons occurs after a sentence has .
  begun, as in the above datum. It need not be the case when th                    already
  stands alone, as in "Jim," when trying to attract Jim's atten/ summons
                               . ...        d" .                             Ion.
     3. A term o f a dd ress 1s     mserte man utterance. By that
                                                                             1
 after the term of address is introduced, the utterance continu mea.n that
 break m  . its
              . grammat1ca   . I contmmty;
                                       . . . e.g., "Te 11 me Jim wh est d'         with no
    .                "                               .   h
 thmk of. . . . When a summons occurs m t e course of an utt         '   '     a    id You
                                                                                        . .
 followed by a "recyclmg" to the egmnmg o the utterance Th t ' It is
                            .            b    .    .    f                    erance
                  .      . h d             . d .        .                .    e u terance
 is begun agam, as m t e atum cite m pomt l above. Althou h .
 datum the original utterance is altered when started again, alteraf 1~ that
 · ·
 mtrms1c · to w h at ·1s ·mten d e d b y th e t erm " recyc 1·mg."               ion is not
    It is an important feature of summonses and answers that I'k
 tions an d answers, they are sequentrn
  ·                                            · II Y use d . Th'1s being so ' th1 e .ques-
 our ana Iys1s 1s a sequence o summons an d answer, which shall
               ·   ·                 f                                      ' e unith     of
 fort h b e a bb revmte· d as "SA" sequence. Q ues t'10n-answer sequences h           ence-II
 be "reierre d to as "QA . " W e now t urn t o an              ·
                                                        exammation  ·  of two majo s a d
 several subsidiary 'properties of SA sequences.                                      r an


   NONTERMINALITY OF SA SEQUENCES

    By nonterminality I mean that a completed SA sequence cannot pro _
 erly stand as the final exchange of a conversation. It is a specific feature pf
 SA sequences that they are preambles, preliminaries, or prefaces to so;
 further conversational or bodily activity. They are both done with tha~
 purpose, as signaling devices to further actions, and are heard as having
 that character. This is most readily noticed in that very common answer
 to a summons "What is it?" Nonterminality indicates that not only must
 something follow but SA sequences are specifically preliminary to some-
 thing that follows.
    Is the continuation upon the completion of an SA sequence constrained
in any way, e.g., in which party produces it? The very property of nonter-
minality is furnished by the obligation of the summoner to talk again upon
the completion ( by the summoned) of the SA sequence. It is he who has
done the summoning and by making a summons incurs the obligation to
talk again. With exceedingly rare exceptions, some of which will be noted
below, the summoner fulfills this obligation and talks again. It is the fact of
the routine fulfillment of the obligation to talk again that produces data in
which every conversation beginning with an SA sequence does not termi-
nate there.
   It may be noted in passing that the structure of SA sequences is more
constraining than the structure of QA sequences. H seems to be a prop-
erty of many QA sequences that the asker of a question has the right to
          360     Di.1'l'ol'eri111: Stmcture in Speech

talk again but not an obligation to do so. 5 SA sentences more forcefully
constrain both contributors to them. One way to see the constraining
character of nonterminality as a normative property of an SA sequence is
by observing what regularly occurs when the summoner, for whatever
reason, does not wish to engage in whatever activity the SA sequence he
originated may have been preli~in~y to. Here we characteristically find
some variant of the sequence: "Sam?" "Yeah?" "Oh, never mind." Note
that in the very attempt to appropriately withdraw from the obligation to
continue after a completed SA sequence, an original summoner must in
fact conform to it and not simply be silent. Even in telephone conversa-
tions between strangers, where maintaining the intactness of some rela-
tionship would not seem to be at issue, the obligation to continue talk
upon an SA sequence has been observed to hold. For example, in calling
an establishment to learn if it is open, that fact may sometimes be es-
tablished positively when the ringing phone (summons) is lifted and
"hello" or an establishment name is heard. Rather than hang up, having
obtained the required information, many persons will continue with the
self-evidently answered question "Are you still open?" (although note
here the common tendency to append to it a more reasonable inquiry, one
not rendered superfluous by the very act, as "How late are you open?"
even though that might not, on the given occasion, be of interest). The
limited rule "the caller supplies the first topic" advanced earlier may be
seen to be one partial application of the obligation of a summoner to talk
again.
   A property directly related to the nonterminality of SA sequences is
their nonrepeatability. Once a summons has been answered, the
summoner may not begin ·another SA sequence. A contrast is suggested
with QA sequences where a questioner, having a right to talk again after
an answer is given, may fill his slot with another question. Although a
questioner may sometimes be constrained against asking the same ques-
tion again (e.g., in two-person interaction: A: "How are you?" B: "Fine."
A: "How are you?"), he may choose some question to fill the next slot. A
summoner is not only barred from using the same summons again but
from doing any more summoning (of the same "other"). If, as occurs on
occasion, a summoner does not hear the answer of the other, and repeats
the summons, should the answerer hear both summonses he will treat the
second one as over-insistent. This is most likely to occur in those situa-
tions where physical barriers make it difficult for the summoned person to
indicate his having received the summons and having initiated a course of
                                                                                                       1·'·

  5
     I am indebted to Harvey Sacks for the first part of this observation. Some questions         ~/
may, to be sure, obligate their askers to talk again. The statement in the text may, therefore,
reflect a stage in the analysis of questions where such questions have not yet been closely
examined.




                                                                                                              .
                             Sequencing in Conversational Openings            361

answering. Continued knocking on the door is often met wlth the com-
plaint as the answerer is on his way, "I'm coming, I'm coming." To sum
up, the summoner's obligation to talk again cannot be satisfied by ini-
tiating another SA sequence to the same other. This does not mean, how-
ever, that one might not have, in a transcript of the opening of a conversa-
tion, two SA sequences back-to-back. As we shall shortly see, if the
nonterminality property is not met, i.e., should the summoner not fulfill
his obligation to talk again, the answerer of the first SA sequence may, in
turn, start another with a summons of his own, as in the first line below (E
has called M-the initial S): 6

M:       MacNamara (pause). Hello? (A # S)
E:       Yeah uh John? (A . . . )
M:       Yeah.
E:       I uh just trying to do some uh intercom here in my own set up and get
         ahold of you at the same time.

   We may further see the operation of the nonterminality property in a
common misunderstanding of the use of a name. Names may serve, as
 suggested above, both as simple terms of address or as summoning terms
 of address. Should a name intendedly uttered as a simple term of address be
 heard as a summons, the hearer will expect a continuation while the
 speaker will not be prepared to give one. While not a particularly frequent
 occurrence, when found, it usually occurs in the following way: X uses
 Y's name, and in so doing waves. This is a typical way to perform a greet-
ing, part of which is verbally accomplished and part gesturally ac-
complished. The lexical item perceived alone, i.e., where the gesture is
not seen, may be heard as a summons, and one who hears it in this way
will then answer it and await the activity to which it was expectably pre-
liminary. The misinterpreted sender, like he who calls merely to find out
information that the answer conveys, may feel obligated to say "I was just
saying 'hello.' "
   It is worth noting about such occurrences that misinterpreted persons
can see how they were misinterpreted: Being able to see the kind of error
involved rather than having to investigate its character, allows immediate
correction. Such availability of the nature of an error may be quite impor-
tant. One consequence may be the following. That the systematic ambigu-
ity of the term (i.e., its use to do more than one activity-here "sum-
moning" and "greeting") is available when invoked by the second party,
suggests that the summoner can see how the error could be made; he can

   " The datum is from a collection of calls to and from a public agency other than the one
from which the bulk of the data are drawn. The first two SA sequences arc indicated in
parentheses.
         362     Discovering Structure in Speech

see its methodical character. Members may be able, then, not only to
methodically detect which of two activities a term is being used for but
also to detect methodical errors in such determinations. The hope may,
therefore, be warranted that investigators will be able to describe methods
for differentiating "term of address" usages from "summons" usages,
even if the three suggestions offered earlier prove wrong.
   Nonterminality is an outcome of the obligation of the summoner to talk
again. Corollary to that obligation is the obligation of the answerer, having
answered the summons, to listen further. Just as the summoner, by virtue
of his summons, obligates himself for further interaction, so the answerer,
by virtue of his answer, commits himself to staying with the encounter.
More will be said about this matter and some of its ramifications in the
discussion of what I term the problem of "availability." For the present it
may suffice to give an example of a common situation under which the
power of this reciprocality makes itself felt. Compare, for example, two
ways in which a mother may seek to call her child to dinner from a play
area. One way would involve the use of his name as a term of address with
the request that he-return home, e.g., "Johnny, come home. It's time for
dinner." It is not an anomalous experience in this culture that such calls
may elicit no response from the parties to whom they are directed. It may
be claimed, upon complaint about this nonresponse, that the call was not
heard. Contrast with this, however, a sequence in which the child is sum-
 moned prior to a statement of the summoner's intention. If the child
 answers the summons, he is estopped from ignoring what follows it, e.g.,
 "Johnny," "Yes?" "Come home for dinner." Children may resist an-
 swering the summons, knowing what may follow it, and realizing that to
 answer the summons commits them to hearing what they do not want to
 hear. Although they may nonetheless not obey the commandment,
 claiming they have not heard, it is more difficult if they have answered the
 summons. 7

  7 The same phenomenon is presented in a rather more exalted setting in the following ex-

cerpt from Kafka's The Trial:
   He had almost passed the last of the pews and was emerging into the open space between
himself and the doorway when he heard the priest lifting up his voice. A resonant, well-
trained voice. How it rolled through the expectant Cathedral! But it was no congregation the
priest was addressing, the words were unambiguous and inescapable, he was calling out:
"Joseph K.!"
   K. started and stared at the ground before him. For the moment he was still free, he could
continue on his way and vanish through one of the small, dark wooden doors that faced him
at no great distance. It would simply indicate that he had not understood the call, or that he
had understood it and did not care. But ifhe were to turn round he would be caught, for that
would amount to an admission that he had understood it very well, that he was really the
person addressed, and that he was ready to obey. Had the priest called his name a second
time K. would certainly have gone on but since there was a persistent silence, though he
stood waiting for a long time, he could not help turning his head a little just to see what the
priest was doing. The priest was standing calmly in the pulpit as before, yet it was obvious
                            Sequencing in Conversational Openings
                                                                              363
   It is to be noted that the nonterminality of an SA sequ
obligations that produce it are mutually oriented to by the enc~ and the
interaction and may ,~ffect the very choice of an answer ti~~Ies ~-o _the
summons. A prospective answerer of a summons is attuned t O
tion of the summoner to respect the nonterminality of the s t e 0 bhga-
                                                                                i
                                                                                oug~nal

to continue the interaction, either by talk or bodily acti/tqrence (i.e.,
answer is delivered. He is likewise attuned to his oblig~ttononce ~he
answered, to be prepared to attend the summoner's obligated                    ' havmg
ior. Should he not be in a position to fulfill this listener's ob~~xt _behav-
may provide for that fact by answering the summons with a .!gatl?n, he
defer," e.g., "John?" "Just a minute, I'll be right there." Of co motion to
deferrals may, in fact, serve to cancel the interaction, as whe urs~\·. such
minute" either intendedly or unwittingly exhausts the span or° a JUst a
the summons. More will be said below about deferrals, and theircont~ol ~f
ateness, ·m our cons1"d erat10n
                              · o f t h e ·issue of avai·1 a b·1·             appiopn-
                                                              1 1ty to interact [C
                                                                                    0
pare Goffman (1953: 197): "sometimes the reply may contain an·                       .~-
                       "                       ,, Th                                1
request to h o Id o ff 1or a moment . . . .          e present analysis is int d1c1t
                                                                            '   exp    d
to explicate why this should be needed (its occurrence being ind en ed
              .      I                         h                                 epen -
ently_ estab IIShab e) by reference to t e temporal organization of the
openmg sequence.]
  We now turn to a consideration of another property of SA sequenc
one that will allow us to examine not only the relationship betw es,
completed SA sequences and their sequels but the internal structuree:~
the sequences themselves.

  CONDITIONAL RELEVANCE IN SA SEQUENCES
   The property of conditional relevance is forinulated to address two
problems. [The term and some elements of the idea of "conditional rele-
vance" were suggested by Sacks (1969).] The first of these is: How can
we rigorously talk about two items as a sequenced pair of items, rather
than as two separate units, one of which might happen to follow the other?
The second problem is: How can we, in a sociologically meaningful and
rigorous way, talk about the "absence" of an item; numerous things are
not present at any point in a conversation, yet only some have a relevance


that he had observed K. 's turn of the head. It would have been like a childish game of hide-
and-seek if K. had not turned right around to face him . . . "You are Joseph K. ?" said the
priest, lifting one hand from the balustrade in a vague gesture. "Yes," said K., thinking how
frankly he used to give his name and what a burden it had recently become to him; nowadays
people he had never seen before seemed to know his name. How pleasant it was to have to
introduce oneself before being recognized: "Yes," said K., "so I have been informed."
"Then you are the man I seek," said the priest. "I am the prison chaplain"(© copyright,
1956 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.).
        364    Discovering Structure in Speech

that would allow them to be seen as "absent." Some items are, so to
speak, "officially absent." It is to address these problems that the notion
of conditional relevance is introduced. By conditional relevance of one
item on another we mean: given the first, the second is expectable; upon
its occurrence it can be seen to be a second item to the first; upon its
nonoccurrence it can be seen to be officially absent-all this provided by
the occurrence of the first item.
   We may begin to explicate conditional relevance in SA sequences by
employing it to clarify further some materials already discussed. The
property of "nonterminality" may be reformulated by saying that further
talk is conditionally relevant on a completed SA sequence. In such a
formulation we treat the SA sequence as a unit; it has the status of a first
item in a sequence for which further talk becomes the second item, expect
able upon the occurrence of the first. As noted, the specific focus of this
expectation is upon the summoner, who must supply the beginning of the
further talk. Within this reformulation, if he fails to do so, that fact is of-
ficially noticeable and further talk is officially absent. It is by orienting to
these facts that an answerer may find further talk coming fast upon him
and, if unprepared to fulfill his obligation to attend to it, may seek to defer
it by answering "Just a minute," as was noted above.
   My main interest in conditional relevance at this point does not, how-
ever, have to do with that of further talk upon a completed SA sequence
but with the internal workings of the sequence itself. Simply said, A is
conditionally relevant 011 the occurrence of S.
   We can see the conditional relevance of A on S most clearly in the fol-
lowing sort of circumstance. If one party issues an S and no A occurs, that
provides the occasion for repetition of the S. That is to say, the nonoccur-
rence of the A is seen by the summoner as its official absence, and its of-
ficial absence provides him with adequate grounds for repetition of the S.
We say "adequate grounds" in light of the rule, previously formulated,
that the summoner may not repeat the S if the sequence has been
completed. As long as the sequence is not completed, however, the Smay
be repeated.
   Two qualifications must be introduced at this point, one dealing with
the extendability of repetitions of S, the other with the temporal organiza-
tion of those repetitions relative to the initial S. To take the second point
first: In order to find that an A is absent, the summoner need not wait for
posterity. In principle, unless some limitation is introduced, the occur-
rence of S might be the occasion for an indefinite waiting period at some
point in which an A might occur. This is not the case. In noting this fact, a
subsidiary property of the conditional relevance of A on S may be
formulated-the property of immediate juxtaposition.
   The following observations seem to hold: In QA sequences, if one asks
a question, a considerable amount of silence may pass before the other
                                                                     -.... - , , " . , , . , ~ , - ~ ~ ~
                                                                                              --=--~~:=;

                             Sequencing in Conversational O            .
                                                                  Pe11111gs    365
  speaks. Nonetheless, if certain constraints on the co t
  (having to do with the relation of their substantive content of his remarks
  tive content of the question) are met, then the oth n ~nt to the substan-
  heard as an answer to the quest10n.   .    S econdly, even ifer  th s .remark<    _may be
  is filled not with silence but with talk, within certain con et m~ervenmg time
  utterance may be heard as the answer to the question ( s ram~s..some later
  seen Jim yet?" Y: "Oh is he in town?" X: "Yeah, he g0~'?'' X. Have you
  "No, I haven't seen him yet.").                                      10 Yesterday." Y:

       By contrast with this possible organization of QA se
 lowing may be noted about SA sequences. The condi"t· que nces, the fol-
 an A on an S must be satisfied .         · · a constraint of inmrona.1 relev ance of
                                      w1thm
                                                                          1
 tum. That 1s to say, an item t at may b e used as an answzec. tatejurtap
   .           .              .     h                                              ·       .·
                                                                                        os1-
     .                            .
 will not be heard to constitute an answer to a summons if ·t          er   to  a summo   ns
                                                                          1
 rated from the summons. While this point may seem to . ~ccurs sepa-
 poral ordering is involved, it is far from clear that "ti~e~'P Y \?at tem-
   .
 time"    · the relevant matter. A n a Iternative,
          rs                                       ·     suggested by H or ehpsed     <
 would make reference to "nextness" plus some conception ;~.v:y _Sa~.ks,
                                                                          0
 of units of activity of finer or coarser grain by reference Pt:c 17:h. or
 "nextness" would be located.                                                            rch
     We may now note the relevance of this constraint to the "o                       .
                                                                          1 ' rmu 1ation of
 the absence of an A. When we say t hat upon A's absenc S                                 b
                   .                h A' b                                    e     may e
 repeated, we mtend t~ note t at             s Sa sTehnce may be found if its occur-
 rence does not immediately fo 11ow an ,               e phenomenon is encou t . d
                 . .                  .          .        h                          n ere
 when exammmg occurrences m a senes sue as S-short pause-S- h
 pause, or    "D"  rc k" . . . no answer . . .       "D"1c k" . . . , etc. In thiss me- ort
 chanic~[ age it may be ~f int~re~t to _note that the _very construction and
operat10n of the m~chamcal nng rs bmlt on these pnnc(ples. If each ring of
the phone be c?ns1dered a summ~ns, th:n the _Phone 1s built to ring, wait
for an answer, 1f none occurs, to nng a?am, wait for an answer, ring again,
etc. And indeed, some persons, polite even when interacting with a
machine, will not interrupt a phone, but wait for the completion of a ring
before picking up the receiver.
     The other qualification concerning the repeatability of an S upon the of-
ficial absence of an A concerns a tenninating rule. It is empirically observ-
able that S's are not repeated without limitation, until an A is actually re-
turned. There is, then, some terminating rule used by members of the
society to limit the number of repetitions of an S. I cannot at this point
give a firm formulation of such a terminating rule, except to note my
impression that S's are not strung out beyond three to five repetitions at
the most. However, that some terminating rule is normally used by adult
members of the society can be noted by observing their annoyance at the
behavior of children who do not employ it. Despite the formulation in
numerical terms, a similar reservation must be entered here as was en-
tered with respect to time above. It is not likely that "number" or
        366    Discovering Structure in Speech

"counting" is the relevant matter. Aside from contextual circumstances
(e.g., location), the requirement of "immediate juxtaposition" discussed
above may be related to the terminating rule(s). It may be by virtue of a
telephone caller's assumption of the priority or "nextness" of a response,
given the ring of the phone, that the telephone company finds it necessary
to use the phone book to advise callers to allow at least ten rings to permit
prospective answerers time to maneuver their way to the phone.
   One further observation may be made at this point about repetitions of
S. "Repetition" does not require that the same lexical item be repeated;
rather, successive utterances are each drawn from the class of items that
may be summonses, although the particular items that are used
may change over some string of repetitions. For example,
"Mommy . . . Mommy" may then shift to "Mom . . . Mom" or
"Mother . . . "; "Jim" may shift to "Mr. Smith," or "Jim Smith" (as, for
example, when trying to attract someone from the rear in a crowded set-
ting). A ring of a doorbell may shift to a knock on the door, the mechanical
ring of a phone is replaced by some lexical item, such as "hello" when the
caller hears the receiver lifted and nothing is said (as with the deviant case
introduced earlier to which I shall return later).
   While I am unable to formulate a terminating rule for repetitions of S
when no A occurs, it is clear that we have a terminating rule when an A
does occur: A terminates the sequence. As noted, upon the completion of
the .SA sequence, the original summoner cannot summon again. The
operation of this terminating rule, however, depends upon the clear recog-
nition that an A has occurred. This recognition normally is untroubled.
However, trouble sometimes occurs by virtue of the fact that some lexical
items, e.g., "Hello," may be used both as summonses and as answers.
Under some circumstances it may be impossible to tell whether such a
term has been used as summons or as answer. Thus, for example, when
acoustic difficulties arise in a telephone connection, both parties may at-
tempt to confirm their mutual availability to one another. Each one may
then employ the term "Hello?" as a summons to the other. For each of
them, however, it may be unclear whether what he hears in the earpiece is
an answer to his check or the other's summons for him to answer. One
may, under such circumstances, hear a conversation in which a sequence
of some length is constituted by nothing but alternatively and simulta-
neously offered "hellos." Such "verbal dodging" is typically resolved by
the use, by one party, of an item on which a second is conditionally rele-
vant, where that second is unambiguously a second part of a two-part
sequence. Most typically this is a question, and the question "Can you
hear me?" or one of its common lexical variants, regularly occurs.
   We may note that the matters we have been discussing are involved in
problems having to do with the coordinated character of social interac-
tion, whether they be coordinated entry into a conversation, coordinated




                                                                                 .J
                      Sequencino i I c            .         .
                                ,.,   1   onversattonal Openzngs   367

~e-~nt~y into an interrup~ed conversation, or the coordination of the activ-
ity m its_ course. In particular, we will shortly turn to a consideration of
the beanng ~f SA seque~~es on coordinated entry.
   The po~ei of the conditional relevance of A on S is such that a variety
of strong mf~rences can be made by persons on the basis of it, and we now
turn to consider some of them. We may first note that not only does condi-
tional rel~':'ance operate "forwards," the occurrence of an S providing the
expectab1ht~ of an A, but it works in "reverse" as well. If, after a period
of conversat10nal lapse, one person in a multi-person setting (and partic-
ularly when persons are not physically present but within easily recallable
range) should produce an item that may function as an A to an S, such as
"Wh at.,? " or "Y es·,
                     ? " th en another person in that environment may hear
in that utterance that an unspoken summons was heard. He may then
reply "I didn't call you." (This, then, is another sort of circumstance in
which we find an immediately graspable error, such as was remarked on
earlier.) The connection between a summons and an answer provides
both prospective and retrospective inferences.
   A further inferential structure attached to the conditional relevance of
A on S can lead us to see that this property has the status of what
Durkheim (1950) intended by the term "social fact"; i.e., the property is
both "external" and "constraining." When we say that an answer is con-
ditionally relevant upon a summons, it is to be understood that the behav-
iors referred to are not "casual options" for the persons involved. A
member of the society may not "naively choose" not to answer a
summons. The culture provides that a variety of "strong inferences" can
be drawn from the fact of the official absence of an answer, and any
member who does not answer does so at the peril of one of those infer-
ences being made.
   [Terms such as "casual option," "naively choose," and "strong infer-
ence" are used here in a fashion that may require explanation. Although
 not supplying a fully adequate explication, the following suggestion may
 be in order. By "may not naively choose" is meant that the person sum-
 moned cannot deny that some inference may legitimately be made. If
 some particular inference is proposed, then in denying it the s~1mmoned
 offers a substitute, thereby conceding the legitimacy of an mference,
 though not perhaps of a particular one. If questioned as to the warrant.for
 his inference, the summoner may refer to the absence of an answer, <t~d
 this stands as an adequate warrant. A sequence constructed to exemplify
 these remarks might be:

SUMMONER:          Are you mad at me?
SUMMONED:          Why do you think that?
SUMMONER:          You didn't answer when I called you.
SUMMONED:          Oh. No, I didn't hear you.
        368   Discovering Structure in Speech

Conversely, the following observed exchange may suggest what is in-
tended by "casual option" (or "native choice"):

WIFE:            What are you thinking about?
HUSBAND:         Who says I'm thinking?
WIFE:            You're playing with your hair.
HUSBAND:         That doesn't mean anything.

The activity "playing with one's hair" is a "casual option" (or "naive
choice") in this interaction and, therefore, the claim can be made that no
inference is warranted.]
   What sorts of inferences are involved? A first inference is "no answer-
no person." When a person dials a number on the telephone, if the
receiver on the other end is not picked up, he may say as a matter of
course "there is no one home"; he does not typically announce "they
decided not to answer." A person returning home seeking to find out if
anyone else is already there may call out the name of his wife, for ex-
ample, and upon not receiving an answer, may typically take it that she is
not home or, while physically home, is not interactionally "in play" (e.g.,
she may be asleep. The term is from Goffman 1963). If one person sees
another lying on a couch or a bed with eyes closed and calls their name
and receives no answer, he takes it that that person is asleep or feigning
sleep. He does not take it that the person is simply disregarding the
summons. Or, to use a more classical dramatic example, when Tosca,
thinking that her lover has been only apparently and not really executed,
calls his name, she realizes by the absence of his answer that he is not
only apparently dead but really so. She does not take it that he is merely
continuing the masquerade.
   It is this very structure of inferences that a summoner can make from
the official absence of an answer that provides a resource for members of
the society who seek to do a variety of insolent and quasi-insolent activi-
ties. The resource consists in this: The inference from official absence of
an answer is the physical or interactional absence of the prospective
answerer. Persons who want to engage in such activities as "giving the
cold shoulder," "sulking," "insulting," "looking down their noses at," etc.,
may employ the fact that such inferences will be made from "no answer"
but will be controverted by their very physical presence and being in-
teractionally in play (they are neither asleep nor unconscious). So,
although members can, indeed, "choose" not to answer a summons, they
cannot do so naively; i.e., they know that if the inference of physical or in-
teractional absence cannot be made, then some other inference will, e.g.,
they are cold shouldering, insulting, etc.
   We may note what is a corollary of the inferential structure we have
been describing. The very inferences that may be made from the fact of
                       Sequencing i11 Conversational Openings   369

the official absence of an answer may then stand as accounts of the "no
answer." So, not only does one infer that "no one is home," but also "no
one is home" accounts for the fact of no answer. Not only may one see in
the no answer that "he is mad at me" but one can account for it by that
fact. More generally then, we may say that the conditional relevance of A
on S entails not only that the nonoccurrence of A is its official absence but
also that that absence is "accountable." Furthermore, where an inference
is readily available from the absence of an answer, that inference stands
as its account.
   However, where no ready inference is available, then no ready account
is available and the search for one may be undertaken. Something of this
sort would seem to be involved in an incident such as the following (field
notes): A husband and wife are in an upstairs room when a knock on the
door occurs; the wife goes to answer it; after several minutes the husband
comes to the head of the stairs and calls the wife's name; there is no
answer and the husband runs down the stairs. If the foregoing analysis is
correct, we might say that he does so in search of that which would
provide an account for the absence of the wife's answer. The point made
here does not follow logically, but empirically. From the relationship of
the availability of an inference to its use as an account, it does not
logically follow that the absence of an inference entails the absence of an
account and the legitimacy of a search. An account may not be needed
even if absent. It happens, however, that that is so although not logically
entailed.
   We have now introduced as many of the features of conditional rele-
vance as are required for our further discussion. While the discussion of
conditional relevance in this section has focused on the relations between
A and S, these features are intrinsic to conditional relevance generally,
and apply as well to the relations between completed SA sequences, as a
unit, and further talk. If a called person's first remark is treated as an
answer to the phone ring's summons, it completes the SA sequence, and
provides the proper occasion for talk by the caller. If the conditional rele-
vance of further talk on a completed SA sequence is not satisfied, we find
the same sequel as is found when an A is not returned to an S: repetition
or chaining. In our data:

#86
D:    Police Desk (pause). Police Desk (pause). Hello, Police Desk (longer
      pause). Hello. (A#AA#A)
C:    Hello. (S)
D:    Hello (pause). Police Desk? (A#A)
C:    Pardon?
D:    Do you want the Police Desk?
         370   Discovering Structure in Speech

  We turn now to a consideration of the problem of the availability to talk
that provides the theoretical importance of SA sequences and opening
sequences in general. In doing so we return to the concerns with the coor-
dinated entry into an encounter, and the deviant case that required the
reformulation of the distribution rule.


         The Availability to Talk

         After having formulated a simple description for the opening
sequence of telephone calls, we encountered a deviant case that was not
described by that formulation. Rather than developing a deviant case
analysis we set out to try to deepen the formulation of the opening
sequence so that it would encompass with equal ease the vast majority of
cases already adequately described and the troublesome variant. It will be
recalled that the datum that gave us trouble read as follows:

#9
(Police make call-receiver is lifted and there is a one-second pause.)
D:         Hello.
Other:     American Red Cross
D:         [etc.]

In that piece, the caller made the first remark, whereas the distribution
rule requires that the called party makes the first remark. The foregoing
analysis provides for this occurrence as being as rule-governed a phenom-
enon as other interchanges are. Treating the ringing of the phone as a
summons and recalling the conditional relevance of an answer on it, we
find that after the receiver has been lifted, the expectation of an answer is
operative. In this piece of data, what occurs after the receiver is picked up
would have passed as a normal case of the distribution rule had it not been
noted that it was the caller, not the called, who uttered it. The SA
formulation gives us the circumstances under which it is not unusual for
that remark to be uttered by the caller: treating the ring of the phone
(which the distribution rule disregards) as a summons to which no answer
is returned. As was noted in our discussion of conditional relevance, A is
conditioned upon the occurrence of an S, and should it not occur it is of-
ficially absent and warrants a repetition of the S. Hearing, now, the
"Hello" as such a repetition provides for its status as a second summons
in such an occurrence. The structure of the datum thus is seen to be S, no
answer, S, A.
   Likewise, all the cases easily handled by the distribution rule are
handled with equal ease by the SA formulation, so long as the telephone
                                               Sequencing in Conversational Openings                         371

             ring is regarded as a summons. Thus, the rule "the called talks first"
             follows clearly from the conditional relevance of an A upon the occur-
             rence of an S; and the less general rule, the "caller provides the first
            topic," follows from the conditional relevance of further talk upon a
            completed SA sequence. The distribution rule's operation is incorporated
            within the structure of SA sequencing.
               We will now discuss the work SA sequences do by elaborating some
            properties of the component summons and answer items. The remainder
            of the present discussion, on the availability to talk and the coordinated
            entry into the sequence, will be devoted to further explicating the opening
           interactional structure.
               Many activities seem to require some minimum number of participants.
           For thinking or playing solitaire, only one is required; for dialogue, at
           least two; and for "eristic dialogue," at least three. 8 When an activity has
           as one of its properties a requirement of a minimal number of parties, then
           the same behavior done without that "quota" being met is subject to being
           seen as an instance of some other activity (with a different minimum
          requirement, perhaps), or as "random" behavior casting doubt on the
          competence or normality of its performer. (This is so where the required
          number of parties is two or more; it would appear for any activity to get
          done, one party at least must be available.) Thus, one person playing the
          piano while another is present may be seen to be performing, while in the
          absence of another he may be seen to be practicing. Persons finding them-
          selves waving to no one in particular by mistake may have to provide for
         the sense of their hand movement as having been only the first part of a
         convoluted attempt to scratch their head.
             Conversation, at least for adults in this society, seems to be an activity
         With a minimal requirement of two pa~ticipants. This may be illustrated by
         the following observations.
             Buses in Manhattan have as their last tier of seats one long bench. On

              8
          •  I touch here only tangentially on a larger area-what might be termed "11-party proper-
        ties and problems." What is suggested by that term is that for activities with a common value
        for n (i.e., two-party activities, three-party activities, etc.), there may be, by virtue of that
        common feature, some common problems or properties. For example, two-party activities
        may share some problems of coordination, or some properties as compared to three-party
        activities. Alternatively, activities that have a minimum-number-of-parties requirement may
        have common properties as compared to those whose relevant parameter is a maximum
        number of participants. It is the latter possibility that is being touched on here.
          On "eristics," see Perelman:

        {"ere there. any need for a clear sign enabling one to contrast the crit 7rion of eris tic _dial?g.ue with tha: of
         he other kmds, it would be found in the existence of a judge or arb,tor charged with g1".mg the casting
        Vote between the antagonists, rather than in the intentions and procedures of the adversaries themselves.
        Because the purpose of the debate is to convince not the adversary but the judge; because the adversary
        does not need to be won over to be be·iten. for this very reason the eristic dispute is of no great interest to
        the philosopher (1963: 166).           '   '




,,,,,
        372    Discovering Structure in Speech

one occasion two persons were observed sitting on this last bench next to
one another but in no way indicating that they were, to use Goffman's
term (1963: l 02-103), "with each other." Neither turned his head in the
direction of the other and for a long period of time, neither spoke. At one
point, one of them began speaking without, however, turning his head in
the direction of the other. It was immediately observed that other passen-
gers within whose visual range this "couple" were located, scanned the
back area of the bus to find to whom that talk was addressed. It turned
out, of course, that the talk was addressed to the one the speaker was
"with." What is of interest to us, however, is that the others present in the
scene immediately undertook a search for a conversational other. On
other occasions, however, similar in all respects but one to the preceding,
a different sequel occurred. The dissimilarity was that the talker was not
"with" anyone and, when each observer scanned the environment for the
conversational other, no candidate for that position, including each
scanner himself, could be located. The observers then took it that the
talker was "talking to himself' and the passengers exchanged "knowing
glances." The issue here could be seen to involve what Bales
(1951 :87-90) has called "targeting," and, to be sure, that is what the
persons in the scene appear to have been attending to. It is to be noted,
however, that it is by reference to the character of conversation as a
minimally two-party activity that the relevance of seeking the target is es-
tablished in the first place. In this connection, it may be remarked that
such phenomena as "talking to the air" (Goffman 1953: 159) or glossing
one's behavior by "talking to oneself," are best understood not as excep-
tions to the minimal two-party character of conversation but as special
ways of talking to others while not addressing them, of which other ex-
amples are given in Bales (1951 :89-90).
   On another occasion, two persons were observed walking toward one
another on a college campus, each of them walking normally. Suddenly
one of them began an extremely pronounced and angular walk in which
the trunk of his body was exaggeratedly lowered with each step and raised
with the next. The one encountering him took such a walk to be a com-
municative act and immediately turned around to search the environment
for the recipient of the communication. In the background a girl was
approaching. The two males continued on their respective paths and after
some fifteen to twenty paces the one looked back again to see if, indeed, it
was to the girl in the background that the gesture was directed.
   We have said that conversation is a "minimally two-party" activity.
 The initial problem of coordination in a two-party activity is the problem
 of availability; that is, a person who seeks to engage in an activity that
 requires the collaborative work of two parties must first establish, via
 some interactional procedure, that another party is available to collabo-
 rate. It is clear that a treatment of members' solutions to the problem of
                         Sequencing in Conversational Openings     3 73

   availability might, at the same time, stand as a description of how coordi-
   nated entry into an interactive course of action is accomplished. Our task is
   to show that SA sequences are, indeed, germane to the problems both of
   availability and coordinated entry, and how they provide solutions to both
   these problems simultaneously.
     We must show how the working and properties of SA sequences es-
  tablish the availability of the two parties to a forthcoming two-party in-
  teraction (and, in the absence of a completed sequence, foreclose the pos-
  sibility of the activity) and how they, furthermore, ensure that availability,
  both at the beginning and in the continuing course of the interaction. We
  noted before that the absence of an answer to a summons led strongly to
  the inference of the absence of a party or claimed the other's unavailabil-
  ity to interact. Conversely, the presence of an answer is taken to es-
  tablish the availability of the answerer; his availability involves, as we
  have seen, his obligation to listen to the further talk that is conditionally
  relevant upon the completion of the sequence. In sum, the completion of
  a sequence establishes the mutual availability of the parties and allows the
  activity to continue, and failure to complete the sequence establishes or
  claims the unavailability of at least one of them and perhaps undercuts the
 possibility of furthering that course of action.
     We may note, in qualification, that a distinction must be made between
 a party's "presence" and his "availability" to interact (as we shall later
 distinguish between his "availability" to interact and his "commitment"
 to do so). In our earlier discussion, we pointed out that the resource that
 members of the society draw upon in doing such activities as "cold shoul-
 dering," "insulting," "sulking," etc., involves the joint observability of
 physical presence, social presence (that is, consciousness and awareness)
 and the absence of an answer to a summons, indicating or claiming
 unavailability for interaction. For the insolent activity to be accomplished
 via such a contrast, obviously enough, requires the distinctness of the
 items so contrasted. Several additional illustrations may serve to extend
 the scope of our sense of this difference.
    Those who can remember their adolescence may recall occurrences
 such as the following in their high schools. In the morning, quite often as a
first piece of official business, the teacher would "call the roll." In that
case, a student, when his name was called, would respond by answering
"present" or by raising his hand. Neither party then expected that further
interaction between them would occur. Mere presence was being es-
tablished. If they went to a "proper" high school, they may have been
required to respond to a teacher's calling of their name in a recitation
period by jumping to their feet, and awaiting some further behavior by the
teacher. In that situation, their presence already established, they were
being summoned to be available for some interaction, typically some
examination. Teachers who saw a student physically present but not at-
           374      Discovering Structure in Speech

tentive to the official environment might make that fact observable to the
public there assembled by calling a student's name and allowing all to see
that he did not answer by standing up and establishing his availability. In
that way then, the properties of a summons-answer sequence could be
employed not only to establish availability or unavailability but to pro-
claim it to all who could see.
   In telephone interactions, the lifting of a receiver without further ado
serves to establish the presence of a person at the called number. It does
not, however, establish the availability of that person for further conver-
sation. Indeed, the deviant case that was introduced earlier presents
precisely this set of circumstances, and was met by further summoning by
the caller to elicit some demonstration of availability, i.e., some answering
remark. 9 In this age, in which social critics complain about the replace-
ment of men by machines, this small corner of the social world has not
been uninvaded. It is possible, nowadays, to hear the phone you are
calling picked up and hear a human voice answer, but nevertheless not be
talking to a human. However small its measure of consolation, we may
note that even machines such as the automatic answering device are con-
structed on social, ,ind not only mechanical, principles. The machine's
magnetic voice will not only answer the caller's ring but will also inform
him when its ears will be available to.receive his message, and warns him
both to wait for the beep and confine his interests to fifteen seconds.
Thereby both abab and the properties of SA sequences are preserved.
   While the machine's answer to a summoning incoming call is specifically
constructed to allow the delivery of the message by the summoner, and is
mechanically constructed with a slot for its receipt, the fact that it is a
machine gives callers more of an option either to answer or not than they

  " Note that the French may answer the phone with a remark specifically oriented to their
availability-''.i-ecoute"; while the British may respond to an interlocutor's failure to answer
a summons or question by inquiring if the "no answer-no person" inference is correct-
" Are you there?"
  After this paper had been completed, Miss Gail Ziferstein brought to my attention the
following datum (from another corpus of materials) that is relevant here and at other points
in the analysis:

 .OPERATOR:        Hello, Mister Lehrhoff?
, LEHRHOFF:        Mh hm, ..
, OPERATOR:        Mister Savage is gon' pick up an' talk to ya.} ,
  LEHRHOFF:        Alright,                              ,        simultaneous

 (52 seconds intervening)
 OPERATOR:         Hello.
 LEHRHOFF:         Yes.
 OPERATOR:         Did Mistuh Savage ever pick up?
 LEH RH OFF:       If he did, he didn't say "hello."
 OPERATOR:         Oh, o alright, smarty, just hold on.} ,
 LEH RHO FF:       heh! heh heh heh heh heh heh          simultaneous
 OPERATOR:         hhh!




                                                                                                  J
                              Sequencing in Conversational Openings             375

 have when the voice emanates from a larynx and not a loudspeaker. One
 thing that is specifically clear and differentiated between a human and
 mechanical answerer is that although both may provide a slot for the
 caller to talk again, the human answerer will then talk again himself
 whereas currently available machines will not. We have previously
 provided for the obligation of the answerer to listen to that talk, but we
 have not yet provided for the possibility that the answerer may then talk
 again, and it is to that we now turn.
    One hitherto unnoticed and important fact about answers to · sum-
 monses is that they routinely either are, or borrow some properties of,
 questions. 10 This is most obviously so in the ~ase of "what?" but seems
 equally so of "yeah?," and "yes?," which three terms, together with
 glances of the eyes and bodily alignments, constitute the most frequently
 used answer items. The sheer status of these items as questions, and the
 particular kinds of questions that they are, allow us to deepen the
 previous analysis of the obligation of the summoner to talk again upon the
 completion of the sequence, the obligation of the answerer to listen, and
 what may follow the talk he listens to.
    The obligation of the summoner to talk again is not merely a distinctive
 property of SA sequences. In many activities similar to the SA sequence,
 where, for example, someone's name may also be called, the caller of it
 need not talk again to the person called. Such activities as indicating
 someone's "turn to go," as in a discussion or game, share with "signaling"
 by rings of the telephone the fact that they are prearranged or invoke
 some shared orders of priority and relevance. Such activities much more
 directly can be seen to be pure signaling devices and not summoning
devices. That an activity starting, for example, with the enunciation of a
 name, is a summons, is provided by its assembly over its course. The
obligation of the summoner to talk again is, therefore, not merely "the
obligation of a summoner to talk again"; it is the obligation of a member of
the society to answer a question if he has been asked one. The activity of
summoning, is, therefore, not intrinsic to any of the items that compose it;
it is an assembled product whose efficacious properties are cooperatively
yielded by the interactive work of both summoner and answerer. The sig-
naling devices accomplish different outcomes. By not including questions
as their second items, they do not constrain the utterers of their first items
to talk again. Rather, they invoke prearrangements, priorities, and shared

   10 I am indebted here to David Sudnow. The notion of "borrowing properties of ques-

tions" is a difficult one. How one might prove that some item, while not a question, bor-
rowed some property of questions is not clear, in part because it is not clear how one would
prove that some item was or was not a question. The discussion that follows may, therefore,
be read as being limited to items that are, intuitively, "clearly" questions, e.g., items that
have "interrogative intonation," or that are lexically question items (e.g., "what?"), defer-
ring the issue of "borrowing properties."
         376   Discovering Structure in Speech

relevances as matters to which the addressed party must now direct his
attention.
   We now see that the summons is a particularly powerful way of
generating a conversational interaction. We have seen that it requires, in a
strong way, that an answer be returned to it. By "in a strong way" we in-
tend that the strong set of inferences we described before attend the ab-
sence of an answer, e.g., physical absence, social absence (being alseep or
unconscious), or purposeful ignoring. Moreover, it seems to be the case
that the answer returned to it has the character of a question. The
consequence of this is two-fold: ( 1) that the summoner now has, by virtue
of the question he has elicited, the obligation to produce an answer to it,
and (2) the person who asked the question thereby assumes an obligation
to listen to the talk he has obi'igated the other to produce. Thus, sheerly
by virtue of this two-part sequence, two parties have been brought
together; each has acted; each by his action has produced and assumed
further obligations; each is then available; and a pair of roles has been in-
voked and aligned. To review these observations with specific reference
to the two steps that are their locus:

SUMMONER:          Bill? (A summons item; obligates other to answer under
                   penalty of being found absent, insane, insolent, conde-
                   scending, etc. Moreover, by virtue of orientation to proper-
                   ties of answer items, i.e., their character as questions, pro-
                   vides for user's future obligation to answer, and thereby to
                   have another turn to talk. Thus, preliminary or prefatory
                   character, establishing and ensuring availability of other to
                   in~eract.)
SUMMONED:          What? (Answers summons, thereby establishing availability
                   to interact further. Ensures there will be further interaction
                   by employing a question item, which demands further talk or
                   activity by summoner.)


   We may notice that in relating our observations to the first two steps of
the sequence we have dealt not only with two steps but with the third as
well. We may now show that the span of control of the first two items ex-
tends further still. Not only is it the case that a question demands an
answer and thereby provides for the third slot to be filled ,by the
summoner, but also one who asks a question, as we noted above, has the
right to talk again. The consequence of this is that after the summoner has
talked for the second time, this talk. will have amounted to the answer to
the answerer (of the summons), and the latter will have a right to take
another turn. This provides for the J)Ossibility of four initial steps follow-




                                                                                        ,/
                                                                                    J
                              Sequencing in Conversational Openings             3 77

  ing from the use of a summons, which thus emerges as an extraordinarily
  powerful social item.U We have not yet exhausted its power.
    We may note that the item the summons elicits in the second slot is not
 adequately described as merely "a question." It is a question of a very
 special sort. Its special characteristic may become observable by contrast
 with other kinds of questions. One not unusual type of question has the
 property that its asker knows the specific content of the answer that must
 be returned to it. So, for example, radio interviewers acquainted with the
 person they are interviewing and perhaps long and intimate friends of
 theirs may nonetheless ask such a question as was heard posed to one
 musician by another who doubles as a disk jockey: "Tell me, Jim, how did
 you first break into music?" In a second type of question, while the ~isker
 does not know the specific content of the answer, he knows, ifwe may use
 a mathematical analogy, the general parameters that will describe it. So,
for example, while the doctor in an initial interview may not know
specifically what will be answered to his "What seems to be the trouble?"
he very readily takes it that the answer will include references to some
physical or psychic troubles.
    The character of the question that is returned to a summons differs
sharply from either of these. Its specific feature seems to be that the asker
of "what?" may have little notion of what an accomplished answer may
look like, both with respect to its substantive content and with respect to
the amount of time that may be necessary for its delivery. This property-
the specific ambiguity of what would constitute an answer-is clearly
seen in the use that is often made of it by those persons in the society who
may have restricted rights to talk. Thus, we may understand the elegance

   11
      That conversational oaks may out of conversational ac~rns grow is a frequent theme in
folklore. One version of such a story, starting from a somewhat different acorn, is the
following:
 On the express train to Lublin, a young man stopped at the seat of an obviously prosperous
 merchant.
   "Can you tell me the time?" he said.
   The merchant looked at him and replied: "Go to hell!"
   "What? Why, what's the matter with you! I ask you a civil question in a properly civil
way, and you give me such an outrageous rude answer! What's the idea?"
   The merchant looked at him, sighed wearily, and said, "Very well. Sit down and I'll tell
you. You ask me a question. I have to give you an answer, no? You start a conversation with
me-about the weather, politics, business. One thing leads to another. It turns out you're a
Jew-I'm a Jew, I live in Lublin-you're a stranger. Out of hospitality, I ask you to my home
for dinner. You meet my daughter. She's a beautiful girl-you're a handsome young man. So
you go out together a few times-and you fall in love. Finally you come to ask for my daugh-
ter's hand in marriage. So why go to all that trouble. Let me tell you right now, young man, I
won't let my daughter marry anyone who doesn't even own a watch!!" ("To Save Time," in
Ausubel 1948:404-405).
       378    Discovering Structure in Speech

involved in a standardized way in which children often begin conversa-
tions with adults. A phrase such as "You know what, Mommy?," inviting
a "what?" as its return, allows the child to talk by virtue of the obligation
thereby imposed upon him to answer a question while retaining a certain
freedom in his response by virtue of the adult's inability to know in ad-
vance what would have been adequate, complete, satisfactory, or other-
 wise socially acceptable answer.· (For these points I am indebted to
 Harvey Sacks.)
     Such an open-ended question does not expand what can be said beyond
 the constraints of the categorical relationship of the parties. But as com-
 pared with other kinds of answers to summonses, it does not introduce ad-
 ditional constraints. Additional constraints may, of course, be introduced
 by modifications on "what?," such as intonation or addition (e.g., "what
 now?"). [Other lexical items used as answers are (on the telephone)
 "hello" or some self-identification (e.g., "Macy's"). For a discussion of
  the ways the latter items impose additional constraints, see Scheglotf
  ( 1967, Chapter 4).]
      In other words, there are constraints on the "contents" of a speaker's
  remarks once a conversational course is entered into and some conversa-
  tional "line" is already present to be coordinated to. At the beginning of a
  conversation, however, no such "line" is already present, and the open-
  endedness of the ansJer that "what?" allows is a reflection of that fact
   and the requirement that if there is to be a conversation, it must be about
   something. The fact of open-endedness, however, does not necessarily
   imply the absence of all constraint. How much constraint is to be put, or
   can be put, on the content of some opening substantive remark may
   depend strongly on the relationship of the parties to one another, and that
   includes not only their relationship as it may turn out to be formulated but
   their relationship as it develops from moment to moment. While two
    parties who are about to be joined by an interaction medium may later be
    properly categorized as father and son, for them, as the phone rings, and
    indeed when it is picked up and the "hello" is uttered, they may be strang-
    ers. Their relationship to one another may have to be "discovered," while
    interactional work must precede the "discovery." Under such a circum-
    stance, given that strangers have restricted rights to talk to one another
    and restricted topics about which they may talk, then a completely open-
    ended "what" may be a "hazardous'.' opening for a phone conversation in
    which, at the moment of its utterance, the other may be a stranger. The
     consequences of such matters for the infrequency of answers such as
     "what" or "yes" on the phone, and for the alternatives that may be
     employed in their stead, are matters that cannot be gone into here.
       To conclude the present discussion, it may be noted that provision is
     made by an SA sequence not only for the coordinated entry into a conver- /,-
                             Sequencing in Conversational Openings               379

sation but also for its continued orderliness. First, we may note that in the
very doing of the two items that constitute SA sequences, and in the two
turns these items specifically provide for, the first two alternations of
abab are produced and that sequence is established as a patterned rule for
the interaction that follows.
    Insofar as the answerer of the summons does not use his right to talk
again to introduce an extended utterance, the work of SA sequences may
be seen to extend over a yet larger span of conversation. By "not in-
troducing an extended utterance," I mean that he simply employs one of
what might be called the "assent terms" of the society, such as
"mmhmm" or "yes" or "yeah," or "uh huh." Under that circumstance
the following may be the case: As the initial response to the summons es-
tablishes the answerer's availability and commits him to attend the next
utterance of the summoner (that is, ensures his continued availability for
the next remark), this obligation to listen and this ensurance that he will,
may be renewable. Each subsequent "uh huh" or "yes" then indicates the
continuing availability of its speaker and recommits him to hear the utter-
 ance that may follow. Availability may, in this way, be "chained," and, in
 fact, speakers with extended things to say may routinely leave slots open
 for the other to insert an "uh huh/' thereby recalling them to and recom-
 mitting them to the continuing course of the activity. 12
     It was remarked earlier that conversation is a "minimally two-party"
 activity. That requirement is not satisfied by the mere copresence of two
 persons, one of whom is talking. It requires that there be both a "speaker"
 and a "hearer." (That "hearership" can be seen as a locus of rules, and a
 status whose incumbency is subject to demonstration, is suggested by
 some of Sacks' work.) To behave as a "speaker" or as a "hearer" when
 the other is not observably available is to subject oneself to a review of
 one's competence and "normality." Speakers without hearers can be seen
 to be "talking to themselves." Hearers without speakers "hear voices."
 (But cf. Hymes l 964e on cultural variations in the definition of partici-
 pants in speech events.) SA sequences establish and align the roles of
  speaker and hearer, providing a summoner with evidence of the availabil-
  ity or unavailability of a hearer, and a prospective hearer with notice of a
  prospective speaker. The sequence constitutes a coordinated entry into
  the activity, allowing each party occasion to demonstrate his coordination

   12 It is as wry recognition of the operation and subversion of this mechanism that a stan-
 dard joke of the society may be appreciated. In it, a tired husband returns from the office,
 sinks gratefully into his easy chair and opens the evening paper to the sports page. His nag-
 ging wife, however, wishes to unburden herself of the accumulated troubles of the day and
 begins an extended monologue. Routinely, she leaves a slot of silence and he dutifully in-
 serts "Yes, dear," until, dimly aware that all is not as it appears to be, she says, "Are you ig-
 noring me?" and he replies "Yes, dear."
       380   Discovering Structure in Speech

with the other, a coordination that may then be sustained by the parties
demonstrating continued speakership or hearership. It is by way of the
status of items such as "uh huh" and "mmhmm" as demonstrations of
continued, coordinated hearership that we may appreciate the fact that
they are among the few items that can be spoken while another is
speaking without being heard as "an interruption."
 13
  A Kinesic.,Linguistic Exercise:
 'The Cig~rette Scene
 RAY L. BIRDWHISTELL




  Ray L. Birdwhistell is Professor of Communications,
  Annenberg School of Communications, at the University
  of Pennsylvania and Senior Research Scientist, Eastern
  Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute. He received his
  doctorate from the University of Chicago and has taught
 at the University of Kentucky, the Foreign Service In-
  stitute, and the University of Buffalo. Inventor of the
 field of kinesics, for two decades he has been concerned
 with the analysis of communicative behavior as a com-
 plex whole.
     In this sketch of the development of kinesic research
 and its current status, Birdwhistell brings out the bitter-
 sweet tension so far inherent in it. Body motion is un-
 deniably essential to interpretation of communicative
 conduct, and, as Birdwhistell shows in his discussion of
 linguistic and kinesic interdependence, it sometimes
substitutes for linguistic means. Sociolinguists concerned
with the study of natural conversation are becoming in-
creasingly aware of the need for both visual and audio
records in the interpretation of interactional sequences.
Some rules of alternation thus must hold across, or be-
tween, verbal and nonverbal modalities (and rules of
co-occurrence, of course, involve them). "Movers" (like
"speakers") presumably have a competence, a charac-
terizable knowledge and ability, in terms of which they

From Kinesics and Context: Essays 011 Body /llfotion Communication
by Ray L. Birdwhistell. Copyright© 1970 by the Trustees of the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. By permission of the author and The Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press.

                                381
_J




     382   Discovering Structure in Speech

     interpret and accomplish body motion, both as an auton-
     omous mode of communication and as a mode integrated
     with language in social interaction. Because its mech-
     anisms and functions are so largely out of awareness,
     nonverbal behavior should illustrate, better than most
     forms of cultural behavior, the same kind of patterning as
     language (see Sapir I 949c:556-557). Yet units and pat-
     terns of nonverbal behavior prove difficult to determine
     with certainty; even short segments are found almost
     infinitely rich for continued analysis.
        If definitive progress is slow, it may be because "non-
     verbal behavior" conflates several aspects of patterning
     that must be discretely analyzed, a problem Birdwhistell
     discusses in terms of the relation of kinesic to extra-
     kinesic (parakinesic) phenomena. It may be that differ-
     ences between linguistic and nonlinguistic codes in means
     and functions override such common organization as the
     human brain might be expected to confer. It may be also
     that structure cannot be ascertained apart form semantic
     and "functional" analysis (see Ervin-Tripp, Chapter 7,
     for a discussion of function), and that observational
     identification, however necessary, must ultimately de-
     pend upon ethnographic consultation of native intuition
     (see Sapir 1949g, and also Hockett 1955, on the dashed
     hope that sound spectographs would solve problems of
     phonological identification).
        It is certain that the progress of the field has been slow
     because the necessarily painstaking research has de-
     pended upon a very few men. The material discussed in
     this chapter was filmed in 1956 and is part of a larger
     body of data to be treated more extensively by a group
     of anthropologists, psychologists, and linguists in the
     forthcoming The Natural History of an Interview
     (McQuown, in preparation). The linguistic model that
     has helped shape kinesic research (that of Trager and
     Smith) has been supplanted within linguistics by trans-
     formational-generative grammar. This has meant a shift
     in emphasis from behaviorally oriented observation and
     analysis to a concern with the more abstract and not
     directly observable rules relating meaning to sound
     (Chomsky and Halle 1968). But linguists of the latter
     school have not concerned themselves with modalities of
     communication apart from language, or with the differ-
     ence that their approach might make for kinesic analysis.
    A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   383

     Interest in the formal analysis of nonverbal communi-
  cation processes is rapidly increasing, howev.er. A col-
  lection of Birdwhistell's essays has recently appeared in
  paperback (1970). Work along similar lines is now being
  caITied on by several other groups of researchers con-
  cerned with diagnosis of behavior in psychiatric inter-
  views (Mahl 1968; Scheflen 1964). Of interest to stu-
 dents of social interaction is the work of Condon and his
 collaborators (1969, 1970), who, turning away from the
 earlier atomistic emphasis on isolation of phoneme-like
 units of motion, have begun to focus on "self synchrony"
 (on changes in the flow of body motion in relation to
 speech) and "interactional synchrony" (body change
 patterns of listeners in relation to the speech and body
 motion change patterns of speakers). There are indica-
 tions that this type of analysis may be particularly useful
 in the study of communication in ethnically diverse
 societies.
     Paul Ekman and his associates (Ekman and Friesen
 1969) at the University of California, San Francisco, are
 focusing on some of the broader gestural complexes an-
 alyzed in terms of their physiological properties and
 communicative function. They distinguished five major
 categories of nonverbal behavior: (I) emblems, non-
 verbal acts which have a direct verbal translation, i.e.,
greetings, gestures of assent, etc.; (2) illustrators, move-
 ments tied to speech which serve to illustrate the spoken
word; (3) affective displays such as facial signs indicating
happiness, surprise, fear, etc.; (4) regulators, acts which
 maintain and regulate the act of speaking; (5) adaptors,
signs originally linked to bodily needs, such as brow
wiping, lip biting, etc. Computer aided methods for the
isolation of these categories in video tape or film records
have been developed materially reducing the otherwise
considerable time required for analysis (Ekman, Friesen,
and Tausig 1971 ).
    In yet another direction, Cicourel and Boese have
begun a study of deaf and dumb sign language. Their
preliminary results indicate that sign language can be
described in terms of syntactic rules and rules of stylistic
contraction and emphasis much like those of spoken
language (Cicourel and Boese 1971 ).
   Every issue of the theory and description of communi-
cative conduct arises forcefully in the study of nonverbal
         384    Discovering Structure in Speech

         modalities: the relation between universal and culturally
         specific features (see Ekman and Friesen 1968); the
         relation between linguistic and other methodological ap-
         proaches (see Greimas 1968); the uncertainty as to
         adequate parameters of description and initial "etic"
         frameworks; and the paucity of adequate data and ade-
         quately trained investigators for integrating communica-
         tive form (or means) with communicative purpose. Re-
         newed interest in primate behavior and comparative
         study of signaling across species make human nonverbal
         signaling all the greater a challenge. Additional related
         readings are provided by Crystal (1969), Crystal and
         Quirk (1964), Dance (1968), Cazden, Hymes, and John
         (1971), Goffman (1964), Key (in press), LaBarre (1964),
         Rensky (1966), and Sebeok, Hayes, and Bateson (1964).


Doris and Gregory, as the camera is reloaded and again begins to record the
scene, are reseated upon the sofa. Each has a stein of the homemade beer supplied
by Doris. Doris looks from Gregory to her beer stein and at the matches which
Gregory is holding. Her left hand carries the cigarette to her mouth after her right
leaves the stein on the coffee table before them. Gregory continues: "He's a very,
very bright four-and-a-half-year-old. Why, that drawing that he brought in is very
advanced for four-and-a-half." As he talks, he opens the match folder, extracts a
match, strikes the match under the closed flap, moves the lighted match into
position and makes contact with her cigarette as he terminates his vocalization.
As he talks, Doris moves in concert with his match manipulations until her cig-
arette is lighted. She speaks: "I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart, but
I have no worries about that child's intellectual ability." A J second lag between
"child's" and "intellectual" was equaled by another between "intellectual" and
"ability." Gregory speaks, his first words coterminous with the latter hesitation
and "ability": "No, that's a very smart one." As Doris talks, her right hand drops
to the table edge and then past it slightly to the left to adjust her shoe strap before
she drops her hand backward to the couch. This movement, with its momentary
shifts, are still in concert with Gregory's, who, after Doris' cigarette is lighted,
forms a triangular movement in the air which terminates with the extinguishing
of the match and its disposal in the ash tray. This scene begins at (plus or minus
ten frames) # 12529 and is concluded by (plus or minus IO frames) # 12784.


         Introduction

        "The Cigarette Scene," an interactional sequence of some 18
seconds in duration, has remained a type site for linguistic-kinesic analysis
throughout the decade following the original work on the Doris-Gregory
                                                                                              ----   ~ 1 ·i.':
                                                                                                           ) I
                                                                                                           '11


                A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene             385

  films. 1 Filming techniques have improved, budgets have become suf-
  ficiently large to permit extensive recording on sound film of half-hour
  and hour-long sequences of conversation, interview, and interaction, and
  with Jacques Van Vlack's development of the frame count B Roll, th;
  correlation of the vocalic and the movement stream has become more
  precise. Other films have attracted our research interest, but this scene
  in which Gregory and Doris contemporaneously discuss the merits of
  Doris' fou~-year-old son, Bruce, and engage in a ritua~ dancelike lighting
  of Doris' cigarette, has remained a rich, only partially analyzed corpus.
  The special cadence of this piece of interaction, which Gregory (frames
  12756-12786 and 12786-12826) terminates by a batonlike change of
  pace, marks the scene as critical and relevant to any final appraisal of the
  Gregory-Doris reciprocal. The seeming irrelevance of the body move-
  ment to the content exchanged by the participants and the glove-fit
  coherence of the rhythmic movements of the two participants to the in-
  strumental act of cigarette lighting has made the scene useful for demon-
 stration purposes. In our earlier assessments, the dramatic quality of the
 interchange masked out the significance of other behavior in the perfor-
 mance. The parakinesic category, "Rhythmic-Disrhythmic," in the first
 appraisals, subsumed data that, as our analyses became more refined;
 were to be analyzable as stress kinemes and suprasegmental kinemor-
 phemes. This present exercise attempts to bring the earlier research in
 line with some more recently developed techniques.


          Kine to Kineme ·

         As reported elsewhere (Birdwhistell 1952, 1958, 1961), . the
theory and methodology of kinesics has been consistently influenced by
that of descriptive and structural linguistics. From the initial morphologi-
cal discoveries, it has been clear that visible communicative behavior
exhibited formal properties at least analogic to those describable for
audible behavior. I have been fortunate to be in constant consultative
contact with linguistic researchers, and this contact shaped the research
design and terminology constructed for kinesic research. At the same
time, because of a deep appreciation of linguistic discipline and rigor, I

  1
    From The Natural History of an lnte,Tiew. Norman A ]\lc_quown, ed., i~ preparation,
1956- . The research for this still unpublished report was imtiated at the Center for the
Behavioral Sciences, during the summer of 1956. Gregory Bateson, Henry Brosin, Charles
H?ckett, Norman A. McQuown, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, and .the _author selected 10
minutes of sound-filmed interview taken earlier by Bateson for exammatton. Research of the
~cene~ from this corpus given special attention has continued spm:adica)lY by ~lcQuo~n
and his students, Birdwhistell arid his students, and by Henry Brosm unttl the time of this
Writing (June, 1967).


                                                                                                     I:
        386   Discovering Structure in Speech

have reacted against the fashionable and often careless preemption of the
"etic-emic" distinctions. Throughout kinesic research, every attempt has
been made to be cautious about the abstraction of isolable elements of
body motion (kines) into manipulable classes of allokines (kinemes).
"Complementary distribution" ·is a~ idea of great methodological force
for the linguist and has proved to be an efficient tool for phonologic anal-
ysis. Because of the multiple layering of body motion behavior, both in
body part and temporal arrangement, the distributional qualities of units
of kinemorphology are more difficult to assess in the empirical data.
   At the present writing, a kineme is a class of allokines which can be
demonstrated in kinemorphs to be substitutable.
   Note: If more than one allokine is discovered to be present in the same
structural neighborhood, the kine representing it may be either:

        a. a member of more than one kinemic class or
        b. an insufficiently refined kine; or
        c. the morphology has been insufficiently analyzed and we are
        probably dealing with an intersection of levels in the behavioral
        stream

  The distinctions between kine and kineme, kinemorph and kinemor-
pheme, remain useful and efficient. However, these terms are heuristic
devices. Until we become much more secure as to the morphology and
syntactics of kinesics (even for American English movers) our emic as-
signments must be registered as tentative. The history of phonological
research is reassuring to the kinesicist timid about working models; to-
morrow's research will validate the model or obliterate it.


        Sight and Sound

        The earliest work in kinesics attempted only the crudest corre-
lation of body motion and speech behavior (Birdwhistell 1952). I had yet
to comprehend either the feasibility or necessity of sound film recording
and was, in fact, resistant to the idea early suggested by McQuown that
the future of kinesic-Iinguistic research as related to social processes
depended upon intensive and parallel phonetic and microkinesic recording
and analysis. As an anthropologist, I was attracted by grosser elements
which I felt could be abstracted and organized by the careful scansion of 1 ·
the complex message stream. The isolation of these, I believed, would 1
lead to the understanding of communication-for me then, as now, the
dynamic structure which sustains order and creativity in social interaction.
   The complex data which began to emerge as body motion research
               A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene            387

  became involved in cross-cultural comparisons of humad body motion,
  and the encouragement of Henry Lee Smith, Jr., and George L. Trager to
  study body motion as a structure with its own rules of order combined to
  force me to concentrate upon the visible and silenced behavior of human
  beings. Small stretches of films and access to a slow-motion projector by
   I 956 Iaid the groundwork for the analysis of the American kinesic system.
  As research proceeded, the presence of vocalization or auditor behavior
  was not ignored. However, it was recorded at the articulatory level as body
  motion behavior-not as speech behavior. Even the preliminary attempts
  to abstract this data, however, made it clear that beyond the circumoral
  activity involved in speech production, behavior appeared which seemed
  related to or was at least usually modified by the presence of vocalization.
  It was not until the Palo Alto group 2 began its research conferences that
 the delineation of such behavior became relevant to kinesic research.
      Out of these conferences, out of the co-research with Smith and Trager,
 and out of the subsequent ongoing research at Eastern Pennsylvania
 Psychiatric Institute and at Western Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute
 and Clinic3 came ideas which led to the isolation of a variety of circum-
 speech body behavioral abstractions. These abstractions cover behavior
characteristic of conversation, but which seems to have differing struc-
 tural properties than those which could be traced for the phenomena as-
 signed to kinesics proper.
     In the Cigarette Scene, the acts of lighting the cigarette, Gregory's
manipulation of the match, and Doris' adjustment of her shoe strap may
be termed instrwnental behavior. Moreover, the fact that Doris and
Gregory are seated for an extended conversation is, at one level, instru-
mental. To say that an act is instrumental, however, does not define it, in
itself, as without signal or message value. The performance of any act in
the presence of others must be comprehended as having the stamp of
individual and social practice. Yet, at this writing, acts such as walking,
smoking, eating, knitting, woodworking, still must be filed as "instru-
mental" and/or "task oriented" until we know more about their communi-
cative structure.~ However, as we can see from the analysis of the scene,
the assignment of instrumentality to the larger frame of behavior must not
preclude the examination of concurrent behavior, whether such behavior

  2 Gregory Bateson, Ray Birdwhistell, Henry Brosin, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, and

Charles Hockett.
  3 The work of Harvey Sarles, William Condon, Felix Loeb, and Joseph Charny at Western

Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute and Clinic has been invaluable both as a check upon and
as a creative incentive to the work here at Eastern Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute.
  1 The work of Marvin Harris is an approach to this problem. See The Nature ofC11/t11ral

Things (New York: 1964). See also the review by Duane Metzger in the American A nthro-
pologist 67, no. 5, pt. I (1965): 1293.
       388   Discovering Structure in Speech

is at first glance integral to or apparently trivial to the immediate task
accomplishment. There is a temptation to see instrumental acts in a social
situation as "carriers" of other messages. Yet there is an equal justifica-
tion, from another point of view, of assigning priority to the communica-
tional act. At the moment, I am using the concept of alternating context.
Either can be the context for the other.
   There is a· second type of customary behavior which resists kinesic
analysis while having patterned form and discernible message value.
Included in this category, the demonstratives, would be such acts as
gestural mapping, the illustrative movements customary as accompani-
ments to female discussions of dressmaking and design or of cosmetolog-
ical arrangements of the hair. To the same category belong the illustrative
movements which accompany male discussions of fishing or cabinet
making and which. often accompany male discussions of sporting events.
From the limited cross-cultural data available it is clear that demonstra-
tives are conventionalized forms, but they do not appear to follow kinesic
rules, at least among American movers. No definitive demonstratives
appear in this particular scene. However, the limited tridirectional sweep
which is employed by Gregory as he extinguishes the match and which is
followed by the larger cigarette movement to change the cadence of the
scene may, as we get more comparative data, be both "instrumental" and
"demonstrative." The act is clearly, at one level, instrumental. However,
without supporting data, we cannot define the act itself as demonstrative
-the change of cadence may very well be at times, in and of itself,
demonstrative.
   The durations of both instrumental behavior and demonstrative be-
havior are often longer than that of the accompanying syntactic sentences.
This need not be so. For example, a speaker may circumscribe a shape in
the air while describing an object and the air picture may be coextant with
the nominal clause. Comparably, an instrumental act, whether referred to
in the context of accompanying speech or not, may be completed within
or beyond the stretches of the speech behavior.
   There is a third type of body behavior which, while still only crudely
understood, should be mentioned here. This behavior is characteristic of
all conversational and nonconversational interactional situations. Inter-
actional behavior includes a variety of behaviors of part or whole bodies
as they move toward or away from, or maintain careful spacing among,
participants of an interactional scene. Hall (1959, 1966) has done pioneer-
ing work in the isolation of certain aspects of these phenomena in his
work upon proxemics. Scheflen's (1966) analysis of the movement pat- ,--
terns in the psychiatric interview provides still another dimension to the /
understanding of body shifts as messageful. His study, related to Bateson
and Mead's ( 1942) earlier work of complementary, mirroring, and parallel
                A Kinesic-Li11guistic: Exercise: The Cigarette Scene          389

   movements of participants, indicates that there is a discoverable logic
  which marks segments of interaction. The work of Condo'n on "syn-
  chrony" and "dissynchrony" in interaction is further suggestive of overall
  interpersonal movement patterns which promise, as analysis proceeds, to
  supply us with measures of interactional communicative signals. 5 A num-
  ber of behavioral categories are reported as relevant to the examination of
  the interaction. Often this behavior, which ranges from the presence of a
  rhythmic cadence to the interaction to a disassociation in the behavior of
  the actors to the extent that they appear to be in isolation from one
  another, seems almost to be a running comment to the participants about
  the interaction (see also Birdwhistell 1961). Bateson's concept of "meta-
 communicational" is of relevance here. Perhaps the term "metainterac-
 tional" would leave the function of such variations in behavior more open
 for further investigation. In the case of the Cigarette Scene, going beyond
 the data provided by our corpus, Doris' activity might be interpreted as a
 demand upon Gregory for a relationship more interpersonally involved
 than he has seemed to engage in before. As hostess, she has provided
 beer. Her nonlexical request for Gregory to light her cigarette may be no
 more than an act to elicit a formalizing etiquette. At some level of analysis
 his act can be seen as the reciprocal of hers. The cadence of which we
 spoke above, which distinguishes this part of the scene from the remaining
 20 minutes, sustains itself until Gregory cuts the beat in half with the
 waved match and cigarette. This action is special and must ultimately be
 accounted for in any description of the interaction. However, the point
 being made here is that while Doris moves her hands and arms and shifts
 her body, and while Gregory moves his hands and body in a concert beat,
other things are continuing to happen. The "dance" is no more exclusive
than is her "shoe fixing" -interaction is multidimensional in time and
structure.
    To return to the data, Doris, while continuing to talk about her son,
turns away from Gregory, "reaches" for a glass which she· does not take,
drops the heel of her shoe away from her foot and then adjusts the strap
and lets her hand fall away from the shoe before it swings back to touch
the table again. Meanwhile, she has "closed" her body, moving her torso
closer to her legs as she talks about "all mothers think their kids are
smart". . . . Her hand touches the table on "but." She then turns back to
Gregory and focuses upon him as she says, "I have no worries about that
child's intellectual ability" while shaking her head with animation. Here
again is a "layer" of behavior which cannot be accounted for either in

  5 Personal communication with William Condon. His analysis of fine-grained move-

ment reveals that there is very close coordination in the fine movement of interactants in
conversation.
          390   Discovering Structure in Speech

  strictly kinesic structure or in either of the categories laid out above. The
  quality of the film makes it impossible for us to confirm the impression
. that as she talks the tonus of her face changes. Nor can we determine
  whether the tight mouth-limited smile with which the scene began, taken
  together with the tonus shift,.forms a cross-referencing signal that calls
  attention to the signal value of the complexity of her utterance. These
  phenomena which are recorded as parakinesic are detectable when we
  contrast these scenes with others in the larger film. However, "interpreta-
  tion" of these would require more data than are supplied by all of the film
  and tape at our disposal.
     Since the stretch which we are examining contains no clear examples of
  kinesic markers, these movements, which seem to be tied to particular
  semologic forms, require no discussion here. These movements custom-
  arily but irregularly appear in utterance situations in conjunction with
  ambiguous pronominals, in situations where the lexeme is ambiguous
  about tense, position, possession, and plurality, and in situations where
  adverbial clauses appear to require reinforcement or modification. The
  fact that these are lacking or submerged within other phenomena in this
  stretch may or may not be of significance. The string upon which we will
  concentrate in this discussion is Doris' "I suppose all mothers think their
  kids are smart, but I have no worries about that child's intellectual
  ability." When compared to comparable strings within the larger corpus,
  there is a kind of stereotypy here to her speech behavior. It is impossible
  from the available data to determine whether this stereotypy arises from
  the fact that she has used this sentence before in her dealings with the
  outside world, whether her words are somehow fillers for a critical rela-
  tionship shift, or, whether what we hear is not stereotypy at all but
  what Fromm-Reichmann once described in conference as the "voice of
  despair." At any rate, regardless of our rationalization, the absence of
  discernible markers is worthy of note and may become of significance as
  we come to know more about the codes of interaction.
     In this exercise our focus is upon what Doris says in this situation. It is
  not our present problem to determine what she means. At the same time,
  operating upon the assumption that description approaches explanation
  as it deals with a greater proportion of the available data, it should be
  profitable to describe our corpus more adequately. Charles Hockett
  originally transcribed this string, and his transcription was modified only
  slightly by an independent analysis by Norman McQuown. Trager-Smith
  conventions are used here, although modified slightly for Hackett's
  purposes.                                                                      1
                                                                                  ,,-
     In an attempt to get some kind of perspective upon the lexical aspect'
  of this piece, twelve women of comparable age and social class back-
  ground to that of Doris were given a typescript in standard English ortho-
                A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene                 391

graphy and asked to comment upon it. All except one commented that
 this was standard "woman talk," i.e., a preliminary apology followed by a
proud statement about the child, unusual only in the presence of the "but"
 rather than the expected "and." The one exception to the "woman talk"
generalization came from an informant who said, "It's a sentence to hide
the 'but.' She is very concerned about her child." The general attitude of
these informants about the "but" was consistent with the appraisal of
the psychiatrists, Henry Brosin and Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, who
saw the central lexical signal of the sentence in the conjunction. (It
is worthy of note that four of a control group of six women, when showed
this sentence among five other sentences and asked to recall them 5
minutes later, wrote this sentence as "I suppose [one case 'guess']
all women think their kids are smart [two cases, 'bright'] and I have no
worries [one case, 'I'm not worried'] about that child's [three cases, 'my
child's'] intellectual ability.")
   Careful review of the linguistic evidence (see Charts 13. la, I b, I c)


           chart 13 .1 a

Linguistic Transcription: "I Suppose All Mothers Think Their Kids Are Smart
But"

le***                                  ?-                                     -?
fn**<
v~·~
Int   3
Str.J A    A      A
                    2
                            A         A            A
                                                         J 2 3
                                                                /
Sgm ay + spoz + ::,hi + m::,cforz + 8ink + 15er + kidz ::,r + smart
                                                                      r
                                                                      b::,t
                                                                              ?



        suppose all mothers think their kids arc smart                but




      676 683     686 691        698    702 706 710 718               725

* ?,h,r,::,,m, Vocal Segregates (Trager).
** <, Crescend (Hockett): r.. Drawling (Trager).
*** 'l', Rasp (Trager).
Phonetic transcription omitted. Circled numbers are numbas assigned 1956.
Open numbers are from edge reading of sound lilm 1967.



provides the following discussion. Doris' customary discourse pattern
contains long strings of secondary stress. Moreover, the tertiary on "I" at
the start of the string is not unusual. What is more unusual are the two
double cross junctures within such a short string. Doris customarily has
           392       Discovering Structure in Speech

           chart 13.J b

Transcription: "I Have No Worries About"

*In
VSg       hr ?-;J'/m?-?
Int
StrJ
                             2I        /\
                                                  3
                                                      /\
                                                           3
                                                                   I
                                                                       21 '-)
Sgm                       1ay + haev +now+ W-;Jriyz                         -;Jbawt +
                              I    have           no       worries           about



                             752   755            760      763                   778

*   Overloud (Trager).


           chart 13.lc

Transcription: "That Child's Intellectual Ability"

*ln/fn                -~
                      _r.,                                     >
YSg                     hr                                                  r
Int                                :                        1          I    #
StrJ                    /\         : , /\                      /            I
Sgm            5.et + cayldz :     : intilekcuwil + :ib1htiy
               that childs           intellectual    ability



         783           789                  804                            831

* > Fading (Hockett).



very long strings without terminal junctures. This is a phenomenon com-
mon in psychiatric interviews (this is not ostensibly such an interview)
and has been interpreted as a device to avoid interruption or interpreta-
tion. The segregates here again are not unusual in her speech patterning.
The paralinguistic rasp over "think their kids are smart" is consistent
with other portions of the larger protocol. The drawl over "are smart but I
have no worries about that child's" is not, in the fact that it conveys por-
tions of two syntactic sentences, a common device for her. If we were
trying to assess her meanings, the use of drawl here would deserve fur-
ther comparative attention. Studies of silence remain preliminary among
linguists. "Hesitations" and "pauses" have been remarked upon by a
number of students as worthy of study, but even when they are statis-
             A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   393

tically appraised, we still know relatively little about the conventional
use of the devices. However, in the case of Doris, the roughly t second
between "worries" and "about" and between "child's" and "intellectual"
seem worthy of note, particularly if we are in pursuit (consciously or not)
of some kind of evidence that the utterance implies that she does have
worries and among those worries, some about her child. Even though we
are not here preoccupied with meaning, it is always with us, and an in-
crease in our data might amplify our understanding of the situation. Let
us see how this sentence is marked kinesically.


         Kinesic Junctures

           From the beginning of the systematic investigation of American
 movement patterns it was evident that we were not dealing with a set of
 isolated and disconnected gestural forms. The discovery of kinesic junc-
 tures in the behavior of American (including American-English-speaking
 Canadians) movers laid the groundwork for structural kinesics. Not only
 were movement segments tied together morphologically, but longer
 segments and complex forms were joined or; separated by junctural con-
 ventions. The fact that streams of body behavior were segmented and
 connected by demonstrable behavioral shifts analogic to double cross,
 double bar, and single bar junctures in the speech stream enhanced
 the research upon kinemorphology and freed kinesics from the atomistic
 amorphy of earlier studies dominated by "gestures" and "sign" lan-
guage. Moreover, when we attempted to study interactional situations,
by means of context analysis (Scheflen 1966), the need for rigor de-
manded markers to give us some way of explicitly breaking the be-
havioral stream, of segmenting out sections for special comparative
attention. The fact that the kinesic markers, while at times coextant with
the linguistic markers, often gave us a very different shape contributed to
our assessment of data that did not seem to fit within linguistic terminal
junctures. This became particularly evident when the major body shift
which I termed the kinesic triple cross juncture served to relate and seg-
ment much longer stretches of conversational behavior. While not en-
tirely accurate, we have come to see the behavioral stretch marked by
kinesic triple cross junctures as comparable to paragraphing or stanzaing
in writing. We have not attempted the systematic research necessary to
relate this juncture to content but, as of this writing, the best statement
possible is that it is often but not always related to shifts in content or to
shifts in relationship patterning. Only further research will permit security
as to whether such phenomena as these are separate, interdependent, or
in free distribution.
         394     Discovering Structure in Speech

   During the past several years, research upon complex strings of speech
taken from conversation and compared with the production of simple and
complex statistical formulas (Birdwhistell 1968) has provided us with two
other junctural forms. The first of these, the "tie" juncture, has been
detected only in conjunction with spoken nominal constructions and will
be demonstrated (p. 395). The second, the "hold" juncture, occurs reg-
ularly in conjunction with complex strings of discourse and apparently
has a discretely semologic function. The hold juncture, involving a par-
ticular body part which holds a position while other parts continue to
perform other functions, connects included and apparently intrusive
variation in content, maintains the coherence of complex themes, and
bridges apparently trivial diversionary or explanatory discourse excur-
sions. These six kinesic junctures are working tools. The primitive state
of kinesic research does not permit us at the moment to see them either as
structurally equivalent or as of more than one level of activity. My hunch
is that the single bar and the tie juncture will turn out to be at a different
level than are the double cross, the double bar, the triple cross, and the
hold. However, this may be a result of the types of data I have been
analyzing rather than a matter of structure.


         Tentative Kinemes of Juncture
Symbol         Term                       Gross Behavioral Description
  K#      Double cross   Inferior movement of body part followed by "pause." Termi-
                         nates structural string.
  KIi     Double bar     Superior movement of body part followed by "pause." Termi-
                         nates structural strings. Homomorph in initial and medial or
                         parallel positions may be a kinemorpheme which permits K# in
                         terminal position. We have no data which illustrate coexistence
                         of a terminal Kl/ in conjunction with a complex kinemorphemic
                         construction containing "Kl/" in other positons.
  K #I   Triple cross    Major shift in body activity (relative to customary performance).
                         Normally terminates strings marked by two or more K#s or
                         K//s. However, in certain instances K#I may mark termination
                         of a single item kinic construction, e.g., in auditor response, may
                         exclude further discussion or initiate subject or activity change.
  K=      Hold           A portion of the body actively involved in construction perfor-
                         mance projects an arrested position while otherjunctural activity
                         continues in other body areas.
  Kl      Single bar     Projected held position, followed by "pause." Considerable
                         idiosyncratic variation in performance; "pause" may be momen-
                         tary lag in shift from body part to body part in kinemorphic
                         presentation or may involve full stop and hold of entire body
                         projection activity.
  K.     Tie             A continuation of movement, thus far isolated only in displace-
                         ment of primary stress, discussed below (p. 399 11).
             A Kinesic-Li11g11istic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   395


         The Stress Kinemes                                               ....-

          Three of the junctural kinemes were isolated prior to the initiation
 of serious research and analysis designed to integrate kinesic and lin-
 guistic data. K#, K//, and, although not given separate status, K :/# were
 easily detectable as operative forms in complex kinemorphic construc-
 tions. Only as linguistic-kinesic analysis proceeded, however, did K/,
 K=, and K. emerge in that order from the behavioral stream. From this
 time on, work proceeded, in a sense, in· two directions. Microanalysis
permitted the abstraction of the kinic stream from articulatory description
to the point that complex kinemorphs could be abstracted. Fortunately,
early hunches that shifts in body part, of intensity or breadth of move-
 ment, marked movement from kinemorph to kinemorph held up in a
 sufficiently large number of cases that, as the "terminal" junctures were
isolated, their function in relation to strings of kinemorphs could be
postulated and a primitive syntactics could be derived to permit the
investigation of bounded sequence of behavior. This proved immediately
productive.
   The Cigarette Scene as a unit for study was originally chosen because
of the unique interactional cigarette lighting. While the film was being
changed, Doris reported to Gregory that a psychologist had examined her
son and felt that he did not need any special attention. The sound made by
the camera starting seemed to trigger Doris and she makes a major body
shift which is recorded as a kinesic triple cross. The termination of the
scene is marked by Gregory's body shift and match lid closing which
follows directly upon his triangular cigarette wave. The cameraman shifts
his focus and we are precluded from determining whether Doris acqui-
esces to his juncture. The fact that after a 34-frame duration of silence she
places her hand firmly on the table as she shifts indicates that she has. It is
worthy of comment that even after this m~uor shift they continue to dis-
cuss the little boy's personality.
   Doris' string, with which we are concerned here, is marked:
                        K·    K/     K# K#       K=
                                                 K/(?)
//1 suppose all mothers think their kids are smart but I have no worries
       K/                    K·        K#
about that child's intellectual ability//.
(See Charts 3a, b, and c below for correlation with linguistic transcription.)
  The kinesic single bar, noted in the phonational gap between "worries"
and "about," is questioned because while her head activity is the only
         396    Discovering Structure in Speech

part in manifest movement, it, in its activity, meets the minimal articula-
tory requirement for held part. However, there is no manifest (in relation-
ship to her ongoing movement pattern) stop in that activity. Analysis of
the film does not lead me to see the presence of the morpheme of "dead
pan," nor can I find any evidence of "destressed," discussed below under
the stress kinemes. The "hesitation" in the head sweeps is assigned single
bar status, but I hold little confidence in the assignment. It may be simply
that kinesics, like linguistics, must learn how to deal with cessations of
activity which are not codable by any prevalent classification system. The
K= is manifest; her very active torso holds over the remaining stretch. I
suspect that it is the K= which gives the impression of the presence of
aK/.
   McQuown and I had insisted that the analysis of human communica-
tional behavior was in such a primitive state that, insofar as time per-
mitted, we could not afford either in the linguistic or kinesic transcriptions
to dispense with the most microscopic recording achievable within the
state of the art. We felt that it would be more profitable in the long run to
do shorter stretches in an intense fashion than to do longer stretches of
macrorecording. In the annotated transcript which accompanies The
Natural fl istory of an Interview, the reader will find that the kinesic
"macro" is often crude and arbitrary. Unlike linguistics with its back-
ground of research, kinesics had no canons which would regulate the
size and relevance of shapes which we termed "macro." On the other
hand, the past IO years have given me little reason to vary my decision
that microanalysis is, for our purposes, sufficiently fine-grained if every
third frame of a movie taken at 24 frames a second is recorded. 6 As the
 years have passed, the micro line has continued to supply data to and
confirm hypotheses made about conclusions derived at much higher
 levels of analysis.
    Data have a way of hiding in a corpus and have in themselves little
 power of resistance to false, overfine, or overgross retrieval techniques.
 In the case of the behaviors that were to become the kinesic stress
 phonemes, two factors served to obscure them. The first of these factors
 came from an all-too-av~1ilable classification called "speech effort" into
 which I placed the nonkinemorphic activity which occurred between the
 isolated junctures. Naively and innocently influenced by the fact that
 these activities were roughly correlatable with shifts in vocalic pitch and
 stress and reinforced in my conclusions by introspective support as I
 mimicked the speech patterns, I at first dismissed such evident variations
 in movement as artifacts of speech production. The difficulty of matching

  6
    The elegant work of Condon, Sarles, Loeb, Charny, and their colleagues to my mind
constitutes a partial affirmation of this position. Moreover, there seems every reason to
believe from their reported data that an articulatory kinesics is developing which will ease
the microrecording of exotic movement systems.
               A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   397
                                                          1
speech and movement because of the crudity of 0 ur correlational tech-
niques contributed to the artifact theory. Only later, when Henry Lee
Smith, Jr., and George L. Trager worked to strengthen my knowledge of
descriptive linguistics and to sharpen my ear, did it become evident that,
while clearly production of speech strings requires effort or at least is not
Iaborless, the regularities I was becoming aware of could not (because of
their systematically variable appearance)' be so dismissed.
   Kinesic stresses are discussed at length elsewhere (Birdwhistell 1970:
 128-147). It is enough to say here that four distinct variations in move-
ment pattern, usually with the head, the hand, or the brows, serve to mark
the flow of speech. These have been termed "primary" / V/, "secondary"
I A/, "unstressed"/-/, and "destressed" /0/. At least one stress occurs
between all kinesic terminal junctures. By definition this is a primary
stress. The following example from a film may serve to illustrate the
stresses. In response to the question //What was John's last name?//,
//Doe// is marked by a single movement, //Doe//. If the emphasis is upon
John (not Harry), in the question, the question itself would be marked
with //John// under primary kinesic stress and //last name// either has a
secondary plus unstressed, two secondarys, or two unstressed.

Thus:
    V     /\                   V     /\    /\             V   --
//John's last name// or //John's last name// or //John's last name//.
The stressing is reversed if "name" not "John" is being emphasized.

Thus:
    /\    -V                   /\     /\   V          -       -V
//John's last name// or //John's last name// or //John's last name//.

The third stress of "unstressed" was derived following the isolation of
"destressed," the fourth stress which is a reduction of stress below the
norm of the produced string. In the filmed corpus was discovered:
                  I\ -          0    0   I\      V     /\   V
               //What is Johns you know Bills friends last name//.
The string takes on more form when the kinesic junctures are added:
          K// I\ -    V K= 0   0 K//\ V K# /\ V K#
          //What is Johns you know Bills friends last name//.
   Although several thousands of exercises have been run from sound
filmed data, it is still not possible to establish a rule which states an abso-
lute relationship between these kinesic stresses and junctures and the
linguistic stress and intonation patterns (by the Smith-Trager conventions)
which accompany them. In general, a primary kinesic stress tends to·
coincide with the primary linguistic stress. Yet, in more than 20 per cent
          398    Discovering Structllre in Speech

. of the cases it does not. Perusal of the data indicates that the highest point
  of loudness and pitch, when these points coincide, is usually marked by a
  kinesic primary. However, this does not always occur. A long string of
  linguistic secondary stresses or a long string of phonation at a pitch 2
  level is usually marked by destressed, but not always. In nominal phrases
  which are often marked by kinesic secondary-primary or kinesic primary-
  secondary or kinesic tertiary-primary, the kinesic stress may be consistent
  with or differ from the linguistic stresses. To summarize: while, statis-
  tically, kinesic stress patterning tends to be consistent with linguistic
  stress patterning, this is not invariable. I assume that further research at
  the semologic level and greater refinement of research with relationship to
  both linguistic and kinesic stress patterning will provide more perspective
  upon these phenomena. I am attracted by a conception of communicative
  structure which would include the possibility that, at least for American
  English, kinesic and linguistic suprasegmentals may be in free variation.
  However, I would hasten to say that the burden of proof for such a prop-
  osition would at the present state of knowledge rest upon me.
      The concept "free variation," a useful one for structural analysis, may
  be misleading to the reader concerned with either psychological or socio-
   logical considerations of meaning. All that the term is intended to desig-
   nate is the fact that forms of a given level are substitutable without special
   structural adaptation at that level. Throughout the structures of either
   linguistic or kinesic phenomena, "emic" forms are abstracted from class
   members, which are described as being in free variation with one another.
   However, there is no implication here that the choice of one of a series of
   alternatives (defined in structural terms) at any level of structure is not of
   consequence at the level of social interaction. The difference between
   /cfa/ and /oiy/ (thuh and the) may at one level of analysis be seen as trivial
   but at another be of great consequence. These forms, under certain
   morphological or syntactical analyses, may be seen as identical, but, at
   the semological level, as well as at the phonological, as absolutely dis-
   tinct. Comparably, the fact that in a stream of action the movement of the
   head may be seen to transport all kinesic .stress signals, while in another
   stream a movement of the brows or, in another, the hand is utilized for this
   activity, is of little consequence in kinemorphological analysis. However,
   this may be of definitive significance for questions asked of this data at the
   level of social interaction.                                                      ,--,
      When the tentative hypothesis is established that at certain levels of ./
   analysis we may discover, as research proceeds, structural forms from
   kinesics which are substitutable for structural forms from linguistics,
    there is no suggestion that the "choice" made by the conversant is not of
   consequence to the interaction. We are postulating an interdependence of
   linguistic and kinesic structure, not a final equivalence of semological or
    interactional function. In the discussion to follow, it will be seen that struc-
             A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene              399

tural distinctions are made in the abstracted speech stream which do not
appear in the abstracted movement stream and vice versa. At one level of
analysis it is possible to say that the kinesic suprasegmental activity is
functioning to make distinctions that might have been made by the linguis-
tic suprasegmentals, and that we could not have been aware of these
distinctions if we examined only the audible aspects of the activity stream.
It is furthermore possible to say that these same (at this level of analysis)
distinctions could have been made in the linguistic stream without an
alteration in the structural activity in the kinesic stream. All that we are
saying is that unless we analyze both the linguistic and kine sic stream, we
have no way of knowing what distinctions have been made by the
conversant.
   There is a temptation to say that when one channel carries a distinction
which is not made by the other, the fuller channel carries the "real" mean-
ing. This implies that a given performance has a particular meaning. Un-
der no circumstances must the reader be misled by the heuristically
limited corpus which we are examining in this exercise. From the exam-
ination of extensive sound-filmed interactional sequences, I have every
reason to posit the proposition that in human experience there are at all
observational times many streams of meaning in process. The particular
section of the stream we analyze is always a partial one, and only as we
come to comprehend the larger rules of communicational structure will
we be able to determine the relevant meanings in particular sequences. In
short, it is my hope that as we gain more complete control of the vari-
sized forms of both linguistics and kinesics, we shall be able to examine
limited sequences with an increased control over the data we ignore when
we limit our corpus. I think a great part of the arguments popular in lin-
guistics today about "grammar," syntax, and meaning are viable only
because of the limited universe which is under scrutiny.
   The kinemes of stress combine to form a set of suprasegmental kine-
morphemes which have been tested in studies of complex sentences and
statistical formulas. These are:

               Stress Kinemes                 Suprasegmental Kinemorp/remes
                      /VI                                    /v/
              /AV /or/-V /or/-A/                             / --v /
              /V A/or/V-/or/ A-/                             I ..,.... I
              /-\/-/or/\/ /or/-\/ A/                         I -v- I
          /VKIV/or/VK#V/or/V ~v/                             I V"V 11
           /OOKl/or/OOK#/or/0011/                            /-0-/
                    /OOV/                                    I --;.y I
                     /VOO/                                   Iv I
           7 / v-v / and /-0-/ may as research develops turn out to be at a higher

level of structure. The fact that the form crosses terminal junctures may or may
not require such placement.
        400      Discovering Structure in Speech

  Charts 13 .2a, 2b, and 2c, below, will demonstrate the kinic, the kinemic,
and the kinemorphemic levels of analysis of Doris' circumlexical stress
behavior. The structural balance of this selected segment is immediately
obvious. The /K=/ is the added factor in the latter section of the utterance.
However, ignoring this, if the suspected /K// is added, our type becomes:


        chart 13.2a

Kincmorphic, Kincmic, and Kinic Transcriptions
              'Y'
K,             K·                                          #     V #
K2             V     Ki              V      /\           -K#     VK#
Ka             hn                   hn      hn                       an

        I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart but

K,   KINEMORPHIC
K,   KINEMIC
K3   KINIC


        chart 13.2b

                                    K=
                                    K/(?)
        (\                 V
                                    K=
                                    K/(?)
        hn                     hn        (torsohold)

              have no       worries         about


         chart 13 .2 c
                    'Y'
                                                      K#
                    K·
                    V          (\                     K#
                     hn        hn                     -(torsohold)

       that    child's    intellectual      ability


This balance could be related to the cadence in which Gregory and Doris
are moving in their interactional dance. On the other hand, this may be a
stylistic factor related to the production of a stereotypic utterance. At
this stage of kinesic and communicational research, however, such state-
ments remain little more than conjecture. (One of my assistants who was
proofreading this chapter points out that the sentence above, when




                                                                                _)
               A Kinesic-Li11g11istic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene                   401

spoken aloud, has the same quality of balance in its accompanying
suprasegmental structure.)
   A final task remains for this exercise. In Charts 13.3a, 3b, and 3c, the
linguistic and kinesic materials are assembled for comparison.
   A linear examination of the charts points up a series of items for special
examination:
   I. The movement of the kinesic stress from its expectable position,
                                             V   /\             /\    V
either over /mothers/ or over /all/ as in //all mothers// or //all mothers//,
                       V                       V
gives us a form //all mothers// as in //hot dog// which contrasts with
   V /\            /\ V
//hot dog// and //hot dog//.
                             V         /\
   2. The form //their kids// in the string is specially marked by the
kinesic primary-secondary form.
   3. Neither of these distinctions appear to be marked either in linguistic
stress or intonation (verboid marker?).

           chart 13.3a

Linguistic and Kinesic Transcriptions

K,                 i                         r                    #     V#
                       K
                       V      Kl           V     I\               K# VK#
                       hn                 hn     hn                        an
                        I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart but

K,     KINEMORPHIC
K2     KINEMIC
Ka     KINIC
le***                                ?-                                          -?
fn** <
VSg*' 1m                                                                          ?
Int     3        2                                        J 2 3
StrJ   II   I\   I\       I\        I\           I\          I
Sgm ay + spoz +:,hi+ rrncl ;irz + 8ink + cler + kidz ;ir + smart
       I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart                   but


@)@)@) §                     8
     676     683       686       691        698   702   706 710   718      725

           1 Phonetic transcription omitted. Circled numbers are numbers assigned 1956.

           Open numbers are from edge reading of sound film 1967.
           * ·1, h, r, ;i, m, Vocal Segregates (Trager).
           * * < , Crescend (Hockett); r.-, Drawling (Trager).
           * * * 'i', Rasp (Trager).
            402        Discovering Structure in Speech

            chart 13.Jh

K,
                                                           K=
                         ~K/('?)
                                                           K=
                   /I                             V        K/(?)
                   hn                               hn    (torsohold)-
                           have       no          worries    about

*In
VSg        hr?;:,?m'I-'>
Int
StrJ
                              2
                              \         /I
                                                      3
                                                       /I
                                                                     J 2
                                                                       /
                                                                                I2
Sgm                           ay + haev + now+ w;iriyz                              ;ibawt +

                                       have           no            worries         about

                              @)@.88@§(§
                              752      755            760       763                  778

* f: Overloud (Trager).

           chart 13.Jc

K,                                I"                                  K#
                                  K·
                                  V                   /I                            K#
                                  hn              hn                                -(torsohold)
                that    child's              intellectual            ability

* In/fn                       - f:
                              -17'<                                        >
VSg                               hr
Int
StrJ
Sgm
                         /I
                c'Sret + cayldz
                                              \            .   /I
                                             intilekcuwil + ;ibilitiy
                                                                           /J   I     r
                that childs                   intelle.ctual ability



          783           789                  804                                831

* > Fading (Hockett).


   4. The kinesic single bar between /mothers/ and /think/ is unmarked in
the linguistic stream.
   5. The linguistic stress and intonation appearing over /smart/ is absent
in the· kinesic line but may be subsumed under the kinesic / # /.
   6. The kinesic primary stress over /but/, bounded by kinesic double


                                                                                                   ...
            A Ki11esic-Li11g11istic Exercise: The Cigarette ~cene   403

cross junctures, in emphasis seems comparable to but not identical with
the rather complicated linguistic situation in which /but/ is not specially
denoted in either pitch or stress but is followed by a "pause" and glottal
stop, and is the nexal point for the paralinguistics. /But/ is included within
the rasp, which marks //think their kids are smart but// and is, at the same
time, within the drawl which covers //but I have no worries about that
childs/ /. It is furthermore excluded from the overloud which extends
over //1 have no worries about that childs//.
   7. The initial /I/ is kinesically unmarked while being at pitch 3. This
may be a function of the cigarette lighting which masks either a kinesic
stress or a pronominal marker. The second /I/ is marked with a kinesic
secondary (perhaps flavored by a pronominal marker) while she speaks
with tertiary stress over /I/.
   8. The intonation pattern of 3-3-2, as marked by Hockett, over /no
worries/ has some parallel in the primary kinesic stress over /worries/. I
think that the kinesic stress pattern of secondary-primary or primary-
secondary that might have been expected in this construction may have
been absorbed in the kinemorphic construction of "head-shaking" which
extends over //1 have no worries about that childs//.
   9. The kinesic primary stress which is pulled to a point between /childs/
and /intellectual/ to give us a form parallel to /all mothers/ is of special
interest. More statistically normal forms would have been either:
                        I\   I\       I\          V
                    //that childs intellectual ability// or
                        V    /\        /\         /\
                    //that chi Ids intellectual ability// or
                        /\   V ,,__    V           /\
                    //that childs intellectual ability//.

The /,.--.._/ recorded for the last form indicates a continuation of move-
ment which seems to cross kinesic junctures, either of single bar or double
cross. The linguistic pause, marked by Hockett, may be of consequence
in the case. The segregates and the termination of the overloud and drawl
are also to be noted here.


        Summary

        The nine points listed above are sufficient to illustrate some of the
complexities which confront the linguist, the kinesicist, or the communica-
tion analyst who would attempt an assessment of the relationship between
kinesic and linguistic phenomena at this level of analysis. This limited
segment, containing two syntactic sentences, represents an abstracted
corpus which is short enough to be subjected to intense analysis but does
        404    Discovering Structure in Speech

not seem to contain sufficient information to settle many of the questions
which come to mind. One general point may be made from these data.
Any discourse analysis, conversational analysis, communicational an-
alysis, or interactional analysis which would attend to but one modality-
lexical, linguistic, or kinesic-must suffer from (or, at least, be responsible
for) the assumption that the other modalities maintain a steady or non-
influential state.
part three




             GENESIS,
    MAINTENANCE,
              AND
             CHANGE
               OF
LINGUISTIC CODES
           14
           Social Meaning
           in Linguistic Structure:                                          .
           Code,Switching in N orway                                1




           JAN-PETTER BLOM AND JOHN J. GUMPERZ




           Jan-Petter Blom is a lecturer in social anthropology and
           member of the Research Institute for Social Anthropol-
           ogy at the University of Bergen. He has done fieldwork
           in rural Norway and, most recently, in the Bahamas,
           on folklore, social structure, and ethnomusicology.
                John J. Gumperz is a professor of anthropology at
           the University of California, Berkeley. He received his
           doctorate in Germanic linguistics at the University of
           Michigan and has taught at Cornell University and
           Deccan College in Poona. He has done fieldwork in
           India, Norway, and among minority groups in the United
           States.
              This study of the meaning of linguistic choice in a
           Norwegian community exemplifies what is meant by an
           integrated sociolinguistic approach. Ethnography and
           linguistics both are drawn upon, technically and concep-
           tually; but more than that, the outcome is an under-
           standing of social constraints and linguistic rules as parts
           of a single communicative system. The conceptual frame-
           work for the social analysis here leans on the work of
           Leach (1954) and Barth (1966) and Goffman (1964).
              The stability of the valued local form of speech, as well
           as the potential for change in speech patterns within the

   1 Some of the data cited in this study were given in preliminary form in previous publica-

tions (Gumperz 1964b and Gumperz 1966). The authors are grateful to Einar Haugen,
Aaron Cicourel, and Richard Howell for their comments. Field work for the study was
sponsored by the Institute of Sociology, University of Oslo, Norway. We are grateful to
Professor Sverre Holm of that institution for support and encouragement. Mr. Gumperz'
stay in Norway was made possible through a senior postdoctoral fellowship from the Na-
tional Science Foundation.

                                            407
                                                                i
                                                                I
 408   Genesis, Maintenance, ancl Change of Linguistic Codes
                                                                '
                                                                I
community, is discussed. To show the relationships
between social and linguistic alternatives presupposes
the technical analysis of specific features of speech, as
well as also, of social relations (particularly of participa-
tion in closed and open networks) and of the diversity of
local value systems. It requires an experimental ap-
proach such as the one employed. It also requires a uni-
tary frame of reference; here the whole network is
viewed from the standpoint of actors in particular social
 situations as they adopt strategies constrained by the ex-
isting communicative repertoire.
    As in Part I of this volume, the present study concerns
values expressed in certain genres of speech, particularly
 self-identity and pride in informal conversations. As in
 Part 2, this study deals with rules; here, rules of alterna-
 tion that govern the linguistic repertoire of an entire com-
 munity. The components of the repertoire themselves are
 defined by co-occurrence rules. One can also describe
 the study as making problematic a series of things some-
 times taken for granted: (I) given that members of the
 community consider there to be two varieties of code, to
 what extent and in what way are the varieties actually
 linguistically distinct? Blom and Gumperz find a single
 linguistic system, differentiated by features similar to
 what Labov (Chapter I 9) calls variables. Notice that def-
 inition of the two varieties, Ranamal and Bokmal, cuts
 across several formal sectors of language (phonology,
 lexis, morphology). (2) Given that elicitation brings out
 these differences, what is the case in everyday interac-
 tion? Some features found in elicitation sessions are
 never found in spontaneous speech. (3) Given the
 linguistic reality of the two varieties, why are both main-
 tained? Unintelligibility can hardly be a factor since most
 speakers control the entire range of both. To speak of
 persistence of dialects in remote or less advanced areas is
  merely to name the phenomenon, not to explain it. Again,
  since the adult population has access to both varieties,
  the explanation must lie in the social meanings of the two.
'(4) If social symbolism is the basis, what is its nature?
  How is it actually expressed? Blom and Gumperz in-
  troduce the concepts of setting, situation, and event,
  taken as stages recognized in the enactment of personal
  strategies, to analyze the meaning of choice between the
  two varieties. An important distinction is made between
                         Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   409
                                                        I


         situational switching, where alternation between
          varieties redefines a situation, being a change in gov-
          erning norms, and metaphorical switching, where alter-
         nation enriches a situation, allowing for allusion to more
         than one social relationship within the situation. In
         Hemnes situational switching involves change in partici-
         pants and/or strategies, metaphorical switching involves
         only a change in topical emphasis. (Cf. Albert's Burundi
         case of role switching initiated by an aristocrat talking to
         a peasant, described in terms of change of topic and pur-
         pose.)
            Notice the experimental presentation of the uncon-
         scious status of metaphorical switching among the
        members of the open network (i.e., a network of rela-
        tionships with reference points outside the local commu-
        nity); and criticism of it in terms of the folk concept of
        knot 'artifical speech.' Goffman ( 1961) provides an addi-
        tional related reading. A collection of Gumperz' papers
        dealing with similar issues has recently appeared (Gum-
        perz 1971).




          In recent discussions of the problem of language and society,
 Bernstein ( 1961, 1964a) explores the hypothesis that social relationships
act as intervening variables between linguistic structures and their realiza-
tion in speech. His formulation suggests that the anthropologists' analysis
of social constraints governing interpersonal relationships may be utilized
in the interpretation of verbal performances. This chapter attempts to
clarify the social and linguistic factors involved in the communication
process and to test Bernstein's hypothesis by showing that speaker's
selection among semantically, grammatically, and phonologically permis-
sible alternates occuring in conversation sequences recorded in natural
groups is both patterned and predictable on the basis of certain features of
the local social system. In other words, given a particular aggregate of
people engaged in regular face-to-face interaction, and given some knowl-
edge of the speakers' linguistic repertoire (Gumperz 1964b), we wish to
relate the structure of that repertoire to the verbal behavior of members of
the community in particular situations.
   Data on verbal interaction derives from approximately two months'
field work in Hemnesberget, a small commercial and industrial town of
about 1300 inhabitants in the center of the Rana Fjord, close to the Arctic
circle in northern Norway. The settlement owes its existence to the
        410   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

growth of local trade and industry following the abolition of government-
sanctioned trade monopolies covering most of northern Norway in 1858.
Since the Middle Ages, these monopolies had kept the area's economy
dependent upon a small elite of merchant and landholding families with
connections to southern Norway, separated by great differences in
wealth, culture, and education from the tenant farmers, fishermen, estate
laborers, and servants who formed the bulk of the populace. Apart from a
few shop owners and government officials, present-day Hemnesberget
residents are mostly descendants of these latter groups. They have been
attracted to the town from the surroundings by new economic opportuni-
ties there, while a hundred years of relatively free economic development
have splintered the old ruling circles. Many of this former elite have
moved away, and the remainder no longer form a visible social group in
the region.
   Present inhabitants of Hemnesberget earn their livelihood mainly as
craftsmen in family workshops or in the somewhat larger boat-building
and lumber-processing plants, all of which are locally owned. The area
serves as a major source of wood products and fishing equipment for the
northernmost part of Norway. A significant group of merchant mid-
                                1
dlemen deal in locally produced boats and other products, which they ship
north for resale, and maintain sales agencies for motors and other appli-
ances and manufactured goods from the south.
   While at the beginning of the century Hemnesberget was the most im-
portant communications and commercial center in the area, it has been
eclipsed in recent years by government-sponsored economic develop-
ment which has turned the town of Mo i Rana, at the mouth of Rana Fjord,
into Norway's major iron- and steel-producing center. The region of Mo
has grown from about 1000 inhabitants in 1920 to almost 9000 in 1960,
largely through immigration from the region of Tryjndelag and southern
Norway. It now boasts several modern department stores, hotels, restau-
rants;and cinemas. The railroad from Trondheim in the south through Mo
and on north to Bodyj was completed shortly after World War II, and the
road system is steadily improving. All these new communication arteries,
however, now bypass Hemnesberget, which has all but lost its importance
as a communication link for both land and sea traffic.
   Although the immediate ecological environment has changed greatlY,
Hemnesberget remains an island of tradition in a sea of change. There is a
regular once-a-day boat service to Mo, buses leave for the railroad station
twice a day, and a few people commute to Mo by private automobile or
motorcycle. However, the bulk of the residents spend most of their wor~-
ing and leisure time in and around Hemnesberget. Those who can afford it
build vacation cabins in the unsettled areas across the fjord a few miles
away. Our interviews uniformly show that social events in Mo i Rana are
only of marginal interest to local inhabitants.
                                Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   411


               The Community Linguistic Repertoire
                   Most residents of Hemnesberget are native speakers of Ranamal
         (R), one of a series of dialects which segment northern Norway into
         linguistic regions roughly corresponding to other cultural and ecological
         divisions (Christiansen 1962). As elsewhere in Norway, where local in-
         dependence and distinctness of folk culture are highly valued, the dialect
         enjoys great prestige. A person's native speech is regarded as an integral
         Part of his family background, a sign of his local identity. By identifying
         himself as a dialect speaker both at home and abroad, a member symbol-
        izes pride in his community and in the distinctness of its contribution to
        society at large.
           Formal education, however, is always carried on in the standard, the
        language of official transactions, religion, and the mass media. Norwegian
        law sanctions two standard languages: Bokmal (formally called Riksmal)
        and N ynorsk (formerly Landsmal), of which only Bokmal (B) is current in
       northern Norway.
           Education is universal and, allowing for certain individual differences in
       fluency, all speakers of Ranamal also control the standard. Both Bokmal
       and Ranamal, therefore, form part of what we may call the community
       linguistic repertoire (Gumperz 1964b), the totality of linguistic resources
       Which speakers may employ in significant social interaction. In their
       everyday interaction, they select among the two as the situation demands.
       Members view this alternation as a shift between two distinct entities,
       Which are never mixed. A person speaks either one or the other.
          The fact that the two varieties are perceived as distinct, however, does
      not necessarily mean that their separateness is marked by significant
      linguistic differences. Pairs such as Hindi and Urdu, Serbian and Croa-
      tian, Thai and Laotian, and many others which are regarded as separate
      languages by their speakers are known to be grammatically almost iden-
      tical. The native 's view of language distinctions must thus be validated by
     empirical linguistic investigation.                     \
         We began our analysis by employing standard linguistic elicitation
     Procedures. A series of informants selected for their fluency in the dialect
     Were interviewed in our office and were asked to produce single words,
     sentences, and short texts, first in the dialect and then in the standard, for
     t~ping or phonetic recording by the linguist. These elicitation sessions
     Yielded a series of dialect features which are essentially identical to those
     described by Norwegian dialectologists (Christiansen 1962).
    ) The vowel system distinguishes three tongue heights-high: front
    Unrounded i, front rounded y, central rounded u, back rounded o; mid:
    front unrounded e, front rounded 0 , back rounded a; low: front unrounded
    ie, front rounded jiS, back a.



l
            4I2        Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

   Consonants occur either singly or as geminates. Vowels are phonet-
ically short before geminates, consonant clusters, and palatalized conso-
nants. There are two series of consonants: unmarked and palatalized. Un-
marked consonants include stops p, b, t, d, k, g; spirants f, v, s, s, j, <;;
nasals m, n, l); trill r, lateral I, and retroflex flap I. The palatal series con-
tains tj, dj, nj, and Ij. On the phonetic level, a set of cacuminal or retroflex
allophones occur for the sequences rs [s], rd [d], rt [t], and rn [J}].
   The local pronunciation of the standard differs from the "pure" dialect
as follows: Bokmal does not have the phonemic distinction between the
palatalized and nonpalatalized series of consonants. Only nonpalatalized
consonants occur. In addition, it does not distinguish between mid front
rounded /of and low front rounded /,,-6/; only the former occurs. On the
purely phonetic level, dialect allophones of the phonemes /re/ and /a/ are
considerably lower and ·more retracted than their standard equivalents.
The dialect furthermore has a dark allophone [l] of /1/ where the standard
has clear [I]. The cacuminal or retroflex allophones of /s/, /d/, /ti, and /n/,
and the flap /I/, however, which are commonly regarded as dialect fea-
tures, are used in both varieties, although they tend to disappear in highly
formal Bokmal.                     I

   Morphological peculiarities of the dialect include the masculine plural
indefinite suffix -cl! and the definite suffix -an, e.g., (R) luestll! (horses),
lucstan (the horses), contrasting with (B) hester and hestene. In verb
 inflection the dialect lacks the infinitive suffix -e and the present suffix -er
 of regular verbs. Further differences in past tense and past participle
 markers and in the assignment of individual words to strong or weak
 inflectional classes serve to set off almost every dialect verb from its stan-
 dard Norwegian equivalent. Here are some examples of common regular
 and irregular verbs and their standard equivalents:

              /11fi11itive          Present               Past           Past Participle
            (R)          (B)     (R)        (B)    (R)           (B)      (R)        (B)
      fi1ii            fi1111e   Jinj    finner    fwii      fant      fpnje       fi1nnet   (find)
      vara
            or va       v<ere    e       lk..'I'   V(l       var       1'¢re       \'{l'r/   (be)
      ft)               fti      ftir    Jiir      Jekk      fikk.     Jiitt       Jiitt     (get)
      stwii             Sill     st1ir   st1ir     sto       sto       stie        sttitt    (stand)
      j1l!r             j¢re     j{l!r   jpr       jol       j¢re      jort        jort      (do)
       lws               Iese     lws    leser     ltr!st     leste    hr!st       lest      (read)
       ta                ta       tek     tar      tok        tokk      tatt       tat(      (take)
                                                                         or tire



 Other important dialect features appear in pronouns, common adverbs of
 time, place, and manner, conjunctions, and other grammatically signifi-
 cant function words. Here is a list of some of the most common distinctive
 forms of personal pronouns and possessive pronouns:
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure                       413

                           (B)          (R)
                         j{l'jj        OR            (I)
                         111ll')i      Ille[.!    (me)
                         da,jj         deR        (you)
                         lw1111        hwti       (he)

                           (B)              (R)
                        hunn             ho                (she)
                        ha1111s          lwnjs             (his)
                        he1111es         hi11iers          (hers)
                        dere             d{ikk             (you)(plural)
                        di               dll'mm*           (theirs)
                * Sometimes also di and deres.

         Interrogatives, relatives, and indefinites:
                           (B)                   (R)
                        Slllll/ll        sa                     [ who, which (relative)]
                        va               ke                     [ what (interrogative)]
                        ve1111n          kem                    (who)
                        ,we              nakka                  (something)
                        l'{/lf(I/'/'     kefr/>r                (what for)
                        vilket           kefij>r nokka          [ which (thing)]
                        vi/ken           kefij>r 1101111        [ which (person)]
                        Vll'/'           kvar                   (every)
                        en               ein                    (one)


              Adverbs and conjunctions:

                           (B)              (R)
                        till            tell               (to, toward)
                        111enn          /ll{l'/lll         (but)
                        lul'r           her                (here)
                       fi'a             (fi'a              (from)
                       me/lam           ime(i{l'           (in between)
                        1•ordan         kelesn             (how)
                        1•iss            i•ess             (if)
                                                                  I
   These data constitute empirical evidence to support the view of the
dialect as a distinct linguistic entity. By comparing information collected
in this manner with local speech forms elsewhere in northern Norway,
dialectologists interested in historical reconstruction identify Ranamal as
one of a series of northern Norwegian dialects set off from others by the
fact that it shows influences of eastern Norwegian forms of speech (Chris-
tiansen 1962). In this discussion however, we are concerned with social
interaction and not with history, and this leads us to raise somewhat dif-
ferent problems.
   The elicitation sessions which provide the source data for dialect
grammars are conducted in the linguist's, and not in the informant's,
        414    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

frame of reference. Although by asking speakers to speak in the dialect,
the linguist may be interested in purely descriptive or historical informa-
tion, the native speaker, mindful of the association between dialect, local
culture, and local identity, is, of course, anxious to present his locality in
the best possible light. Consistency of performance in linguistic interview
sessions might well be the result of the interviewer's presence; it need not
reflect everyday interaction. Furthermore, when comparisons with other
forms of speech are made, it is the linguist's analysis which serves as the
basis for these comparisons, not the speaker's performance.


        Ranamttl and Bokmal as Codes
        in a Repertoire

          In order to understand how natives may perceive the dialect stan-
dard language differences, some further discussion of the way in which
distinctions between what are ordinarily treated as separate linguistic
systems may be manifested in everyday speech is necessary. Thus if we
compare a bilingual's prdnunciation of the Norwegian sentence vill du ha
egg og heiken till frokast? with the same speaker's pronunciation of the
English equivalent "Will you have bacon and eggs for breakfast?" the two
utterances will show phonetic distinctions in every segment. The Nor-
wegian voiced spirant [v] has much less spirantal noise than its English
equivalent, the [i] is tense as compared to the lax English [i], the Nor-
wegian [l] may be clear or dark but it is phonetically different from English
[l]. The Norwegian central rounded [u] in du has no direct English equiva-
lent. In egg the Norwegian has a tense [e] and the [g] has an aspirate
release, whereas in English the vowel is lax and [g] has a voiced release.
Similarly, the Norwegian has a stressed vowel in heike11 [rei] whereas the
English has [ey]. Bilinguals whose entire articulation shifts in this way can
be said to have two distinct articulation ranges in addition to two sets of
grammatical rules.
    Analysis of recordings of Hemnesberget speakers' switching from the
dialect to the standard reveals a different situation. In a sentence pair like
hanj hor f){/ nilsen' s paysonat and its Bokmal equivalent hann hor pa
nilsen's paysonat "He lives in Nilsen's pensionat," only the realizations
of /a/, /ti, and /nj/ which appear in our list of dialect characteristics differ.
In other relevant respects the two utterances are identical. Furthermore,
even in the case of these dialect characteristics, speakers do not alternate
between two clearly distinguishable articulation points; rather, the shift
takes the form of a displacement along a scale in which palatalized conso-
nants show at least three degrees of palatalization, strong [nj], weak [ni],
and zero [n] and /a/ and /re/ each show three degrees of retraction and
lowering.
                         Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   415

     While the switch from Norwegian to English implies a shift between
  two distinct structural wholes, the Bokmal-Ranamal alternation, in pho-
  nology at least, seems more similar to conditions described by Labov
  (1966b) for New York speech. A speaker's standard and dialect perfor-
  mance can be accounted for by a single phonetic system. The bulk of the
 constituent phones within this system are marked by relatively stable,
 easily identifiable points of articulation. The palatalized consonants and
 the vowels listed here differ in that they vary within a much greater articu-
 lation range. They are instances of what Labov has called variables
 (1964b). It is the position of such variables along the scale of possible
 articulations which, when evaluated along with morphological informa-
 tion, signals dialect vs. standard speech.
    Not all items identified in our elicitation sessions as Ranamal features
 function as variables, however. The contrast between /p/ and /6/ was
 never produced spontaneously. In normal discourse only [6] occurs. Fur-
 thermore, as stated previously, the flap allophone/!/ and the retroflex stop
 allophones which find a prominent place in dialect grammars are also used
 in local Bokmal as well as in eastern varieties of standard Norwegian;
 thus their status as dialect markers is doubtful.
    Our texts also reveal some individual differences in the pronunciation
 of the palatalized consonant and vowel variables. While the normal
 dialect speech of most residents shows strong palatalization of these con-
 sonants and extreme vowel retraction, some of the more highly educated
 younger residents normally have medium palatalization and medium
 vowel retraction. Regardless, however, the direction of variation is the
 same for all individuals.
    In the realm of morphology-syntax it is also possible to set up a single
 set of grammatical categories to account for what on the surface seem like
 striking differences between the two varieties. All nouns, e.g., appear in
an indefinite form consisting of the noun stem and in an indefinite form .
made up of stem plus suffixed article, both of which are inflected for singu-
lar and plural. There are three subcategories of noun gender: masculine,
feminine, and neuter, and the case categories are shared. Verbs appear in
imperative, infinitive, present, past, and past participle forms. Basic func-
tion word categories, including pronouns, conjunctions, and adverbs, are
shared, etc.
    Ranamal shows a few peculiarities in the order of pronouns and verbs
in sentences such as (R) ke du e (fr{I, (B) vor <l!r du fra "Where are you
from?" But even without detailed analysis, it is obvious that these dif-
ferences correspond to relatively low-order syntactic rules. The m,tjority
of the distinctions between the dialect and the standard thus do not affect
the basic grammar but only what we may call the morphophonemic real-
ization of shared grammatical categories.
   Even at the morphophonemic level, variation is not without pattern.
         416    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 Examination of such alternates as (B) till, (R) tell "to"; (B) jikk, (R) fekk
 "received"; (B) hest, (R) hwst "horse"; and (B) ,nenn, (R) mcenn "but"
 suggests a general process of lowering of front vowels in the dialect. This
 lowering process is also found elsewhere in Norway, although it may
 occur in different linguistic forms/ Similarly, other sets of alternates such
 as icce/ikke "not," dcemm/di "they," and ifra/ji·a "from" are common in
 other Norwegian regions.
     Leaving aside historical considerations, it is almost as if all dialect vari-
 ation within Norway were generated by selection of different forms from
 a common reservoir of alternates. Ranamal differs from other dialects not
 so much because it contains entirely different features but because of the
 way in which it combines features already found elsewhere. Furthermore,
 Hemnesberget pairs such as (B) lcerer, (R) lerar, and (B) !uer, (R) her,
 which conflict with the lowering process just mentioned, suggest that here ·
 as elsewhere selection may at times be motivated by social pressures
 favoring maintenance of distinctions (Ramanujan 1967). No matter what
 the actual historical facts are, however, the narrow range of variation we
 find lends support to our view of dialect features as variables within a
 single grammatical system.
    The effect of structural similarities on speakers' perception of speech
 differences is somewhat counterbalanced by the fact that choice among
 these variables is always restricted by sociolinguistic selection constraints
 such that if, for instance, a person selects a standard morphological
 variant in one part of an utterance, this first choice also implies selection
 of pronunciation variables tending toward the standard end of the scale. A
 speaker wishing to ask for another's place ofresidence may, e.g., start his
 sentence either with (R) ke "where" or (B) var. In the first case, the rest of
 the sentence will read hanj e ifrc1 "is he from?" In the second case, it will
 be cer hannfra; var and hanj do not co-occur. Similarly, selection of e "is"
 requires dialect pronunciation; the form cer "is" would sound odd if it
 appeared in the same sentence with hanj.
    It is the nature of these selection constraints and the manner in which
they cut across the usual boundaries of phonology and morphology to
generate co-occurrences among phonetic and allomorphic and lexical vari-
ables, which lends the Ranamal-Bokmal variation its peculiar stamp, and
sets it off, e.g., from the phonologically similar situation in New York.
Sociolinguistic selection rules also account to some extent for the speak-
er's view of the two varieties as separate entities.
   Since the dialect and the standard are almost isomorphic in syntax and
phonetics and vary chiefly in morphophonemics, and since most speakers//"
control the entire range of variables, it would be unreasonable to assume,
as is frequently done wherever two distinct dialects are spoken, that
selection patterns affecting the just-mentioned selection rules are mo-
tivated by considerations of intelligibility. The most reasonable assump-




                                                                               d
                                 Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   417
                                                                      I

          tion is that the linguistic separateness between the dialect and the stan-
          dard, i.e., the maintenance of distinct alternates for common inflectional
          morphemes and function, is conditioned by social factors.
             Some idea of how this came about can be obtained by considering the
         conditions under which the two varieties are learned. The dialect is
         acquired in most homes and in the sphere of domestic and friendship rela-
         tions. As a result, it has acquired the flavor of these locally based rela-
         tionships. However, dialect speakers learn the standard in school and in
         church, at a time when they are also introduced to national Norwegian
         values. It has therefore become associated with such pan-Norwegian
         activity systems.
            Since the adult population has equal access to both sets of variants
         however, the developmental argument does not provide sufficient expla~
        nation for the maintenance of distinctness. Immigrants to urban centers
        around the world, e.g., frequently give up their languages after a generation
        if social conditions are favorable to language shift. The hypothesis suggests
        itself, therefore, that given the initial acquisition patterns, the dialect and
        the standard remain separate because of the cultural identities they com-
        municate and the social values implied ,therein. It is this aspect of the
        problem that we intend to explore in the .remaining sections of the
        chapter. Before we proceed, however, something more needs to be said
        about the process of social symbolization.
           Students of communication usually distinguish between semantics
       proper, or reference, and pragmatics (Ervin-Tripp 1964). Reference in-
       dicates verbal categorization of objects' actions and experience in terms
       of their objective properties; pragmatics deals with the effect of symbols
       of various kinds on speakers and listeners, i.e., with the significance of
       what is communicated for the actors involved. Most discussions of prag-
       matics ordinarily do not distinguish between individual intent and inter-
       personal significance of usage patterns, although it is evident that without
       such a distinction it would be impossible to explain the fact that the same
       message may indicate praise in some instances and disapproval in others.
      Effective communication requires that speakers and audiences agree both
      on the meaning of words and on the social import or values attached to
      choice of expression. Our discussions will be confined to the latter. We
      Will use the term social significance, or social 1nea11ing, to refer to the
      social value implied when an utterance is used in a certain context.
          In general, the assignment of value to particular objects or acts is as ar-
      bitrary as the referential naming of objects. Just as a particular term may
      refer to a round object in one group and a square object in another, so also
     the value of actions or utterance.s may vary. Thus the same term may in-
      dicate geographical distinctions in one community and symbolize social
     stratification elsewhere. Social meanings differ from referential meanings
     in the way in which they are coded. Whereas reference is coded largely

i


ob
          418   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

  through words, social meaning can attach not only to acoustic signs but
  also to settings, to items of background knowledge, as well as to particular
  word sequences. In Hemnes, e.g., values attached to a person's family
  background or to his reputation as a fisherman are important in under-
  standing what he says and influence the selection of responses to his
  actions.
     It must also be pointed out th;tt referential meanings are at least to some
  extent recoverable through the study of individual words, they are, to use
  Pike's (1967) term, segmental, while social meanings are not. A sentence
  like ke due iji·d "Where are you from?" can be divided into units of refer-
  ence like ke "where," du "you," e "are," and ifr/1 "from." Social signifi-
  cance attaches to the utterance as a whole; it is not segmentable into
  smaller component stretches. Sociolinguistic co-occurrence patterns along
  with intonation contours enable the speaker to group language into larger
· pragmatic wholes and to interpret them in relation to signs transmitted by
  other communicative media.


         Local Organization and Values

          Social life in; Hemnesberget shows a fluidity of class structure
 quite similar to that described for southern Norway by Barnes (I 954). Ex-
 tremes of poverty and wealth are absent. Expressions of solidarity such as
 "'We all know each other here in Hemnes," and "We are all friends here"
 recur in our interviews. The majority of those who claim local descent
 show a strong sense of local identification. To be a hremnesvcering
 "Hemnes resident" in their view is like belonging to a team characterized
 by commonalty of descent. Members of this reference group act like kin,
 friends, and neighbors, cooperating in the pursuit of community ideals. In
 everyday behavior they symbolize this quality of their ties through greet-
 ings, exchanges of personal information, and general informality of pos-
'ture toward fellow members. The dialect is an important marker of their
 common culture. Residents of neighboring settlements, of Mo i Rana, as
 well as other Norwegians, stand apart from this local community. They
 are potential competitors who must at least initially be treated with
 reserve. Their dialects are said to be different. The linguist interested in
 structural significance may wish to· disregard such variation as minor.
 Nevertheless, they have important social meanings for intercommunity
 communication within the Rana region. They are constantly commented
 upon and joked about and seem to play an important role in the mainte-
 nance of local identity.
    Despite the intense sense of local identification, perceptions of close-
 ness within this local group are not everywhere the same among Hemnes
 residents. More detailed interviews and observations of visiting and rec-
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   419

    reational patterns and of the exchange of assistance suggest a clear dis-
    tinction between personal relations and the more general local relations.
    The actual range of effective personal relations for any single individual
   tends to be fairly small and stable over time. For most people it includes
   only certain near kin, in-laws, neighbors, or fellow workers. The commu-
   nity can thus be described as segmented into small nuclei of personal in-
   teraction. Since these groups are not marked linguistically, however, the
   behavioral signs of friendliness and equality constitute a communicative
   idiom which applies to both these nuclei and to other relations or shared
   local identification.
      The meaning attached to local descent and dialect use-to being part of
  the "local team"-is clearly seen when we consider those members of the
  community who dissociate themselves from this "team." Traditionally, in
  northern Norway the local community of equals was separated from the
  landowning commercial and administrative elite by a wide gulf of social
  and judicial inequality. Since the latter were the introducers and users of
  standard Norwegian, the standard form was-and to some extent still is-
  associated with this inequality of status. Many of the functions of the
  former elite have now been incorporated into the local social system.
  Individuals who fill these functions, however, continue to be largely of
  nonlocal descent. Although they may pay lip service to locally accepted
  rules of etiquette and use the dialect on occasion, their experience else-
  where in Norway, where differences in education, influence, and prestige
 are much more pronounced, leads them to associate the dialect with lack
 of education and sophistication. Therefore, they show a clear preference
 for the standard.
      Such attitudes are unacceptable to locals, who view lack of respect for
 and refusal to speak the dialect as an expression of social distance and
 contempt for the "local team" and its community spirit. It is not sur-
 prising, therefore, that their loyalty to the dialect is thereby reaffirmed.
 For a local resident to employ (B) forms with other local residents is in
 their view to snakk fint or to snakk jalat "to put on airs."
     Since the different social meanings which attach to the dialect are regu-
 lar and persistent, they must in some way be reinforced by the pattern of
social ties. This relationship can best be described if we consider the
socioecological system which sustains the community. There is a correla-
tion between a person's regional background, his reference group, and the
niche he occupies in this system (Barth 1964). This information enables
us to segment the local population into three distinct categories: (1) ar-
tisans, (2) wholesale-retail merchants and plant managers, and (3) service
personnel. Members of the first two categories are the basic producers of
wealth.
    The more than 50 percent of the population which falls into the first cat-
egory includes draftsmen who may or may not own their own shops, as
         420   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 well as workmen employed in the larger plants and their dependents.
 Most of them are locally born or have been drawn to Hemnes from the
 surrounding farms by the demand for their skills. Since they live and work
 among their relatives and among others of the same social background,
 they tend to choose their friends and spouses from within their own refer-
 ence group and thus become strong supporters of local values.
    Wholesale-retail merchants buy lumber products and finished boats
 from producers in the Rana are~l, f.:i'rnishing them with supplies and gear
 and appliances in exchange. They sell boats, lumber products, and fishing
 supplies to customers all the way up to the northernmost tip of Norway.
 Relationships between merchants and their customers most commonly
 take the form of long-term credit arrangements based on personal trust in
 which credit is given to artisans against their future production. Also part
 of the second category are the managers of large local enterprises who
 achieve their position partly because of their special commercial and man-
.agerial skills and partly through their ability to get along with and keep the
 confidence of owners, workers, and foremen.
    Like artisans, members of category 2 are largely of local descent.
 Although they tend to be in the higher income brackets, they maintain kin
 and conjugal relationships among craftsmen and fishermen-farmers. The
 fact that their livelihood depends to a great extent on their standing within
 the system of locally b,ased relations leads them to associate more closely
 with the local values. The circumstances of their commercial enterprises,
 however, also take them outside this local network. They must be able to
 act within the urban commercial ethic, and they must also maintain per-
 sonal ties with their customers in the north and elsewhere. The range of
 their social connections includes both local and supralocal ties, involving
 different and sometimes conflicting standards of behavior. The result is
 that while they maintain strong loyalty to general local values, they tend
 to avoid close personal ties with their kin in the first category and confine
 their friendships to others who are in similar circumstances.
    The third category is a composite one, consisting of individuals whose
 position depends on the productivity of others. It includes persons
 engaged in purely local services-private and administrative-of all kinds
 such as salesmen, clerks, repairmen, shopkeepers, professionals, and
 those who are employed in repair shops and in transportation. The
  sociocultural background of these people varies. Those who pe1form
  manual labor tend to be of local descent and are culturally indistin-
 guishable from members of the first category. The same is true for the
  lower echelons of employees in stores and in administrative offices.
  Among the owners of retail businesses, clothing, shoe, pastry, and sta-
  tionary shops, many belong to families who have moved to Hemnesberget
 from other urban or semiurban centers in northern Norway. Their kin and
 friendship relations tend to be dispersed among these communities, and
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   421

 this leads them to identify with the differentiated nonlocal middle-class
 value system. Shopowners of local background also aspire to these stan-
dards, at the same time trying to maintain their position in the "local
team" by showing loyalty to its values. Professionals are similarly drawn
to Hemnes from the outside because of their technical expertise. The
more stable core of this group, the schoolteachers, tend to be of north
Norwegian background. Doctors, veterinarians, dentists, and priests
frequently come from the south. Invariably their values are those of the
pan-Norwegian elite.
   Economic conditions in Hemnes leave little room for the academically
trained and those with technical skills outside local niches. Consequently,
young people from all categories who aspire to higher education must
spend most of their student years away from Hemnes and will eventually
have to seek employment somewhere else. While they remain students,
however, they are partly dependent on their families. They tend to return
home during the summer vacation and seek local employment.


         Contextual Constraints

           Previous sections have dealt with the linguistic repertoire, in-
  ternal cultural differences, and relevantfeatures of social organization.
 We have suggested that linguistic alternates within the repertoire serve to
 symbolize the differing social identities which members may assume. It is,
 however, evident from our discussion that there is by no means a simple
 one-to-one relationship between specific speech varieties and specific
 social identities. Apart from the fact that values attached to language
 usage vary with social background, the same individual need not be abso-
 lutely consistent in all his actions. He may wish to appear as a member of
 the local team on some occasions, while identifying with middle-class val-
ues on others. In order to determine the social significance of any one
utterance, we need additional information about the contextual clues by
which natives arrive at correct interpretations of social meaning.
    Recent linguistic writings have devoted considerable attention to
speech events as the starting point for the analysis of verbal com-
munication. It has been shown that aside from purely linguistic and
stylistic rules, the form of a verbal message in any speech event is directly
affected by (a) the participants (i.e., speakers, addressees, and audiences);
(b) the ecological surroundings; and (c) the topic or range of topics
(Hymes I 964e; Ervin-Tripp 1964).
    In visualizing the relationship between social and linguistic factors in
speech events, it seems reasonable to assume that the former restrict the
selection of linguistic variables in somewhat the same way that syntactic
environments serve to narrow the broader dictionary meanings of words.
        422    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 For the purpose of our analysis, we can thus visualize verbal com-
munication as a two-step process. In step I, speakers take in clues from
the outside and translate them into appropriate behavioral strategies. This
step parallels the perceptual process by which referential meanings are
converted into sentences. In step 2, these behavioral strategies are in turn
translated into appropriate verbal symbols. The determinants of this com-
municative process are the speaker's knowledge of the linguistic reper-
toire, culture, and social structure, and his ability to relate these kinds of
knowledge to contextual constraints. For Hemnesberget, it seems useful
to describe these constraints in terms of three concepts representing suc-
cessively more complex levels of information processing.
   We will use the term setting to indicate the way in which natives clas-
sify their ecological environment into distinct locales. This enables us to
relate the opportunities for action to constraints upon action provided by
the socially significant features of the environment. First, and most impor-
tant among local settings in Hemnesberget, is the home. Homes form the
center for all domestic activities and act as meeting places for children's
peer groups. Houses are well built and provide ample space for all. Also,
friends and kin prefer the privacy of meetings at home to restaurants or
other more public places.
   Workshops and plants where productive activity is carried on are sepa-
rated for the most part from residential areas, although some families con-
tinue to live next to their workshops along the shore of the fjord. The
work force normally consists of male members of the group of owners,
whether managed by a single nuclear family or by a group of families con-
nected by filial, sibling, or in-law ties. Employees in the larger plants
frequently also include groups of kin who work together as work teams.
In view of the homogeneity of workers, it is not surprising that the place
of work frequently forms the center for informal gathering among males.
In offices, shops, and merchant establishments, however, where the ex-
pertise requirements favor socially more differentiated personnel, work
relations tend to be less colored by preexistent social ties.
   A second group of settings lacks the specific restrictions on personnel
which mark those just mentioned. These include the public dock, where
visiting boats and the steamer are moored, as well as a few of the larger
stores, e.g., the co-operative society store located near the central square,
the square itself, and the community park. Here all local residents may
meet somewhat more freely without commitments, subject, of course, to
the constraints imposed by lack of privacy. The primary school, the junior
high school, the church, and community meeting hall all form somewhat
more restricted meeting grounds for more formal gatherings such as
classroom sessions, religious services, political meetings, meetings of
various voluntary associations, and occasional movies. The church is
used only for church services.
l
I                              Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   423

          The socioecological restrictions on personnel and activities still allow
       for a wide range of socially distinct happenings. ,The school, e.g., is used
       for class sessions during the day and for meetings of voluntary associa-
       tions during the evening. Similarly, in the town square, men gather for dis-
      cussions of public affairs, women shoppers stop to chat with acquaint-
      ances, adolescent peer groups play their various games, etc. A closer
      specification of social constraints is possible if we concentrate on activi-
      ties carried on by particular constellations of personnel, gathered in par-
      ticular settings during a particular span of time. We will use the term
      social situation to refer to these. Social situations form the background
      for the enactment of a limited range of social relationships within the
      framework of specific status sets, i.e., systems of complementary distribu-
      tions of rights and duties (Barth 1966).
          Thus alternative social definitions of the situation may occur within the
      same setting, depending on the opportunities and constraints on interac-
      tion offered by a shift in personnel and/or object of the interaction. Such
      definitions always manifest themselves in what we would prefer to call a
      social event. Events center around one or at the most a limited range of
      topics and are distinguishable because of their sequential structure. They
      are marked by stereotyped and thus recognizable opening and closing
      routines. The distinction between situation and event can be clarified if
     we consider the behavior of Hemnes residents who are sometimes seen in
     the community office, first transacting their business in an officially cor-
     rect manner, and then turning to one of the clerks and asking him to step
     aside for a private chat. The norms which apply to the two kinds of in-
     teraction differ; the break between the two is clearly marked. Therefore,
     they constitute two distinct social events, although the personnel and the
     locale remain the same.
         The terms setting, social situation, and social event as used here can be
     considered three successively more complex stages in the speaker's
     processing of contextual information. Each stage subsumes the previous
     one in such a way that the preceding one is part of the input affecting the
     selection rules of the next stage. Thus, a speaker cannot identify the social
     situation without first having made some decision as to the nature of the
     setting. To demonstrate· how these factors influence language usage in
     Hemnesberget, we turn now to some examples drawn from participant
    observation.
         The fact that the dialect reflects local values suggests that it symbolizes
    relationships based on shared identities with local culture. Casual obser-
    vations and rec0rding of free speech among locals in homes, workshops,
    and the various public meeting places where such relationships are as-
    sumed do indeed show that only the dialect is used there. However, sta-
    tuses defined with respect to the superimposed national Norwegian
    system elicit the standard. Examples of these are church services, presen-
        424   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tation of text material in school, reports, and announcements-but not
necessarily informal public appeals or political speeches-at public meet-
ings. Similarly, meetings with tourists or other strangers elicit the stan-
dard at least until the participants' identity becomes more clearly known.


       Situational and Metaphorical Switching

          When within the same setting the participants' definition of the
social event changes, this change may be signaled among others by
linguistic clues. On one occasion, when we, as outsiders, stepped up to a
group of locals engaged in conversation, our arrival caused a significant
alteration in the casual posture of the group. Hands were removed from
pockets and looks changed. Predictably, our remarks elicited a code
switch marked simultaneously by a change in channel cues (i.e., sentence
speed, ryhthm, more hesitation pauses, etc.) and by a shift from (R) to (B)
grammar: Similarly, teachers report that while formal lectures-where
interruptions are not encouraged-are delivered in (B), the speakers will
shift to (R) when they want to encourage open and free discussion among
students. Each of these examples involves clear changes in the partici-
pants' definition of each other's rights and obligation. We will use the term
situational switching to refer to this kind of a language shift.
   The notion of situational switching assumes a direct relationship
between language and the social situation. The linguistic forms employed
are critical features of the event in the sense that any violation of selection
rules changes members' perception of the event. A person who uses the
standard where only the dialect is appropriate violates commonly ac-
cepted norms. His action may terminate the conversation or bring about
other social sanctions. To be sure language choice is never completely
determined; sociolinguistic variables must be investigated empirically.
Furthermore, situations differ in the amount of freedom of choice al-
lowed to speakers. Ritual events, like the well-known Vedic ceremonies
of South Asia, constitute extreme examples of determination, where
every care is taken to avoid even the slightest change in pronunciation or
rhythm lest the effectiveness of the ceremony be destroyed. The greet-
ings, petitions, and similar routines described by Albert (Chapter 2)
similarly seem strictly determined.
   In Hemnesberget, as our example will show later on, speakers are given
relatively wide choice in vocabulary and some choice in syntax. Selection
rules affect mainly the variables discussed previously. Values of these
variables are sociolinguistically determined in the sense that when, on the
one hand, we speak of someone giving a classroom lecture or performing
a Lutheran church service or talking to a tourist, we can safely assume
                           Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   425

    that he is using (8) grammatical forms. On the other hand, two locals
    having a heart-to-heart talk will presumably speak in (R). If instead they
   are found speaking in (8), we conclude either that they do not identify
   with the values of the local team or that they are not having a heart-to-
   heart talk.
       In contrast with those instances where choice of variables is narrowly
   constrained by social norms, there are others in which participants are
   given considerably more latitude. Thus official community affairs are
   largely defined as nonlocal and hence the standard is appropriate. But
   since many individuals who carry out the relevant activities all know each
   other as fellow locals, they often interject casual statements in the dialect
   into their formal discussions. In the course of a morning spent at the com-
   munity administration office, we noticed that clerks used both standard
  and dialect phrases, depending on whether they were talking about official
  affairs or not. Likewise, when residents step up to a clerk's desk, greeting
  and inquiries about family affairs tend to be exchanged in the dialect,
  while the business part of the transaction is carried on in the standard.
      In neither of these cases is there any significant change in definition of
  participants' mutual rights and obligations. The posture of speakers and
  channel clues of their speech remain the same. The language switch here
  relates to particular kinds of topics or subject matters rather than to
  change in social situation. Characteristically, the situations in question
  allow for the enactment of two or more different relationships among the
  same set of individuals. The choice of either (R) or (8) alludes to these
  relationships and thus generates meanings which are quite similar to those
  conveyed by the alternation between ty or vy in the examples from Rus-
 sian literature cited by Friedrich (Chapter 9). We will use the term meta-
 phorical switching for this phenomenon.
     The semantic effect of metaphorical switching depends on the existence
 of regular relationships between variables and social situations of the type
just discussed. The context in which one of a set of alternates is regularly
 used becomes part of its meaning, so that when this form is then employed
 in a context where it is not normal, it brings in some of the flavor of this
 original setting. Thus a phrase like "April is the cruelest month" is
regarded as poetic because of its association with T. S. Eliot's poetry.
When used in natural conversation, it gives that conversation some of the
flavor of this poetry. Similarly, when (R) phrases are inserted metaphori-
cally into a (8) conversation, this may, depending on the circumstances,
add a special social meaning of confidentiality or privateness to the con-
versation.
    The case of the local who, after finishing his business in the community
office, turns to a clerk and asks him to step aside for a private chat further
illustrates the contrast between metaphorical and role switching. By their
constant alternation between the standard and the dialect during their
        426    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

business transaction, they alluded to the dual relationship which exists
between them. The event was terminated when the local asked the clerk
in the dialect whether he had time to step aside to talk about private af-
fairs, suggesting in effect that they shift to a purely personal, local rela-
tionship. The clerk looked around and said, "Yes, we are not too busy."
The two then stepped aside, although remaining in the same room, and
their subsequent private discussion was appropriately carried on entirely
in the dialect.


        The Experiment

          Our discussion of verbal behavior so far has relied largely on
deductive reasoning supported by unstructured ethnographic observa-
tion. Additional tests of our hypothesis are based on controlled text elici-
tation. We have stated that gatherings among friends and kin implying
shared local identities must be carried on in the dialect. If we are correct
in our hypothesis, then individuals involved in such friendly gatherings
should not change speech variety regardless of whether they talk about
local, national, or official matters.
    In order to test this, we asked local acquaintances whom we knew to be
part of the network of local relationships to arrange a friendly gathering at
which refreshments were to be served and to allow us to record the pro-
ceedings as samples of dialect speech. Two such gatherings were re-
corded, one in the living room of our local hosts, and the other in the home
of an acquaintance. The fact that arrangements for the meeting were made
 by local people means that the groups were self-recruited. Participants in
the first group included two sisters and a brother and their respective
 spouses. One of the men was a shopkeeper, one of the few in this category
who claims local descent; his brothers-in-law were employed as
craftsmen. All three men are quite literate compared to workmen else-
where in the world and well read in public affairs. They are active in local
 politics and experienced in formal committee work. The second group
included three craftsmen, friends and neighbors who worked in the same
 plant, and their wives. One of these had served as a sailor on a Norwegian
 merchant vessel for several years and spoke English. Participants were all
 quite familiar with standard Norwegian, and our recorded conversations
 contain several passages where the standard was used in quoting nonlocal
 speech or in statements directed at us.                ·
    Methodologically, self-recruitment of groups is important for two
 reasons. It insures that groups are defined by locally recognized rela-
 tionships and enables the investigator to predict the norms relevant to
 their interaction. Furthermore, the fact that participants have preexisting
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure          427

 obligations toward each other means that, given the situation, they are
 likely to respond to such obligations in spite of the presence of strangers.
 Our tape recording and our visual observations give clear evidence that
 this in fact was what occurred.
    Our strategy was to introduce discussion likely to mobilize obligations
 internal to the group, thus engaging members in discussion among them-
 selves. This proved to be relatively easy to do. When a point had been dis-
cussed for some time, we would attempt to change the subject by injecting
 new questions or comments. In doing this, we did not, of course, expect
that our own interjections would predictably affect the speakers' choice of
codes. Participants were always free to reinterpret our comments in any
way they wished. Nevertheless, the greater the range of topics covered,
the greater was the likelihood of language shift.
    As a rule, our comments were followed by a few introductory ex-
changes directed at us. These were marked by relatively slow sentence
speeds, many hesitation pauses, and visual clues indicating that people
were addressing us. Linguistically, we noted some switching to the stan-
dard in such exchanges. After a brief period of this, if the topic was inter-
esting, internal discussion began and arguments that referred to persons,
places, and events we could not possibly be expected to have any knowl-
edge about developed. The transition to internal discussion was marked
by an increase in sentence speed and lack of hesitation pauses and similar
clues. The tape recorder was run continously during the gatherings, and
after some time participants became quite oblivious to its presence.
   Only those passages which were clearly recognizable as internal discus-
sion were used in the analysis; all others were eliminated. The texts ob-
tained in this way consist of stretches of free discussion on diverse topics.
The following passages show that our hypothesis about the lack of con-
nection between code switching and change in topic was confirmed.

Group I: Topic: Chitchat about Local Events

GUNNAR:         ja de va ein sci laimm idag-ein sa kcimm me mcdka-s!t sci hanj
                de va SCI varmt in} pa mo i gar-Ja, sa eg, de 1'(1110 in·e vent an}tl!
                dtikk mli 110 ha 1neir enn di a11jra1111 bestanjdi.
                Yes, there was one who came today-one who came with milk-so
                he said it was so warm in Mo yesterday. Yes, I said, there is nothing
                else to be expected, you people must always have more than any-
                body else.

                Topic: Industrial Pla1111i11g
ALF:           her kunj ha vre eit par Sl/11/1 mel/0111store bedreftcl! pd eill frj>rti-
               fwmti ma,w so ha bescl!ftiga! denna fcl/ke detta sci ha gcidd ledi
               amm vinjtcl!m.
        428   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                There might have been here some medium-size plants employing
                forty to fifty men which then could offer work to those who have
                nothing to do in winter.

                Topic: Govenunental Affairs
OSCAR:          vi jekk inj f<IJr denn forste injsti/jinga! ifrt frikommitenn.
                'We supported the first proposal made by the Schei Committee.'


   Item 1 deals with a local topic in a somewhat humorous way; items 2
and 3 concern planning and formal governmental affairs. All these pas-
sages are clearly in the dialect. Of the phonological variables, [nj] and [lj]
show the highest degree of palatalization and [a] and [re] the highest
degree of retraction throughout. Morphophonemic dialect markers are
(R) ein "one," sl'i "who," ir,;<;e "not," dakk "you," 1neir "more," her
"here," jekk "went," ifdt "from." Even lexical borrowings from the stan-
dard such as injstiljing "proposal" and bedreftw "plants" are clearly in
dialect phonology and morphology. We find one single instance of what
seems to be a standard form: (B) mellom/ (R) imelja "middle." But this
only occurs as part of the borrowed compound mellomstore "medium-
size." In several hours of conversation with both groups, marked by many
changes in topic, we have found a number of lexical borrowings but not a
clear instance of phonological or grammatical switching, in spite of the
fact that all informants clearly know standard grammar.
  While our hypothesis suggests that switching is constrained in those sit-
uations which allow only local relationships to be enacted, it also leads us
to predict that whenever local and nonlocal relationships are relevant to
the same situation, topical variation may elicit code switching. To test
this, we selected members of a formerly quite active local peer group. For
the last few years these individuals had all been at universities in Oslo,
Bergen, and Trondheim. They returned home in the summer either for
vacation or to take up local employment. In conventional interview ses-
sions, all participant's claimed to be pure dialect speakers and professed
local attitudes about dialect use. They thus regarded themselves as
members of the local "team." As fellow students, however, they also
shared statuses that are identified with pan-Norwegian values and as-
sociated with the standard. Our assumption then is that if topical stimuli
are introduced which elicit these values, switching may result.
  Three gatherings were arranged in the home of one of our informants.
Refreshments were again served. Elicitation strategies were similar to
those employed with the first two groups, and similar ranges of topics
were covered. The examples cited here show that our hypothesis was
again confirmed.
                           Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure       429

 Group Ill: Topic: Chitchat about Drinking Habits

BERIT:       ja,ja, nuen vi bjynjt anjer veien du-vi bjynjt i barnelosen-sci vi har
             de II njajort.
             Yes, yes, we started the other way, we started in the children's an-
             tialcoholic league. So we have finished all that.

             Topic: Industrial Development
BERIT:       jo da viss di hare fikk de te /¢nn seg-sci e i vwrtfall prisniv(le luer i
             Rana skmdd h¢ger enn dee vanligvis anner stann i lanne.
             Yes, if they could only manage to make it profitable-so in any case
             the prices tend to be higher here in Rana than is common in other
             places in the country.

             Topic: Informal Statement about University Regulations
OLA:         nuenn no ha dcem111 lw111p{f! pa de.
             But now they have relaxed that.

             Topic: Authoritative Statement about University Regulations
OLA:         de voe/ du mellom en faemm saeks.
             You choose that from among five or six.

    Comparison of Berit's and Ola's first statement with their second state-
 ments shows considerable shifting in each case. Thus Berit's second
utterance has such unpalatalized forms as anner (vs. anjer), and raised and
less retracted [a] in da. She also uses standard variables (B)fikk/(R)fekk,
(B)viss/(R)vess, (B)V<1?rtfall/(R)kvartfal!, (B)lu1?r/(R)her, etc. Ola's second
 statement is characterized by (B)nzel/011/(R)imelja and (B)en/(R)ein. Simi-
larly, his [re] inf{l?,n and :u1?ks is raised and fronted. In neither case is the
 shift to the standard complete-after all the situation never lost its infor-
mality. Berit's statement still contains dialect words like (R)l¢n11/(B)/¢11ne
"to be profitable"; (R)stan/(B)steder "places"; and Ola has
(R)v{l?//(B)velger "to choose." What we see then is a breakdown of co-
occurrence rules, an erosion of the linguistic boundary between Ranamal
and Bokmal. The tendency is to switch toward standard phonology while
preserving some morphophonemic and lexical dialect features of (R). Fea-
tures retained in this manner are largely those which also occur in other
local dialects and to some extent also in N ynorsk. They have thus gained
some acceptance as proper dialect forms. Those characteristics which
locals refer to as broad speech, i.e., those that are known as local peculiar-
ities, tend to be eliminated.
    It must also be noted that Berit and Ola also differ in their pronuncia-
        430    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tion of the phonological variables. Ola's normal pronunciation shows the
strong palatalization of consonant and extreme vowel retraction charac-
teristic of most residents. Berit's normal pronunciation has medium
palatalization and medium retraction. Both, however, switch in the same
direction, in response to similar situational and topical clues, and this
agreement on the rules of stylistic manipulation is clearly more important
in this case than the mere articulatory difference in Berit's and Ola's
speech.
   The social character of the style switch was clearly revealed when the
tape-recorded conversations were played back to other Hemnes resi-
dents. One person who had been working with us as a linguistic informant
at first refused to believe that the conversations were recorded locally.
When he recognized the voices of the participants, he showed clear signs
of disapproval. Apparently, he viewed the violation of co-occurrence
rules as a sign of what is derogatorily called knot "artificial speech" in col-
loquial Norwegian. Some of the participants showed similar reactions
when they heard themselves on tape. They promised to refrain from
switching during future discussion sessions. Our analysis of these later
sessions, however, revealed that when an argument required that the
speaker validate his status as an intellectual, he would again tend to use
standard forms in the manner shown by Berit and Ola. Code selection
rules thus seem to be akin to grammatical rules. Both operate below the
level of consciousness and may be independent of the speaker's overt in-
tentions.
   Additional information about usage patterns in group III was provided
through a fortunate accident. One of our sessions with this group was
interrupted by a somewhat mentally retarded young person, who has the
habit of appearing in peoples' homes to solicit assistance for his various
schemes. Here are some examples of remarks addressed to him by Berit
and Solveig, of all the members of the group, the most prone to use stan-
dard forms. Her normal pronunciation shows the least amount of conso-
nant palatalization. She is socially more marginal to Hemnes than other
members of the group.
Group Ill: Topic: Talking to a Retarded Local Youth

BERIT:           e de du sa vikarier ff/)rr lwnj 110.
                 Are you a stand-in for him now?
SOLVEIG:        /zanj kanj jo jett gate, /zaj kanj 110 va me.
                He is good at word games, he should participate.

   Both Berit and Solveig's pronunication in these examples become iden-
tical with the ordinary speech of Ola and of the members of group I. The
extreme palatalization of [nj] and the lowering of [a] is not normal for
                          Social Meaning in Lingllistic Structllre   431

   them; they clearly are talking down in this case. Their stylistic range, as
   well as their facility in switching, seem to be' greater than those of the
   others.
      In comparing the behavior of the first two groups with that of group III,
   we find two different kinds of language-usage patterns. All three groups
   speak both the dialect and the standard. Groups I and II, however, show
   only situational switching. When members talk to each other, differences
   of formality or informality to topic are reflected only in the lexicon. Pro-
  nunciation and morphology do not change. Those groups shift to (B)
  phonology and grammar only when remarks are addressed directly to us
  who count as outsiders or in indirect quotes of such matters as govern-
  ment rules, on officials' statements, etc. In such instances of situation
  switching, therefore, Ranamal and Bokmal are kept separate throughout
  by strict co-occurrence restrictions. In group III, however, deviation from
  the dialect results both from metaphorical and situation switching. Meta-
  phorical switching, furthermore, involves a breakdown of the co-
  occurrence restrictions characteristic of situational shifts.
     The dialect usage of locals, on the one hand, corresponds to their view
  that the two varieties are distinct, and to their insistence on maintaining
  the strict separation of local and nonlocal values. For the students, on the
  other hand, the distinction between dialect and standard is not so sharp.
  Although they display the same general attitudes about the dialect as the
 team of locals, their behavior shows a range of variation rather than an al-
 ternation between distinct systems. It reflects a de facto recognition of
 their own nonlocal identification.
     A fourth conversational group further illustrates the internal speech
 diversity in the community. The principal speakers here are two men, A
 and B, and C, who is A's wife. All come from families who tend to dissoci-
 ate themselves from the egalitarian value system of the local team. Their
 normal style of speech was Bokmal for remarks directed, at us as well as for
 in-group speech. Only in a few instances when A began telling local
anecdotes did he lapse into Ranamal. (R) forms were introduced as meta-
phorical switches into what were basically (B) utterances to provide local
color, indicate humor, etc., in somewhat the same way that speakers in
group III had used (B) forms in (R) utterances.
     In the course of the evening A and C's teen-age daughter joined the
conversation. She expressed attitudes toward the dialect which are quite
similar to those of the students in group III and thus are somewhat dif-
ferent from those of her parents. The few samples we have of her speech
show (R) phonology similar to that of Berit and Solveig in group II I.
    Although the picture of language usage derived from the four groups
seems at first highly complex, it becomes less so when viewed in relation
to speakers' attitudes, interactional norms, and local values. All Hemnes
        432   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

residents have the same repertoire. Their linguistic competence includes
control of both (R) and (B) rules. They vary in the way in which they use
these rules. Expressed attitudes toward (R) and (B) do not provide an
explanation for these differences in speech behavior. The most reasonable
explanation of the ways in which these groups differ seems to be that the
dual system of local values, differences in individual background, and the
various social situations in which members find themselves operate to
affect their interpretation of the social meaning of the variables they
employ.


        Conclusion

          Our analysis in this chapter is based on the assumption that
regularities in behavior can be analyzed as generated from a series of indi-
vidual choices made under specifiable constraints and incentives (Barth
1966). This position implies an important break with previous approaches
to social structure and to language and society. Behavioral regularities are
no longer regarded as reflections of independently measurable social
norms; on the contrary, these norms are themselves seen as com-
municative behavior. They are reflected in what Goffman (1959) calls the
rules of impression management or, in our terms, in the social meanings
which constrain the actor's adoption of behavioral strategies in particular
situations.
    In interactional sociolinguistics, therefore, we can no longer base our
analyses on the assumption that language and society constitute different
 kinds of reality, subject to correlational studies. Social and linguistic
information is comparable only when studied within the same general
analytical frame work. Moving from statements of social constraints to
grammatical rules thus represents a transformation from one level of
 abstraction to another within a single communicative system.
    As Bernstein (1961) has pointed out, verbal communication is a
process in which actors select from a limited range of alternates within a
 repertoire of speech forms determined by previous learning. Although ul-
timately this selection js a matter of individual choice, our chapter shows
 that the rules of codification by which the deep structure of interpersonal
 relations is transformed into speech performances are independent of
 expressed attitudes and similar in nature to the grammatical rules
 operating on the level of intelligibility. They form part of what Hymes
 (1972) has called the speaker's communicative competence. Socio-
 linguistic constraints on the selection of variables seem to be of central im-
portance in this codification process. We argued that they determine the
 speaker's perception of the utterances as a unit of social meaning. By ac-
                         Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   433

 cepting the native's view of what is and what is not properly part of a
 dialect or language, linguists have tended to assume these co-occurrences
 rather than investigate them empirically. We have attempted to develop
 descriptive procedures suitable for the empirical investigation of these
 rules by combining various ethnographic field techniques with conven-
 tional linguistic elicitation methods.
    In Hemnes, where Ranamal and Bokmal communicate the same objec-
 tive information, we were led to ask how the apparent separateness of the
 dialect and the standard can exist and be maintained. Ethnographic inves-
 tigation suggests the hypothesis that Ranamal has social value as a signal
 of distinctness and of a speaker's identification with others of local
 descent. This social significance of the dialect can only be understood by
 contrast with the meanings which locals assign to the standard, the lan-
 guage of nonlocal activities. The standard is associated with education
 and power on the national scene and carries connotations of differences in
 rank which are unacceptable in the realm of informal local relations.
When used casually among Hemnes residents, therefore, it communicates
dissociation from the "local team."
    Since most Hemnes natives live, marry, and earn their livelihood
among others of their own kind, their values are rarely challenged. Their
personal relations have all.the characteristics of network closure (Barnes
 J 954). On the other hand, those with nonlocal background and who main-
tain significant ties in other communities tend to seek their friends among
those in similar circumstances, even though they may have resided in
Hemnes for more than a generation. Their contacts with members of the
"local team" remain largely nonpersonal, focusing around single tasks,
and are thus similar in kind to nonlocal contacts. This lack of personal ties
between individuals of dissimilar backgrounds and cultural identification
reinforces the general social meanings ascribed to the dialect by those
who share local background and identity, and thus contributes to main-
taining the separateness of dialect and standard.
    While this information provides the background for our study, it does
not explain the fact that all residents frequently switch between the
dialect and the standard. This can only be explained through the analysis
of particular speech events. The concepts of setting, social situation, and
social event represent an attempt to explain the natives' conception of
their behavioral environment in terms of an ordered set of constraints
which operate to transform alternative lines of behavior into particular
social meanings. Our distinction between metaphoric and role switching
shows how constraints at different levels of inclusiveness produce appro-
priate changes in the way speech pe1formances are interpreted.
    Although locals show an overt preference for the dialect, they tolerate
and use the standard in situations where it conveys meanings of of-
        434    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

ficiality, expertise, and politeness toward strangers who are clearly seg-
regated from their personal life. In private gatherings where people meet
as natives and equals, a speaker's use of standard variables suggests
 social dissociation, an attitude which is felt to be out of place. Although
the students in our experimental sessions meet as locals and friends, they
 differ from other members of the local team because they share the addi-
tional status of intellectuals. This fact modifies the social meaning of stan-
dard forms when they are used among the students. To refrain from using
standard forms for these topics which elicit participants' shared experi-
ence as intellectuals would constitute an unnatural limitation on their
freedom of expression. Group IV demonstrates the effect of intracom-
munity differences in value systems on language-usage patterns. Because
of this identification with the urban middle classes, the adult members of
this group use (B) as their normal form of speech while employing (R)
only for special effect. Such usage distinctions, however, are not neces-
sarily very stable. The teen-age daughter of the adult members seems to
follow local usage, thus symbolizing her identification with her peer group
rather than with her family.
   Our experiments, and the analysis presented in this chapter, demon-
strate the importance of social or nonreferential meaning for the study of
language in society. Mere naturalistic observation of speech behavior is
not enough. In order to interpret what he hears, the investigator must
have some background knowledge of the local culture and of the pro-
cesses which generate social meaning. Without this it is impossible to gen-
eralize about the social implication of dialect differences. The processes
studied here are specific to particular small communities. Predictions of
language maintenance or language shift in larger societies will, of course,
have to depend on statistical generalizations. More studies along the lines
suggested here, however, should materially improve the validity of such
generalizations. For Hemnesberget, the fate of the dialect seems assured
as Jong as local identification maintains its importance, and the socioeco-
logical system continues to prevent any significant accumulation of indi-
viduals who, like the students, fail to maintain the situational barrier
between the dialects and'the standard.
 15

Domains and the Relationship
between Micro-- and
Macrosocio1inguistics
JOSHUA A. FISHMAN




 Joshua A. Fishman is a professor of sociology at Yeshiva
  University. He has been concerned with multilingualism
  and the social role of language for some years. Having
 completed studies of language loyalty in the United
 States, and Spanish-English bilingualism among Puerto
 Ricans in the New York area, he is now engaged in
 research on language policy and development. The theo-
 retical framework, as well as part of the data presented in
 this chapter, are contained in an earlier article (Fishman
 1965), of which the present essay is an extension and
 revision.
    Fishman is here concerned with situations of language
choice, as are Blom and Gumperz, but the focus and the
 methods employed are instructively different. Blom and
Gumperz treat norms and other factors all as dimensions
of one communicative system as input to a single set of
rules. The potential for change in the situation is de-
tected, but information as to the larger society and his-
tory is used as context to illuminate the set of rules itself.
The emphasis is on the individual choosing among alter-
native modes of behavior in accordance with linguistic
and social constraints. Fishman, however, is concerned
with behavioral norms seen as jural rules (see Introduc-
tion) and defined in sociological terms as regularities
which stand apart from individual behavior. He concen-
trates on stable systems of choice, or "proper" usage as
he calls it, specifically excluding situations of change
where these norms no longer hold. Fishman's key con-
cept, domain, is intended to relate specific language
choices, from which it is an abstraction, to general insti-
                            435
436   Genesis, Mai/ltenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tutions and spheres of activity, both in one society and,
comparatively, between societies. Concern with chang-
ing situations is not dealt with in terms of formulated
rules and linguistic variation but at the level of changes in
spheres of activity and institutions. Whereas Blom and
Gumperz place participant observation and analysis of
spontaneous speech at the center of their approach,
Fishman employs techniques more characteristic of
large-scale social investigations, including self-report in-
struments, census, word association, test together with
factor analysis and analysis of variance. The approach
taken here is akin to the correlational view of language
described by William Bright ( 1966) and discussed in the
 Introduction.
    Further difference lies in the materials studied and in
 the approach taken. Both chapters are concerned with
successful prediction, but the Norwegian case of vari-
ables within one linguistic matrix clearly requires close
phonetic and other linguistic specification, whereas the·
 Puerto Rican case can be approached in terms of two
grossly distinguishable wholes.
    Notice in Fishman's discussion of topic that this sa-
 lient dimension of rule-governed choices is shown to
 depend on more than one underlying process. The
 implicit danger to which Fishman calls attention is that
 success in stating rules and predicting use may remain at
 a "surface structure" level and may not reach the level at
 which the predictable regularities are generated. In both
 this and the preceding chapter there is the concern of
 relating individual choices to relatively stable patterns,
 but whereas Blom and Gumperz align themselves with
 the view that the latter are generated from the former,
 Fishman treats the individual choices as being derived
 from stable patterns. (It is worthwhile to compare the
 Blom-Gumperz schema of setting-situation-event with
 the scheme of relationships in Fig. 15. I of the present
 chapter.)
    Domain analysis is linked to the analysis of cultural
 scenes discussed by Frake (Chapter 3), although the defi-
 nition of domain here differs from the ethnoscientific defi-
 nition of the term. Fishman points out that a fixed set of
 domains cannot be prescribed in advance for all cases.
 He envisages different categories of participant (e.g.,
            Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics     437

         children), different types of social context1 (e.g., im-
         migrant-host contexts), and different levels of focus (e.g.,
         social-psychological vs. societal-institutional). While
         concerned with the establishment of the validity of the
         constructs for the particular Puerto Rican study,
         Fishman locates the findings of appropriate domains first
         of all in the integrative intuition of the investigator. He
         implies that the heuristic value of the concept of domain
         does not depend on any one method of data collection
         and analysis. Additional related readings are provided
         by: Ferguson ( 1966), Gumperz (1961 ), Rona (1966),
         Rubin (1968), and Fishman (1970).



         The Analysis of Multilingual Settings

          Multilingual speech communities differ from each other in so
 many ways that every student of societal multilingualism must grapp.Je
 with the problem of how best to systematize or organize the manifold dif-
ferences that are readily recognizable between them. This chapter is
 directed to a formal consideration of several descriptive and analytic vari-
ables which may contribute to an understanding of who speaks what lan-
guage to whom and when in those speech communities that are character-
 ized by widespread and relatively stable multilingualism. It deals
primarily with "within-group (or intragroup) multilingualism" rather than
with "between-group (or intergroup) multilingualism," i.e., it focuses upon
those multilingual settings in which a single population makes use of two
(or more) "languages" or varieties of the "same language" for internal
communicative purposes (Fishman 1967). As a result of this limitation,
mastery or control of mother tongue and other tongue [or, more generally,
of the various languages or varieties constituting the speech community's
linguistic repertoire (Gumperz 1962)] may be ruled out as a crucial vari-
able since the members of many speech networks could communicate
with each other quite easily in any of their available codes or subcodes. It
seems dear, however, that habitual language choice in multilingual
speech communities or speech networks is far from being a random
matter of momentary inclination, even under those circumstances when it
could very well function as such from a purely probabilistic point of view
(Lieberson 1964). "Proper" usage dictates that only one of the theoreti-
cally coavailable languages or varieties will be chosen by particular
classes of interlocutors on particular kinds of occasions to discuss partic-
ular kinds of topics.
         438    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

   What are the most appropriate parameters in terms of which these
choice patterns can be described in order to attain both factual accuracy
and theoretical parsimony, and in order to facilitate the integration of
small-group and large-group research rather than its further needless
polarization? If we can solve the problem of how to describe language
choice in stable, within-group bilingual settings (where the limits of lan-
guage mastery do not intrude), we can then more profitably turn (or return)
to the problem of choice determinants in less stable settings such as those
characterizing immigrant-host relationships and between-group mul-
tilingual settings more generally (Fishman I 964).

  A HYPOTHETICAL EXAMPLE

   American students are so accustomed to bilingualism as a "vanishing
phenomenon," as a temporary dislocation from a presumably more
normal state of affairs characterized by "one man, one language," that an
example of stable intragroup bilingualism may help to start off our discus-
sion in a more naturalistic and less bookish vein.
   A government functionary in Brussels arrives home after stopping off at
his club for a drink. He generally speaks standard French in his office,
standard Dutch at his club, and a distinctly local variant of Flemish at
home. 1 In each instance he identifies himself with a different speech
network to which he belongs, wants to belong, and from which he seeks
acceptance. All of these networks-and more-are included in his
overarching speech community, even though each is more commonly as-
sociated with one speech variety than with another. Nevertheless, it is not
impossible to find occasions at the office in which he speaks or is spoken
to in one or another variety of Flemish. There are also occasions at the
club when he speaks or is addressed in French; finally, there are oc-
casions at home when he communicates in standard Dutch or even
French.
   Our hypothetical government functionary is most likely to give and get
Flemish at the office when he bumps into another functionary who hails
from the very same Flemish-speaking town. The two of them grew up
together and went to school together. Their respective sets of parents
strike them as being similarly "kind- but- old- fashioned." In short, they
 share many common experiences and points of view (or think they do, or
 pretend they do), and, therefore, they tend to speak to each other in the

  1
    This example may be replaced by any one of a number of others: standard German,
Schwytzertiitsch, and Romansch (in parts of Switzerland); Hebrew, English, and Yiddish in.
Israel; Riksmaal, Landsmaal, and more local dialectal variants of the latter in Norway; stan-
dard German, Plattdeutsch, and Danish in Schleswig; French, standard German, and
German dialect in Luxembourg, etc.
               Domains between Micro- and Macrosocio/inguistics                  439

language which represents for them the intimacy that they share. The two
do not cease being government functionaries when they speak Flemish to
each other; they simply prefer to treat each other as intimates rather than
as functionaries. However, the careful observer will also note that the two
do not speak Flemish to each other invariably. When they speak about
world affairs, or the worlds of art and literature, not to mention the world
of government, they tend to switch into French (or to reveal far more
French lexical, phonological, or even grammatical influence in their Flem-
ish), even though (for the sake of our didactic argument) the mood of in-
timacy and familiarity remains clearly evident throughout.
   Thus our overall problem is twofold: (a) to recognize and describe
whatever higher order regularities there may be in choosing among the
several varieties that constitute the repertoire of a multilingual speech
community (so that we need not always remain at an anecdotal and
clinical level of analysis) and (b) nevertheless, to provide for and recog-
nize the interpersonal fluctuation (= lower order societal patterning) that
remains even when higher order societal patterning is established.

   TOPIC
   The fact that two individuals who usually speak to each other primarily
in X nevertheless switch to Y (or vacillate more noticeably between X
and Y) when discussing certain topics leads us to consider topic per se as
a regulator of language use in multilingual settings.
   The implication of topical regulation of language choice is that certain
topics are somehow handled "better" or more appropriately in one lan-
guage than in another in particular multilingual contexts. However, this
greater appropriateness may reflect or may be brought about by several
different but mutually reinforcing factors. Thus, some multilingual speak-
ers may "acquire the habit" of speaking about topic x in language X par-
tially because that is the language in which they are trained to deal with
this topic (e.g., they received their university training in economics in
French), partially because they (and their interlocutors) may lack the spe-
cialized terms for a satisfying discussion of x in language Y, 2 partially
because language Y itself may currently lack as exact or as 1nany terms
for handling topic x as those currently possessed by language X, and par-

   2 This effect has been noted even in normally monolingual settings, such as those ob-

taining among American intellectuals, many of whom feel obliged to use French or German
words in conjunction with particular professional topics. English lexical influence on the lan-
guage of immigrants in the United States has also often been explained on topical grounds.
The importance of topical determinants is discussed by Haugen (I 953, 1956) and Weinreich
(1953) and, more recently, by Gumperz (1962) and Susan Ervin-Tripp (1964). It is implied
as a "pressure" exerted upon "contacts" in Mackey's descriptions of bilingualism (I 962,
1965, 1966).
          440     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tially because it is considered strange or inappropriate to discuss x in lan-
guage Y. The very multiplicity of sources of topical regulation suggests
that topic may not in itself be a convenient analytic variable when lan-
guage choice is considered from the point of view of the larger societal
patterns and sociolinguistic norms of a multilingual setting, no matter how
fruitful it may be at the level of face-to-face interaction per se. What would
be helpful for larger societal investigations and for intersocietal compari-
sons is an understanding of how topics reflect or imply regularities which
pertain to the major spheres of activity in any society under consider-
ation. We may be able to discover the latter ifwe inquire why a significant
number of people in a particular multilingual setting at a particular time
have received certain kinds of training in one language rather than in
another; or what lt reveals about a particular multilingual setting if lan-
guage X is currently actually less capable of coping with topic x than is
language Y. Does it not reveal more than merely a topic-language rela-
tionship at the level of particular face~to-face encounters? Does it not
reveal that certain socioculturally recognized spheres of activity are, at
least temporarily, under the sway of one language or variety (and,
therefore, Ptrrhaps, under the control of certain sp~ech networks) rather
than others? Thus, while topic is doubtlessly a crucial consideration in un-
derstanding language choice variance in our two hypothetical government
functionaries, we must seek a means of examining and relating their indi-
vidual, momentary choices to relatively stable patterns of choice that
exist in their multilingual speech community as a whole.



          Domains of Language Behavior

         l. The concept of domains of language behavior seems to have
received its first partial elaboration from students of language mainte-
nance and language shift among Auslandsdeutsche in pre-World-War-II
multilingual settings. 3 German settlers were in contact with many dif-
ferent non-German-speaking populations in various types of contact set-
tings and were exposed to various kinds of sociocultural change pro-
cesses. In attempting to chart and compare the fortunes of the German
language under such varying circumstances Schmidt-Rohr (1963) seems
to have been the first to suggest that dominance configurations needed to


  3 The study of language maintenance and language shift is concerned with the relationship

between change or stability in habitual language use, on the one hand, and ongoing psycholo-
gical, social, or cultural processes of change and stability, on the other hand (Fishman i 964,
1966; Nahirny and Fishman 1965).
                    Domains between Micro- and Macrosocio/inguistics                  441

       be established to reveal the overall status of language choice in various
       domains of behavior. The domains recommended by Schmidt-Rohr were
      the following nine: the family, the playground and street, the school, the
      church, literature, the press, the military, the courts, and the govern-
      mental administration. Subsequently, other investigators either added ad-
      ditional domains [e.g., Mak (1935), who nevertheless followed Schmidt-
      Rohr in overlooking the work sphere as a domain], or found that fewer
     domains were sufficient in particular multilingual settings [e.g., Frey
     0 945), who required only home, school, and church in his analysis of
     Amish "triple talk"]. However, what is more interesting is that Schmidt-
     Rohr's domains bear a stdking similarity to those "generally termed"
     spheres of activity which have more recently been independently ad-
    ~anced by others interested in the study of acculturation, intergroup rela-
    hons, and bilingualism [e.g., Dohrenwend and Smith (1962)) .
      . Domains are defined, regardless of their number,4 in terms of institu-
    tional contexts and their congruent behavioral co-occurrences. They at-
    tempt to summate the major clusters of interaction that occur in clusters
   of multilingual settings and involving clusters of interlocutors. Domains
   enable us to understand that language choice and topic, appropriate
   though they may be for analyses of individual behavior at the level of
  fac~-to-face verbal encounters, are, as I suggested, related to widespread
  sociocultural norms and expectations. By recognizing the existence of
  domains it becomes possible to contrast the language of topics for individ-
  U~ls or particular subpopulations with the predominant language of
;domains for larger networks, if not the whole, of a speech community.
      2. The appropriate designation and definition of domains of language
  behavior obviously calls for considerable insight into the sociocultural
 dy~amics of particular multilingual speech communities at particular
 ~~nods in their history. Schmidt-Rohr's domains reflect not only mul-
 tilingual settings in which a large number of spheres of activity, even
~hose that pertain to governmental functions, are theoretically open to
   0
     t_h or all of the languages present but also those multilingual settings in
Which such permissiveness is at least sought by a sizable number of inter-
ested parties. Quite different domains might be appropriate if one were to
study habitual language use among children in these very same settings.
Ce~tainly, immigrant-host contexts, in which only the language of the host
society is· recognized for governmental functions, would require other and
Perhaps fewer domains, particularly if younger generations constantly

  4
th _We can safely reject the implication encountered in certain discussions of domains that
b ~Ie ~nust be an invariant set of domains applicable to all multilingual settings. If language
k~d~vior is r:~ective of sociocultural patterning, as is now wi,dely acc:pted.' t~en d!fferent
d    _of muit1hngual speech communities should benefit from ,malyses m te1 ms of different
  omain O f
       s    language use, however defined and validated.
          442     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 leave the immigrant society and enter the host society. Finally, the
domains of language behavior may differ from setting to setting not only in
terms of number and designation but also in terms of level. Thus in study-
ing acculturating populations in Arizona, G. C. Barker [who studied bilin-
gual Spanish Americans.(19,47)] and Barber [who studied trilingual Yaqui
 Indians (1952)] formulated domains at the ln•el of sociopsychological
analysis: intimate, informal, formal, and intergroup. Interestingly enough,
the domains defined in this fashion were then identified with domains at
 the societal-institutional level mentioned previously. The "formal" do-
 main, e.g., was found to coincide with religious-ceremonial activities; the
intergroup" domain consisted of economic and recreational activities as
well as of interactions with governmental-legal authority, etc. The in-
terrelationship between domains of language behavior defined at a so-
cietal-institutional level and domains defined at a sociopsychological level
(the latter being somewhat closer to the topical-situational analyses dis-
cussed earlier) may enable us to study language choice in multilingual set-
tings in newer and more fruitful ways.
   3. The "governmental administration" domain is a social nexus which
normally brings certain kinds of people together primarily for a certain
cluster of pw-ri,ses. Furthermore, it brings them together primarily for a
certain set of role relations (discussed later) and in a delimited environ-
ment. Thus, domain is a sociocultural construct abstracted from topics of
communication, relationships between communicators, and locales of
communication, in accord with the institutions of a society and the
spheres of activity of a speech community, in such a way that individual
behavior and social patterns can be distinguishedji-cJrn each other and yet
related to each other. 5 The domain is a higher order summarization which
is arrived at from a detailed study of the face-to-face interactions in which
language choice is imbedded. Of the many factors contributing to and sub-
sumed under the domain concept, some are more important and more ac-
cessible to careful measurement than others. One of these, topic, has
already been discussed. Two others, role relation and locale, remain to be
discussed. Role relations may be of value to us in accounting for the fact
that our two hypothetical governmental functionaries, who usually speak
an informal variant of Flemish to each other at the office, except when
they talk about technical, professional, or sophisticated "cultural''
matters, are themselves not entirely alike in this respect. One of the two
tends to slip into French more frequently than the other. It would not be
surprising to discover that he is the supervisor of the other.

   5
     For a discussion of the differences and similarities between "functions of language
behavior" and "domains oflanguage behavior" see Fishman ( 1964). "Functions" stand closer
t? so.ciopsychological analysis, for they abstract their constituents in terms of individual mo·
t1vat1on rather than in societal institutions.




                                                                                                   ,,,,,
                    Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics                    443

       DOMAINS AND ROLE RELATIONS

          In many studies of multilingual behavior the family domain has proved
       to be a very crucial one. Multilingualism often begins in the family and
       depends upon it for encouragement if not for protection. In other cases,
       multilingualism withdraws into the family domain after it has been dis-
      placed from other domains in which it was previously encountered. Little
      wonder then that many investigators, beginning with Braunshausen sev-
      eral years ago (1928), have differentiated within the family domain in
      terms of "speakers." However, two different approaches have been
     followed in connection with such differentiation. Braunshausen [and,
     much more recently, Mackey (1962, 1965, 1966)] have merely specified
     family "members": father, mother, child, domestic, governess and tutor,
     etc. Gross (1951 ), however, has specified dyads within the family: grand-
     father to grandmother, grandmother to grandfather, grandfather to father,
     grandmother to father, grandfather to mother, grandmother to mother,
    grandfather to child, grandmother to child, father to mother, mother to
    father, etc. The difference between these two approaches is quite consid-
    erable. Not only does the second approach recognize that interacting
    members of a family (as well as the participants in most other domains of
    language behavior) are hearers as well as speakers (i.e., that there may be
   a distinction between multilingual production) but it also recognizes that
   their language behavior may be more than merely a matter of individual
   Preference or facility but also a matter of role relations. In· certain
   societies particular behaviors (including language behaviors) are expected
   (if not required) of particular individuals vis-a-vis each other
  (Goodenough 1965a).
  . The family domain is hardly unique with respect to its differentiability
  Into role relations. Each domain can be differentiated into role relations
  that are specifically crucial or typical of it in particular societies at partic-
 u!ar times. The religious domain (in those societies where religion can be
 ~1fferentiated from folkways more generally) may reveal such role rela-
 ~1ons as cleric-cleric, cleric-parishioner, parishioner-cleric, and parish-
 ioner-parishioner. Similarly, pupil-teacher, buyer-seller, employer-
emp]oyee, judge-petitioner, all refer to specific role relations in other
domains. It would certainly seem desirable to describe and analyze lan-
guage use or language choice in a particular multilingual setting in terms
of the crucial role relations within the specific domains considered to be
rnost revealing for that setting.o The distinction between own-group-in-
   0 These remarks are not intended to imply that all role-relation differences are necessarily
~elated to language-choice differences. This almost certainly is not the case. Just which role-
~elation differences are related .to language-choice differences. \and unde: what circum-
s~ances) is a matter for empirical determination within each mult!lmg~al seth~g i's well as _at
different points in time within the same setting. In general the venficat1on of s1gn!ficantly dif-
ferent clusters of a/lo-roles (as well as significantly different clusters of allo-top1cs and allo-
caJes) (see later discussion) is a prerequisite for the empirical formulation of domains.
        444   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

terlocutor and other-group-interlocutor may also be provided for in this
way_ when intergroup bilingualism becomes the focus of inquiry.

  DOMAINS AND LOCALES
   Bock (1964), Ervin-Tripp (1964), and Gumperz (1964b) have pre-
sented many examples of the importance of locale as a determining com-
ponent of situational analysis. If one meets one's clergyman at the race-
track, the impact of the locale on the topics and role relationships that
normally obtain is likely to be quite noticeable. However, we must also
note that domains too are locale related in the sense that most major
social institutions are associated with a very few primary locales. Just as
topical appropriateness in face-to-face language choice is indicative of
larger scale societal patterns, and just as role appropriateness in face-to-
face language choice is similarly indicative, so the locale constraints and
local appropriatenesses that obtain in face-to-face language choice have
their large-scale implications and extrapolations.

  THE CONSTRUCT VALIDITY OF DOMAINS
    A research project dealing with Puerto Rican bilingualism in the
Greater New York City area has yielded data which may help clarify the
construct validity of domains as well as the procedure for their recogni-
 tion. Since domains are a higher order generalization than congruent situ-
 ations (i.e., from situations in which individuals interacting in appropriate
 role relationships with each other, in the appropriate locales for these role
 relationships, and discussing topics appropriate to their role rela-
 tionships), it was first necessary to try out and revise intuitive and rather
 clinical estimates of the widespread congruences that were felt to obtain.
,After more than a year of participant observation and other data-
,gathering experiences, it seemed to Greenfield ( 1968) that five domains
 could be generalized from the innumerable situations that he had encoun-
 tered in the Puerto Rican speech community. He tentatively labeled these
  "family," "friendship," "religion," "education," and "employment" and
  proceeded to determine whether a typical situation could be presented for
 each domain as a means of collecting valid self-report data on language
  choice. As indicated on p. 445 each domain was represented by a con-
  gruent person (interlocutor), place, and topic in the self-report instrument
  that Greenfield constructed for use with high school students.
    Greenfield's hypothesis was that within the Puerto Rican speech com-
 munity, among individuals who knew Spanish and English equally well,
 Spanish was primarily associated with family and secondarily with friend-
 ship (the two, family and friendship, constituting the intimacy value clus-
                Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics                  445 1

        Domain         /11terloc11tor     Place                       Topic
      Family           Parent           Home          How to be a good son or daughter
      Friendship       Friend           Beach         How to play a certain game
      Religion         Priest           Church        How to be a good Christian
      Education        Teacher          School        How to solve an algebra problem
      Employment       Employer         Workplace     How to do your job more efficiently



  ter), while English was primadly associated with religion, work, and edu-
  cation (the three constituting the status-stressing value cluster).7 In order
  to test this hypothesis, he initially presented two seemingly congruent sit-
  uational components and requested his subjects (a) to select a third com-
 ponent in order to complete the situation as well as (b) to indicate their
 likelihood of using Spanish or English if they were involved in such a situ-
 ation (and if they and their Puerto Rican interlocutors knew Spanish and
 English equally well). Section I of Table 15.1 shows that Greenfield's
 predictions were uniformly confirmed among those subjects who selected
 congruent third components. The domains for, which Spanish was re-
 ported were, from most often to least, family, friendship, religion, employ-
 ment, and education, regardless of whether the third ~omponent selected
was a person, place, or topic.
    However, as Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14), Fishman (1968b), and
others have indicated, seemingly incongruent situations frequently occur
and are rendered understandable and acceptable Gust as are the seemingly
ungrammatical sentences that we hear in most spontaneous speech). In-
terlocutors reinterpret incongruencies in order to salvage some semblance
of. the congruency in terms of which they understand and function within
 their social order (c.f. Garfinkel, Chapter 10). Were this not the case,
then no seemingly congruent domains could arise and be maintained out
of the incongruencies of daily life. In order to test this assumption, Green-
field subsequently proceeded to present his subjects with two incongruent
components (e.g., with a person from one hypothetical domain and with a
place from another hypothetical domain) and asked them (a) to select a
third component in order to complete the situation, as well as (b) to in-
dicate their likelihood of using Spanish or English in a situation so consti-
tuted. Greenfield found that the third component was overwhelmingly
selected from one or the other of the two domains from which he had
selected the first two components, not from some third domain. Further-
more, in their attempts to render a seemingly incongruous situation some-
what more congruent, his subjects' language preferences left tlze normal
relationship between domains and language choice substantially wza/-

  1 For a discussion of the significance or' value clusters in the study of diglossic societies
and the relationship between domain analysis and value analysis see Fishman (1968b).
        446   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tered (directionally), regardless of whether person, places, or topics were
involved. Nevertheless, all domains became somewhat less different from
each other than they had been in the fully congruent situations. Ap-
parently, both individual indecisiven.~ss and sociolinguistic norms gov-
erning domain regularity must be combined and compromised when
incongruencies appear. Language choice is much more clear-cut and
polarized in "usual" situations governed entirely by sociolinguistic
norms of communicative appropriateness than they are in "unusual"
situations which must be resolved by individual interpretation.
   Greenfield's findings imply that the assumed relationship between face-
to-face situations and larger scale societal domains obtains for self-report
data. However, it remained necessary for other investigators to determine
whether the domains adumbrated in this fashion have more general valid-
ity in the speech community under study.
   On a reinterviewed sample of 124 cases the distributions obtained were
practically identical to those shown here, indicating that the marginals
reported here are quite stable.
   The language replies to the census have been subjected to a factor anal-
ysis (verimax orthogonal rotation). The following five-factor solution ap-
peared to be most revealing:
   A language census conducted among all 431 souls in a two-block
Puerto Rican neighborhood in Jersey City yielded the data shown in
Table 15.2. Above and beyond examining the replies obtained to the indi-
vidual census items, the reader should direct his attention to the results of
the factor analysis. If domains are more than the investigator's etic reclas-
sification of situations, then they should also become apparent from factor
analysis, which in essence asks: Which items tend to be answered in a con-
sistent fashion? Of the five domains extracted from this analysis, all four
domains considered appropriate for census questioning (language in the
context of family, education, work, and religion) appeared as separate
factors, namely, I. Spanish: literacy (= education), II. Spanish: oral (=
family), IV. Spanish: at work, and V. Spanish: in religion. In addition, an
English factor also emerged, indicating that although English is not as-
sociated with specific domains for the population as a whole (it is so as-
sociated for children, as we will see), its relation to Spanish is not one of
displacement or transition. An orthogonal English factor indicates that (as
in other speech communities marked by relatively stable and widespread
bilingualism) there is no need for one language to be learned or used at the
expense of the other in the population under study. Other accounts of lan-
guage censuses and the research problems which they pose are provided
by Kloss ( 1929) and Lieberson ( 1966a).
   A third (and, for this presentation, final) indication of the construct
validity of domains as analytic parameters for the study of large-scale
sociolinguistic patterns is yielded by Edelman's data (1968). Here we
note that when the word-naming responses of bilingual Puerto Rican
I
I
                        table 15.1
{
         Spanish- and English-Usage Self-Ratings in Various Situations for Components
         Selected by Bilingual Ss*

         I. Congruent Situations: Two "congruent" components presented; S selects third congruent
            component and language appropriate to situation ( I = All in Spanish; 5 = all in English)

                                                           Congruent Persons Selected
                                Parent        Friend       Total      Priest    Teacher      Employer         Total
(
                  Mean            2.75           3.38       3.08        4.67       4.92         4.77           4.77
                  s.d.            1.67           1.22       1.15        0.68       0.30         0.44           0.37
                  n              12             13         13          12         12           13             13

                                                           Congruent Places Selected

                               Home        Beach         Total      Church      School      Work Place        Total
                  Mean           2.33         3.50        2.60        3.80        4.79         4.27            4.34
                  s.d.           1.11         1.37        1.14        1.57        0.58         1.39            0.99
                  n             15            6          15          15          14           15              15

                                                                            '
                                                          Congruent Topics Selected
                       Family         Friendship         Total      Religion    Education      Employment             Total
         Mean            1.69             3.33            2.64        3.80          4.78              4.44             4.38
         s.d.            0.95             1.24            0.98        1.52          0.55              1.15             0.75
         11             16               18              18          15            18                18               18

     II. Incongruent Situations: Two "incongruent" components presented; S selects any third
         component and language appropriate to situation ( I = All in Spanish; 5 = all in English)

                                                                All Persons Selected
                              Parent       Friend         Total      Priest    Teacher      Employer         Total
              Mean               2.89          3.48        3.50       4.65       4.73         4.38            4.66
              s.d.               1.41          1.21        0.73       0.63       0.42         0.74            0.57
              n                 13            13          13         13         13            8              13

                                                                All Places SelC'l'ted
                           Home          Beach          Total      Church      School      Work Place        Total
              Mean             2.63       3.86           2.77        3.71       4.39          4.42            4.10
              s.d.             0.80       1.05           0.73        1.36       1.03          0.98            0.85
              n               15          5             15          15         15            15              15

                                                                All Topics Selected

                      Family       Friendship           Total      Religion    Education      Employment             Total

    Mean               2.88              3.81            3.26        3.07          3.65           3.81                3.49
    s.d.               1.07              1.16            1.05        1.03          1.59           1.06                0.79
    11                18                16              18          18            17             18                  18
                      * From Greenfield 1968.

                                                                   447
         448    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

         table 15.2

Language Census
                       Item                              Yest     Little   t    110*   np*

I. Can understand Spanish conversation?                  779       135         019     067
2. Can speak Spanish (conversation)'?                    833       077         016     074
3. Can read newspapers/books in Spanish?                 397       049         318     237
4. Can write letters in Spanish?                         390       030         339     241
5. Can understand English conversation?                  571       176         183     070
6. Can speak English (conversation)?                     536       181         216     067
7. Can read newspapers/books in English?                 455       130         206     209
8. Can write letters in English?                         387       063         327     223


                                                        Spant      Engt        Botht   NPt
 9. First language understood (conversation)?            886        002         039    072
10. First language spoken (conversation)?                884                    0.23   093
11. First language read (newspapers/books)?              401                    297    302
12. First language written (letters)?                    383        002         276    339
13. Most frequently spoken at home?                      657        088         183    072
14. Most frequently read at home?                        267        051         357    325
15. Most frequently written at home?                     339        014         255    392
16. Most frequently spoken with fellow workers?          137        049         137    677
17. Most frequently spoken with supervisor?              046        009         264    680
18. Most frequently spoken with clients/customers        032        014         035    919
19. Language of instruction in school?                   339        237         167    257
20. Language liked most (conversation)?                  362        285         186    167
21. Language of priest's/minister's sermon?              452        137         193    206
22. Language of silent prayer?                           469        123         151    257
23. Language of church service?                          427        160         193    220


   On a reinterviewed sample of 124 cases the distributions obtained were practically iden-
tical to those shown here, indicating that·the marginals reported here are quite stable.
   The language replies to the census have been subjected to a factor analysis (verimax
orthogonal rotation). The following five~factor solution appeared to be most revealing:


        No.     Suggested Factor Name                 Items (Loadings)

               Spanish: literacy            4(93), 3(92), 15(89), 12(88), 11 (87),
                                               19(71), 14(70), 20(54)
        II     English (oral and written)   7(89), 6(88), 5(84), 8(82)
        Ill    Spanish: oral                9(78), 1(71), 2(66), 10(63), 13(38)
        IV     Spanish: at work             18(79), 16(73), 17(55)
        V      Spanish: in religion         21 (93), 23(89), 22(40)
        * Fishman 1968a.
        t Percents carried to three places; decimals omitted.
               Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics;                449

             table 15.3a

 Mean Number of Words Named by Young Schoolchildren*
                                     (N=34)

                                                   Domain
      Age       Language   Family       Education       Religion   Friendship    Total
      6-8        English     6.2           8.2              6.6       8.3         7.3
                 Spanish     7.6           6.2              5.8       6.4         6.5
                 Total       6.9           7.2              6.2       7.4         6.9

      9-11       English    11.7          12.8              8.7      I0.9        11.0
                 Spanish    10.5            9.4             7.2       9.7         9.2
                 Total      I I. I        I I. I            7.9      10.3        10.1

     Total      English     9.0           10.5              7.7       9.6         9.2
                Spanish     9.0            7.8              6.5       8.0         7.8
                Total       9.0            9.1              7.1       9.0         8.5

         *Edelman 1968.



children in Jersey City were analyzed in accord with the domains derived
 from Greenfield's and Fishman's data reported here (Tables 15.1 and
15.2) significant and instructive findings were obtained. The most Spanish
 domain for all children was "family" (Table 15.3a). The most English
domain for all children was "education." The analysis of variance (Table
 15.3b) indicates that not only did the children's responses differ signifi-
cantly by age (older children giving more responses in both languages
than did younger children), by language (English yielding more responses
than did Spanish), and by domain (church yielding fewer responses than
did any other domain), but that these three variables interact significantly
as well. This means that one language is much more associated with cer-
tain domains than is the other and that this is differentially so by age. This
is exactly the kind of finding for which domain analysis is particularly
suited. Its utility for inter-society comparisons and for gauging language
shift would seem to be quite promising.

  THE INTEGRATION OF MACRO-
  AND MICROPARAMETERS

  The situational analysis of language and behavior represents the bound-
ary area between micro- and macrosociolinguistics. The very fact that a
baseball conversation "belongs" to one speech variety and an electrical
          450      Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

          table 15.Jb

Analysis of Variance of Young Schoolchildren's Word-Naming Scores
                             Mean
     Source           dj'   Square      F9s      F95    Foo

Between subjects      33
 C (age)               I    689.30    19.67*     4.17   7.56
  D (sex)                    15.54     0.44      4.17   7.56
  CD                    I    87.87     2.51      4.17   7.56
  Error (b)           30     35.05

Within subjects      235
 A (domain)             I   123.13     11.11 *   4.17   7.56
 B (language)           3    64.18      9.30*    2.71   4.00
  AB                    3    21.71      6.66*    2.71   4.00
  AC                    3    20.51      2.97*    4.17   7.56
  AD                    3     0.96      0.14     4.17   7.56
  BC                         16.50      1.49     2.71   4.00
  BO                         42.08      3.80     2.71   4.00
  ABC                   3     8.00      2.45     2.71   4.00
  ABO                   3     2.23      0.68     2.71   4.00
  ACD                   3     4.51      0.65     4.17   7.56
  BCD                        14.62      1.32     2.71   4.00
  ABCD                 3      2.66      0.82     2.71   4.00
  Error (w)          207
  Error 1 (w)         89      6.90
  Error2 (w)          29     11.08
  Error3 (w)          89      3.26

Total                268

          * Significant at or above the 0.01 level.
          t Significant at or above the 0.05 level.


engineering lecture "belongs" to another speech variety is a major key to
an even more generalized description of sociolinguistic variation. The
very fact that humor during a formal lecture is realized through a meta-
phorical switch to another variety (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14) must
be indicative of an underlying sociolinguistic regularity, which obtained
before the switch occurred, perhaps of the view that lecture-like or formal
situations are generally associated with one language or variety whereas
levity or intimacy is tied to another. Without such a view, without a more
general norm assigning a particular topic or situation, as one of a class of
such topics or situations, to one language rather than to another, meta-
phorical purposes could neither be served nor recognized.
   As with all constructs (including situations, role relationships, and
                                                                 I
                   Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics       45 J

          speech events), domains originate in the integrative intuition of the inves-
          tigator. If the investigator notes that student-teacher interactions in
          classrooms, school corridors, school auditoriums, and school laboratories
          of elementary schools, high schools, colleges, and universities are all
         realized via the high variety (H), as long as these interactions are focused
         upon educational technicality and specialization, he may begin to suspect
         that these congruent situations all belong to a single (educational) domain.
         If he further finds that incongruent situations involving an educational and
         a noneducational ingredient are, by and large, predictably resolved in
         terms of H rather than the low variety (L) if the third ingredient is an edu-
        cational time, place, or role relationship, he may feel further justified in
        positing an educational domain. If informants tell him that the predicted
        language or variety would be appropriate in most of the examples he can
        think of that derive from his notion of the educational domain, whereas
        they proclaim that it would not be appropriate for examples that he draws
        from a contrasted domain, and, finally, if the construct helps clarify and
        organize his data, and, particularly, ifit arises as a compositing feature of
        his data-then the construct is as usefu,lly validated as is that of situation
       or event-with one major difference.
           Whereas particular speech acts can be apportioned to the speech events
       and social situations in which they transpire (Hymes, Chapter 1) the same
       cannot be done with respect to such acts in relation to societal domains.
       Domains are extrapolated from the data of "talk" rather than being an
       actual component of the process of talk. However, domains are as real as
       the very social institutions of a speech community and, indeed, they show
       a marked paralleling with such major social institutions (G. C. Barker
       I 947) and the somewhat varied situations that are congruent with them.
      There is an undeniable difference between the social institution, "the fam-
      ily," and any particular family, but there is no doubt that the societal
      regularities concerning the former must be derived from data on many in-
      stances of the latter. Once such societal regularities are formulated, they
      can be utilized to test predictions concerning the distributions of socie-
      tally patterned variation in "talk."
          Thus domains and social situations reveal the links that exist between
     micro- and macrosociolinguistics. The members of diglossic speech com-
     munities can come to have certain views concerning their varieties or lan-
     guages because these varieties are associated (in behavior and in attitude)
     With particular domains. The H variety (or language) is considered to
     reflect certain values and relationships within the speech community,
     Whereas the L variety is considered to reflect others. Certain individuals
     and groups may come to advocate the expansion of the functions of L into
     additional domains. Others may advocate the displacement of L entirely
     and the use of H solely. Neither of these revisionist views could be held




ht
        452     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

or advocated without recognition ()f the reality of domains of language-
and-behavior- (in terms of existing norms of communicative appropri-
ations) on the part of members of speech communities. The high culture
values with which certain varieties are associated and the intimacy and
folksiness with which others are congruent are both derivable from
domain-appropriate norms governing characteristic verbal interaction.
   There are several levels and approaches to sociolinguistic description
and a host of linguistic, sociolinguistic, and societal constructs within
each (Fig. 15. I). The choice among them depends on the particular



                  VALUE CLUSTER
          Set of community values character-
          istically enacted in a corresponding
          set of culturally defined behavioral
          domains                 ;



                        DOMAIN                                        NETWORK TYPE
                                                                        (open und closed)
           Cluster of social situations typically
           constrained by a common set of be-                    Cluster of role relationships
           havioral rules                                        defined by extent to which
                                                                 they are governed by a sin-
                                                                 gle (or multiple) set of com-
                                                                 munity values

                  SOCIAL SITUATION
           Encounter defined by intersection of
           setting, time, and role relationship



           TIME          SETTING
                                                 ROLE
                                              RELATIONSIIIP
                                            Set of culturally de·
                                            fined mutual rights and
                                            obligations




                                                    INTERACTION TYPE
                                                    (personal and trnnsactional)
                                            Function of interaction defined by
                                            degree to which participants in social                   I
                                            situation stress the mutual rights and
                                            obligations of their role relationship               /

                                SPEECH (EVENTS AND ACTS)

        figure 15.1
Relationships among some constructs employed in sociolinguistic
analysis (Cooper 1968).
            Domains between Micro- and Macrosocioling11istics    453

 problem at hand. This is necessarily so. Sociolinguistics is of interest to
 students of small societies as well as to students of national and interna-
 tional integration. It must help clarify the change from one face-to-face
 situation to another. It must also help clarify the different language-
 related beliefs and behaviors of entire social sectors and classes. It must
 be as useful and as informative to sociologists pursuing intersocietal and
 intrasocietal topics as it is to linguists pursuing more contextualized
synchronic description.
    It would be foolhardy to claim that one and the same method of data
 collection and data analysis be utilized for such a variety of problems and
purposes. It is one of the hallmarks of scientific social inquiry that
methods are selected as a result of problem specifications rather than
independently of them. Sociolinguistics is neither methodologically nor
theoretically uniform. Nevertheless, it is gratifying to note that for those
who seek such ties the links between micro- and macroconstructs and
methods exist (as do a number of constructs and methods that have wide
applicability through the entire range of sociolinguistics). Just as there is
no societally unencumbered verbal interaction so are there no large-scale
relationships between language and society that do not depend on individ-
ual interaction for their realization. Although there is no mechanical part-
whole relationship between them, micro- and macrosociolinguistics are
both conceptually and methodologically complementary.
16
Ethnic Processes
on the Pathan--Baluch Boundary
FREDRIK BARTH




Fredrik Barth is· a professor of social anthropology and
director of the Research Institute for Social Anthropol-
ogy at the University of Bergen, Norway. He has done
fieldwork in Iran, Pakistan, Sudan, and most recently in
New Guinea. One of his principal interests is a transac-
tional model of social organization (Barth 1966). The
present chapter was originally published as part of the
Georg Morgenstierne Felicitation volume (Redard
1964).
   The stability of language boundaries in multitribal
areas is in large part determined by the structure of tribal
systems. Taking a sociological insight of the linguist
Georg Morgenstierne as his starting point, Barth explains
the northward expansion of the Baluchi language in
Pakistan in terms of capacity to assimilate and organize
potential personnel, given a situation of fragmentation
and social mobility. The considerations usually invoked
by linguists would have predicted expansion not of the
Baluch but of the Pathans. The Pathans are more nu-
merous, of greater population density, more prosperous,
probably have a higher rate of fertility, and are acknowl-
edged to be more agressive militarily. Yet in spite of
numerical superiority and greater prestige, Pashto, the
 Pathan langauge, is retreating before Baluchi.
   In explaining this seemingly anomalous situation
 Barth, by implication, at least, suggests that the analysis


From !ndo-lranica. Melanges presentes b Georg Morgenstieme ll /'oc-
Cllsio11 de son soixllnte-dixieme anniversaire. Edited by Georges Re-
dard. 1964. Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden.

                                454
      Ethnic Processes on the Patlzan-Baluch Boundary    455

  of language maintenance and language shift (see Fishman
   1965 for a discussion of this problem) requires consider-
  ably more information about intrasocietal social pro-
  cesses internal to the societies concerned than is usually
  adduced. Units such as "a tribe," "a culture," "a caste,"
  or "a nation" cannot be taken for granted and member
  populations treated as culturally uniform (cf. Moerman
  1965 and 1968a for a different approach to similar
  problems). Nor does the common assumption that so-
  cietal or geographical isolation is crucial to maintenance
  of cultural diversity accord with the ethnographic facts.
  Barth's position is explained in detail in his introduction
  to a recent collection of ethnographic investigations of
 ethnic boundaries (Barth 1969). Here he demonstrates
 that ethnic boundaries frequently persist in spite of the
 regular movement of personnel across them and in spite
 of regular and institutionalized intergroup com-
 munication [just as language boundaries are often main-
 tained in regions of almost total bilingualism (Gumperz
 1969)]. There must therefore be, he argues, social pro-
 cesses of exclusion and incorporation which lead to the
 maintenance of such boundaries. Taking an interactional
 point of view of social structure similar to that developed
 by Goffman (I 959), he views ethnic categories as cat-
 egories of ascription by which actors identify themselves
 by expressing particular cultural values and speaking par-
 ticular languages. The social necessity (or advantage) of
 maintaining such identifications is conditioned by a com-
 bination of underlying factors (cultural interactional
 norms, intrasocietal power relationships, ecology, or by
factors of demography, etc.) which must be studied em-
 pirically for each case.
    In the present situation, Barth begins by questioning
the identification of Pathans and Baluch as two com-
pletely distinct social entities. He deals with them as
component groups operating within the same ecological
system-i.e., as members of a single linguistically di-
verse speech region. He then proceeds to examine in de-
tail the social conditions which could lead an individual
to identify himself as a member of one or the other
subgroup. His analysis of the two groups as part ofa single
social whole is justified on grounds of both intergroup
mobility and communication and common culture.
Pathan and Baluch share the fundamental cultural princi-
456   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

pies of patrilineality, honor, and obligation. They differ in
political organization. Pathan communities are based on
councils of equals where a person's ability to survive eco-
nomically is in part based on his ability to muster commu-
nity support. Individuals who for reasons of war or per-
sonal misfortune, etc., no longer possess the resources
for participation in the.competition among equals must
turn to others for protection. If they fail to find support
among their former equals, their alternative is to attach
themselves to a Baluch chief and enter into a hierarchi-
cally organized patron-client relationship with him.
   Notice that the different systems of social organization
also involve differences in norms of verbal interaction
and lead to differential distribution of speech skills and
verbal genres. Among the Pathan, on the one hand the
right to speak in one's local councils requires skilled use
of Pashto rhetoric in formal debate. Furthermore, the
egalitarian ethic emphasizing communality of back-
ground apparently also operates to exclude bilingualism.
Among the Baluch, on the other hand, political com-
munication is between different levels of authority and
may be carried by bilingual intermediarjes. The use of
Baluchi is required only in a type of formalized ritual
exchange. Former Pathan groups may therefore retain in-
formal colloquial Pashto for intragroup communication
while using Baluchi on specialized occasions. (Cf. Bern-
stein, Chapter 17, on the relationship between social rela-
tions and speech skills.)
   Although Barth deals with relatively remote tribal
groups, his approach to social organization has important
implications for the understanding of sociolinguistic phe-
nomena in complex Western societies. In these so-
cieties, even more than in the case discussed by Barth,
ethnically distinguishable groups are tightly enmeshed in
a single social system. Yet, most of our models for the
description of such groups, or subgroups, are models
designed to describe primarily the aspects of mechanical,
rather than organic, solidarity. Note that Barth has a way
of isolating both similarities and differences in culture
and that he is careful to point out the behavioral con-
sequences of an individual's choice among alternate
value systems. He also separates culture from ecology
and shows the effect of common ecologicM systems on
different value systems, and on speech behavior. A simi-
                Ethnic Processes 011 the Pathan-Ba/uclz Bo;mdary   457

           Jar approach applied to Western society might provide
           some revealing insight into subtle behavioral variations in
           such societies. Additional related readings are provided
           by Gumperz (1962), Trevor Hill (1958), Hymes (1968b),
           Pride (in press), Salisbury (1962), and Brudner (1969).



            Linguistic studies on the Indo-Iranian borderland throw light on
   the historical processes of ebb and flow of language areas and on the role
   of contagion, borrowing, and linguistic substrata, as well as genetic
   processes, in language development. In his many contributions to the sub-
  ject, Georg Morgenstierne has referred to the importance of social struc-
   ture in these processes. Thus in an early statement he comments on how
  "the tribal system of the Baloches and Brahuis, which in contrast to that
  of the Pathans favours the assimilation of racially foreign elements into
  the tribe, has no doubt led to frequent changes of language within many
  Baloch and Brahui clans" (1932:8-9). As a tribute to his insight, I should
  like to demonstrate the validity of this contrast, and show its relevance to
  trends along the Pathan-Baluch language boundary. Briefly, I wish to
  demonstrate that the recent northward spread of Baluchi at the expense of
  Pash to in the hill country west of the Suleiman range (Fig. I 6.1) depends
  precisely on the structural differences in the tribal systems of these two
  peoples, to which Morgenstierne refers. The discussion is based mainly
  on material collected during social anthropological fieldwork among
  Pathans in 1954 (see Barth I 959a,b) and in 1960, and among the Marri
 by the late Robert N. Pehrson in I 9 5 5 (see Pehrson I 966).
    The relationship between tribal and ethnic identity and language needs
 to be established. The often-cited Pashto proverb that "he is Pathan who
 does Pashto, not who speaks Pashto" can illustrate the absence of any
 necessary correlation. Yet, in the tribal areas, it is true to say that tribal
 membership presupposes linguistic fluency. In contrast to some other of
 the tribal systems of the Middle East [e.g., South Persia (cf. Barth
 I 961: 130ff)], tribal political structures constitute linguistic communities
and depend on constant internal cross-communication. In the case of
Pathan tribes, these structures are essentially acephalous and are consti-
tuted by lineage councils Uirgas) arranged in a hierarchy of inclusiveness.
Within councils of every level the interests-and in the longer run, sur-
vival-of individuals and segments can only be secured through debate,
requiring the skilled use of the idiom.
    Baluch tribes, however, are socially stratified and have a centralized
form, and the structure is composed of channels of communication
through echelons of leaders. In such a system foreign language bodies
might be encapsulated and communicate upwards through a bilingual
                                                                    69'E
  Jo·1v




                                                 SJ>b.
                                                   'Y    l'.
                                                          '14>1.v          ---··..••••
                                                                              Mekhtar \
                                                                                           -Is.
                                                                                           vi
                                                                                           Co


                                                                                          C'l
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          :::
                                                                                           ~

                                                                                          '";·'
                                                                                           ~
                                                                                          g·
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          :::
                                                                                          ::;:;
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          ;::,
                                                                                          :::
                                                                                          ;::,_
                                                                                          ("')
                                                                                          :::-
                                                                                          ::
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          ~


                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          t:
                                                                                          :::
 29,.'v
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          ~·
                                                                                          t=;·
          0        IO                                                                     ("')
                                                                                          0
                 Miles                                                                    ;::,_
                                                                                          ~

                                                                                          '"'
          68'E

          figure I 6.1
Ethnic processes on the Pathan-Baluch boundary
                          Ethnic Processes on the Pathan-Baluch Boundary      459

             leader, as do linguistic minorities in South-Persian tribes. However, in
             their precarious niche as nomadic mixed herders in a harsh environment,
             the widely dispersed Baluch camps and segments depend for survival also
             on another network of communication, mediating information on the
             availability of grazing, water, and the movements of other persons and
             camps rather than political decisions. This network is formalized in tlie
             Baluch institution of hat-exchanges of information given in a peculiar
             intonation and stereotyped phrases as formal greetings whenever
             tribesmen meet. In both cases, in other words, membership in a tribe
             implies membership in a linguistic community.
                In seeking the causes for the growth and expansion of Baluch-speaking
             tribes at the expense of Pathans, it is convenient first to discuss some of
             the more self-evident possibilities. Indeed a number of factors of undeni-
             able relevance in a situation of competition between tribes seem rather to
             favor the Pathans. With respect to aggregate numbers, Pathans greatly
             outnumber Baluchis; likewise in their over-all density in their respective
             territories. In the zone of contact that concerns us here (Marri/Bugti vs.
             Panni/Tarin/Kakar/Luni/Zarkun/Powindah), the same holds true, and
             Pathan villages and camps are consistently larger than those of the
             Baluchis. Relative prosperity is also on the side of the Pathans-there is
             a general ecological gradient of improvement from south to north, and this
             is mirrored in greater capital accumulation (in dwellings, irrigation devel-
             opments, flocks, movable property, and weapons) among the Pathans.
             Relative rates of natural population growth are difficult to assess in the ab-
             sence of detailed demographic information. Doubtless both populations
             produce a surplus, as evidenced by th.eir history of invasion~ of the plains,
             and the wide dispersal of both groups through contemporary labor migra-
             tion. But the small door-to-door censuses I have suggest a higher rate of
             fertility among Pathan than Baluch, as one would expect in their better
             environment. Finally, in military aggressiveness the reputation of Pathan
             tribes exceeds that of Baluchis, both in their mutual estimation and in the
             judgement of third parties, though perhaps more because of the Pathans'
             better weapons than any difference in the value placed in the two cultures
             on bravery and fighting.
                A number of considerations would thus lead one to expect the pressure
             along the boundary to be primarily from Pathan to Baluch country. In the
             hill regions, until recently, for all practical purposes, uncontrolled by any
             external government, one would expect these pressures to express them-
             selves in fighting, conquest, and over-all expansion. There can be no
             doubt about the anarchy that prevailed in the area (cf. Bruce 1900), which
             resulted in a complex history of conquest and local succession (Dames
              1904). Yet this very anarchy created the situation where structural fea-
             tures of the tribal organizations of the competing peoples become over-



     I
         I
./
        460    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

whelmingly important. Frequently, wars and plundering forays inevitably
tear numbers of people loose from their territorial and social contexts:
splinter groups, fleeing survivors, and families and communities divested
of their property, as well as nuclei of predators, are generated. From such
processes of fragmentation and mobility, a vast pool of personnel results
-persons and groups seeking social identity and membership in viable
communities. The growth rates of such communities will then depend not
so much on their natural fertility rates as on the capacity of their formal
organization to assimilate and organize such potential personnel.
   In this respect, there are striking contrasts between Pathan and Baluch
tribal organization, though the difference in the cultural bases on which
each is built is slight. Fundamentally, both tribal forms derive from the
shared principles of patrilineality, honor, and obligation. Let me try to
sketch these common bases, and then show how the two systems derive
from them.
   I. The patrilinet1l principles are followed in both tribes: Political rights
in the tribe and rights in the tribal estate are vested in men and transmitted
in male line only. Though persons may lose status and rights because of
their mother's lower status, they can never gain rights through their
mother, only through their father. A man's political position inside his
lineage and tribe is thus fixed through agnatic descent.
   2. A position in the tribe implies a patrimony of /zonor which must be
defended against slights from persons with whom one claims to be equal.
An unrequited grievance is' a blemish on one's honor which only talion or
blood revenge can eliminate. A failure to take revenge is an acceptance of
inequality and brings about a loss of honor and position. From the time
they are very small, Pathan boys learn to fight with their peers to defend
their honor (izzlit),just as the Baluch boy who fails to hit back when other
boys beat him is scolded for being beghairat-'without honor.'
   3. Finally, the honor of a tribesman involves an obligation toward
those who depend on his position: his guests, his family who are his legal
wards, and those who have sought his protection as clients (/zamsayalz).
Thus hospitality, patronage, and physical dependence form a complex
with clear political implications.
 ; Pathan tribal organization is based on these principles, as realized for
political and judicial purposes through the mechanism of the council
(jirga). One might say that the model for the whole system is the group of
brothers, independent men with separate interests who, by virtue of their
common blood, keep peace and can unite as a corporate body through
joint decision making on the basis of equality. Extending the notion of
common blood (among patrilineal relatives only), ever-widening circles of
"brotherhood" are defined by ever-deepening genealogies, producing a
hierarchy of merging segments and lineages based on common descent.
 Each such segment becomes corporate in the form of a council of its living
              Ethnic Processes 011 the Patlw11-Ba/11ch Boundary   461

male members, who sit together as agnates with equal rights. It also
follows that the right to speak in one small, local council implies the right
to speak in every council of higher order within the merging series.
   Another important feature of the Pathan tribal system is its t~rritorial
aspect. Groups and their segments hold rights to different types of joint
estate. Persons thus obtain access to agricultural land and to grazing areas
by virtue of agnatic status; as a result, units are also territorial units, and
localities and districts tend to be named after the tribal segment inhabiting
them-names which again usually derive from the common ancestor of
that descent segment.
   The aspect of equality between council members indicates the rele-
vance of honor, point 2, to council procedure. This has tactical implica-
tions since acts which compromise the honor of fellow council members
will lead to retaliation or blood revenge, even against superior force. For
the person who is insulted cannot permit the blemish to remain-he can
sit on the council and act as a tribesman only if he can defend his honor
and assert his equality. It is therefore difficult for such councils to reach
final decisions, and dangerous for the interested parties to use pressure on
members to achieve compliance. Pathan tribes are well able to act
strongly in defense of shared, short-term interests or basic values or in the
pursuit of gain, but generally fail to pursue more long-term strategies, or
to reach agreement on compromises requiring joint action.
   Where a Pathan's honor is lost through a dishonorable act of failure to
extract revenge, he loses his capacity to defend his life and interests in the
council. He must then either flee the country or seek the protection of
another man as noted under point 3. Seeking the protection of one man
is, however, lowering yourself before all the tribesmen, and in most situa-
tions the unfortunate chooses emigration-so Pathans often say that "he
who leaves his tribal land has either committed incest with his mother or
failed to revenge his father." It also follows from the preceding that to ac-
cept hmnsayalzs is in most Pathan areas a commitment that men would
prefer to avoid. In the egalitarian setting of the council, the value of
clients as a fighting force is more than offset by the disputes they may
cause-liabilities which fall squarely on the shoulders of their patron.
Only in rich environments, where the control over a large labor force
gives great economic returns, are such clients an advantage (as, e.g., in
Bannu in preadministration times, and in Malakand Agency today).
   It should be emphasized that this description holds even where, as in
many of the southern Pathan tribes, sardars and maliks are found. An in-
vestigation of actual decision making shows that these leaders have little
authority, and political processes take place within the framework of
egalitarian lineage councils. The tribal growth pattern that follows from
these features is characteristic: It might be called vegetative, based on
natural increase (with a certain loss through individual emigration) and
         462   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 tending toward a ramifying, branching form where local growth 1s as-
 sociated with rapid segmentation.
    Baluch tribal organization, though derived from the same concepts, is
 not based on the particular mechanism of the egalitarian council. Though
 defense of honor among equals is important, it thus does not become built
 into the political system as a m,\jor tactical consideration. A model for the
 Baluch political system is the relationship between a father and his sons-
 one of authority stemming from status, and common submission to this
 authority as the basis for joint action. Instead of working in terms of rhet-
 oric and rallying of equals, with the ultimate sanction of talion, the Baluch
 political and judicial mechanism is based on vertical communication
 between ordinary men and big leaders, with communal action as the ul-
 timate sanction. Political activity thus mainly takes place between
 unequals, and the important principle that is brought into play is not honor
 but obligation, as sketched under point 3. Tribal status in such a system
does not require an assertion of equality but is based on a chain of client-
age and patronage between minor and major leaders in a hierarchy. A
Baluch tribe as a whole becomes divided into segments in a formal pattern
very much like a Pathan tribe, and membership and position in the system
are ascribed on the basis of patrilineal descent; but the politically crucial
aspect of the organization is the recognition of a political clientship tie to
the leader of each group by its members. These leaders again work in the
same "vertical" pattern-political maneuver does not involve appeal to
equals in a council, but communication with and mobilization of more
influential, higher echelon leaders.
   At the top of this hierarchy sits the sardar, who has no equal, only even
more influential connections: with the Khan of Kalat and the government
of the plains. Sardars maintained their influence in the tribe by playing
their inferiors (waderas and mukadams) off against each other, and by
substantial bribes and personal favors-the patron's reciprocal to the
client's request for protection.
   The territorial estate of a Baluch tribe is also allocated differently from
that of Pathans. Among the Marri, grazing rights to the whole tribal area
are held by the sardar and accessible to any Marri by payment of a tax
(gahl), which has now been dispensed with. Agricultural land is held indi-
vidually (until recently by leaders only) or jointly by very large tribal sec-
tions in a system of periodic reallotment. Such systems have also been
common among Pathans; but among them the allocation of fields to sub-
segments and families follows the schema of their genealogical relations,
while among the Marri equal shares are given to all men within the sec-
tion, regardless of genealogical pattern. There is thus no identity between
tribal subunits and territorial units; as might be expected, place names in
Marri area have no reference to social groups, though they sometimes
derive from the personal names of prominent men, past or present.
              Ethnic Processes on the Pathan-Baluclz Boundary    463

    When a man in this system is dishonored, the consequences are of a dif-
 ferent order from what they are for Pathans. Conflicts of honor and
 revenge between equals lead to fission of their immediate group, but need
 not in fact be resolved between the parties since territorial separation can
 take place without consequences for the persons' positions in the political
 structure. A relationship of clientship to the same leader can thus be
 maintained by enemies, though the conflict may also be such as to involve
 the leader and thus force one faction to secede. But where a man or group
 does secede, this implies no important loss of rank, and a new clientship
 relation may be established to another leader. Again in contrast to the
 Pathans, such seceders are welcomed in their new status: The importance
 and influence of a Baluch leader is roughly commensurate with the
 number of his effective followers, and the decision to grant new followers
 protection and rights lies with him and need not be debated and accepted
 by a council of his equals.
   The normal growth pattern that will result in such a system is in part
 different from that of the Pathan system. Further segmentation does not
follow automatically with growth in every generation: Natural growth can
 take place within fixed political units, merely increasing their size. And
where persons secede or are expelled from one segment, they can be
accommodated in an equivalent position in another segment, without loss
of tribal status.
   The structural differences sketched here imply clear differences in
assimilative capacities of the two forms of tribal organization. Disorgan-
ized personnel such as is generated at a high rate during relatively
anarchic periods is readily incorporated in a Baluch tribe: Persons may
seek the protection of, and swear fealty to, a recognized leader within that
tribe. In the case of the Marri, their tribal organization was also clearly
thought of as predatory organization, and for purposes of offense and
increased loot, as well as defense, it was in everybody's interest to
increase the personnel. Thus one Marri leader, himself of Pathan descent,
explained to me: "In those days there was war Uang]-nobody asked
who is your father, brother-you joined the force [las/zkar], moved and
conquered and moved again."
   Though the same military consideration also held for Pathan tribes
along the boundary, incorporation of personnel into their tribal system
would either require that newcomers accept servile status or that a ple-
nary meeting of the whole tribe agreed to accept them as equals, allotted
them a compact block of land, and determined their position in the tribal
schema of segmentation. Though both of these forms of incorporation
have occurred, they are rare, and one would expect the growth rate by
incorporation into Baluch tribes far to exceed that of Pathan tribes.
   There can be little doubt that such is the case. None of the Pathan
tribes along the boundary have sections or, to my knowledge, persons
        464   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

claiming Baluch descent, and the vast majority of tribesmen have recog-
nized agnatic status, though some incorporation of other Pathan groups
has taken place, e.g., among the Kakar and Luni (Baluchistan District
Gazetteer II :76, 85). The tiny Zarkun tribe, partly encapsulated in Marri
territory, is the only one that admits to a (rather fanciful) compound ori-
gin, explaining the name as meaning zar lwum-"thousand nations"-
and their origin as being a defensive confederation against the Marri to
which each Pathan tribe contributed one family. The presence ofso many
small, genealogically distant tribes along the boundary (Panni stem:
Isot/Barozai; Miani stem: Luni/Jafar/Lats; Zarkun; var. Tarins, etc.) is
evidence of this general failure of assimilative growth.
   In the Marri tribe, however, all sections have traditions of incorpo-
ration, and many sections and subsections trace Pathan descent, often to
existing Pathan tribes. Of the three main branches of the Marri, the
Ghazani contains subsections of various origins, the Loharanis are half-
constituted by the Shiranis, tracing descent from the Pathan tribe of that
name, and the Bijaranis are regarded as predominantly of Pathan origin.
Among the Bijaranis the Powadhi section has had the most prolific recent
growth. Mentioned in most texts (based on early and poor material) as a
not particularly significant subsection, their leader is today virtually au-
tonomous in his relation to the Bijarani leader; and the growth of the sec-
tion has taken place so predominantly through incorporation of Pathans
that it is referred to as "Pathan" by other Manis, though it is uniformly
Baluchi speaking.
   This rapid population growth of the Marri tribe, based in large part on
assimilation, has expressed itself also in territorial expansion. Growth
without political subdivision has progressively tipped the military scales
in favor of the Marris; over the last hundred years parts of Panni, Luni,
Zarkun, and Tarin land have been conquered, and the linguistic boundary
moved accordingly. The broken fragments of Pathan tribes along the
boundary, and the Wanechi language remnant among them, suggest that
the northward trend has both considerable consistency and antiquity.
Under present more peaceful conditions, increasing numbers of Marris
also penetrate with their flocks into Pathan country as far north as Loralai
and Mekhtar-an encroachment which the administrative authorities
battle against but are unable to stop.
   The northward expansion of the Baluchi language area in the hill
country west of the Suleiman range is thus an aspect of rather complex
processes of incorporation and exclusion along the ethnic boundary by
which Pathans become assimilated into Baluch tribal organization rather
than a simple case of Baluch population growth and expansion. An analy-
sis of tribal organization illuminates some of the critical factors underlying
the linguistic spread.




                                                                                 rrrd
    17
    A Sociolinguistic Approach
   to Socialization; with Some Reference
   to Educability
  BASIL BERNSTEIN




    Basil Bernstein is Professor of Sociology and director of
   the Sociolinguistics Research Unit at the Institute of
   Education, London University. For some years his re-
   search has been concentrated on speech as a central
   process in social theory. He has conducted extensive in-
   vestigations into the social implications of differences in
   speech in London.
     In the present chapter Bernstein sets forth the theoreti-
  cal perspective that forms the basis for his work. The dis-
  tinction between elaborated and restricted codes, for
  which he is internationally noted, is developed as part of
  a general theory of the processes by which fundamental
 properties of social systems-division of labor, belief,
 type of solidarity, family roles, modes of social control-
 are linked and maintained (or changed). The present
 essay is a general introduction to the work which was
 written especially for this volume-the supporting data
 appear in a series of papers and monographs (e.g., Bern-
 stein and Henderson I 969; Brandis and Henderson
 I 970; Cook, J972; Hasan 1972; Turner and Mohan
 1970; Robinson and Rackstraw 1972; Bernstein 1971).
    The essential thing is that Bernstein identifies a set of
significant dimensions and systematically relates them.
The dimensions and relationships are richly productive,
both of research and further thought, but most important
is that Bernstein shows that sociolinguistics can and must
come to grips with general social theory. There is so
much to discover in the structure of speech that discov-
ery may remain exciting for its own sake for some time to
come. If, however, as Bernstein maintains, speech
                            465
466   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

systems are generated, or controlled, by forms of social
relations, then discoveries, however fascinating and well
described, cannot be explained without a theory that
embraces social relations. [Cf. the relationship between
descriptive and explanatory adequacy in Chomsky's
grammatical theory (1966).] If sociolinguistic research
often begins as an extension of linguistics, it must end as
an intension of the social sciences-but in the idiom of
disciplines that is only to say that it changes from a way
of studying language to a way of studying man as a social
being.
   Much of the initial effort of sociolingusitics is to show
as problematic what is often taken for granted. Bernstein
does this. His work makes it impossible ever again to
pass over the problem of the functions of speech with the
"truism" that language is very important because it
serves · to transmit culture. English, then, transmits
English culture. As this essay shows, the primary ques-
tions are: How? Which parts of culture? For whom? [Cf.
in this respect Bernstein and Henderson 1969.]
   A dichotomy such as elaborated and restricted codes
lends itself Ito dichotomous thinking. Bernstein warns
against it, but the point needs to be emphasized. First of
all, a given individual, family, or group may (and most cer-
tainly will) commonly make use of both kinds of codes
(more exactly, of more than one of the varieties of coding
indicated in the chapter). It is not a question of assigning
persons, families, or classes to a single type of code but
rather of ascertaining the scope of their repertoire of
types of coding, and any hierarchy among them. Bern-
s.tein does focus on the dominant, or preferred, coding of
a person or group, and hence his concepts are to be un-
derstood as ideal types. The present chapter, and the de-
tailed research, show that the types are degrees of more
and less, not of all or nothing (see Cook 1972).
   Second, while the types themselves may be defined by
a particular co-occurrence property (that of contrast in
range, or predictability, or alternatives), their use is sub-
ject to rules of alternation. Bernstein observes that con-
text is a major control upon syntactic and lexical selec-
tion. One would not be surprised to find the quantitative
 measure to vary by social position and situation, as do




                                                                d
              A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   467

      the phonological variables studies by Labov (Chapter
      19).
        Third, the distinctions are not evaluations, and cer-
     tainly not pejorative evaluation. Each type of coding is
     seen as appropriate to the social matrix that gives rise to
     it; the rewards, costs, and possible failures of each are
    recognized. The differences do come under evaluation,
    and sanction, within a complex society, especially where
    individuals of different social background are brought
    into close contact. They do show sources of stress under
    conditions of social mobility, and Bernstein is concerned
    to point out such implications. Either type of coding may
    show warmth, respect for personal dignity, etc. ("Indi-
    vidual oriented" might be more helpful in connotation
   that "person oriented" in this regard.)
       Restricted code use on the one hand, relies heavily on
   gestures, intonation, and verbal metaphor to express
   respect, familiarity, etc., toward addressees or to indicate
   attitude (certainty about, sureness of, etc.) toward a mes-
   sage. These nonverbal signs are fully intelligible only to
   audiences who share the speaker's cultural background
  (home, ethnic identity, intellectual interests, etc.). In
  elaborated codes, on the other hand, a much greater
  amount of such attitudinal iriformation is expressed by
  verbal means. To the extent that these verbal devices are
  taught in public schools (accessible to all, regardless of
  home background), elaborated codes are more suitable
 for cross-cultural communication (Gumperz 1970a).
      Children used to predominantly restricted coding, i.e.,
 who have not had practice in much elaborated code use,
 tend to have difficulty in culturally diverse, big city
 school systems. As Bernstein points out elsewhere
 (1969), teachers in such schools tend to be unable to deal
 with the modes of communication of culturally different
children, and this accounts for much of the children's
lack of educational success (see also Gumperz 1970b).
Given a communality of cultural background, however,
those skilled in restricted code usage may have some ad-
vantage insofar as it is true that the paralinguistic signals
carry the true import of speech wherever they conflict
with the import of the words. (Cf. Bateson et al. 1956;
Hymes 196lb:32I). Note also, e.g., that dramatic per-
468   Genesis, Maintenance, a11d Change of Linguistic Codes

formances as well as music and poetry tend to rely heav-
ily on restricted code-like metaphoric devices, and that in
many situations verbal explicitness of the sort typical of
elaborated coding is inappropriate, even a sign of incom-
petence. It should also be stressed that these functional
notions are entirely independent of "ungrammatical" or
substandard features, and that it is orientation and use of
communicative modes that is in question, not fun-
damental capacity for logical analysis and conceptual
thought (see Labov 1969a).
    Finally, the distinctions do not point to wholly fixed,
received sets of linguistic habits. Bernstein points out
that frequency and length of talk are not what is in ques-
tion. In the first instance, size of vocabulary and scope of
gramm~tical competence are not at issue either (although
long-range consequences might be expected). Long
 stretches of complex syntax, if only taken over as lan-
 guage forms that cannot be used in creative, unpredicted,
 individuating ways, would count as a restricted, not an
 elaborating, use (Barnes et al. 1969:61). As the preceding
 phrase indicates, it would be more appropriate perhaps to
 speak of elaborating and restricting codes, or better yet,
 of elaborated and restricted coding. It is of the essence of
 Bernstein's approach' that it is concerned with a mode of
 action (not a countersign of social class): Witness the
 term communication codes, and the stress on the state-
 ment "A social role can then be considered as a co1nplex
 coding activity . ... " (It is helpful to keep in mind the
 origin of this aspect of Bernstein's approach in the late
 Hughlings Jackson's distinction between "now-coding"
 and "then-coding," i.e., between ad hoc formulation of
 what one is saying (likely to be reflected in more and
 longer hesitation pauses, as well as less predictability of
 forms used), and use of preformulated expressions (greet-
 ings, sayings, and commonplaces provide obvious ex-
 amples).
    The key to the linkage between codes, role systems,
 families, communication systems, and modes of social
 control is the notion of range of alternatives. Codes are
 elaborated or restricted, according to whether it is dif-
 ficult or easy to predict their linguistic alternatives; role
  systems are open or closed, according to whether they
 permit or reduce range of alternatives for realization of
                 A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization     469

      verbal meaning; families are person oriented or posi-
      tional, according to whether decision making is based on
      the psychological (individual) qualities or formal (socially
      defined) status of persons, implying a greater or lesser
      range within which decisions are open to discussion;
      communication systems are open or closed, according to
      this last dimension (openness of decisions to discussion);
     family type and communication system jointly entail
      another important dimension, that of role discretion-in
      the person-oriented, open type there is greater role dis-
     cretion, i.e., greater range of alternatives of the role in dif-
     ferent social situations, while in the positional, more
     closed type, there is less role discretion. With modes of
     social control, matters are somewhat more complex; per-
     sonal and positional modes are both subtypes of appeal,
     itself contrasted to the imperative mode; but the basis of
     all three distinctions is again role discretion (the range of
     alternatives accorded).
        Two further dimensions multiply the range of alterna-
I
     tives within the theory itself. With regard to role systems,
     two orders, or areas, of meaning are noted, those of ob-
I·   ject and person, with respect to each of which a role
     system might be open (encouraging novel meanings,
     hence alternatives) or closed. There may thus be "ob-
     ject" or "person" oriented codes, either elaborated or
     restricted. Later, two variants for each such type of code
     are suggested, considering whether the code is used to
     explore (primarily?) means or ends. There are thus at
     least eight possible types of code, four of them person
     oriented and four object oriented, each four subdivided
     as to elaborated and restricted, and again, as to means
     and ends focus. Morever, the two orders of meaning,
     person and object orientation, are presented as areas
     with regard to which a role system may be open or
     closed. Both pertain to any given role system. In princi-
     ple, then, a person, family, or group might be character-
     izable in any one of sixteen ways (assuming an exclusive
     or dominant mode). The table on page 4 70 shows the pos-
     sibilities; each cell contains one of the possible combina-
     tions of person and object orientation. Possibly, the
     dominance of orientation toward one area, or order, of
     meaning is so great as to obviate any need to consider
     more than eight possibilities [El(e), El(m), R(e), R(m) for
         470     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                                                              Object Orientation*

                                                         Elaborated         Rl'strictl'd

                                                    Ends       Means     Ends       Ml'ans


                        Elaborated
                                       Ends
                                              {~    El(e),
                                                    El(e)
                                                    El(m),
                                                                El(e),
                                                                El(m)
                                                                El(m),
                                                                         El(e),
                                                                         R(e)
                                                                         El(m),
                                                                                    El(e),
                                                                                    R(m)
                                                                                    El(m),
Pl'rson Orientation
                                      Means   {"0   El(e)       El(m)    R(e)       R(m)
                                                    R(e),       R(e),    R(e),      R(e),
                        Restricted
                                      Ends
                                              {~    El(e)
                                                    R(m),
                                                                El(m)
                                                                R(m),
                                                                         R(e)
                                                                         R(m),
                                                                                    R(m)
                                                                                    R(m),
                                      Ml'ans {~     El(e)       El(m)    R(e)       R(m)

                      * P, person orientation; 0, object orientation;     El, elaborated; R,
                      restricted; (e) ends; (m) means.

         both person orientation (any column in the table) and ob-
         ject orientation (any row)]. In any case, when one singles
         out, say, a person-oriented elaborated code (means
         variant) for discussion in relation to a type of social con-
         trol, one must understand a preferred or dominant mode
         of coding (not an absence of coding with respect to the
         other order, in this case, object).
             Notice that Bernstein's work could be developed to ac-
          count for the origin and maintenance of particular genres
          of speech. In the context of family types and forms of
          social control he observes that "special forms of arbitra-
          tion, reconciliation, and explanation will develop. It
          would be interesting if Bernstein's approach should yield
          predictions different in this regard from that of Roberts
          (see Roberts and Forman, Chapter 6). The two are, of
          course, distinct both in basis in the verbal genres to
          which they most readily apply, Roberts dealing with
          salient expressive models, games, and the like, whereas
          Bernstein's approach points to speech structures that
          have yet to be well described or even identified for many
          cultures, e.g., what. counts as an apology, a request, an in-
          struction. Sociolinguistic description here would enrich
          both approaches. Certainly, in extending Bernstein's
          theory to societies of which the investigator lacks a par-
          ticipant's knowledge, many difficult, yet rewarding, eth-
          nographic problems arise-the distribution of restricted
          coding according to formality or politeness of situation,
          or type of political authority (one suspects that the
             A Socioling11istic Approach to Socialization   471

   Pathans described by Barth favor elaborated coding in
   political communication, the Baluchi not). It is es-
  sential to bear in mind that restricted coding (e.g., a genre
  such as "small talk") is as much an accomplishment as
  elaborated coding; those who have the knowledge and
  skill to manage it in one set of circumstances may not in
  another, and some may be unsuccessful altogether. In
  any community to be able to identify "small talk," to
  recognize where it is and is not done, and to discover
  what comfort or success in it presuppose, might be es-
  pecially revealing.
     Bernstein places his work in relation to that of Whorf.
  Whorf, of course, did not consider the form of social rela-
  tionships, or differences in function within a single lan-
  guage. He did, however, specify that it was not a lan-
  guage as such but rather a consistent active selection of
  its resources, a fashion of speaking, that was to be stud-
 ied. Bernstein's delineation of communication codes can
  be seen as giving Whorf's insight new life and socio-
 logical substance. There is a further parallel between the
 two approaches. Whorf held that different languages en-
 tail different world views; that thesis itself implies a
 single universal relationship between languages and
 world views. Multilingualism and cross-cultural dif-
 ferences in the use of language in socialization make the
 functional implication something to be demonstrated, not
 taken for granted (Hymes 1966a). Bernstein's theory
 implies a single universal relationship between linguistic
 and paralinguistic channels, on the one hand, and social
 systems (including ingredients of world view), on the
 other. It assumes that personal (individualized) meanings
and novel intent are always made explicit, and elab-
orated, through relatively novel, unpredictable words
and syntax, never through selection and elaboration of
conventionalized verbal means (e.g., proverbs) and/or
paralanguage. The range of alternatives, or unpredict-
ability within the one (words and syntax) matches the
range of alternatives in the other. Bernstein's view gives
added, realistic dimension to the notion of the "creative"
use oflanguage (Chomsky 1966); but its assumptions can
and should be tested cross-culturally. Indeed, a great im-
portance of Bernstein's work for the development of
sociolinguistics is that it provides a theory that stimu-
       472    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

        !ates, gives immediate theoretical point to, ethnographic
        work.
            The final section of the chapter indicates the range of
        suggestiveness of the theory. It is not without bearing on
        subjects as seemingly remote as interviewing (Strauss
        and Schatzmann 1955), liturgical reform, and structural
        analysis of myth. In societies where myths convey of-
        ficial cultural meaning through terse, traditional ma-
        terials, personal meaning may find expression through
        imagery and tone in ways that very much suggest an
        institutionalized form ofrestricted coding (Hymes 1968a).
         Additional related readings are provided by Gardner
        (1966); Mead (1937, 1964a); Sapir (1949b, 1949c,
         I 949e).



          If a social group, by virtue of its class relation, i.e., as a result of
its common occupational function and social status, has developed strong
communal bonds; if the work relations of this group offers little variety;
little exercise in decision making; if assertion, if it is to be successful must
be a collective rather than an individual act; if the work task requires
physical manipulation and control rather than symbolic organization and
control; if the diminished authority of the man at work is transformed into
an authority of power at home; if the home is overcrowded and limits the
variety of situations it can offer; if the children socialize each other in an
environment offering little intellectual stimuli; if all these attributes are
found in one setting, then it is plausible to assume that such a social
setting will generate a particular form of communication which will shape
the intellectual, social, and affective orientation of the children.
    I am suggesting that if we look into the work relationships of this partic-
 ular group, its community relationships, its family role systems, it is rea-
 sonable to argue that the genes of social class may well be carried not
 through a genetic code but through a communication code that social
 class itself promotes. Such a communication code will emphasize verbally
 the communal rather than the individual, the concrete rather than the ab-
 stract, substance rather than the elaboration of processes, the here and
 now rather than exploration of motives and intentions, and positional
 rather than personalized forms of social control. To say this about a com-
 munication system is not to dis value it, for such a communication system
 has a vast potential, a considerable metaphoric range and a unique
 esthetic capacity. A whole range of diverse meanings can be generated
 by such a system of communication. It so happens, however, that this
                     A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   473

communication code directs the child to orders of learning and relevance
that are not in harmony with those required by the school. Where the
child is sensitive to the communication system of the school and thus to
its orders of learning and relation, then the experience of school for this
child is one of symbolic and social development; where the child is not
sensitive to the communication system at school, then this child's experi-
ence at school becomes one of symbolic and social change. In the first
case we have an elaboration of social identity; in the second case, a
change of social identity. Thus between the school and community of the
working class child there may exist a cultural discontinuity based upon
two radically different systems of communication.

  THE SOCIAL ORIGINS OF
  COMMUNICATION CODES
    I shall spend the rest of this section examining how different forms of
 communication arise. I shall argue that the particular form of a social rela-
 tion acts selectively upon what is said, when it is said, and how it is said.
 The form of the social relation regulates the options that speakers take up
 at both syntactic and lexical levels. For example, an adult talking to a
 child will use a form of speech in which both the syntax and vocabulary
 are relatively simple. The speech used by members of an army combat
 unit on maneuvers will clearly be different from the same members'
 speech at a padre's evening. To put it another way, the consequences of
 the form the social relation takes, are transmitted in terms of certain syn-
tactic and lexical selections. Thus different forms of social relation can
generate very different speech systems or communication codes (Ervin-
Tripp 1964, 1969; Gumperz 1964b; Hymes 1967; Blom and Gumperz,
Chapter 14).
    I shall argue that different speech systems or codes create for their
speakers different orders of relevance and relation. The experience of the
speakers may then be transformed by what is made significant or relevant
by different speech systems. As the child learns his speech, or in the terms
I shall use here, learns specific codes which regulate his verbal acts, he
learns the requirements of his social structure. The experience of the child
is transformed by the learning generated by his own apparently voluntary
acts of speech. The social structure becomes, in this way, the substratum
of the child's experience essentially through the manifold consequence of
the linguistic process. From this point of view, every time the child speaks
or listens, the social structure is reinforced in him and his social identity
shaped. The social structure becomes the child's psychological reality
through the shaping of his acts of speech.
   The same argument can be stated rather more formally. Individuals
        474    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

come to learn their social roles through the process of communication. A
social role from this point of view is a constellation of shared, learned
meanings through which individuals are able to enter stable, consistent,
and publically recognized forms of interaction with others. A social role
can then be considered as a complex coding activity controlling both the
creation and organization of specific meanings and the conditions for
their transmission and reception. Now if the communication system
which defines a given role is essentially that of speech, it should be pos-
sible to distinguish critical social roles in terms of the speech forms they
regulate. By critical social roles I mean those through which the culture is
transmitted. These roles are learned in the family, in the age or peer
group, in the school, and at work. These are the four major sets of roles
learned in the process of socialization. As a person learns to subordinate
his behavior to the linguistic code through which the role is realized, then
orders of meaning, of relation, of relevance are made available to him.
The complex of meanings, e.g., generated within the role system of a fam-
ily, reverberates developmentally in the child to inform his general con-
duct. Children who have access to different speech systems or codes, i.e.,
children who learn different roles by virtue of their family's class position
in a society, may adopt quite different social and intellectual orientations
and procedures despite a common potential.
   The concept code, as I shall use it, refers to the principle which regu-
lates the selection and organization of speech events. I shall briefly
outline two fundamental types of communication codes and consider their
regulative functions. These codes will be defined in terms of the relative
ease or difficulty of predicting the syntactic alternatives which speakers
take up to organize meanings. If it is difficult to predict across a represent-
ative range the syntactic options or alternatives taken up in the organiza-
tion of speech, this form of speech will be called an elaborated code. In
the case of an elaborated code, the speaker will select from a wide range
of syntactic alternatives, and these will be flexibly organized. A restricted
code is one where it is much less difficult to predict, across a represent-
ative range, the syntactic alternatives, as these will be drawn from a
narrow range. Whereas there is flexibility in the use of alternatives in an
elaborated code, in the case of a restricted code the syntactic organization
is marked by rigidity. Notice that these codes are not defined in terms of
vocabulary or !exes. Jargon does not constitute a restricted code. How-
ever, it is likely that the lexical differentiation of certain semantic fields
will be greater in the case of an elaborated code.
   It is clear that context is a major control upon syntactic and lexical
selections, consequently, it is not easy to give general linguistic criteria
for the isolation of the two codes. Derivations from the theory would be
required in order to describe syntactic and lexical usage by any one




                                                                                  rd
                          A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization           475

    speaker in a specific context. 1 The definitions given in the text would have
    increasing relevance to the extent that speakers could freely determine for
    themselves the nature of the constraints upon their syntax and !exes. In
   other words, the less rigid the external constraints upon the speech, the
   more appropriate the general definitions. The more rigid the external con-
   straints, the more specific the criteria required. It is also important to
   point out that the codes refer to cultural not genetic controls upon the op-
   tions speakers take up. The codes refer to performance not to compe-
   tence in Chomsky's sense of these terms. There may be differentpe1form-
   ances for every degree of competence. It is certainly the case that these
   codes can be seen as different kinds of communicative competence as this
   concept is expounded by Dell Hymes (1970d).
      If a speaker is oriented toward an elaborated code, then the code will
  facilitate the speaker in his attempts to make explicit (verbally) his inten-
  tions. If a speaker is oriented toward a restricted code, then this code will
  not facilitate the verbal expansion of the speaker's intent. In the case of an
  ~laborated code the speech system requires more complex planning than
  Ill the case of a restricted code. For example, in the case of an elaborated
  Code the time dimension of the verbal planning of the speech is likely to be
  longer (provided that the speaker is not quoting from himself) than in the
  case of a restricted code [Bernstein 1962, 1964b (especially the post-
  script)]. It will be argued that the events in the environment which take on
  significance when these codes are used are different, whether the events
 be social, intellectual, or affective. Those two codes, elaborated and
                                                                                               !
 restricted, are generated by a particular form of social relation. Indeed                     iJ

 they are likely to be a realization of different social structures. They do
 not necessarily develop solely because of a speaker's innate ability.
     We can now ask what is responsible for the simplification and rigidity of                 I'

 the syntax of a restricted code. Why should the vocabulary across certain                     !
 semantic fields be drawn from a narrow range? Why are the speaker's in-
tentions relatively unelaborated verbally? Why should the speech con-
trolled by a restricted code tend to be fast, fluent, with reduced articula-
~ory clues, the meanings often discontinuous, condensed, and local,
'.~volving a low level of syntactic and vocabulary selection where the
   how" rather than the "what" of the communication is important; above
ali, Why should the meaning of the person be implicit rather than verbally
explicit? Why should the code orient its speakers to a low level of
causality?

ab; R~search carried out by the Sociological Research Unit shows that ~here are consider-
   e differences between middle-class and working-class five-year-old children at five years
~nd seven years of age in their ability to switch grammar and !exes in accordance with the
l:ture of the context. [See Hawkins 1968; Henderson 1968; also Hakulinen, Lewis, and
   Ylor (in preparation).]
         476    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

   A restricted code will arise where the form of the social relation is
based upon closely shared identifications, upon an extensive range of
shared expectations, upon a range of common assumptions. Thus a
restricted code emerges where the culture or subculture raises the "we"
above "l." 2 Such codes will emerge as both controls and transmitters of
the culture in such diverse groups as prisons, the age group of adoles-
cents, army, friends of long standing, between husband and wife. The use
of a restricted code creates social solidarity at the cost of the verbal elabo-
ration of individual experience. The type of social solidarity realized
through a restricted code points toward mechanical solidarity, whereas
the type of solidarity realized through elaborated codes points toward
organic solidarity (Durkheim 1933). The form of communication re-
inforces the form of the social relation rather than creating a need to
create speech which uniquely fits the intentions of the speakers.
 Restricted codes do not give rise to verbally differentiated "l's." If we
think of the communication pattern between married couples of long
standing, then we see that meaning does not have to be fully explicit, a
slight shift of pitch or stress, a small gesture, can carry a complex
 meaning. Communication goes forward against a backcloth of closely
 shared identifications and affective empathy which removes the need to
 elaborate verbal meanings and logical continuity in the organization of the
 speech. Indeed, orientation in these relationships is less toward verbal but
 more toward extraverbal means. For extraverbal means are likely to be
 used to transmit intentions, purposes, and qualifications. lt follows from
 this that speakers limited to a restricted code may well have difficulty in
 switching from this form of communication to other forms of com-
 munication which presuppose different role relations and so different
 social orientations. Thus a restricted code may limit certain kinds of role
 switching. However, it must be pointed out that a restricted code may be
 entirely appropriate for certain contexts.
    An elaborated code will arise wherever the culture or subculture
 emphasizes the "I" over the "we." It will arise wherever the intent of the
 other person cannot be taken for granted. Inasmuch as the intent of the
 other person cannot be taken for granted, then speakers are forced to
 elaborate their meanings and make them both explicit and specific.
 Meanings which are discrete and local to the speaker must be cut so that
 they are intelligible to the listener. And this pressure forces the speaker to
  select from among syntactic alternatives and encourages differentiation of
  vocabulary. In terms of what is transmitted verbally, an elaborated code

   2 In different ways Vyg~tsky, Sapir, and Malinowski have drawn attention to the simplifi-

 cation of grammar and the lack of specificity in !exes where social relationships are based
 upon closely shared assumptions and identifications.
                    A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   477

 encourages the speaker to focus upon the experience of others as different
 from his own. In the case of a restricted code, what is tra~smitted verbally
 usually refers to the other person in terms of a common group or status
 membership. What is said here epitomizes the social structure and its
 basis of shared assumptions. Thus restricted codes could be considered
 status or positional codes, whereas elaborated codes are oriented to
 persons. An elaborated code, in principle, presupposes a sharp boundary
 or gap between self and others which is crossed through the creation of
 speech which specifically fits a differentiated "other." In this sense, an
 elaborated code is oriented toward a person rather than a social category
 or status. In the case of a restricted code, the boundary or gap is between
 sharers and nonsharers of the code. In this sense a restricted code is posi-
tional or status not person oriented. It presupposes a generalized rather
than a differentiated other.
   In the case of an elaborated code, the orientation is toward the verbal
channel, for this channel will carry the elaboration of the speaker's inten-
tions. In the case of restricted codes, to varying degrees it is the ex-
traverbal channels which become objects of special perceptual activity. It
is important to point out that restricted code users are not nonverbal, only
that the speech is of a different order from that controlled by an ela-
borated code. If an elaborated code ci·eates the possibility for the trans-
mission of individual symbols, then a restricted code creates the possibil-
ity for the transmission of communalized symbols. I now want to discuss
differences in the type of social roles which are realized through these two
codes.


  OPEN AND CLOSED ROLE SYSTEMS
   Let us first consider the range of alternatives that a role system (say
that of the family) makes available to individuals for the verbal realization
of meanings. Here we need to distinguish between two basic orders of
meaning, one which refers to interpersonal and intrapersonal rela-
tionships and one which refers to relationships between objects-object
meanings and person meanings. We could call a role system which
reduced the range of alternatives for the realization of verbal meaning a
closed type. It would follow that the greater the reduction in the range of
alternatives, the more communal or coilective the verbal meanings and
the lower the order and more rigid the syntactic and vocabulary selec-
tions-thus the more restricted the code. However, we could call a role
system which permitted a range of alternatives for the realization of
verbal meanings an open type. It would follow that the greater the range
of alternatives permitted by the role system, the more individualized the
           478     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

verbal meanings, the higher the order, and the more flexible the syntactic
and vocabulary selection and so the more elaborated the code. 3
  We can now take this simple dichotomy a little further by picking up the
di~tinction between object and person orders of meaning. A role system
may be open or closed with respect to the alternatives it permits for the
verbal realization of object or person meanings (Fig. 17.1).

                                                  Role Systems

                        Elaborated code               Open              Elaborated code
                          (person)                                        (object)

Verbal
                 Person----------+-----------Object
MEANINGS


                      · Restricted code              Closed             Restricted code
                         (person)                                        (object)




   Now in the area where the role system is open, novel meanings are
likely to be encouraged and a complex conceptual order explored. In the
area where the role system is closed, novel meanings are likely to be dis-
couraged and the conceptual order limited. Where the role system is of
the closed type, verbal meanings are likely to be assigned. The individual
(or child) steps into the meaning system and leaves it relatively undis-
turbed. Where the role system is of the open type, the individual is more
likely to achieve meaning on his own terms, and here there is the potential
of disturbing or changing the pattern of received meanings. We can begin
to see that in the area where the role system is open, there is an induced
motivation to explore and actively seek out and extend meanings; where
the role is closed, there is little induced motivation to explore and create
novel meanings. Let us take this a little further. Where the role system is
open, the individual or child learns to cope with ambiguity and isolation in

   " Our research shows that the speech of middle-class children compared to working-class
children at five years of age is more likely to show greater differentiation in the open set lex-
ical choices within the nominal group, and that these children are more flexible in their use of
the grammatical options they take up within the nominal group. The working-class children
are more likely to select pronouns as heads (especially third person pronouns). Where pro-
nouns are used as head, the possibility of both modification and qualification is considerably
reduced. Further, our research shows [as does that of Loban (1966)] that middle-class
children are more likely, in certain contexts, to use more frequently than working-class
children modal verbs of uncertainty or possibility. A detailed discussion of this work will be
found in a future Sociological Research Unit monograph (Hawkins and Turner, in prepara-
tion).
                       A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   479

     the creation of verbal meanings; where the role system is closed, the indi-
     vidual or child forgoes such learning. On the contrary, he learns to create
     verbal meanings in social contexts which are unambiguous and com-
     munalized. Such an individual or child may experience considerable ten-
    sion and role conflict if he persistently attempts to individualize the basis
    of his syntactic and vocabulary selections, and thus attempts to create or
    point toward an open role system. Notice that what is a source of strain
    here is precisely that which an individual or child learns to do if he is
    socialized into an open role system. Thus a source of role strain in
    restricted codes is precisely the role relationship appropriate to an
    elaborated code.
       We have now outlined a framework which shows a causal connection
    between role systems, communication codes, and the realization of dif-
   ferent orders of meaning and relevance. Emphasis has been laid upon the
   relationship between roles and codes. It is possible for a person to be able
   to write in an elaborated code but not to be able to speak it, for he may not
   be able to manage the face-to-face requirements of the role (over and
   above the matter of dialect). This may apply, e.g., to a bright working-
   class boy whose early socialization has offered little training in the social
   role. In the same way, object and person forms of an elaborated code not
   only create different orders of meaning; they are realized through dif-
  ferent role relations. It may well be that the cultural tension between the
  sciences, especially the applied sciences, add the arts reflects the different
  role relations which control object and person forms of the elaborated
  code.
      The organization of education often produces cleavage and insulation
  between subjects and levels, and this serves to reduce role and code
  switching between person and object modes of the elaborated code and
 from restricted to elaborated codes.
     If we ask what are the general social forces which influence the devel-
 opment of elaborated and restricted codes and their two modes, the
 answer is likely to be found in two sources. These shape the culture and
 role systems of the four major socializing agencies, the family, the age
 group (or peer group), the school, and work. One major source of the
 movement from restricted to elaborated codes lies in increases in the
 complexity of the division of labor. This changes both the nature of
the occupational roles and their linguistic bases. The two modes of the
elaborated code may well be affected by the movement of economics from
goods to service types. The shift from a goods to a service economy may
Well promote the development of the person mode of an elaborated code.
The second major source of code orientation is likely to be the character
of the central value system. Pluralistic societies are likely to produce
strong orientations toward the person mode of an elaborated code,
        480    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

whereas monolithic societies are likely to strengthen the orientation
towards the object mode. It should be remembered that persons can be
treated as objects.


  COMMUNICATION CODES
  AND EDUCABILITY

   I have been trying to show how the nature of the division of labor and
the character of the central value system affects communication codes
through the way they affect the culture and role systems of the major
socializing agencies, especially the family and school. Social class posi-
tion regulates the occupational function, the intrafamilial and interfamilial
relationships, and responsiveness to the school. Thus we can expect,
broadly speaking, to find both modes of an elaborated code within the
middle class together with restricted codes. In the lower working class we
could expect to find a high proportion of families limited to a restricted
code. We might further expect that upwardly mobile working-class chil-
dren would move toward the object rather than the person mode of the
elaborated code.
   Where children are limited to a restricted code, primarily because of the
subculture and role systems of the family, community, and work, we can
expect a major problem of educability whose source lies not in the genetic
code but in the culturally determined communication code.
   Children limited to a restricted code learn a code where the extra verbal
tends to become a major channel for the qualification and elaboration of
individual experience. This does not mean that such children's speech
output is relatively reduced. The verbal planning of the speech, relative to
an elaborated code, involves a relatively low order and rigidity of syn-
tactic organization. The interpersonal and intrapersonal, although clearly
perceived and felt, are less verbally differentiated. The concept of self-
development through a restricted code does not, itself, become an area of
enquiry, as in the case of an elaborated code, particularly one whose ori-
entation is toward persons. In the case of an elaborated code, such a code
points to the possibilities which inhere in a complex conceptual hierarchy
for the organization and expression of inner experience. This is much less
the case where experience is regulated by a restricted code, for this code
orients its speakers to a less complex conceptual hierarchy and so to a low
order of causality. What is made available for learning through elaborated
and restricted codes is radically different. Social and intellectual orienta-
tions, motivational imperative and forms of social control, rebellion, and
innovation are different. Thus the relative backwardness of many
working-class children who live in areas of high population density or in
                       A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   481

    rural areas may well be a culturally induced backwardness transmitted by
    the linguistic process. Such children's low performance on verbal IQ
    tests, their difficulty with abstract concepts, and their failures within the
    language area, their general inability to profit from the school all may
    result from the limitations of a restricted code. For these children the
    school induces a change of code and with this a change in the way the
    children relate to their kin and community. At the same time we often
   offer these children grossly inadequate schools with less than able teach-
   ers. No wonder they often fail-for the "more" tend to receive more and
   become more, while the socially defined "less" receive less and become
   less.
      I want to make one final point. A restricted code contains a vast poten-
   tial of meanings. It is a form of speech which symbolizes a communally
                                                                                    '   '
  based culture. It carries its own esthetic. It should not be disvalued. We        .i / '
                                                                                    '''
  must ensure that the material conditions of the schools we offer, their val-
  ues, social organization, forms of control and pedagogy, the skills and sen-
  sitivities of the teachers are refracted through an understanding of the cul-
  ture these children bring to the school. After all, we do no less for the
  middle-class child. The problem does not stop there. Housing conditions
  must be improved, social services extended, and preschool education
 developed.
     We cannot say what a child is capable of, as we do not have a theory of
 what an optimum learning environment looks like; and even if such a
 theory existed, we are unwilling to redirect national expenditure toward
 physically creating it for children, on the scale required.


   FAMILY ROLE SYSTEMS, SOCIAL CONTROL,
   AND COMMUNICATION
     I shall now look more closely at the relationships between role systems
 and communication codes, as the connection between social class and
 communication codes is too imprecise. Such a relationship omits the
 dynamics of the causal relationship. In order to examine these dynamics,
 it is necessary to look at the nature of the role system of a family and its
procedures of social controL The basic requirement of such an analysis is
that it is predictive and so gives rise to measurable criteria for evaluating
the interrelationships between role systems, forms of social control, and
linguistic orientations.
    It is possible to evaluate family role systems by reference to the prin-
ciples which for any one family control the allocation of decision
making. Thus we could consider the effect of the allocation of decision
making on the extent and kind of interactions between members of the
         482    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

family. Let us postulate two types of families-positional and person-
oriented families.'1

  Positional Fwnilies. If the area of decision making is invested in the
members' formal status (father, mother, grandfather, grandmother, age of
child, or sex of child), this type of family will be called positional. (It is not
necessarily authoritarian or "cold" rather than "warm.") In such a family
there would be a clear separation of roles. There would be formally
defined areas of decision making and judgments accorded to members of
the family in terms of their formal status. In such a family type we could
expect close relationships and interactions between the parents and
grandparents. Further, we could expect that the parents would closely
regulate the child's relationships with his age peers (if middle class) or the
child's relationship with his peers would be relatively independent of the
parents' regulation (if working class). Thus in certain positional families
the socialization of the child might well be through his own age mates.
Positional families, it is suggested, would give rise to a weak or closed
communication system.

   Person-Oriented Families. By contrast we could consider a family type
where the range of decisions, modifications, and judgments were a func-
tion of the psychological qualities of the person rather than a function of
the formal status. In such families there is clearly a limit to the interac-
tions set by age development and status ascription. However, status
ascription would be reduced (age, sex, age relations) compared to posi-
tional families. Unlike certain positional families the socialization of the
children would never be left to the child's age group. The behavior of the
child in his peer group would be subject to discussion with parents rather
than to their legislation. Person-oriented families would give rise to a
strong or "open" communication system.

  DISCUSSION: POSITIONAL-PERSONAL FAMILY TYPES
  AND OPEN AND CLOSED COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
  Person-Oriented Families-Open Communication System. In these
families the limits on the extent to which decisions may be open to discus-
sion would be set by the psychological characteristics of the person rather
than by his formal status. Simply, the ascribed status of the member, for

  1
    This distinction between positional and personal forms of control was set out by the
author in a paper in 1963. At that time the term stallls was used instead of positional. The
terms positional and personal have also been used by Hanson (1965). However, Hanson's
discussion is somewhat differently focused, for he sees positional relationships as contrac-
tual and personal relationships as noncontractual.
                      A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization    483

  many activities, would be weakened by his achieved status. The children,
  e.g., would achieve a role within the communication system in terms of
  their unique social, affective, and cognitive chad1cteristics. Clearly, if
  there is reduced segregation of role and less formal definition, then the
  parents and the children operate with a greater range of alternatives; i.e.,
  with greater role discretion. In as much as the role discretion is wide (the
  range of alternatives of the role in different social situations), then individ-
 ual choices can be made and offered. Verbal communication, ofa particu-
 lar kind, is generated. It is not just a question of more talk but talk of a
 particular kind. Judgments, their bases and consequences, would form a
 marked content of the communications. The role system would be contin-
 uously eliciting and reinforcing the verbal signaling and the making
 explicit of individual intentions, qualifications, and judgments. The role
 system would be continuously accommodating and assimilating the dif-
 ferent intents of its members. Looked at from another point of view, the
 children would be socializing the parents as much as the parents were
 socializing the children; for the parents would be very sensitive toward
 the unique characteristics of the children. These would be verbally
 realized and so enter into the communication system. Thus there would
 develop an "open" communication system which would foster and pro-
vide the linguistic means and role learning for the verbal signaling and
making explicit of individual differences, together with the explication of
judgments and their bases and consequences. Of fundamental impor-
tance, the role system would promote communication and orientation
toward the motives and dispositions of others. Note also that in such a
family the child learns to make his role rather than having it formally as-
signed to him. Children socialized within such a role and communication
system learn to cope with ambiguity and ambivalence, although clearly
there may well be pathological consequences if insufficient sense of
boundary is not provided.

   Positional Farnilies-Closed Conunwzication Systems. In this type of
family we said that judgments and the decision-making process would be
a function of the status of the member rather than a quality of the person.
There would be segregation of roles and a formal division of areas of
responsibility according to age, sex, and age-relation status. Boundary
areas, instead of generating discussion and accommodation, might well
become border disputes settled by the relative power inhering in the
respective statuses. The children's communication system might well be
"open" only in relation to their age mates, who wouJa then become a
major source of learning and relevance. If socialization is reciprocal in
person-oriented families, it tends to be unilateral in positional families.
The role system here is less likely to facilitate the verbal elaboration of
        484    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

individual differences and is less likely to lead to the verbal elaboration of
judgments and their bases and consequences; it does not encourage the
verbal exploration of individual intentions and motive. In a person-
oriented family the child's developing self is differentiated by the continu-
ous adjustment to the verbally realized and elaborated intentions, qualifi-
cations, and motives of others. In positional families the child takes over
and responds to status requirements. Here he learns what can be called a
communalized role as distinct from the individualized role of person-
oriented families. In positional families, the range of alternatives which
 inhere in the roles (the role discretion) is relatively limited; consequently,
the communication system reduces the degree of individual selection
from alternatives. Of course, within positional families there is sensitivity
toward persons, but the point is that these sensitivities are less likely to be
 raised to a level of verbal elaboration so that they can become objects of
 special perceptual activity and control. Within positional families the
 child develops either within the unambiguous roles within his family or
 within the clearly structural roles of his age-mate society or both. Thus
 these children are less likely to learn to cope with problems of role ambi-
 guity and ambivalence. They are more likely to avoid or foreclose upon
 activities or problems which carry this potential.


   SOCIAL CONTROL AND FAMILY TYPES
   It is clear that these two family types generate radically different com-
munication systems which we have characterized as open and closed. It
has been suggested that there are important socializing and linguistic
consequences. I want now to outline differences in their forms of social
control with again special reference to uses of spoken language.
   We have said that inasmuch as a role system is person rather than posi-
tion oriented, then it is a relatively more unstable system. It is continu-
ously in the process of assimilating and accommodating the verbally
realized but different intentions, qualifications, and motives of its
members. Tensions will arise which are a function of the characteristics of
the role system. Special forms of arbitration, reconciliation, and explana-
tion will develop. These tensions only in the last resource will be managed
in terms of relative power which inheres in the respective statuses. Social
control will be based upon linguistically elaborated meanings rather than
upon power. However, it is clearly the case that power in the end is still
the ultimate basis of authority.
   In positional families where the status arrangements reduce the insta-
bility which inheres in person-oriented families, social control will be af-
fected either through power or through the referring of behavior to the
universal or particular norms which regulate the status. Thus in person-
                         A Socioli11g11istic Approach to Socialization        485

 oriented families social control is likely to be realized through. verbally
  elaborated means oriented to the person, while in positional families
 social control is likely to be realized through less elaborated verbal
 means, less oriented to the person but more oriented toward the formal
 status of the regulated (child).
    It is of crucial importance to analyze the procedures of social control,
 for I want to show, among other things, that person-oriented families,
 very early in the child's life, sensitize him toward and actively promote his
 language development in order that they can apply their favored modes of
 control. In positional families the modes of social control depend less
 upon individually created and elaborated verbal meanings, and so within
 these families there is less need to sensitize the child toward, and promote
 the early development of, verbally elaborated forms of speech.

   MODES OF SOCIAL CONTROL5
   I shall distinguish initially between imperative modes of control and
control based upon appeals. Two forms of appeal will be further distin-
guished. Underlying these distinctions in modes of control is the role
discretion (the range of alternatives) accorded.

   Jrnperative Modes. This mode of control reduces the role discretion ac-
corded to the regulated (child). It allows the child only the external possi-
bilities of rebellion, withdrawal, or acceptance. The imperative mode is
realized through a restricted code (lexicon prediction): "Shut up," "Leave
it alone," "Get out," or extraverbally through physical coercion.

  'APPEALS
   These are modes of control where the regulated is accorded varying
degrees of discretion in the sense that a range of alternatives, essentially
linguistic, are available to him. Thus social control which rests upon ap-
peals does permit, to different degrees, reciprocity in communication and
so linguistically regulated learning. These appeals may be broadly broken
into two types and each type further classified into subtypes. The two
broad types are positional and personal appeals.

   Positional Appeals. Positional appeals refer the behavior of the regu-
lated (child) to the norms which inhere in a particular or universal status.
   5 A coding manual for social control has been developed and applied to the speech of

mothers and their children. This manual gives a range of delicate subdivisions within impera-
tive, positional, and personal forms of control. The coding manual, constructed by B. Bern-
stein, and J. Cook, is available from the Sociological Research Unit, University of London
Institute of Education.
       486    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

Positional appeals do not work through the verbal realization of the per-
sonal attributes of the controllers (parents) or regulated (children).
  Some examples now follow:
  "You should be able to do that by now" (age status rule).
  "Little boys don't cry" (sex status rule).
   "People like us don't behave like that" (subcultural rule).
  "Daddy doesn't expect to be spoken to like that" (age relation rule).
Positional appeals are not necessarily disguised forms of the imperative
mode. Consider the following situation where a child is learning his sex
role. A. little boy is playing with a doll.

MOTHER:        "Little boys don't play with dolls."
CHILD:         "I want the dolly."
MOTHER:        "Dolls are for your sister."
CHILD:         "I want the doll" (or he still persists with the doll).
MOTHER:        "Here, take the drum instead."

As compared with a situation where the mother says:
  "Why do you want to play with the doll-they are so boring-why
not play with the drum?"
   The essence of positional appeals is that in the process of learning the
rule, the child is explicitly linked to others who hold a similar universal or
particular status. The rule is transmitted in such a way that the child is
reminded of what he shares in common with others. Where control is
positional, the rule is communalized. Where control is positional, the "I"
is subordinate to the "we." Positional control is realized through a spe-
cific linguistic variant. As will be shown later, positional appeals can be
given in restricted or elaborated codes. They can be complex linguis-
tically and conceptually, as in the case of a West Point or public school
boy who is reminded of his obligations and their origins. Where control is
pos_itional, the child (the regulated) learns the norms in a social context
where the relative statuses are clear-cut and unambiguous. Positional ap-
peals may lead to the formation of shame rather than guilt. In the case of
positional appeals, however, certain areas of experience are less verbally
differentiated than in the case of personal appeals. Positional appeals
transmit the culture of subculture in such a way as to increase the similar-
ity of the regulated with others of his social group. They create bounda-
ries. If the child rebels, he very soon challenges the bases of the culture
and its social organization, and this may force the controller
(parent/teacher) into the imperative mode.

   Personal Appeals. In these appeals the focus is upon the child as an
 individual rather than upon his formal status. Personal appeals take into
                                 A Socioliniuistic Approach to Socialization   487

            account interpersonal or intrapersonal components of the soci~1l re-
            lationship. They work very much at the level of individual intention,
            motive, and disposition and consequently are realized through a dis-
            tinctive linguistic variant. This again can be within restricted or elab-
            orated codes. It will be the case that the areas of experience verbally
            differentiated through personal appeals are very different from the experi-
            ences controlled by positional appeals. The following example might help
            to bring out the distinctions.
               Imagine a situation where a child has to visit his grandfather who is
            unwell and the child does not like to kiss him because the grandfather has
            not shaved for some time. One mother says to the child before they go:

            MOTHER:         "Children kiss their Grandpa" (positional).
            CHILD:          "I don't want to-why must I kiss him always?"
            MOTHER:         "He's not well-I don't want none of your nonsense" (positional
                            reason) (imperative).          ·

               Another mother says in the same context:

            MOTHER:         "I know you don't like kissing Grandpa, but he is unwell and he
                            is very fond of you."                ·

               The second example is perhaps blackmail, but note that the child's in-
             tent is recognized explicitly by the mother and linked to the wishes of
             another. Causal relations at the interpersonal level are made. Further, in
             the second example, there is the appearance of the child having a choice
             (discretion). If the child raises a question, more explanation is given. The
             mother, so to speak, lays out the situation for the child, and the rule is
             learned in an individualized interpersonal context. The rule is, so to
             speak, achieved by the child. The child, given the situation and the expla-
             nation, opts for the rule. In the first example, the rule is simply assigned in
            a social relationship which relies upon latent power for its effectiveness.
             Here we see another difference between positional and personal appeals
            in that rules are assigned in positional control and achieved in personal
            control.                                       ·
               Where control is personal, whole orders of learning are made available
            to the child which are not there if control is positional. Where control is
            personal, each child learns the rule in a context which, so to speak,
            uniquely fits him, and a language through which this is realized. Where
            control is positional, learning about objects, events, and persons is
    ;
        /   reduced and the child comes to learn that the power which inheres in
            authority may soon be revealed. Where control is personal, as distinct
/           from where it is positional, the status differences are less clear-cut and
            ambiguities and ambivalences are verbally realized. I should point out,
         488   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 although I have no time to develop this, that there may well be patholog-
  ical consequences to extensive use of personal appeals.
     Finally, if positional appeals do lead to the development of shame, per-
  sonal appeals may lead to the formation of guilt.
     In the case of person-oriented appeals, the rights of the controller or
  parent which inhere in his formal status are less likely to come under at-
  tack than in the case of positional appeals. For in the case of personal ap-
  peals, what may be challenged are the reasons the controller gives or even
  a specific condition of the controller or parent (e.g., "Do you always have
  a headache when I want to play?"). Thus personal appeals may act to pro-
  tect the normative order from which the controller derives his rights. For
  here there is an attenuation of the relationship between power and the rule
  system. In the case of positional appeals which shift rapidly to the impera-
  tive mode of control, the formal rights of the controller or parent may well
  be challenged, and with this the whole normative order from which the
. controller derives his rights can come under attack. Imperative/positional
  forms of control under certain conditions may lead the socialized to turn
  to alternative value systems. Further, where control is personal, the basis
  of control lies in linguistically elaborated individualized meanings. This
  may lead to a situation where the child attains autonomy, although his
  sense of social identity may be weakened. Such ambiguity in the sense of
  social identity, the lack of boundary, may move such children toward a
  radical closed value system and its attendent social structure. However,
  where control is positional, and, even more, where it is imperative, the
  child has a strong sense of social identity, but the rules which he learns
  will be tied to specific contexts and his sense of autonomy may well be
  reduced. Finally, a child socialized by controllers who favor positional or
  imperative procedures becomes highly sensitive to specific role relations
  in the context of control. Such a child may be bewildered, initially, when
  placed in a context of control where personal procedures are used as he
  may lack the orientation and the facility to take up the different options or
  alternatives which this form of control makes available. Person-oriented
  forms of control may induce role strain where the child has been socia-
  lized through imperative or positional forms of control.
     I have briefly outlined, with special reference to communication, imper-
  ative, positional and personal modes of social control. It is very clear that
  in any one family, or even in any one context of control, all three modes
  may be used. It is also likely to be the case within a family that parents
   may share control modes or each may use a different mode. We can, how-
  ever, distinguish between families or, at a greater level of delicacy,
  between parents, in terms of their preferred modes of control. It follows
  that we could also distinguish the modes of control which are used in any
  one context. We can summarize the consequences for learning which
  inhere thus:
                         A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization            489

                      Mode              Leaming            Le1•e/ of Leaming
                   Imperative     Hierarchy                 Restricted code
                   Positional     Role obligation           Restricted code
                                   and differentiation
                                                            Elaborated code
                   Personal       Interpersonal             Restricted code
                                  lntrapersonal             Elaborated code



    We can now link positional families with closed systems of com-
munication with positional imperative modes of control. We could, in
principle, distinguish between positional families whose preferred mode
of control was imperative power (the lower working class?) from posi-
tional families where the preferred mode was positional appeals with rela-
tively little physical coercion. We could distinguish between positional
families according to whether the dominant code was elaborated or
restricted. In the same way we could link person-oriented families with
open communication systems operating with personal appeals. We could
again distinguish between such families in terms of the dominant general
code, elaborated or restricted. The latter tells us about the degree of
openness of the communication system and its conceptual orientation.
Thus the roles which children learn in those various families, their con-
ceptual orientations, their perception of and use of language, should
ditfer.c;


          Means and Ends Variants

         It may be that we can now sepeculate about the dynamics of ob-
ject and person modes of the two general codes as these were discussed in
the early part of this chapter. You may remember that here we suggested
that a communication system could be open or closed with reference to
relationships between objects or relationships within or between persons.
We should bear in mind that persons, if they are treated in their status
capacity can be likened to objects.
  We could in principle distinguish between two variants of "person" and
"object" oriented elaborated or restricted codes (Fig. 17.2)

   l. Object- or person-oriented codes can lead to the exploration
of means or ends. Thus we might consider that an object code (means)
is likely to be used by members of the applied sciences where indi-

  " It should be clear that in this discussion I have drawn upon a range of work in the litera-
ture of sociology and social psychology (in particular, Bott 1957; Foote 1961, Chapter V;
Nye and Berardo 1966; Bronfennbrenner 1958).
           490    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                                           Orientation
                                             Object




                                             Person


   viduals tend to work within established principles and derive from
   them specific applications. In the case of an object code (ends) the indi-
   vidual is less concerned with the specific application of established princi-
   ples but more concerned with the explorations, than we might expect its
   orientation to be, toward objects at the level of means.
      2. If the form of control is personal appeal and the code restricted, we
   might expect that the children wouid move initially toward a person-
   oriented restricted code of either the means of ends type. The predomi-
   nant characteristic of the ipdividuals in the quadrant would be their poten-
   tiality for change ..
      3. Families which use predominantly positional forms of control and
   elaborated codes are likely to socialize their children into an object-
   oriented elaborated code (means) where the code referents may be either
   relationships between objects (future applied scientists?) or where the
   code referents are the status characteristics of persons (military, bureau-
   cratic position?).
      4. Families which use predominantly personal forms of control are
  likely to develop a person-oriented elaborated code (means) where the
  referents emphasized are likely to be inner states and processes of the
 ·person.We might expect that such sociolinguistic socialization is likely to
~ orient the children initially toward social positions which involve control
  relationships over persons.
      5. It is difficult to speculate about the social origins of elaborated codes
  (ends), for the social psychology of creativity is still in its infancy. We
  might say that such socialization would induce (a) marked egocentricity,
  (b) risk taking, ~d (c) flexibility of boundary. In terms of the model used,
  we might then expect that where positional and personal forms of control
  were very much parent specific then the child might be faced with a basic
  tension between inner and outer which he resolves by creative restruc-             I
  turing.                                                                            I
     It is clearly the case that occupational functions of children are not sim-
  ply given by primary socialization but are dominated by the nature of the          I
  educational and occupational systems. The point here is to emphasize the
  need for research to examine the linguistic consequences of role and con-
  trol systems within families.
                            A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization             491


      SOCIAL CLASS, POSITIONAL AND PERSONAL FAMILIES,
      AND SOCIAL CHANGE
      On this analysis we might find positional families who were deeply im-
    bedded in their community operating essentially with imperative modes of
    control and where the children were socialized through unsupervised age
   peers or mates. Here we could expect the development ofrestricted codes
   (object) to be the hard core of the language/educability problem. It should
   also be possible to locate within the working class families who were
   moving toward personal forms of control within the general rubric of a
   restricted code. These families, we would expect, would be less tightly
   imbedded within their local community, perhaps through rehousing or
   where the parents were actively confronting the complex relationships
   between their local subculture and the cultures of the wider society. Here
   we might find an orientation toward a restricted code (person) or a move-
  ment toward an elaborated code (person).
     A further point is worth making. Within working class positional large
  families we should expect a marked difference between boys and girls in
  theiruse of language. Girls, especially older girls' in such families, tend to
  take on mothering roles. They also, of equal relevance, mediate between
  parents and sibs. Their role then is more complex as it combines a normal
 sib role with that of mediator, and with that of controller. Further, girls
 are less tied to the activity-oriented, group-dominated peer-group social
 structure such as that of boys. Thus girls, especially older girls in such
 families, are likely to be person-oriented and to have to rely upon forms of
 control based upon linguistically elaborated meanings rather than upon
 physical coercion. Finally, they are placed in a situation involving a vari-
ety of role and code switching, e.g., girl-girl, girl-boy, girl controlling girls,
girl controlling boys, girl mediating between parents and other sibs. These
factors are likely to develop the girl's orientation toward a more differen-
tiated, more individualized use of language. 7
    Within the middle class we should be able to isolate positional and
person-oriented families who, on this arg~ment, should orientate their

   7
      Henderson's research (quoted previously), as other research, indicates a marked superi-
 ority in the form-class usage of working-class girls as compared to working-class boys. It is
 Possible, however, that our very eliciting techniques may well create contexts for girls in
 Which they can demonstrate a socially promoted superiority. We have reason to believe that
 such superiority in girls is not wholly the result of earlier biological development. The girls
(five years of age) of middle-class mothers who score low on an index of repo1'ted com-
fi?Unication offer speech where the !exes is less differentiated tha~ th~ !exes of mi?dle-class
girls whose mothers score high on an index of reported commumca!lon. The findmgs of B.
Bernstein and W. Brandis ( J 968) indicate that there is a subgroup of middle-class mothers
(positional) who explain less and are more coercive in the socializing _of the girl than in !he
socializing of the boy. Thus, different uses of language by boys and_ girls may p~1r!Iy derive
from family and age-group role learning. They may also be a functwn of the ehc1tmg con-
texts constructed to obtain speech.
         492     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

children initially (formal education could change this) to the two modes of
object and person of an elaborated code. In the earlier section of this
chapter suggestions were made as to the social origins of elaborated and
restricted codes in terms of the increases in the complexity of the division
of labor and the character of the central value system. We shall now turn
our attention to the social conditions which may produce positional and
person-oriented families within the middle-class and the working class. 8
   The literature strongly suggests that the traditional working-class fam-
ily is of the positional type. For here we find insulation between working-
class and middle-class subcultures and social relationships (a product of
the class system); high population density within limited territories; low
rate of social mobility (through educational failure) producing intragroup
marriage; social solidarity arising out of similarity of economic function
and interests; un~mployment; reciprocity of services and mutual help
between families arising partly out of low income (in the United States a.
common ethnic origin and subculture) sustaining the transmission of this
particular subculture. The weakening of the positional family type, closed
systems of communication limited to a restricted code, would result from
the play of forces which would differentiate the family from its community
and so weaken the transmission of collective beliefs, values, and the
subsequent detailed regulation of behavior.
   In England since the war, this has begun to happen as a result of:

          1. Greater affluence, greater geographical mobility, and, there-
         fore, greater responsiveness to a wide range of influences which
         has been partly assisted by mass media.
         2. Rehousing into areas of relatively low population density.
         3. A change in the power position of the wife through her in-
         dependent earning capacity.
         4. A change in attitude both toward education and child develop-
         ment on the part of the working-class groups and, therefore,
         greater responsiveness to education and subsequent social mobil-
         ity.                           .
         5. A change in the solidarity between workers arising out of, until
         recently, full employment and. higher earnings.
         6. A shift in the division of labor away from goods to that of a
         services economy. This is part of a long-term trend from a goods
         to a service economy, an economy which is now more person
         than object oriented.
                                                                                                 /

  These different forces are beginning to weaken the transmission of the                     )
  8 D. Miller and Swanson (1968) provide a very interesting attempt to distinguish between

entrepreneurial and bureaucratic families.
                                                                                                     I


                                                                                                     I

                                                                                                 ~
                            A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization          493

      communally based, socially insulated working-class subculti,re and have
      created the conditions for more individualized family systems. 9
        This is not to say that the working-class subculture has been eroded and
      replaced by middle-class beliefs, values, and norms, but only that there
     now exists the conditions for more individualized and less communalized
     relationships.
        In the United States (and I am really not entitled to discuss this) the situ-
     ation is much more complex. Apart from attempts of the school which so
     far have not been outstandingly successful, the most important influence
     upon change of linguistic code is probably the Civil Rights movement.
    This movement and its various organizations is bringing about a change in
    the Negro's view of his own subculture, his relation to the white culture,
    and his attitude toward education. This movement has produced powerful
    charismatic leaders at both national and local levels, who are forcing
    Negroes to reassess, reexamine, their structural relationship to the soci-
    ety. This confrontation (despite the violence) is likely to make new
    demands upon linguistic resources and to challenge the passivity of the
    old subculture and its system of social relationships. The language of
   social protest, with its challenging of assumptions, its grasping toward
   new cultural forms, may play an important role in breaking down the limi-
   tations of subculturally bound restricted codes.
       Middle-class changes in the orientations of family types, however,
   might well reflect changes in the character of middle-class occupations; in
  particular, the movement from entrepreneurial to managerial, profes-
  sional and service type occupations. At the same time, the indeter-
  minancy of the value system has individualized choice and changed the
  basis of authority relationships within the family. The "science" of child
  development and its popularization through books, papers, and journals
  has also had an important influence, given the just-stated conditions, in
  shaping role relationships and communication within middle-class fami-
 lies. It is likely that the personalizing of socialization agencies has gone
 further in the United States than in the United Kingdom. It is important to
 point out that family types may also be very influenced by the nature of
 religious and political beliefs. On the 'whole, pluralistic societies like those
in the United States and the United Kingdom are likely to produce strong
tendencies toward personalized socialization agencies, whereas societies
with monolithic centrally planned and disseminated value systems are
likely to develop highly positional socializing agencies, generating
object-oriented communication codes.

  " A good account of this movement is given ~y Go.ldthorpe and Loc~~o?d (1963). For a
general analysis of the effects of the interrelat10nsh1ps between the d1v1s10n of labor and
the central value system upon the structure of socializing agencies, see Parsons (1964),
Chapter 8.
        494   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes


  REPRISE.
   Let me now retrace the argument. First, we started with the view that
the social organization and subculture of the lower working class would
be likely to generate a distinctive form of communication through which
the genes of social class would be transmitted. Second, two general types
of communication codes were postulated and their social origins and
regulative consequences analyzed. Third, it was suggested that the sub-
culture of the lower working class would be transmitted through a
restricted code while that of the middle class would realize both elab-
orated and restricted codes. This causal link was considered to be very
imprecise and omitted the dynamics of the process. The fourth step en-
tailed the construction of two types of family role systems, positional and
personal, their causally related "open" and "closed" communication
systems, and their procedures of social control. The fifth step made the
causal link between restricted and elaborated codes and their two modes
with positional and person-oriented ·family role systems. Finally, factors
affecting the development and change of family types were discussed.

  SOME CONSEQUENCES OF CHANGE OF
  HABITUAL LINGUISTIC CODE
   I should like finally to consider some possible consequences of
linguistic code switching. In contemporary societies, both in the West and
in the newly developing societies, educational institutions are faced with
the problem of encouraging children to change and extend the way they
normally use language. In terms of this chapter, this becomes a switch
from restricted to elaborated codes. A change in linguistic code implies
more than a change in syntactic and lexical selection. The view taken here
and in other publications is that linguistic codes are basic controls on the
transmission of a culture or subculture and are the creators of social iden-
tity. Changes in such codes involve changes in the means whereby order
and relevance are generated. Changes in codes involve changes in role
relationships and in procedures of social control.
    Elsewhere (Bernstein 1965) I have distinguished my position from that
of Whorf, but I believe that there are distillations or precipitations from
the general system of meanings which inhere in linguistic codes which
exert a diffuse and generalized effect upon the behavior of speakers. What
 I am tentatively putting forward is that imbedded in a culture or subculture
may be a basic organizing concept, concepts, or themes whose ramifica-
tions may be diffused throughout the culture or subculture. The speech
forms through which the culture or subculture is realized transmits this
                                                           i
                       A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization              495

 organizing concept or concepts within their gestalt rather than through
 any one set of meanings.
    The following diagram sets out the application of this essentially Whor-
 fian thought to the linguistic codes and their social controls discussed in
 this chapter:

                                           CODES
                                          Restricted

              OBJECT                                               PERSON
              Authority                                           A11t/10rity
              Piety                                               Identity

Positional                                                                            Personal
  Controls


              Rationality                                         Identity                       (

              OBJECT                                              PERSON

                                         Elaborated

        Positional restricted code (object). The basic organizing concept here
        would form around the concepts of authority or piety.
        Personal restricted code (person). The basic organizing concepts here
        would be authority/identity in a state of unresolved tension. By "iden-
        tity" I simply mean a preoccupation with the question: "Who am I?"
        Positional elaborated code (object). The basic organizing concept here
        would center about the concept of rationality.
        Personal elaborated code (person). The basic organizing concept would
        refer to the concept of identity.



   On this view an educationally induced change of code from a restricted
code (object) to an elaborated code (person) involves a shift in organizing
concepts from authority/piety toward identity. From an organizing con-
cept which makes irrelevant the question of personal identity to an
organizing concept which places the notion of identity in the forefront of
the personality. Individuals who are in the process of making such a
switch of codes are involved in a basic cultural change at the level of
meanings and at the sociological level of role. We need to know much
more about. the social and psychological consequences of radical shifts in
linguistic codes.
        496    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

    It may be that the switch from a restricted code (object) is more
likely to be toward an elaborated code (object) than toward the person
mode of an elaborated code. In concrete terms we might expect working-
class children to move toward the applied sciences than toward the
verbal arts. This shift from authority to rationality for working-class
children may involve a less traumatic change in their role relations,
systems of meanings and control, than a shift from authority to identity.
Authority and rationality are both positional in the sense that the individ-
ual works within a framework, within a system or structure, without a
critical problem of ambiguity of ends. Where the organizing concept trans-
mitted by the code is that of identity, the individual is faced with ambigu-
ity at the level of ends and often moans. This speculation on no account
should be taken to mean that it is more appropriate for individuals limited
to a restricted code (object) to be guided toward the applied sciences or
routine low-level supervisory functions, where persons are often treated
as objects but only that it may be expected that they may well make these
choices rather than choose the verbal arts. They are more likely to be con-
cerned with object processes than interpersonal and intrapersonal pro-
cesses.
    One might further expect that the individuals starting from restricted
codes (person) will move toward elaborated codes (person) rather than
toward elaborated codes (objects). If they were to move toward the latter
mode, it would be perhaps one where persons are treated as objects. Indi-
viduals in this quadrant, if they switch to elaborated codes, are likely to be
restless in their search for belonging, or they might accept some belief
system which creates it for them. It is thought that many may become
teachers, writers, or community protest leaders, or perhaps become in-
volved in dropout movements or deviant. This code switch involves
major problems of culture conflict.
    There are relatiyely few individuals who are capable of managing
equally both mode.s of an elaborated code, although one suspects that the
social sciences contain many of these. The meanings, roles, and controls
entailed in these two modes ar~ somewhat antithetical. At the basis of the
meanings of an el~tborated code (object) is the notion of one integrated
system which can generate order. In an odd way it is objective idealist in
character. At the basis of the meanings of an elaborated code (person) is a
pluralism, a range of possibilities. It is subjective idealist or romantic in
character. Another way of seeing this might be to suggest that the major
latent function of an elaborated code (object) is to remove ambiguity,
while the major latent function of an elaborated code (person) is to create
it. In this brief discussion I have not referred to the means/ends variants
of object- and person-oriented linguistic codes. They should be borne in
mind.
   These are poorly worked out thoughts. [They have been developed by
                   A Sociolinguistic Approach
                                           I
                                              to Socialization   497

Mary Douglas ( 1967).] My excuse for including them is to point up the
need for discussion of more general issues involved in the changing of
forms of speech.


        Conclusion

        I have attempted within the confines of this chapter to work on a
broad canvas in which particular problems of language and educability
may be placed within a much broader setting. The chapter is really a plea
for more extensive research into the social constraints upon the
emergence of linguistic codes, the conditions for their maintenance and
change, and above all their regulative functions.
18
The Stylistic Significance
of Consonantal. Sandhi
in Trukese and Ponapean
JOHN L. FISCHER




John L. Fischer is a professor of anthropology at Tulane
University. He received. his doctorate from Harvard
University, where he has also taught. The present chap-
ter draws on several years of fieldwork on Truk and on
Ponape; Dr. Fischer has done fieldwork in Acton, Mas-
 sachusetts, and Japan. His major research interests in-
 clude socialization, social structure, folklore, and
 language. This chapter is a slightly revised version of an
 original paper published in the American Anthropologist
 (Fischer 1965).
     This short discussion points toward a number of im-
  portant lines of research. The particular phenomenon,
  sandhi (or morphophonemic alternation) is common in
  languages. [An English analogue would be found in
  finance: financial, province: provincial, justice: justicial,
  where (despite the spelling) the final /s/ in the first of each
  pair alternates with an /s/ ('sh' sound) before the adjecti-
  val ending -ial in the second of each pair.] Fischer points
  out that the normal, or unmarked, consequence of con-
   sonantal sandhi differs as between these two historically
   related languages. He asks· why. One course is to see
   whether there are differences between the two societies
   that might match the differences in normal linguistic
   form. Suggestive differences do exist, in the attitudes
   toward each language and toward speaking itself. Pon-

   From "The Stylistic Significance of Consonantal Sand hi in Trukese and
   Ponapean." Reproduced by permission of the American Anthropolog-
   ical Association _from the American A nthropo/ogist, Vol. 67, pp.
 ' 1495-1502, December, 1965.

                                   498
        Consonantal Sandhi in Trukese and Ponapean       499

apeans value conciseness, emotional restraint,' formal
etiquette, while Trukese value loquacity and show greater
freedom of expression. A second course is to consider the
unusual, or marked, form. The evidence again suggests a
contrast between the two societies, and a complementary
one. In effect, there appears to be sociolinguistic alterna-
tion in each society such that on Ponape the marked form
expresses abruptness, freedom of expression, aggression;
on Truk the marked form expresses greater restraint,
politeness, gentleness.
   Notice that it is notjust correlation between the normal
aspects of language and of culture but the value of the
corresponding marked forms in actual speech events, that
is decisive, for both the existence of a relationship be-
tween linguistic form and social structure and its ex-
planation. The contrast in unmarked forms suggests, and
the social meaning of the marked forms would seem to
prove, that the phonetic features involved have a com-
mon expressive value in both societies.
   Interpretation of the marked forms depends on rec-
ognizing that they serve more than one function. In
themselves, it would seem, the marked forms are con-
ventional stylistic devices, defined by their relation to the
normal phonological forms. In some uses they serve the
metalinguistic function of clarity, in others, of expression
and persuasion (and in some, both). [Mitchell-Kernan
(Chapter 5) and Gumperz (1970b) provide similar analy-
ses of marking.]
   Fischer considers alternative historical explanations
for the Trukese-Ponapean contrast but finds the best
explanation to lie in a view of the relation of linguistic
features to social life quite like that of Labov (Chapter 19)
and Barth (Chapter l 6).1 Where variation or alternation
exists, it may be given meaning, and selective pressures
over time will then operate in terms of such meaning.
Fischer adds to this view the important point that ex-
pressive, as well as social, meaning must be considered;
and he shows that expressive features must be taken into
account in the study of universals of language and of
language change. He indicates ways in which this line of
research should be further pursued, with regard to socio-
linguistic investigation in the field, and with regard to
other linguistic features whose selection might also be
         500     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

         found to have similar explanation. Additional related
         readings are provided by Guiraud ( 1967) and Stankiewicz
         (l 964).




         This chapter1 examines a phonological process in Trukese and
 Ponapean and suggests possible differences in the significance of its use
and omission as between these two related Micronesian languages. It also
proposes a common, perhaps universal, expressive value for the types of
·sound sequence involved in the phonological process. Finally, the chapter
considers the implications for linguistic change of such stylistic choices as
 conditioned by social structure and underlying cultural attitudes toward
 speech.


          The Sandhi Rules

          Trukese and Ponapean are mutually unintelligible but have rather
similar structures. The degree of their relationship may be roughly gauged
by the fact that they share about 40 % of the Swadesh hundred-word basic
vocabulary list (indicating perhaps some 3000 years of separation). The
inventories of consonant phonemes are quite similar. For purposes of this
chapter we may note that both languages have the same number of genet-
ically equivalent and phonetically quite similar stops and nasals (the two
types of consonant involved in the phonological process to be discussed).
    In both Trukese and Ponapean there are various phonetic accommoda-
tions at the boundaries of words adjoining one another in the same con-
 struction in fluent casual speech. Some of these accommodations involve
 simply the substitution of one allophone for another of the same phoneme.
 Instead of the allophone that would occur finally if the word were uttered
 in isolation, there occurs an allophone characteristic of word-medial posi-
 tion. A particularly striking illustration of this for English speakers con-
 cerns the Trukese phoneme /n/. The [n] allophone usually found in word-

   1
     This chapter is a revised and expanded version of a paper first read at the winter meeting
 of the Linguistic Society of America in New York, December 1964, and subsequently
 published in the A 111erirn11 A nthropo/ogist (Fischer 1965). I wish to express my thanks to
 Marshall Durbin, Dell Hymes, William Labov, and Ernst Pulgram for very helpful advice
 on a number of points. Hymes in particular has provided extensive comment. Data discussed
 cussed herein are derived principally from texts and daily experience in the use of languages
 obtained during residence in the Caroline Islands 1949-1953. I was greatly aided in my
 initial understanding of the two languages by the availability of the unpublished sketches of
 Trukese by Dyen ( 1965) and of Ponapean by Garvin ( 1949), although my chief informants
 spoke slightly different dialects. Responsibility for the full formation of this chapter remains
 my own.
                   Consonantal Sall(/hi in Trukese and Ponapean     501
                                                            i


   final position is replaced by the flap allophone [r] (which is regularly
   found between vowels in words) when the next word of the construction
   begins with a vowel. Thus, the final /n/ of niikiin 'outside,' pronounced [n]
   when the word is used in isolation, is pronounced fr] in a phrase such as
   nukun iimw [niikiiriimw] 'outside the house.'
      Other phonetic accommodations may be interpreted as involving addi-
   tions or substitutions of phonemes. Changes such as these are often re-
   ferred to as sall(/hi, after the term employed by Sanskrit grammarians. (In
   modern linguistic theory, the changes treated here are technically mor-
   phophonemic since they are dependent on grammatical relationships; i.e.,
   the changes cannot be explained in terms of the occurrence of the partic-
   ular sounds as such but only in terms of their occurrence in relation to
  word boundaries and syntactic constructions.)
     The relevant rules for consonantal sandhi in Trukese and Ponapean are
  as follows (we are now considering fluent speech without special expres-
  sive import):
      I. If a final consonant of one word and the initial consonant of the fol-
  lowing word are heterorganic (i.e., articulated at significantly different
  points in the vocal passage), an epenthetic vowel is introduced. This holds
 in either language. Thus Ponapean emen 'one (living thing)' and lwern
  'frog' (the latter a Japanese loan-the example is from a modern love song
 text) yield emen-i lwem 'one frog' or 'a frog.' The vowel i is inserted be-
 tween the heterorganic consonants /n/ and /k/ but bears no additional
 meaning. Similarly, Trukese imwen 'house of' and ppw 'dirt' yield
 innven-i-ppw1111 'house of dirt,' 'native-style house.' An i is inserted
 without change of meaning, and the dental /n/ and labial /ppw/ remain
 unchanged.
     2. If the final consonant of one word and the initial consonant of the
 following word are homorganic (i.e., articulated at essentially the same
 point in the vocal passage), a vowel usually is not inserted and a con-
 sonant cluster results. Here we reach the phenomena that are the special
concern of this chapter. Under similar general conditions in both lan-
guages, sandhi operates so as to eliminate or prevent one type of conso-
nant cluster in both languages, but the type of cluster eliminated in one
language is precisely the type retained in the other. In other words, the
favored types of cluster are diametrically opposed.
    The conditions for such sandhi are that the first of the two words juxta-
posed in the construction end in a nasal or a stop, and that the second
begin with a stop. (We speak here of the form of a word as pronounced in
isolation; this form is taken as the base or underlying form.) As noted, the
final consonant of the first word and the initial consonant of the second
must also be hom·organic. Sandhi affects the first of the two consonants,
the second remaining unchanged.
           502   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

     In Trukese, sandhi operates to produce clusters of two identical stops
  (articulated as a single long stop), while in Ponapean sandhi operates to
  produce clusters of nasal plus stop. Thus in Trukese, if the juxtaposition
                             a
  of two words results in cluster of two identical stops, no phonemic
  change occurs. Thus, Trukese otoot 'husk' (verb) plus taka 'ripe coconut'
  yield otoot taka 'husking coconuts.' The double t cluster remains phone-
  mically unchanged. On the other hand, if a homorganic cluster of nasal plus
  stop occurs at adjoining word boundaries, the nasal is normally replaced
  by the corresponding stop, resulting in a double stop (technically, regres-
 sive assimilation). Thus, Trukese aetin 'youth of-' and Toon 'Toi Island'
 yield aetit Toon 'youth of Toi Island.' In this example, the final /n/ of the
 first word has been replaced by the homorganic stop /t/.
     Conversely, in Ponapean, if the juxtaposition of two words results in a
 homorganic cluster of nasal plus stop at the adjoining boundaries, no
 phonemic change occurs, bµt if the sequence results in a double stop at
 the boundaries, the first stop is replaced by the homorganic nasal (tech-
 nically, progressive assimilation. Thus, Ponapean meen 'person of' and
 Tiati (a place name) yield meen Tiati 'person of Tiati.' Unlike Trukese,
the final /n/ does not change. But in aak 'mangrove' plus k':J 'those, the,'
yielding aa k':J 'those mangroves,' the stop at the end of the first word
(/k/) is replaced by the corresponding homorganic nasal (/r,!).
    If we represent nasals by N; stops by S, and the particular point of
articulation by subscript a, we may summarize the interlinguistic differ-
ences in which we are interested by the following formulae:


                           Underlyinr.: Forms   Results of Sane/hi
                 Truk        · • -~a Sa . . .    .. .Sa Sa. • •
                            ... s. Sa . . .      . . .Sa Sa. • •
                 Ponape     .. . Na S•...        . . . Na Sa
                            • • .Sa Sa . ..      . . . Na Sa.••



    I might add here that in both languages the most common cases in which
 the juxtaposition of words results in a cluster of nasal plus stop, the first
 ends in the construct suffix -Vn 'of,' while the second begins with a dental
or alveolar stop. As we have seen, such clusters are modifiable by sandhi
in Trukese but not in Po_napean. The most common cases in which the
juxtaposition of words results in a double stop cluster probably involve
nouns ending in -k (the most common stop in both languages), followed by
one of several plural demonstratives, which always begin with k- in
Ponapean and often do so in Trukese. As we have seen, these cases are
modifiable by sandhi in Ponapean but not in Trukese.
   In view of the above, we may speak of the clusters of two identical
                                         Conso11a11ta/ Sand!zi in Trukese and PonaP,ean            503

                   stops as a normally "preferred" type of consonant cluster in Trukese, and
                   of the clusters of nasal plus homorganic stop as a normally "preferred"
                   type in Ponapean. 2


                             Cultural Significance of Sandhi

                           There are two lines along which the significance of these contrast-
                  ing preferences for type of consonantal cluster can be explored. One is to
                  relate the preferred type in each culture to other cultural characteristics
                  on which Truk and Ponape contrast, and attempt to discern some sort of
                 relationship between the linguistic and the other traits. Since the sandhi
                 changes are the ordinary, but not the inevitable, result of the conditions
                 described, one can also examine in each culture the contexts and cir-
                 cumstances of the omission of the preferred type and the selection of its
                alternate. Both lines of inquiry involve the expressive value of the two
                types of consonant cluster. We shall consider first cultural contrasts in
                characteristic attitudes toward speech as influenced by social structure,
                for this would seem to be a promising, even essential, area in which to
                begin a search for relationships between intra- and extra-linguistic factors.


                  CULTURAL ATTITUDES TOWARD
                  SPEECH AS INFLUENCED BY
                  SOCIAL STRUCTURE
                  In this section I wish to consider what Hymes has called the relativity
         I     of role or function of language in societies ( 1966a). Most of us are perhaps
               accustomed to thinking of the function of language as a universal and
         I     stable thing which should vary little or not at all from one society to the
     I         next. However, if we think about it a bit, we recognize that within our own
               society language can serve many distinguishable functions, and it becomes
              plausible that in some other soci6ty the balance among these functions, if
              not the total inventory of functions, might be considerably different.
                 Elsewhere I have discussed differences between Ponapean and Trukese
              a little more fully (1966), but would like to note a few points here which
              seem significant for apprehending the typical attitudes of members of the


     I          2
                  A complete description ofTrukese and Ponapean sandhi would require various qualifica-
             tions and additions that are not given in detail since they would be irrelevant to the problem
             of this chapter. Suffice it to note that there are some dialectal variations in sandhi in both
             languages; that epenthetic vowels can be introduced between certain homorganic conso-
             nants, especially between a stop and afol/cJll'ing nasal; that at least in some dialects heter-


I
"i
             organic consonant clusters without an intervening epenthetic vowel result at times from
             prosodic considerations, such as number and length of syllables in the two words.
             504   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

       two cultures toward their languages and toward speech in general:
          I. Fluency versus precision in speaking. Ponapeans value concise,
       well-chosen speech. Trukese value loquacity and fluency, and are less
       concerned with careful choice 9f words . . . . In spite of a generally
       greater emphasis on personal achievement in Ponape, there is a greater
       emphasis on verbal productivity in Truk.
          2. Overt expression of enwtion. The control of emotion in public is
      greatly emphasized in Ponape (cf. Bascom I 965: I 6-17), while relatively
      free expression of at least some kinds of emotion is allowed in Truk.
         3. Joking, lying. Ponapean joking is milder and more controlled, while
      Trukese joking is relatively more aggressive and freer. For instance, it is
      common to hear one Trukese tell another that he is lying and this is usually
      a joke. Ponapeans make this charge much less frequently and when they
     do it is more likely to be taken and intended as a serious insult.
         4. Etiquette. Formal etiquette is highly developed on Ponape. This
     includes the use of two or more levels of respect vocabulary toward chiefs
     and other social superiors (cf. Garvin and Riesenberg I 952). In Truk
     respect vocabulary is weakly developed. Such respect behavior as exists
    is about as strdng toward matrilineal of the opposite sex as toward the
    highest chiefs, perhaps stronger (cf. Goodenough 1951); in other words,
    even the existing respect behavior on Truk is not so deeply involved in
    social stratification in the usual sense of the term.
        In brief, we may say in comparing the two c~ltures that the Ponapeans
    place greater value on precision and quality of speech, while the Trukese
    place greater value on fluency and quantity of speech. These preferences
   appear related to the greater emphasis on formal etiquette in Ponape, and
   beyond that, to differences in social structure. The differences in social
   structure have been discussed elsewhere and will not be repeated in detail
   here (for a short summary and further references, see Fischer I 957; for a
   recent summary of references on Po nape see Bascom I 965). Very briefly,
   on Ponape as compared with Truk, greater individual social mobility is
   possible and at the same time. rank differences are much more elaborate
  and important, with the result that speech is pervaded by a striving to be
  courteous to near equals and superiors.
      Of course, great variations in speech situations do exist within both cul-
  tures. The Trukese can be polite in their own language and the Ponapeans
 can be informal, but the predominance of politeness and informality varies
 by culture. To give a simple example, I have heard a young boy address
 the most respected Trukese chief by an abbreviated version of his per-
sonal name, whereas in Ponape even a close intimate of a high chief, such
as his wife or younger brother, would normally address him by his title,
even in rather informal situations. In other words, while formal and in-
formal speech are found in both cultures, the formal forms are much more
widely used in Ponapean, the informal.in Trukese.
~--·




                               Co11so11a11ta/ Sand!zi in Trukese and Po11aeea11   505


                INTRACULTURAL VARIATION IN
                USES OF CONSONANT CLUSTERS
                    By noting the association of type of preferred consonant cluster with
                 the characteristic cultural attitudes toward speech described above we
                might be led to form the hypothesis that clusters of nasal plus stop, pre-
                ferred in Ponapean, in some fashion express typical Ponapean attitudes
                toward speech, and that double stop clusters, preferred in Trukese, in
                some fashion express typical Trukese attitudes toward speech. This
               hypothesis would be strengthened ifwe could examine more closely situa-
               tional variation in the use of consonantal sandhi in each language and find
               that where sandhi tends to be omitted (and thus the frequency of the pre-
              ferred type of consonant cluster reduced) there is evidence of a special
              attitude toward speech contrasting with the culturally dominant attitude,
              or a marking of the message as of some special or specialized import. For,
              as noted, the sandhi changes are by no means completely automatic in
              either language, and the frequency of their use varies by speaker and
             situation.
                 To some extent the situations in which sandhi is omitted in either cul-
             ture are parallel, and the import of the omission is much the same. Sandhi
             changes may be omitted in either language whenever it is desired to speak
            with special clarity, as in talking to a very small child or to a foreigner
            learning to speak the language, or when talking against a background of
           interfering noise. The changes are, of course, also omitted whenever there
           is hesitation between two words in a sequential construction.
               Other data, however, suggest that the omission of consonantal sandhi
           may also have some special expressive significance, one which contrasts
           as between the two languages; further, that this differing expressive value
          for omission of sandhi is related to an expressive value shared by the
          two cultures with respect to each of the two types of consonant cluster in
          question. The observations supporting this view are not numerous but
          are, I believe, suggestive.
             Regarding the expressive omission of consonantal sandhi in Ponapean
         (i.e., preserving double stops at word boundaries rather than changing the
         first stop to the corresponding nasal), the only time when I heard this done
         consistently between native speakers in a situation of ordinary audibility
         was during a rather outrageous speech in which a chief who had recently
        won out in a long dispute over rights to certain traditional titles was force-
        fully castigating his opponents and attempting to cow them into permanent
       submission. This is quite unusual behavior for modern Ponapean chiefs,
       who, like their subjects, generally try to give the impression that they are
       reasonable and gentle. Rather than directly express his anger a chief will
       usually try to manage an unruly subject through go-betweens if he sus-
       pects there is a chance of serious open resistance. This chief, on this one
        506   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

occasion only, regularly omitted consonantal sandhi at all wordjunctures,
resulting in many double consonant clusters, especially double k's in his
speech. I spoke with him many times on other occasions and never no-
ticed the slightest tendency in this direction, nor did I ever notice such a
tendency in other speakers in speech to other native speakers in situations
of ordinary audibility. It is true that in the situation described, the speaker
was trying to state his position very clearly, and no doubt this is relevant
to the omission of sandhi, but the point to note is that the clarity was for
the purpose of expressing aggression, of telling certain members of his
audience something which he knew they did not want to hear. The omis-
sion of sandhi in this situation therefore facilitated the expression of ag-
gression. It is of special interest that the more formal form without sandhi
 should be used to express aggression since it would seem to be more com-
 mon for informal, slurred forms characteristic of rapid speech to result
 from aggressive feelings.
     For Trukese I can report no single dramatic incident such as this, but
 can give my general impression that some tendency toward the omission
 of sandhi in Trukese characterizes polite speech, as toward strangers of
 greater age, or in formal public gatherings. For what it is worth, I would
 note that consonantal sandhi does not occur as far as I know in the texts
  of love songs in Truk, although the epenthetic vowels, another sandhi
  feature, are especially common in songs in both languages. Admittedly,
  musical reasons could help to account for the epenthetic vowels and the
  retention of nasal stop clusters. But if double stops give an impression of
  greater force in both languages, it may also be significant that I have re-
  corded them in consonantal sandhi in texts of Trukese spells, where the
  intent is presumably to compel some event by magical power.
     Thus we find various bits of ethnographic evidence, as just reported,
  supporting the notion that there is a common expressive significance for
  each of the two types of c9nsonant cluster in the two languages. Specif-
   ically, in both languages the double stops seem to have the values of
   abruptness and freedom of emotional expression, including the expression
   of aggression, while the clusters of nasal plus stop seem to have the values
   of restraint, politeness, and gentleness. To the extent that these expres-
   sive considerations influence the use of sandhi, we may say that the use
   and omission of sandhi have contrasting expressive value as between the
   two cultures.


    POSSIBLE UNIVERSAL EXPRESSIVE
    VALUE OF TYPES OF CONSONANT
    CLUSTER
    The apparent similarities between the two cultures in the expressive
  value of these two types of consonant cluster may lead us to consider
                 Consonantal Sandlzi in Trukese and Ponapean     507

further whether there may not be something appropriate in these cultural
meanings from the point of view of a potentially universal phonetic sym-
bolism. If found, this would give further support to the thesis. It would
appear that in any language it would be natural for double stops to be
articulated more forcefully than single stops or nasal stop clusters: in
order to ensure most economically that a single stop is not held too long
(and thus confused with a double stop), it helps to close it with less force,
preparing for its prompt release. Increasing the number of double stops by
whatever optional means would then be suitable for expressing aggres-
sion since it would result in a more forceful articulation, considered as a
gesture of the speech organs. In Ponapean, of course, this effect is
achieved by elimination of consonantal sandhi, as in the angry chief's
speech, while in Trukese it is achieved through the normal operation of
consonantal sandhi.
   By analogy, the clusters of nasal plus stop may be regarded as a less
forceful vocal gesture. Especially when they are substituted for double
stop clusters, as in Ponapean sandhi, they may be interpreted gesturally
as a dulling or blunting of the abruptness of the double stop cluster.

   FUNCTIONAL LOAD
   While I believe that the expressive value and stylistic role of consonant
clusters discussed herein are probably in part dependent on universal
phonetic symbolism, I do not believe that the "stylistic functional load"
of these or similar consonant clusters is equal in all languages in which
they can occur. The expressive value of the consonant clusters would be
slight if there were no opportunity in actualizing particular constructions
for choice between the two types of cluster-double consonants versus
clusters of nasal plus other homorganic consonants. Since such a choice
does exist frequently in both languages, it can actively serve an important
expressive function. Of course, in any language in which the two types of
cluster existed in different words or constructions, there is still a little
opportunity for an expressive function to be served insofar as approxi-
mate synonyms might be selected at times on the basis of their phonetic
shape, e.g., as an English speaking writer might select "large" in prefer-
ence to "big" because he found the open (low) vowel of the first in some
way more expressive than the closed (high) vowel of the second.
   We may say, therefore, that the development of optional sandhi affect-
ing these consonant clusters in the two languages has provided an op-
portunity for speakers to make especially great stylistic use of what may
be a universal tendency or potential in phonetic symbolism. In the context
of human culture as a whole, then, the occurrence of sandhi may be said
to be marked (or potentially marked) in relation to its absence, and the
normal speech of the two cultures in question can be seen as marked as
           508   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

    aggressive, and restrained, respectively,just in virtue of normal phonolog-
   ical process, as against a hypothetical universal baseline. However, in the
   context of a single culture, it is the omission of the normal phonological
   process, sandhi, that is marked, as against the known cultural (and mor-
   phonemic) baseline. On this view, in Trukese it is restrained speech that
   is marked, in Ponapean aggressive.


          Historical Considerations

           Whatever the reasons for the expressive significance of these con-
  sonant clusters, whether universal or particular to these two cultures
  there are grounds for suspecting that it is the contrasting attitudes toward
  language in the two cultures that have provided a selective pressure in
  favor of one type of consonantal sandhi in Trukese and another type in
  Ponapean.

   PHONETIC ECONOMY
    It is hard to interpret the difference in type of consonantal sandhi in
 terms of phonetic economy. While either type of sandhi results in a kind
of economy by reducing the number of consonant clusters which the
speaker must produce and the listener identify, the two languages con-
sidered in themselves appear to offer no evidence that either form of
sandhi results in a cluster which is easier to pronounce than the original
cluster since the Trukese form of sandhi (nasal plus homorganic stop
changing to double stop) results in precisely the type of consonant cluster
which Ponapean sandhi eliminates, and vice versa.

  RECENT ACCULTURATION
   The question was .raised as to whether the learning of Japanese by the
speakers of one or the other language during the period of Japanese ad-
ministration between the two world wars could have altered the possible
consonant clusters in very recent times. This possibility can be conclu-
sively ruled out for several reasons:

        I. A majority of the speakers of both languages remained mono-
       lingual during the Japanese period.
       2. Nearly all Trukese or Ponapeans who learned some Japanese
       did so imperfectly and simply used the most appropriate pho-
       nemes and phone·me combinations of their mother tongue to
       approximate Japanese pronunciation.
       3. The types of consonant clusters favored at word boundaries
-------
  /
 I
 I                           Consonantal Sandhi in Trukese and Ponapean      509

                      by sandhi shifts are the only types found within indigenous mor-
                     phemes; the consonant clusters within morphemes are generally
                     subject to no variation at present and are presumably more stable
                     historically.
                     4. Exposure to the Japanese language was roughly equal for
                    speakers of the local Trukese and Ponapean dialects which I
                    studied.
                    5. Both types of consonant cluster under consideration-double
                    stops and nasal-stop clusters-occur frequently in Japanese.

             The other m,uor non-Micronesian languages with which there has been
           some contact are English, Spanish, and German. The first three reasons
          apply to these languages as well, the first two with even greater force.
             We cannot at present rule out conclusively the possibility that after
          initial differentiation of the two languages prehistoric contact with one or
          more other Pacific languages influenced the divergent development of
         sandhi patterns, but I consider this explanation less probable than the one
         offered. I think there is some suggestion of greater Polynesian contact for
         Ponapean, but Polynesian languages generally lack all consonant clusters,
         and presumably have for some time.

           WORLD VIEW, SOCIAL STRUCTURE,
           AND LINGUISTIC CHANGE
             Consonant clusters occur within words and within morphemes in both
          languages. Here there is at present less room for stylistic choice: in
          Trukese one generally finds a double stop (or fricative) where in the cog-
         nate Ponapean word (if there is one) one finds a nasal-stop (or nasal-
         fricative) cluster. However, it seems to me plausible that we may infer a
         time in the past when "free variation," i.e., variation conditioned by ex-
         pressive or social factors and not by linguistic factors, existed in both
        languages with respect to these internal consonant clusters. I think it is
        also reasonable to infer that the significance in the internal clusters was
        the same as that of the corresponding clusters at adjoining word bound-
        aries. If this is granted, then we have an instance of an effect of stylistic
        preferences conditioned by social structure on phonological change. If
       more instances can be documented and studied in greater detail, we may
       ultimately be able to develop a general social-psychological theory for the
       interpretation of much phonological change.
          The argument with respect to phonology (specifically, formation of
      consonant clusters) is similar to the argument of a paper of mine with
      respect to syntax-specifically, the construction of noun phrases. In both
      works I compare the genetically related languages and cultures of Truk
      and Ponape and infer that long-standing differences in world view have
         510    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

led to linguistic change along different lines. The basic theme of both
papers is that:

World view can have influence on linguistic change ... through its effect on
attitudes toward speech and language. . . . Given a fairly consistent set of
attitudes toward speech over a period of time, the linguistic alternatives of style
which express the preferred attitudes at one period ... will tend to increase in
frequency and become obligatory. . .. At the same time . . . new alternatives
must develop to express the same sort of attitudes (Fischer 1966: 182).

   World view is further relatable to social structure. As has been indi-
 cated, the basic difference between the two societies, one from which a
 number of others flow, is the greater emphasis on political and social
 hierarchy in Ponape. Ponapean hierarchy entails, for one thing, a much
 greater concern with politeness and control of emotions among the Pon-
apeans as compared with the Trukese. There is in Ponape less free play
for verbal aggression, joking or serious. In the present work I have argued
that this politeness and carefulness with speech extends to phonology,
favoring less "forceful" consonant clusters in Ponapean, and have pre-
sented some evidence suggesting that the people of both cultures attribute
similar expressive significance to the forcefulness of the different types of
cluster.
   In the paper on syntax I argue for another effect of social hierarchy on
the two languages. In the more differentiated and more hierarchical
society, Ponape, there is a stronger assumption that the listener has a
different point of view from the speaker. Consequently there is a greater
concern for speaking carefully and economically-to say what one has to
say but to avoid saying anything extra which might be misinterpreted. At
the same time there is less willingness to suffer interruption when one
"has the floor." Ponapean noun phrase construction contributes to these
values by its tightness: i.e., in the context of actual discourse it is usually
easier to infer the end of a Trukese noun phrase than its Ponapean equiv-
alent because of the differences in order of presentation of information. It
is therefore easier to interrupt the Trukese noun phrase before its comple-
tion, once the end has been inferred, or to prepare to seize the floor as
soon as it does end.
   More recently, in an unpublished paper presented at the 1967 annual
meeting of the American Anthropological Association in Washington,
D.C., I have examined some regularities in combinations of syntactic
rules noted by Joseph Greenberg (1963) in a diverse sample of world
languages, and have attempted an interpretation of these along lines
similar to those of my 1966 paper on Trukese and Ponapean noun phrase
construction. Greenberg's ~ample contains a wide range of syntactic
variables which show no difference between Trukese and Ponapean. A
                   Consonantal Sandhi in Trukese wui Ponapean      511
                                                       I


   number of these variables show a tendency toward scaling, suggesting to
   me a single underlying rhetorical variable on the order of "looseness/
   tightness" or "suspense/directness," as I have discussed previously for
   the noun phrase in Trukese and Ponapean. As I interpret Greenberg's
   data, Japanese is at one end of the scale and four languages-Berber,
   Hebrew, Welsh, and Zapotec-are at the other end.
      Unfortunately for my argument, Trukese noun phrase construction             !
                                                                                  I.
   turns out to be more like Japanese than does Ponapean, although in terms
   of social structure and values about speech Japanese culture appears to
  me to be closer to Ponapean than it is to Trukese-and I have conducted
  fieldwork in all three cultures. As far as dominant subject-verb-object
  (SVO) order is concerned, Japanese has what I regard as the most
  "suspenseful" of the three common orders, SOY, while Ponapean and
  Trukese are both like English, SVO, which is an intermediate order.
  (The other extreme order is VSO.) Probably greater weight should be
 given to the subject-verb-object order than to internal order of noun
 Phrases since either subject or object can itself be a complex noun phrase;
 SVO order therefore involves an ordering of greater chunks of the sen-
 tence. I have no simple explanation which satisfies me to explain these
 apparent inconsistencies. Possibly more focused fieldwork on the ethnog-
 raphy of speaking in these cultures would reveal that I have not chosen
 the correct rhetorical and social variables. There are a number of genres
 of language use (various kinds of narrative and songs, poetry, oratory,
 courting, gossip, age-graded discourse, etc.) in relation to which stylistic
 choices might be intensively investigated.
    However, I am still inclined to think that the scaling of certain syntactic
variables suggests the operation of some sort of universal rhetorical or
expressive factor. Further work with a larger number of variables and a
larger sample of world language may enable us ultimately to develop a
general social psychological theory for the interpretation of much lin-
guistic change.
===~~·-·-····'-·~=-....-..-- - - ~ ~




                        19

                        On the Mechanism
                        of Linguistic Change
                        WILLIAM LABOY




                        William Labov is a professor of linguistics at the Uni-
                        versity of Pennsylvania. He received his doctorate from
                        Columbia University where he also taught for a number
                        of years. He is a member of the Committee on Socio-
                        linguistics of the Social Science Research Council. His
                        research has concentrated on the observation and ex-
                        planation of linguistic change in English, analysis of
                        conversation ·and narrative, and the development of more
                        adequate linguistic analyses through the incorporation of
                        quantitative patterning and social features. The present
                        chapter is reprinted from a Georgetown University
                        monograph edited by Charles Kreidler ( 1965). Part of the
                        discussion of Labov's paper also reprinted there is re-
                        produced in an appendix at the end of the chapter. A
                        more detailed discussion of some of the notions in this
                        chapter is provided by Weinreich, Herzog, and Labov
                        (1968).              -
                           Some thirty years ago Edward Sapir objected that "In
                        linguistics, abstracied speech sounds, words and the
                        arrangement of words have come to have so authentic a
                        vitality that one can speak of 'regular sound changes' and
                        'loss of genders' without knowing or caring who opened
                        their mouths, at what time, to communicate what to
                        whom" ( I 949d:579). Sapir criticized the arbitrary bound-
                        aries drawn by "the many kinds of segmental scientists of


                        From "On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change." Reprinted from
                        Georgetown University Monograph Series on Languages and Lin-
                        guistics, No. 18, edited by Charles W. Kreidler, pp. 91-114 and pp.
                        131-132.

                                                       512


                                                                                              rd
                  On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change      513

       man," arguing that "we need never fear to modify, prune,
       extend, redefine, rearrange, and reorient our sciences of
       man as social being, for these sciences cannot point to an
       order of nature that has meaning apart from the directly
       experienced perceptions and values of the individual"
       (l 949d:578, 581). Much of the study of linguistic change
       has continued to deserve Sapir's stricture. Labov shows
       how research not afraid to "extend, redefine, rearrange,
      and reorient" current segmentations of the study of man
      can succeed in observing what has been pronounced
      unobservable, find regularity in what was thought to be
      confusion, and begin to answer some of the fundamental
      questions posed by the universal fact of linguistic change.
         The present chapter begins and ends with reference to
      data from the speech community. The implication is that
      data on the internal structure of the language, i.e., lin-
     guistic forms collected by the traditional elicitation pro-
     cedures, in which these forms are abstracted from ordi-
     nary verbal interaction, do not provide a proper basis for
     the explanation of linguistic change. One must have data
    on attitudes and use as well. Indeed the phrase means
    more than that. It is not enough simply to add (or cor-
    relate) information from the speech community to the
    linguistic analysis. The two kinds of data are interlocked
    and must be obtained and analyzed together. Note that
   the speech community is defined not by the presence or
   absence of a particular dialect or language but by the
   presence of a common set of normative values in regard
   to linguistic features. (One might speak of a criterion of
  social rather than merely "referential" intelligibility.)
       This concept of the data and conception of the speech
  community has led to the development of new and highly
  ingenious elicitation techniques capable of simulating
 some of the significant variations in social context which
 characterize everyday verbal interaction. Labov dis-
 covered that although individual speech varies greatly,
 New Yorkers are alike in the way in which they adapt
 their pronunciation and grammar in differing social situa-
tions and in the way in which they judge or evaluate the
social significance of the forms they hear. (See Labov
1966b for a full account of field techniques and results.)
Previous investigators who had confined themselves
simply to recording linguistic forms in formal interview
sessions had been defeated by the heterogeneity of what
514    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 they found and thought of New York only as a locale of
 great mixture of speech. Labov showed that underneath
 the heterogeneity of what people say is a considerable
 homogeneity of social meaning and of evaluation of what
  is said, New York City shows in perhaps extreme form
  what is true for any community (see e.g., that described
  by Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14); a synchronic de-
  scription cannot be static, but must take the perspective
  called by Jakobson (1962) "dynamic synchrony."
      Labov's concern in this chapter is to develop a theory
  of some of the processes that contribute to the diversity
  within speech communities, while at the same time re-
  flecting the common evaluations that unite them. He is
  concerned first to show that sound change, a classic locus
  of linguistic theory, can indeed be observed and be de-
. scribed (as against some neogrammarian views), and then
   to show that its occurrence can be explained (a possibility
   dismissed, or trivialized, by some generative grammarians
   (Postal 1968:283-284)). Centrano the approach is recog-
   nition of a new concept, the linguistic variable, as the unit
   of change (see the Introduction and also Ervin-Tripp,
   Chapter 7). The linguistic variable is by definition a
   feature subject to social evaluation, hence requiring data
   from the speech community for its description, and at the
   same time making explanation possible (through con-
   comitant variation between the linguistic and social data).
    At any one time some features of a language will be
    subject to social evaluation, moving through the statuses
    of indicator, marker, and perhaps stereotype indicated in
    the outline of states of change.
       Linguistic change is seen as an adaptive process, as
    linguistic evolution. Its adequate study must deal with
    three problems, transition, embedding, and evaluation-
    finding the route, the sociolinguistic matrix, and the social
    meaning of a change. In both the studies reported here
    (Martha's Vineyard and New York City) self-identity is
    found to be at the root of linguistic change (see the Nor-
    wegian study by Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14, and
     Bernstein, Chapter 16). In the first, native status as a
    Vineyarder is the key. In New York City socioeconomic
    class and, most of all, ethnic identity are most important.
     In both, of course, age enters (other work of Labov has
    formalized generation as one of the contextual features
     to which a linguistic rule is sensitive).
               On the Mechanism of Ling1iistic Change     515

      Notice the necessity of placing data in terms of the
   identity of the speaker and the context of speech. Only qy
   treating data as situated in these two respects could the
   patterning be discerned. Survey techniques were used to
   place the New York City speakers in terms of socio-
   economic class. Diverse modes of elicitation were used
  to deal with contextual style. Recognizing self-conscious-
  ness as the crucial factor, whose effects could not be
  eliminated, Labov proceeded to control for it, and indeed,
  to turn it to advantage. Four contextual styles were dif-
  ferentiated, reading of isolated words from a list giving
  the most self-conscious speech, the telling of an incident
  in which one's life had been in danger giving the least
  self-conscious. Statistical techniques were, of course,
  required to show the stable patterns that emerged, for
  these were patterns not of presence and absence of fea-
  tures but of greater and lesser incidence. Notice that it is
  not the absolute values of the percentages of a feature,
  according to class and context but the reliable (and valid)
  pattern of relationship between values that counts. An-
  other investigator or another day might show a different
 absolute but not a different relative incidence.
     Like Blom and Gumperz, Labov found people unaware
 of their own usage of language and holding values about
 speech in terms of which their usage would be stigmatized
 by the larger community. Such research gives a dynamic
 dimension to the thesis of the unconscious patterning of
 linguistic and other behavior developed by Boas, Sapir,
 and Levi-Strauss and indicates some specific explana-
 tions of that dimension, e.g., the relationship between
 hypercorrection and position just below the highest social
 level. The conflict between two sets of values (see Bern-
 stein, Chapter 17) is significant. In his general monograph
 Labov ( 1966b) speaks of the great linguistic insecurity of
the average New York speaker. participation in a partic-
ular linguistic change may be a sensitive index of social
mobility and struggle.
    Labov's research disproves the recurrent view that
linguistic change can be bifurcated between a purely
internal process of the origin of changes and an external
process of their spread, such that social factors enter only
into the second (see, most recently, Postal 1968:284).
The other view can be seen as an attempt to avoid recog-
nition of linguistics as partly a social science, as a field
      516    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

       whose problems require some use of social science meth-
       ods for their solution. Such a view must ignore clear
       cases of social motivation of sound change (see Fischer
       1958; Hymes l 964d:450; as well as the Martha's Vine-
       yard case in this chapter), and retreat to a position from
       which the meaningfulness of linguistic change to "the
       directly experienced perceptions and values of the in-
       dividual" is either invisible or explained away (cf. Postal
       1968:283: "There is no more reason for languages to
       change than there is for automobiles to add fins one year
       and remove them the next").
          If the description and explanation of linguistic change
       require data beyond that with which most linguists are
       used to dealing, it is not, Labov stresses, multiplication of
       data in itself that matters but theoretically motivated
       selection of data, and rigor in its analysis. Additional
       related readings are provided by Malkiel ( 1960) and Mar-
       tinet ( 1952).


        Introduction

         This chapter outlines the approaches to the explanation of lin-
guistic change which are being followed in ou~ current research within the
context of the speech community. It is now clear that many theoretical
problems of linguistic structure cannot be resolved without data from the
speech community. This point of view is developed in detail in Labov
1964a. Here I will focus on the converse proposition-that linguistic
change cannot be explained by arguments drawn from purely internal
relations within the system, even if external, sociolinguistic relations are
recognized as additional conditioning factors. In the mechanism of lin-
guistic changes which we have observed, the two sets of relations are
interlocked in a systematic way.
  The investigations which form the basis for the present discussion are
studies of linguistic change on the island of Martha's Vineyard, and in
New York City; the principal focus will be on the process of sound
change. The chief techniques used in this research have been described in
several previous papers and publications, along with a certain amount of
the data and the findings (see Labov 1963, 1964a, 1964b, 1965, 1966a,
 1966b, 1968). The data to be presented here may be considered repre-
sentative of a much larger set of facts and correlations derived from these
studies.                                                                       /
   The problems of linguistic evolution. Despite the achievements of
                            On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change               517

 nineteenth century historical linguistics, many avenues to the study of
 linguistic change remain unexplored. In 1905, Meillet noted that all of the
 laws of linguistic history that had been discovered were mefely possi-
 bilities (Meillet 1921: 16): "It remains for us to discover the variables
 which permit or incite the possibilities thus recognized."

The problem as we face it today is precisely that which Meillet outlined
sixty years ago, for little progress has been made in ascertaining the
empirical factors which condition historical change. There has actually
been a retrograde movement in this respect in the sense that treatments of
linguistic change which are essentially ahistorical have become popular.
Chronological detail is deliberately set aside in such articles as those by
Pilch (1955) and Halle (1962).
   The chief problems of linguistic evolution might be summarized as five
questions:

          I. What are the causes of the continual origination of new lin-
          guistic changes?
          2. By what mechanism do changes proceed?
          3. Is there an adaptive function to linguistic evolution? 1
          4. Is there an over-all direction of linguistic evolution?
          5. What are the universal constraints upon linguistic change?

   One approach to linguistic evolution is to study changes completed in
 the past. This has, of course, been the major strategy of historical lin-
guistics, and it is the only possible approach to the last two questions-
the direction of linguistic evolution, and the universal constraints upon
change. On the other hand, the questions of the mechanism of change, the
inciting causes of change, and the adaptive functions of change are best
analyzed by studying in detail linguistic changes in progress. The mech-
anism of linguistic change will be the chief topic of the discussion to fol-
low; however, many of the conclusions will plainly be relevant to the
questions of inciting causes and adaptive functions of change, and it will
be apparent that more complete answers to these three questions will
require methods similar to those used ,here.
   An essential presupposition of this line of research is the claim that the
same mechanisms which operated to produce the large scale changes of
the past may be observed operating in the current changes taking place
around us.
   1 This question is all the more puzzling when we contrast linguistic with biological evolu-
tion. It is difficult to discuss the evolution of the plant and anim~1l kingdoms _without ~o~e
reference to adaptation to various environments. But what conceivable adaptive function 1s
served by the efllorescence of the Indo-European family? On this topic, see Labov (1964a)
and Hymes (1961 a).
        518    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes



        A Strategy for the Study
        of Linguistic Changes in Progress
          Although answers to the first three questions given above are the
 ultimate goals of our current research, they do not represent the actual
 strategy used. For the empirical study of changes in progress, the task can
 be sub-divided into three separate problems which jointly serve to answer
 the questions raised above.
     I. The transition problem is to find the route by which one stage of a
 linguistic change has evolved from an earlier stage. We wish to trace
 enough of the intervening stages so that we can eliminate all but one of the
 major alternatives. Thus questions of the regularity of sound change, of
 grammatical influence on sound change (Malkiel 1960), of "push chains"
 versus "pull chains" (Martinet 1952), of steady movement versus sudden
 and discontinuous shifts, are all aspects of the transition problem.
    2. The embedding problem is to find the continuous matrix of social
 and linguistic behavior in which the linguistic change is carried. The
principal route to the solution is through the discovery of correlations
between elements of the linguistic system and between those elements
and the non-linguistic system of social behavior. The correlations are
established by strong proof of concomitant variation: that is, by showing
that a small change in the independent variable is regularly accompanied
by a change of the linguistic variable in a predictable direction.
    The concept of the linguistic variable is that developed in Labov 1964c.
The definition of such a variable amounts to an empirical assertion of
co-variation, within or without the linguistic system. It appears that the
fundamental difference between an explanation of a linguistic change and
a description is that a description makes no such assertion. I_n terms of a
description of change, such as that provided by Halle (1962), there is no
greater probability of the change taking place in the observed direction as
in the reverse direction. Note that the embedding problem is presented
here as a single problem, despite the fact that there are two distinct as-
pects: correlations within the linguistic system and with elements outside
the system. The main body of this chapter provides justification for this
decision.
    3. The evaluation problem is to find ·the subjective (or latent) correlates
of the objective (or manifest) changes which have been observed. The
indirect approach to this problem correlates the general attitudes and
aspirations of the informants with their linguistic behavior. The more
direct approach is to measure the unconscious subjective reactions of the             /
informants to values of the linguistic variable itself.                           )
   With tentative solutions to these problems in hand, it would be pos-
                                                                             -~-·,---~-.--:-·--




                         On the Mechanism vf Linguistic Change     519
                                                                                            ':i
  sible to provide an explanation of a linguistic change which answers the
  three questions of inciting cause, mechanism, and adaptive function. As in
  any other investigation, the value of an explanation rises in relation to its
  generality, but only to the extent that it rests upon a foundation ofreliable
  and reproducible evidence.


          The Observation of Sound Change
            The simplest data that will establish the existence of a linguistic
    change is a set of observations of two successive generations of speakers
    -generations of comparable social characteristics which represent stages
   in the evolution of the same speech community. Hermann (1929) obtained
   such data at Charmey in 1929 by developing the original observations of
   Gauchat (1905), obtained in 1899. We have such data for Martha's Vine-
   yard, adding the 1961 observations to the 1933 data of the Linguistic
   Atlas (Kurath 1941). For New York City, we add the current data of
   1963 to the Linguistic Atlas data of 1940; in addition, we have many
   other reports, including the excellent observations of Babbitt in 1896, to
   add further time depth to our analysis (Frank 1948; Kurath and Mc David
  Jr. 1961; Hubbell 1949; Babbitt 1896).          '                           '
     Solutions to the transition problem proposed here will depend upon
  close analysis of the distribution of linguistic forms in apparent time-that
  is, along the dimension formed by the age groups of the present popula-
 tion. Such an analysis is possible only because the original simple descrip-
 tion of change in real time enables us to distinguish age-grading in the
 present population from the effects of linguistic change (Hockett 1950).
     The evidence obtained in the research reported here indicates that the
 regular process of sound change can be isolated and recorded by observa-
 tions across two generations. This process is characterized by a i·apid
 development of some units of a phonetic sub-system, while other units
 remain relatively constant. It affects word classes as a whole rather than
 individual words: yet these classes may be defined by a variety of condi-
 tions, morphophonemic and grammatkal as well as phonetic. It is regular,
 but more in the outcome than in its inc'eption or its development. Further-
 more, it appears that the process of sound change is not an autonomous
 movement within the confines of a linguistic system but rather a complex
response to many aspects of human behavior.
    Some comment is required on the possibility of observing regular sound
since arguments inherited from the neogrammarian controversy have
impeded the progress of empirical research in this area. The inheritors of
the neogrammarian tradition, who should be most interested in the em-
pirical study of regular change in progress, have abandoned the arena of
             520   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

        meaningful research in favor of abstract and speculative arguments. In-
        deed, Bloomfield (1933:347, 365) and Hockett (1958:439, 444) have
        maintained that phonetic change cannot in principle be observed by any
        of the techniques currently available. Hockett writes: "No one has yet
       observed sound change: we have only been able to detect it via its con-
       sequences. We shall see later that a mor~ nearly direct observation would
       be theoretically possible, if impractical, but any ostensible report of such
       an observation so far must be discredited." His theoretical proposal is
       that "over a period of fifty years we made, each month, a thousand ac-
      curate acoustic records . . . all from the members of a tight-knit com-
      munity." The suggestion to multiply the data in this way is not necessarily
      helpful, as the experience of sociological survey analysts has shown: for
      relatively small numbers are needed to measure change in a population if
     the bias of selection is eliminated or minimized. Otherwise, we merely
     multiply the errorsor   measurement.
         Hockett proceeds to identify sound change with a level of random
     fluctuations in the action of the articulatory apparatus, without any in-
     herent direction, a drift of the articulatory target which has no cognitive,
    expressive, or social significance. According to Hockett, the variables
    responsible for sound change include "the amount of moisture in the
    throat, nose and mouth of the speaker, random currents in his central
    nervous system, muscular tics . . . the condition of the hearer's outer
    ear [presence of wax or dirt]" (1958:443-444). All of the empirical ob-
    servations of change in progress which have been reported are explained
   as the results of a complex process of borrowing, and are relegated to a
   type of linguistic behavior known as the fluctuation or conflict of forms.
   No claims are made for the regularity of this process, and so the basic
   tenet of the regularity of sound change has been deprived of all empirical
   significance. Furthermore, the changes which actually are observed are re-
  garded as unsystematic phenomena, to be discussed with anecdotal evi-
  dence, subject to forces "quite outside the linguist's reach," factors which
  '"'elude our grasp," fluctuations "beyond our powers" to record (Bloom-
  field l 933:343-368).
      The evidence of current research suggests that this retreat was pre-
 mature, that the regular process of sound change can be observed by
 empirical methods. The refinements in methodology called for are not the
 mechanical. elaborations suggested by the writers cited above; for the
 mere multiplication of data only confounds analysis and perpetuates the
 bias of selection. It is rigor in the analysis of a population and in the selec-
tion of informants which is required. Furthermore, we need ingenuity in
the resolution of stylistic variation, to go beyond the sterile method of
endless dissection into idiolects. With such techniques, we find that reg-
ularity emerges where only confusion was seen before. Random fluctua-
tions in articulation can certainly be found: indeed, this is the level of
                                    On tlze Mechanism of Linguistic Change             521
                                                                                        I
           "noise" which prevents us from predicting the form of every utterance
           which our informants will make. But it would be an error to ascribe a
           major role to such fluctuations in the economy of linguistic change. The
          forces which direct the observed changes appear to be of an entirely dif-
          ferent order of magnitude, and the changes take place much more rapidly
          than any process of random drift could account for.
            Thus the following table contrasts the two points of view:

                                                         Fluctuation of    Ultimate
                   Neogrammarian:        Sound change
                                                             forms        regularity
                                         Sublinguistic                     Ultimate
                   Present discussion:                   Sound change
                                         fluctuations                     regularity

           A single example of a sound change recently observed will be used to
        illustrate the general approach to solving the transition, embedding, and
I       evaluation problems. This example is one of the simplest cases-that of
I      the centralization of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard. In the development of
'      this case, some new evidence will be presented on the mechanism of
'      sound changes which has not been published before.



               The Centralization of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard

                 We begin with a clear-cut case for the existence of a linguistic
         change from observations in real time. In 1933, Guy Lowman found no
         more than the barest trace of centralization of /aw/; the significant varia-
        tion observed was the fronting of /aw/ from [aUJ to [re U]. In 1961, a
        comparable set of older eighth generation descendants of Yankee settlers
        from the same villages showed a very pronounced centralization of /aw/-
        now clearly the variable (aw). (In the notation used here, parentheses in-
       dicate the linguistic variable, while slashes indicate bi-unique phonemes
       and brackets phonetic notation as usual. Thus (aw) represents the variable
       in general; (aw-2) is a particular value of,the variable; (aw)-22 is an aver-
      age index score for the variable.)           '
          The transition problem is studied through a detailed examination of the
      distribution of forms through apparent time-that is, through the various
      age levels in the present population. In this case, as in many others, the
     original sample was too small to allow us to study differences in age levels;
     only four informants were chosen on Martha's Vineyard in I 933. The
     first step in the analysis is to construct a quantitative index for discrete
     values of the variable. The original impressionistic scale had six levels.
     Instrumental measurements of a sample of these ratings indicated that
    four levels could be distinguished with a high degree of conformity to
    formant positions (see Labov 1963 :286-287).
         522   Genesis, lvlai11te11a11ce, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                                  aw-0        [aU]
                                  aw-I        [a 1. U]
                                  aw-2_,      [uU]
                                  aw-3        [~U]

The index of centralization was constructed from this scale by averaging
the numerical values assigned to each variant. Thus (aw)-00 would mean
no centralization at all, while (aw)-3.00 would mean consistent centraliza-
tion at the level of [~U]. This index was applied to interviews with 69
informants by rating each of the words in which (aw) occurred. The first
approach to the transition problem can then be made by correlating aver-
age (aw) inde;x. scores for these interviews with the age level of the
speakers. The first three columns of Table 19.1 show a regular correla-
tion, in which the centralization index rises regularly for four successive
age levels.


         table I 9. I

Centralization Indexes by Age Level
Generation          Age level          (aw)-             (ai)-

   la                   Over 75        0.22              0.25
   lb                   61-75          0.37              0.35
   Ila                  46-60          0.44              0.62
   lib                  31-45.         0.88              0.81



   The over-all tendency of Table 19.1 represents an amalgamation of
many different types of speakers and many different trends in the use of
(aw). Figure 19.1 presents a more detailed analysis of the transition prob-
lem for a critical sub-group. Here are displayed the percentage distribu-
tion of lexical items for eight individuals from 92 to 31 years of age. The
horizontal axes show the four coded levels of the variable (aw). The
vertical axes are the percentages of lexical items used with each variant.
The vocabulary is broken into two sections that are tabulated separately:
the solid line represents words in which (aw) is followed by a voiceless
obstruent, as in out, house, about, 1noutlz; the broken line represents all
other words (and principally those ending in a nasal, as in town.found, or
with no consonant final, as in now, how, etc.) [The phonetic conditioning
was actually much more complex than this, and both following and pre-
ceding consonants are involved (Labov 1963 :290).]
   The first diagram, a, in Fig. 19.1 is not that of an individual but shows
the composite results for the four Linguistic Atlas informants interviewed
in 1933. They show only the barest trace of centralization. The secol).d
                               (aw)                    (aw)                        (aw)
                         0            2     3    0    I       2    3               index



  a. Four LANE                                  15                       _co       0.06
    informants,                                                        elsewhere
                                                22
    average 65 years.




  h. Mr. H. H., Sr.,                            15    2                  _co       0.10
     92 years.                                  14    I                elsewhere




  c. Mrs. S. H.,                                 8    2                  _co       0.20
     87 years.                                  12    3                elsewhere




  d. Mr. E. M.,                                 19    2       4          _co       0.52
     83 years.                                  20    3       3        elsewhere




                                                 I    6       4          _co       I.I 8
  c. Mr. H. H., Jr.,                             4    8       2
     60 years.                                                         elsewhere




  f. Mr. D.P.,                                         3   JO            _co       1.1 I
     57 years.                                   9    15    3          elsewhere




  g. Mr. P. N.,                                               17   2     _co       1.3 I
     52 years.                                   IO   6                elsewhere




  h. Mr. E. P.,                                               9    9     _co       2.1 I
     31 years.                                   7    2                elsewhere




           figure 19.1
Stages in the centralization of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard, Massa-
chusetts

                                          523
        524    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

diagram, b, is that of the oldest informant of 1961, a man 92 years old.
The average age of the Atlas informants was 65 years; Mr. H. H., Sr.,
would have been 64 years,old-in 1933, and so he is of the same age group.
His centralization profile is quite similar to that of the Atlas informants
in a. Inc, we have an 87-year-old woman who shows only a slight increase
in centralization. Diagram d, Mr. E. M., 83 years old, indicates a small but
distinct increase in the occurrence of variant (aw-2). Mr. H. H., Jr., in e, is
considerably younger; he is 61 years old, the first representative of the
next generation since he is the son of Mr. H. H., Sr. Here we have a
marked increase in centralization, with both classes of words centered
about a norm of (aw-1). In J: Mr. D. P., 57 years old, shows a distinct
difference between words ending in voiceless obstruents and all others;
the first are now centered about a norm of (aw-2), while the second group
is concentrated at (aw-1). This process is carried furthering, the speech
of Mr. P. N., 52 years old, who shows perfect complementary distribu-
tion. Before voiceless obstruents, /aw/ has an allophone which is almost
always (aw-2), while before other terminals it is usually uncentralized.
And at this point( there is no overlap in the distribution. Finally, in /z, the
most extreme case of centralization, we see an even sharper separation:
this is Mr. E. P., 31 years old, the son of Mr. D. P. in .f.
    On the right hand side of Fig. 19. l are the figures for the actual numbers
of lexical items observed, and the composite index scores for each of the
eight cases. It may be noted that (aw) is only one-third as frequent as (ay);
the regularity which appears here does not require a vast corpus of ob-
 servations. The regularity emerges through the controlled selection of
informants, methods of elicitation, and of recording the data.
    The eight diagrams of Fig. 19.1 represent the most homogeneous type
 of population. All of the speakers are Yankee descendants of the original
 settlers of the island, all are interrelated, many from the same families,
 with similar attitudes towards the island. All had rural upbringing, and
 worked as carpenters or fisherman, with one exception. Thus the con-
 tinuous development of centralization represents the very model of a
 neogrammarian sound change,. accomplished within two generations.
    The embedding problem was first approached by correlating the cen-
 tralization of the obviously related variables (ay) and (aw)-that is, the
 change of (aw) was embedded in the system of upgliding diphthongs. The
Atlas records indicate a moderate degree of centralization in the 1930s,
 so that we know that the centralized forms of (ay) preceded the rise of
 (aw). The fourth column of Table 19.1 shows a close correlation of the
 two variables, with (ay) slightly in the lead at first, but (aw) becoming
 more dominant at the end. This pattern was repeated when the variables
 were correlated with a number of independent extra-linguistic factors: the
 occupation, education, and geographic location of the speaker, and most
 importantly, the ethnic group to which he belonged. The significant dif-
                           On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change             525

 ferences in the transition rates of these various sub-groups allowed the
 following statement of a solution to the embedding problem:

 The centralization of (aw) was part of a more general change which began with
 the centralization of (ay). This initial change proceeded from a moderate level of
 (ay) centralization which was probably a regional recessive trait inherited from the
 original settlers of the island. The increase of centralization of (ay) began in a
 rural community of Yankee fisherman descended directly from these original
 settlers. From there, it spread outward to speakers of the same ethnic group in
 other occupations and in other communities. The structurally symmetrical vari-
 able (aw) began to show similar tendencies early in this process. The change was
·also adopted by the neighboring Indian group at Gay Head, and a generation
 later, spread to the large Portuguese group in the more settled sections of the
 island. In these two ethnic groups, centralization of (aw) overtook and surpassed
 centralization of (ay).

     Figure 19.1 would lead us to believe that the phonetic environment of
  (aw) was a powerful factor in the initiation of the sound change. More-
 over, we can observe that the centralization of (ay) also showed a strong
 tendency towards phonetic conditioning in Generation lb, similar to that
 displayed for (aw) in Generation Ilb. 2 However, phonetic restriction on
 (ay) was overridden in the following generation, so that Generation I I
 shows a uniform norm for (ay) in all phonetic environments. This develop-
 ment would support the view that phonetic conditioning does not play a
 significant role as an inciting cause of the centralization of (aw), but acts
 rather as a conditioning factor which may be eliminated by further change.
    On Martha's Vineyard, the evaluation problem was approached by
 analyzing a number of clues to the subjective attitudes towards island
 life which appeared in the course of the interviews. Attitudes toward
 summer tourists, toward unemployment insurance, toward work on the
mainland, toward other occupational and ethnic groups, were correlated
with data obtained from community leaders and historical records, and
then with the linguistic variables. It appeared that the rise of (aw) was
correlated with the successive entry into the main stream of island life of
groups that had previously been partially excluded. It was concluded that
a social value had been (more or less arbitrarily) associated with the
centralization of (ay) and (aw), and that social value could best be ex-
pressed as "native status as a Vineyarder." Thus to the extent that an
individual felt able to claim and maintain status as a native Vineyarder,
he adopted increasing centralization of (ay) and (aw). Sons who had tried
to earn a living on the mainland, and afterwards returned to the island

  2 This phonetic conditioning is more in the nature of a continuum than that for (aw). The
complete data for a speaker of the same age and background as Mr. H. H., Jr. of Fig. 19.1
are given in Labov (1963 :289).
         526     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

developed an even higher degree of centralization than their fathers had
used. But to the extent that a Vineyarder abandoned his claim to stay on
the island and earn his living there, he also abandoned centralization and
returned to the standard uncentralized forms.
  The solution to. the evaluation problem is a statement of the social
significance of the changed form-that is, the function which is the direct
equivalent of the meaning of the form in its grammatical function. In the
developments described here, the grammatical function of /ay/ and /aw/
has remained constant. It is plain that the non-grammatical (or non-refer-
ential) functions which are carried by these phonological elements are
the essential factors in the mechanism of the change. This conclusion can
be generalized to many other instances of more complex changes in which
the net result is a radical change of grammatical function. The sound
change observed on Martha's Vineyard did not produce phonemic change,
in which units defined by grammatical function were merged or split. But
many of the changes in progress that have been observed in New York
City did produce such mergers and splits on the level of the bi-unique
phoneme.a One such change is the raising of (oh), the vowel of law, talk,
off, more, etc., which will serve to illustrate many aspects of the mech-
anism of linguistic change not relevant to the simpler example on Martha's
 Vineyard.


          The Raising of ( oh) in New York City

        It was not possible to make a direct attack upon the transition
problem in New York City. Although the records of the Linguistic Atlas
showed sporadic raising of (oh) at a fairly low level, the Atlas informants
in New York City were not selected systematically enough so that we
could construct a comparable sample in 1963.
  Convenience was apparently a greater factor in the selection of Atlas
informants in New York than on Martha's Vineyard. The great bulk of
the New York population was poorly represented in the sample, including
the working class and lower middle class. The old-family stock used for
Atlas interviews represents only a very small fraction of the ethnic com-
position of the city, at most 1 or 2 percent. Furthermore, an over-all com-
parison of the usage of this variable by older and younger speakers did not
show the clear-cut and regular progression which we saw for (aw) on
Martha's Vineyard. It was suspected that the reason for this difficulty was

    3
      The far-reaching shifts and mergers observed in the long and ingliding vowel system of
 New York City, to be discussed here, do not affect the morphophonemic system. The de-
 tailed distribution of the variables in the process of change appear to provide evidence for
 the systematic status of the bi-unique phoneme. See Labov ( 1964a) for discussion.
                        On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change     527

 the greater tendency towards stylistic variation among New Yorkers, and
 the heterogeneity of the population in terms of socio-economic class and
 ethnic membership. Therefore it was necessary to attack the embedding
 problem first, before the transition problem.
    The variable (oh) is a part of the system of long and ingliding vowels in
 the vernacular pattern of New York City speech which is essentially
 r-less: that is, where final and pre-consonantal /r/ does not occur as a
 consonantal glide.· Thus (oh) occurs in the word class of law, talk, broad,
 caught, off, and 1nore, four, board, etc. To establish a quantifiable index,
 five variants were coded as follows:

                             (oh-1)     [U:"]
                             (oh-2)     [0:J.:,+'J
                             (oh-3)     [:,:-1.•J
                             ( oh-4)    [ :,: ]
                             ( oh-5)    [o:J

  The codification of these variants can be assisted by the use of some
  modal reference points. (oh-1) is at the level of the vowel of(r-less) sure;
 (oh-3) is the level of the most common Northern vowel in (r-pronouncing)
 or, nor; (oh-4) at cardinal LP.A. [:,]; (oh-5) at the level of eastern New
 England cot. The (oh) index score was established by taking the numerical
 average of the variants recorded in any given portion of speech, and
 multiplying by ten. Thus the consistent use of (oh-2) would give a score of
 (oh)-20, and a consistent use of (oh-4), a score of (oh)-40.
    A method was developed in the New York City study for isolating a
 range of well-defined contextual styles in the speech of individual in-
 formants, and average index scores were determined for each style. A
 systematic approach to the sampling of a large urban population was
 utilized, embodying the techniques of survey methodology, and average
 index scores for various sub-groups of the sample population were de-
 termined for each style. The embedding problem was then attacked by
 correlating the five chief linguistic variables each with each other, and
 with other elements of the linguistic system, with the level of stylistic
variation in which they were recorded, and with the inµependent variables
of socio-economic class (occupation, education and income), sex, ethnic
group, and age level. (The embedding problem is treated here as one
problem, not two, in accordance with the general logic of this chapter.)
   Correlations of (oh) with socio-economic class revealed that the ir-
regular distribution of (oh) in the population as a whole was partly due to
the fact that the change had not yet affected all social classes. Figure 19.2
is a style stratification diagram for (oh) in which the transition state of
this variable can be seen in synchronic section. The horizontal axis repre-
sents the ten socio-economic levels used for this analysis, grouped in-
formally into lower class, working cl:,~ss, lower middle class, and upper
         528       Ge nesis, Maint enance , and Change of Linguistic Codes

                 Average (oh) im.l ex score s
             1 5 ..-----~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~                                                              .....




                         • ••• • • • • • Reading style
                         • • • Careful speech



               JS '--~......~~-'----~.__~_...~~-'-~~"--~--'-~~-'
                  0                        2          J    4      5                    6      7- 8               9
                                                   SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS



                                       0       I   2       J     4    5     6        7-8             9

            Soc ioeco nomi c                                              Lower m ill <l le   Upper m idd le
                                     Lower class         Working class
              class                                                          class              class
            Stylisti c
                                           None             Sli ght          Extreme             Moderate
               stratification
            (oh) in casual
              speech                       Low                 High             High                 Low

          fi gure 19.2
Sty le stratifica tion of (o h) fo r nine socio-eco nomic sub-classes



middle class. The vertical ax is represents the average (o h) index sco res:
the lower val ues of (oh) are at the top , representing the higher, closer
vowels, and the higher values of (oh) are at the bottom , indicating more
open vowe ls. The index scores for each socio-economic group are entered
on the diagram for each styli stic context, and values for the same styl e
are conn ected along straight lines.
   Figure 19.2 indicates that (oh) is not a significant variable for lower
class speakers, who do not use particularly hi gh values of thi s vowel and
show no styli stic stratification at all. Working class speakers show a recent
stage in the rai sing of (oh): very hi gh vowels in casual speech, but other-
wi se very little stratification in the more formal styles , and little tendency
 towards the extreme, hypercorrect (oh-4) and (oh-5). But lower midd le
                                       On !he M echanism r~f Linguistic C hange      529

 class speakers show the most developed state of the sound c ha nge, with
 high valu es in cas ual speec h, a nd extreme styli stic stratification. F inally,
 the uppe r middle class group is more mode rate in all respects than the
 lower middl e cl ass, still retaining the patte rn of stylistic stratifi cation.
    The ethni c group me mbers hip of N ew York C ity speakers is even more
 relevant to their use of (oh) 'th a n socio-economic class. Figure 19. 3 shows .
 th e differences be tween speakers of Jewish and Italia n background in the


                I       Ave ra ge (oh) index
                    6

                18 1--~ ~ ~~ .................;:---~ ~ ~ ~--I

               20 1--~ ~"'--:.n..-..--=--:=-c--~~~-"'111..c~ ~-1




                                       - - - - Italians

               28 ,...__~~"--~~"--~~........~~....i...~,..........,
                    0- 2               3- 5      6- 8            9
                    Lower             Workin g  Lower         Upper
                                                middle        middle
                                     SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS

           fig tll'e 19 .3
C lass stratificatio n diagram fo r (o h) by ethnic gro up in causa l speec h


  treatmen t of (o h) in casual speec h. For all but the upper middl e class, the
 Jewi sh group uses higher leve ls of (o h). The Negro group does not show
 a ny significant response to the variable (oh) , and shows a constant index
 of performance at a low level. As noted above, the lower class in general
 is simil a rly indifferen t to (o h). T able 19. 2 s hows J ewish a nd Itali a n ethni c
 groups on ly, with the lowe r class excluded. Table 19.2 shows that both
Jewi sh and Italia n speakers have participated in the raising of (o h) , but the
 increase see ms to have reached its maxi mum early for th e Jewi sh group ,
and later for the Itali an group. A separate solu tion for th e transitio n prob-
 lem is therefore required for eac h ethnic group.
    The tran sition problem for the Itali an group can be seen a nalyzed in
 F igure 19.4. The procession of values is not abso lutely regular since
socio-economic membership , sex, and othe r factors affect the valu es;
neve rtheless, there is a steady upward moveme nt from the o ldest speakers
o n the right to th e youngest spea kers on the left. Within the present sa m-
pl e of N ew York C ity spea kers, thi s is the fin est reso luti on of the transi-
tion problem which can be obtained:'

  " Figure 19.4 inc lud es Ita lian inform ants who refu sed the original int er view, a nd w hose
speec h pattern s we re sa mpl ed by th e te levi sio n inte rview , as described in Appendi x D of
Labov ( 1966b).
          530      Genesis, Maint enance, and C hange of Linguistic Codes

          table /9 .2

A verage (oh) Indexes by Age Level and Ethnic Group in C asual S peech
A ,:e                 .f e lV.\'             l taliw1.1·

 8- 19                   17                     18
20-35                    18                     18
36-49                    17                     20
50-59                    15                     20
60-                      25                     30



   The embedding problem for (oh) requires an intricate set of correla-
tion s with other elements in the linguistic system, in addition to the extra-
linguistic correlations exemplified above. We find that (oh) is firmly
embedded within the sub-s ystem of long and ingliding vowel s, and al so
related structurally to other vowel sub-systems. Quantitative studie s of
these relation s fall into five sets:
   I. There is a strong correlation between the height of (oh) and the
height of the corresponding front ingliding vowel (eh) in the word class of
bad, ask, dan ce, etc. Thi s variable originated as a rai sing of /reh/ , but

               A vcrngc (oh) index                                •women        • Men




               201--l-+--4--Hll~-!--1-4.......--l--+--l--l--l--l--+---1-+--l--+-+--+--I




               25 l-la+--1-+-al-+-!--hAIA-+-4-~            a-J---1--+---l-+-+-+-+--+--I




                 IO                20   30           40          50        60        70
                                               Age in ye ar s


          .fi g ure 19.4
Distribut io n of (oh) ind e x scores fo r Italian subjects by age
                          On the M echanism o.f Linguistic: Change   531


     early in the evo luti on of New York City speech it merged with /eh/ , the
     word class of bare, bared, where, etc. The relation between (eh) and (oh)
     is strikingly parall el to that of (ay) and (aw) on Martha's Vineyard, the
     variab le (oh) became specialized in the usage of a particular ethnic group:
     to the extent that the Italian group s hows higher use of (eh) in casual
     speech , the Jewi sh group shows higher values of (oh), until the difference
    is largely resolved in the youngest age level by merger of (eh) and /ih/ ,
    (oh) and /uh/.
        2. The variable (oh) also has close relation s with the higher ingliding
    vowel /uh/. As we observe higher and higher variants of (oh) in the casual
    speech of the younger informants, it becomes apparent that a merger of
    (oh) and /uh/ is imminent. This merger has undoubtedly occurred in the
    youngest speakers in our sample from the worki ng class and lower middle
   class. In fact, we have many informants who show the merger even in the
   mo st forma l styles, in the reading of isolated word li sts, and we can con-
   clude a fortiori that the merger exists in casual speech . C lose study of the
   variants of their casual speech shows the merger as an accompli shed fact:
   though most li steners who are not conscious of the overlap wi ll hear beer
  as higher than bear, it is in fact indistingui shable out of context.
       3. There is also a close correlation between (oh) and /ah/ , the long
  ten se vowel heard in guard, fath er, car, etc. The variab le (ah) represents
  the choi ce of back or center options for the subclasses of hot, heart, hod,
  and hard (with the last two generall y homonymou s); lower values of (oh)
  are correlated with low center positions of the vowels in these word
  classes. This corre lation is independent of socio-economic class or ethnic
 group. Whereas (oh) is firmly embedded in the socio-linguistic structure of
 the speech community, /ah/ is not. As a linguistic variable, (ah) seems to
 be a function only of the height of (oh): a purely internal variable. [The
 quantitative correlatio ns are given in Chapter I 2 of Labov 1966b. The
 relationship of (oh) and (ah) held even within a single ethnic group.]
      4. (oh) is also related to the variable height of the vowel in boy, coil,
 etc., (oy) in the front upgliding system. The height of the vowels in coil
 and ca ll seem to vary directly together in casual speech , but only (oh) is
 corrected to lower values in more formal styles. (oh) carries the major
 burden of social significance, and is the focus of non-systematic press ure
from above.
     5. Finally, we find that (oh) and (oy) are jointly correlated with the
variable (ay), which represents the backing or fronting of th e first element
of the diphthong in my, why, side, etc. High values of (oh) and (oy) are
correlated with back values of (ay), and low va lu es of (oh) and (oy) with
low center values of (ay).
    Beyond these immediate correlations, there are more indirect, diffu se
relation s with such variables as (aw) and /ih/ , through which (oh) is co n-
nec ted with all of the other vowels in the vernacular syste m of New York
        532     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

City speech. This is not the place to pursue the full details of this intricate
set of structural correlations within the linguistic system; however, it
should be apparent that a full solution to the embedding problem will
reveal the ways in which the internal relations of linguistic elements de-
termine the direction of sound change, in a manner which provides em-
pirical confirmation for the view of linguistic structure expressed by
Martinet (1955). (See the Append1x.(We can summarize the most im-
portant relations that center about (oh) in the following notation, which
defines the structural units on the left hand side of the equations as lin-
guistic variables:

     (oh)= f1(St, C, E, A, Sx, (eh))              St= Style
     (ah)=f2((oh))                                 C = Socio-economic class
     (oy) = f3 ( (oh))                             E = Ethnic group
     (ay) =f1((ah)) =f4(f2((oh)))                  A= Age level
     (ay) = f5( (oy)') = f5(f3( (oh)))            Sx = Sex

   In New York City, the evaluation problem was approached more
directly than on Martha's Vineyard; The unconscious subjective reactions
of the informants to each of the variables were determined. The details of
this method have been presented elsewhere. 5 In general, we can say that
the reliability of the te'sts can be measured by the high degree of uni-
formity showed by New Yorkers in contrast to the scattered results from
those raised outside of New York City.
   The subjective reaction responses to (oh) give us a clear view of the
social significance of the variable, as shown in Table 19.3. The majority
of informants responded to the test in a way consistent with the stigma-
tized status of high (oh). 6 Just as the solution to the embedding problem
showed no significant stylistic response to (oh) for lower class speakers,
here we find that lower class speakers showed no significant (oh)-negative
response. The other groups showed (oh)-negative response in proportion
to the average height of (oh) used in their own casual speech, and to the
 degree of stylistic stratification in their speech patterns. This result il-
 lustrates a principle which holds quite generally in New York City: that
 those who used the highest percentage of a stigmatized form in casual
 speech were the most sensitive in stigmatizing it in the speech of others.
 Thus the lower middle class speakers between the ages of 20 and 39, who
 use the highest values of (oh) in their own casual speech, show 100%

   5 In addition to Chapter XI of Labov (1966b), the most detailed presentation of.this

 method is in "Subjective Dimensions of a Linguistic Change in Progress," a paper given
 before the Linguistic Society of America in Chicago, December, 1963.
   6 The (oh)-negative response shown here consisted of rating three speakers lower on a

 scale of job suitability when they pronounced sentences with high, close (oh) vowels, as
 compared to sentences with no significant variables. Those making the ratings were unaware
 that they were rating the same speakers.



                                                                                               !

                                                                                              td
                                  011 the Mechanism of Linguistic Change               533

                  table 19.3

      Percentage of (oh)-Negative Response by Socio-economic Class and Age Level
                                                                                       I
                                     Working         Lower Middle       Upper Middle
                    Lower Class       Class             Class              Class
      Age Level      [SEC 0-2]      [SEC 3-4]         [SEC 5-8]           [SEC 9]

       20-39            25             80                  100              60
       40-59            18             60                   62              57
       60-              33            [00]

                                                           N
                                                 4    10       II   5
                                                11    15       13   7
                                                 6     I


       (oh)-negative response. Similarly, we find that the percentages of (oh)-
      negative response among Jewish and Italian speakers is proportionate to
      the height of (oh) in casual speech.
         This solution to the evaluation problem can hardly be called satisfac-
      tory. It is not clear why a group of speakers should adopt more and more
      extreme forms of a speech sound which they themselves stigmatize as
      bad speech. (Many subjects reacted to the test with violent and unrealistic
      ratings; as, for example, marking a person who used high vowels for
      coffee and chocolate as not even speaking well enough to hold a factory
     job.) Some further explanation must be given.
         First of all, it has become clear that very few speakers realize that they
     use the stigmatized form themselves. They hear themselves as using the
     prestige forms which occur sporadically in their careful speech and in
     their reading of isolated word lists. Secondly, the subjective responses
     tapped by our test are only the overt values-those which conform to the
     value systems of the dominant middle class group. There are surely other
     values, at a deeper level of consciousness, which reinforce the vernacular
     speech forms of New York City. We have not yet measured these more
     obscure forms systematically, but through anecdotal evidence we can be
     sure of their existence-values which cluster about the themes of group
    identification, masculinity, friendship ties, and so on.
        In the case of the alternate pr~ference of Jewish and Italian ethnic
    groups for (oh) and (eh), we can put forward a reasonable suggestion
    based upon the mechanism of hypercorrection. Hypercorrection is used
    here not to indicate the sporadic and irregular treatment of a word class
    but the movement of an entire word class beyond the target point set by
    the prestige model. This mechanism is evident on Martha's Vineyard, as
    well as in New York. The influence of the Yiddish sub-stratum leads to
    a loss of the distinction between low back rounded and unrounded vowels


I


~
        534   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

in first-generation Jewish speakers of English, so that cup and coffee have
the same vowel. In second-generation speakers of Jewish descent, the
reaction against this tendency leads to a hypercorrect exaggeration of the
distinction, so that (oh) becomes raised, tense, and over-rounded. A
parallel argument applies to Italian speakers. This suggestion is all the
more plausible since hypercorrection has been demonstrated to be an
important mechanism of linguistic c.hange in a variety of circumstances.
(I am indebted to Marvin Herzog for this suggestion.)


        The Mechanism of Sound Change
         Solutions to the transition, embedding, and evaluation problems
have been illustrated by two examples, drawn from Martha's Vineyard
and New York City. It is possible to apply the results of our work with
these and other variables to a provisional answer to the question: what is
the mechanism by which sound change proceeds? The following outline
is based upon analysis of twelve sound changes: three on rural Martha's
Vineyard, and nine in urban New York City. The stages suggested here
are necessarily ordered in approximately the manner listed, but there are
some re-arrangements and permutations in the data observed.
    l. The sound changes u,sually originated with a restricted sub-group of
 the speech community, at a time when the separate identity of this group
 had been weakened by internal or external pressures. The linguistic form
 which began to shift was often a marker of regional status with an ir-
 regular distribution within the community. At this stage, the form is an
 undefined linguistic variable.
    2. The changes began as generalizations of the linguistic form to all
 members of the sub-group; we may refer to this stage as change fronz
 below, that is, below the level of social awareness. The variable shows no
 pattern of stylistic variation in the speech of those who use it, affecting all
 items in a given word class. The linguistic variable is an indicator, de-
.fined as a function of group membership.
    3. Succeeding generations of speakers within the same subgroup,
 responding to the same social pressures, carried the linguistic variable
 further along the process of change, beyond the model set by their parents.
 We may refer to this stage as hypercorrectionfrom below. The variable is
 now defined as a function of group membership and age level.
    4. To the extent that the values of the original sub-group were adopted
 by other groups in the speech community, the sound change with its
  associated value of group membership spread to these adopting groups.
 The function of group membership is now re-defined in successive stages.
     5. The limits of the spread of the sound change were the limits of the
                        On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change     535

   speech community, defined as a group with a common set of normative
   values in regard to language.
      6. As the sound change with its associated values reached the 'limits of
  its expansion, the linguistic variable became one of the norms which
  defined the speech community, and all members of the speech community
  reacted in a uniform manner to its use (without necessarily being aware
  of it). The variable is now a marker, and begins to show stylistic variation.
     7. The movement of the linguistic variable within the linguistic system
  always led to readjustments in the distribution of other elements within
  phonological space.
     8. The structural readjustments led to further sound changes which
  were associated with the original change. However, other subgroups
  which entered the speech community in the interim adopted the older
  sound change as stage I. This re-cycling stage appears to be the primary
  source for the continual origination of new changes. In the following de-
  velopment, the second sound change may be carried by the new group
 beyond the level of the first change.
    (Stages 1-8 dealt with change from below; stages 9-13 concern change
 from above.)
    9. If the group in which the change originated was not the highest
 status group in the speech community, members of the highest status
 group eventually stigmatized the changed form through their control of
 various institutions of the communication network. ;
    10. This stigmatization initiated change from above, a sporadic and
 irregular correction of the changed forms towards the model of the highest
 status group-that is, the prestige model. This prestige model is now the
pattern which speakers hear themselves using: it governs the audio-
monitoring of the speech signal. The linguistic variable now shows regular
stylistic stratification as well as social stratification, as the motor-con-
trolled model of casual speech competes with the audio-monitored model
of more careful styles.
    11. If the prestige model of the highest status group does not corre-
spond to a form used by the other groups in some word class, the other
groups will show a second type of hypercorrection: shifting their careful
speech to a form further from the changed form than the target set by the
prestige group. We may call this state hypercorrection from above.
    12. Under extreme stigmatization, a form may become the overt topic
of social comment, and may eventually disappear. It is thus a stereotype,
which may become increasingly divorced from the forms which are ac-
tually used in speech.
    I 3. If the change originated in the highest status group of the com-
munity, it became a prestige model for all members of the speech com-
munity. The changed form was then adopted in more careful forms of
        536     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

speech by all other groups in proportion to their contact with users of the
prestige model, and to a lesser extent, in casual speech.7
   Many of the stages in the mechanism of sound change outlined here are
exemplified in the two detailed examples given above. The centralization
of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard did not provide the evidence to decide this
question. There is no doubt, however, that the centralization of (aw) is a
secondary change, produced by the. re~cycling process when the centra-
lization of (ay) reached stage 8.
   To place the raising of (oh) in this outline, it is necessary to consider
briefly the evolution of the New York City vowel system as a whole. The
first step in the historical record is the raising of (eh). We have reason to
believe that the merger of /reh/ with /eh/ began in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century (see Babbitt 1896). The upward movement of the
linguistic variable (eh) continued beyond this merger, leading to the cur-
rent cumulative merger of /eh/ with /ih/ among most younger New
Yorkers. For the entire community, (eh) is subject to the full force of
correction from above: the change has reached stage 11, so that the lin-
guistic variable is defined by co-variation with social class, ethnic mem-
bership, age level, and contextual style. The raising of (oh) was the first
re-cycling process which began when (eh) reached stage 8. The major
burden of the raising of (oh) has been carried by the Jewish ethnic group;
 the extreme upward social mobility of this group has led to a special
 sensitivity to (oh) in the lower middle class. Thus the merger of /oh/ and
 /uh/ has gone quite quickly, and (oh) has reached stage 11 for the lower
 middle class; yet it has hardly touched stage I for the lower class.
   The third stage in the re-cycling process occurred when (oh) reached
 stage 8. The structural re-adjustments which took place were complex:
 (oy) and (ah) were closely associated with (oh), and were defined as lin-
 guistic variables only by their co-variation with (oh). Thus the raising of
 (oy) and the backing of (ah) were determined by internal, structural
 factors. Change from above is exerted upon (oh), but not upon (oy). In
 careful speech, a New Yorker might say [Its o:l tin fU:11], It's all tin
foil. But the shift of (ah) and (oy) have in turn led to a shift of (ay), and this
:Process has apparently begun a third re-cycling. Indeed, the backing of
 (ay) has reached stage 8 itself, and produced an associated fourth re-
 cycling, the fronting of (aw). There are indications that (ay) has evolved to
 stage 9, with the beginning of overt correction from above, although (aw)
 has reached only stage 4 or 5 (for details,' see Labov 1966b, Chapter 12).
    It is evident that the type of structural re-adjustments that have been
 considered here require a linguistic theory which preserves the geometry

    7
      We find some support in these observations for the idea that people do not borrow much
 from broadcast media or from other remote sources, but rather from those who are at the
 most one or two removes from them in age or social distance.
                       On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change    537

of phonological space. The structural relations found here are strikingly
parallel to those established by Moulton ( 1962) in his study of co-varia-
tion of mid and low vowels in Swiss German dialects. The techniques, the
area, the societies studied are quite different, and the coincidence of re-
sults provides strong empirical evidence for the view of phonological
structure advanced by Martinet. Both studies show strong evidence for
co-variation of low vowels along the front-to-back dimension with back
vowels along the dimension of height. Distinctive feature theory, in the
form utilized by Halle (1962), dissolves the geometry of phonological
space into a set of independent dimensions. Even if a phonetic form of
distinctive features is provided with scalar values, distinctive feature
theory has no rationale for co-variation of grave and acute with compact
and diffuse. Nevertheless, the purely internal equilibria projected by
Martinet do not provide a coherent theory of the mechanism of sound
change. In the scheme that has been outlined here, they are only part of a
more comprehensive process, embedded in the sociolinguistic structure
of the community.


        Conclusion
          This discussion has focused on the theme that internal, structural
 pressures and sociolinguistic pressure act in systematic alternation in the
 mechanism of linguistic change. It can no longer be seriously argued that
 the linguist must limit his explanations of change to the mutual influences
 of linguistic elements defined by cognitive function. Nor can it be argued
 that a changing linguistic system is autonomous in any serious sense.
 Here I have attempted to carry the argument beyond the mere cataloguing
of possibilities by introducing a large body of evidence on sound changes
observed in progress. On the basis of this evidence, we can make the
stronger claim that it is not possible to complete an analysis of structural
relations within a linguistic system, and then turn to external relations.
The re-cycling process outlined here suggests the kind of answer we can
make to the basic questions of the inciting causes of linguistic change, and
the adaptive functions of change, as well as the mechanism by which
change proceeds. We can expect that further investigations will modify
the outline given here, but that data from the speech community will con-
tinue to form an essential part in the analysis of linguistic change.
          538    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes


           Discussion

  The following excerpt from the discussion of Mr. Labov's paper re-
printed in Kreidler ( 1965) may clarify the problem of linguistic deter-
minants of sound change:
MR. GUMPERZ: I have another question for Professor Labov. You say that
your studies show a connection between the movement of /ay/ and /oy/. ls there
any reason why you could predict that /ey/ will not be affected?
MR. LABOY: In terms of the concept of phonological space I have developed
here, nothing could be more clear than that /ey/ would not rise. First, there is a
system of long vowels and/or centering dip!Jthongs, which originally were related
like this:
                                  ih       uh
                                  eh       oh
                                      ah
In the community investigated, the high-front and mid-front have merged, and the
high-back and mid-back have merged, forming a triangular system:               ·
                             [I:"]eh       oh[U:·']
                                      ah
Then, there is a system of forward-upgliding diphthongs, originally like this:
                                   ,iy
                                    ey        oy
                                         ay
There is a hole in the high-back position since there is no /uy/ (very few New
Yorkers say buoy or [chop] suey as one syllable). As /oy/ moves upward to fill the
hole, /ay/ moves to the back. The result is that a skewed system becomes perfectly
symmetrical:
                                   iy oy[U1]
                                   ey ay[oi]
The pronunciation [m:,' bu'] 'my boy' is the most extreme form, but it shows the
direction in which the change is headed. This is repeated in the system of back-
ward-upgliding diphthongs, in which we have:
                                   iw         uw
                                              ow
                                         aw
Our theory of phonological space would predict that /aw/ would move forward to
[reu] paralleling the movement of /ay/ to [on And this, in fact, is what happens-
there is detailed quantitative evidence to show that to the extent that /ay/ moves
to the back, /aw/ moves to the front, yielding:
                                       iw uw
                                       aw ow
 There is no reason for /ey/ to rise, because it is now structurally parallel to /ay/,
 not /oy/. I think we have here a remarkable demonstration of the internal struc-
 tural pressures that Martinet has discussed in his Economie. 8
   8
       Andre Martinet, Economie des c/umgements p/zonetiques (1955).
                appendix 1
                Background Reading

               I. Predecessors in general linguistics
               2. General linguistics: current trends
               3. Historical linguistics
               4. Dialectology and social dialectology
               5. Methods of fieldwork and description
               6. Sociological perspective
               7. A short list of principal collections, monographs and journals

         1. Predecessors in General Linguistics
         Modern sociolinguistics is in many ways a renewal of long-standing interests.
      The three great American contributors to general linguistics in the first half of the
      century are also the three men of most importance in shaping interests relevant to
      the study of language as an aspect of social life: Franz Boas, Edward Sapir, and
      Leonard Bloomfield. The major statement by Boas is his :·Introduction" to the
      Hand book of American Indian Languages (Bulletin of the Bureau of American
      Ethnology 40, Part 1) (Washington, D.C.: 1911). Sapir's Language (New York:
      Harcourt, Brace, 1921) is still read. for its insights as to the relation of language to
      culture, as are his seminal essays, collected in D. G. Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected
      writings of Edward Sapir (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1949).
      Bloomfield's Language (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1933) was
      the standard text for a generation, establishing orientations to the speech commu-
      nity and its description, and is still read for its masterful presentation of historical
      linguistics. On these pioneers, see discussion and bibliography in Hymes (ed.),
      Language in culture and society (New York: Harper & Row, 1964); a more de-
      tailed analysis of the development of American work with regard to a linguistic
      approach to social life is given in Hymes, "Linguistic method of ethnography," in
      P. L. Garvin (ed.), Method and theory in linguistics (The Hague: Mouton, 1970).
      On the Sapir tradition, see Hymes, "Morris Swadesh and the first Yale School" in
      Swadesh, Origin and diversification of languages (Chicago: Aldine, 1971 ).
         An early classic by a Danish scholar is Otto Jespersen, Mankind, nation and
     the individual frorn a linguistic point of view (Oslo, 1925; now reprinted, Bloom-
     ington: Indiana University Press, 1964). In England the central earlier figures
     were Bronislaw Malinowski, especially his Coral gardens and their magic; Part
     2: The language of gardening (London: Allen Unwin, 1935; reprinted, Bloom-
     ington: Indiana University Press, 1968), andJ. R. Firth. For Firth's views, see his
     Papers in linguistics 1934-1951 (London: Oxford University Press, 1957) and F.
     R. Palmer (ed.) Selected papers 1952-1959 (Bloomington: Indiana University
     Press, 1969). In France, Antoine Meillet took a social point of view in major writ-
     ings, such as the famous essay, "Comme Jes mots changent leur sens," L'a1111ee
 J
./
     sociologique (1905-1906). Meillet and Ferdinand de Saussure (Cours de linguis-

                                              539
         540    Appendix I

tique R<'Jlerale (Paris: Payot, 1916), were influenced by the sociological perspec-
tive of Emile Durkheim, whose own classic work, Elementary forms of religious
life (Paris: 1912; English translation, London: G. Allen, 1915; New York: The
Free Press, 194 7), has much about the social role of language.
   A major force for a social point of view in linguistics has been the Prague
School; see selections in P. Garvin (ed.), A Prague school reader in aesthetics, lit-
emry stmct11re and style (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press,
 1969), and Josef Vachek (ed.), A Prague school reader in linguistics (Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 1964). See also a special number of the current
Travaux Linguistique de Prague 3 (1971 ), devoted to an assessment of the prewar
school.

  2. General Linguistics: Current Trends
   H. A. Gleason, Jr., An introduction to descriptive linguistics (New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1961) gives a still useful introduction to American
descriptive practice in the recent period. J. Greenberg, Anthropological
Linguistics (New York: Random House, 1968) provides a nonpartisan account of
descriptive and historical linguistics from a structural standpoint. The dominant
trend in linguistic analysis today of course is tranformational generative grammar
in the form given it by Noam Chomsky. Chomsky's first monograph, Syntactic
stmctures (The Hague: Mouton, 1957) remains essential reading; his more recent
views stem from the revised model presented in A spec ts of the theory of syntax
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1965). A general introduction to Chomsky's
development of syntactic theory and to its larger implications is found in J. Lyons,
Noam C ho111sky (New York: Viking, 1970). Lyons' Introduction to theoretical
linguistics (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ'ersity Press, 1968) is probably the best
general introduction to contemporary grammatical theory. As a practical in-
troduction to technical transformational generative grammar, note R. A. Jacobs
and P. S. Rosenbaum, English tramfornwtional grammer (Waltham, Mass.:
Blaisdell, 1968).
   A younger group of linguists have developed an alternative perspective within
the Chomskyan framework. This approach, commonly called "generative se-
mantics," is well illustrated in E. Bach and R. Hamms (eds.), Universals in
linguistic theory (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1968). An ex-
cellent study, presenting Chomsky's Aspects model more clearly than Chomsky,
and then showing cogently the lines of criticism that lead to development of a
semantic approach, is P. Seuren, Operators and nuclei (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1969).
   Notice that the scope of the term "linguistic theory" has come to be narrowed
in practice to "theory of grammar"; works concerned with linguistic theory in this
sense have by no means the scope and relevance of the books on language by
Sapir and Bloomfield.
   A critical analysis, uniting a social standpoint with transformational generative
grammar, has been developed by W. Labov. See especially two major articles,
"The study of language in its social context," S flldi11111 G enerale 23: 30-87 (I 970),
and "The notion of 'system' in creole studies," in D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization
and creoli;,ation of languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
   An approach generically influenced by the Firthian concern with social meaning
is being developed in England by M. A. K. Halliday. His work has also been
influenced by the continuing concern of Prague School linguistics with functional
perspective on syntax. See Halliday's "Language structure and language func-
                                                            Appendix 1     541

    tion," in J. Lyons (ed.), New horizans in linguistics (Baltl.more: Penguin Books,
    1970), a collection with a number of other useful articles on many aspects of the
    study of language.
      The school of linguistic analysis developed by Kenneth L. Pike, known as tag-
   memics, has an essentially sociolinguistic foundation; see Pike, Language in rela-
   tion to a wujied theory of the structure of human behavior (The Hague: Mouton,
    1967). (The concern of tagmemics with functional aspects of syntactic units is
   taken up into the formalization developed by Seuren (see above).)
      The lines of work inspired by Halliday and Pike both are being developed in the
   analysis of texts and discourse in such a way as to make these larger contexts of
   linguistic units relevant to their grammatical analysis. In general, models of
   grammar which start from semantic rather than syntactic function are the more
   realistic and relevant to sociolinguistics; and models whose semantics include
   social as well as referential meaning are a fortiori most realistic and relevant.
      The approach being developed by Sydney Lamb takes as its premise that lan-
  guage in the mind is in the form of a network rather than a set of rules (as modelled
  in transformational grammar); Lamb applies the approach of his stratificational
  analysis to all aspects of meaning and culture. See his Outline of stratificational
  grammar (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 1966).
      A broad perspective on linguistics in relation to social and humanistic concerns
  continues to be maintained by an eminent leader of the prewar Prague School,
  Roman Jakobson, who has had a special impact on American linguistics through
  residence in the United States since early in the Second World War. Jakobson's
 development of a functional perspective can be seen in a major essay, "Linguistics
 and poetics," in T. A. Sebeok (ed.), Style in language (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
 Press, 1960). Jakobson's comprehensive view of linguistic theory is set forth in
 "Linguistics in its relation to other sciences," Actes du Xe Congres foternational
 des Linguistes (Bucharest: 1969). A cognate view of the scope of general
 linguistics is presented in Hymes, "Linguistics-the field," international En-
 cyclopedia of Social Sciences (New York: Macmillan, 1968).

   3. fl istorical Linguistics
     Two standard works are W. P. Lehmann, Historical linguistics; an introduction
  (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1962) and H. M. Hoenigswald,
  Language change and linguistic reconstmction (Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press, 1960), an advanced and in some respects definitive work. The second part
  of Bloomfield's Language is still useful as an introduction and has been reissued
  separately for this purpose as Language history (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
 Winston, Inc., 1966).
    The development of a sociolinguistic perspective may have the effect of re-
 storing the study of language change to the central place in linguistic theory which
 it once enjoyed. Such possibilities are broached in the efft)rts toward a reconstruc-
 tion of the explanation of change in language by U. Weinreich, W. Labov, and M.
 Herzog, "Empirical foundations for a theory of language change," in W. P.
 Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds.), Directions for historical linguistics: a symposium
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 1968), and in the character and scope of the
study of the processes of standardization, pidginization and creolization. For
these last 'see P. S. Ray, Language standardization (The Hague: Mouton, 1963);
J. Fishman, C. Ferguson and J. Das Gupta (eds.), Language problems of develop-
ing nations (New York: Wiley, 1968) and D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and
creolization of languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
        542    Appendix I

   A unified approach to language change will of necessity integrate historical
linguistics (conceived as study of change as internal to a language) with what is
often segregated as language history (conceived as factors external to a language).
A major question in language history is maintenance and loss of language; see J.
Fishman, "Language maintenance and language shift as a field of inquiry,"
Linguistics 9:32-70 (1964) and his monograph, Language loyalty in the United
Stat es (The H tlgue: Mouton, 1966). On the related problems of language planning
and language politics, see two important recent volumes, E. Haugen, Language
conflict and language planning (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
 1966), which gives a detailed analysis of the Norwegian case, and J. Das Gupta,
 Language politics and language planning in modern India (Berkeley: University
 of California Press, 1970), in which the pressure-group theory of political science
 is applied.
    For the recent revival of a long-term evolutionary perspective on language
 change, see B. Berlin and P. Kay, Basic color terms (Berkeley: University of
 California Press, 1970), and M. Swadesh, Origin and diversification of languages
 (ed. J. Sherzer) (Chicago: Aldine, 1971).

  4. Dialectology and Social Dialecto/ogy
  •s. Pop, La dialectologie. Apercu historique et ,nethodes d' enquetes linguis-
tiques (Louvain, 1950) is the standard reference for earlier work. H. Kurath,
Handbook of the linguistic geography of New England (Washington, D.C.:
American Council of Learned Societies, 1939) provides an excellent concise in-
troduction to the development and practice of standard European dialectology
with reference to its application in the :United States. A. MacIntosh, Introduction
to a survey of Scottish dialects (Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson, 1952) provides a
more modem, structurally-oriented introduction, including attention to stylistic al-
ternation between dialects and standard languages. The major study in modem
urban dialectology, essentially redefining the entire subject, is W. Labov, The
social stratification of English in New York City (Washington, D.C.: Center for
 Applied Linguistics, 1966). Whereas earlier dialectology had focussed on dif-
 ferentiation of dialects, Labov develops a methodology for comprehending the
 dominant phenomenon of modem life, reintegration of diverse dialects within a
 complex speech community.
   The sociolinguistic character of intimate contact and diffusion among language
 varieties is given fundamental treatment in U. Weinreich's Languages in contact
 (New York: Linguistic Circle of New York, 1953; reprinted, The Hague:
  Mouton).

   5. Methods of Fieldwork and Description.
    Earlier works in descriptive linguistics retain their usefulness for socio-
 linguistics, because of their attention to the actual problems of observation,
 recording and description of speech. See K. L. Pike, Phonemics (Ann Arbor: Uni-
 versity of Michigan Press, 1947) and E. A. Nida, Morphology (Ann Arbor: Uni-
 versity of Michigan Press, 1949). W. Samarin, Field linguistics: a guide to
 linguistic field work (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1967) is the
 basic introduction to elicitation and analytic procedure. W. Smalley, Manual of
 articulatory phonetics, rev. ed. (Tarrytown, N. Y.: Practical Anthropology, 1968)
 provides the best introduction to the mastery and use of phonetic transcription.
    Sociolinguistic description must extend to whatever features of verbal com-
  munication have conventional social meaning. The problems of description of
                                                            Appendix 1     543

      paralinguistic aspects of speech, including intonation, are dealt with by D.
     Crystal, Prosodic systems and intonation in English (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, 1968) and "Prosodic and paralinguistic correlates of social ta-
     tegories," in E. Ardener (ed.), Social anthropology and language (ASA Mono-
     graphs I 0) (London: Tavistock, 1971 ). The related problems of description of ges-
     ture and body motion are treated from an anthropological perspective by R.
     Birdwhistell, Kinesics and context (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
     Press, 1970); a different system of analysis is developed by P. Ekman and W.
     Friesen, "The repertoire of non-verbal behavior: categories, origins, usage and
     coding," Semiotica 1:49-98 (1969).
        Paralinguistics and kinesics have together played an important part in the devel-
     opment of the general study of communicative codes; see T. Sebeok, A. Hayes
     and M. C. Bateson (eds.), Approaches to semiotics (The Hague: Mouton, 1964).
     E.T. Hall, Tlze silent language (New York: Doubleday, 1959) is a challenging in-
     troduction to the significance of nonverbal phenomena. For a generalized structur-
  . alist approach to semiotic phenomena, see R. Barthes, Elements of semiology
    (London: Jonathan Cape, 1969). Since 1968, see the journal Semiotica and its as-
    sociated series of monographs.
        Many aspects of sociolinguistic description intersect problems of stylistics. See
    the historical introduction by P. Guiraud, La stylistique (Que Sais-je, 646) (Paris:
    Presses Universitaires de France, 1961); the report of a conference in T. A.
    Sebeok (ed.), Style in language (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1960); the recent
    collection by S. Chatman and S. Levin (eds.), Essays on t/ze language of literature
    (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967); and since 1967, the journal Language and
    Style. A close relation also exists between sociolinguistics. and work under the
    heading of rhetoric; cf M. Steinmann, Jr. (ed.), New rhetorics (New York:
    Scribners, 1967). Not to be neglected here is the seminal influence of Kenneth
    Burke, whose Philosophy of literary form (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univer-
    sity Press, 1941) Grammar of motives (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
    1945) and Rhetoric of motives (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1950) have
   been variously reprinted and have influenced many students of the workings of
   language. For an overview, see Burke's article "Dramatism," in the /ntemational
   Encyclopedia 4 the Social Sciences (New York: Macmillan, 1968).
       Philosophical interest in the analysis of speech acts intersects sociolinguistic
   problems also. The seminal work is J. L. Austin, How to do things with words
   (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962). The philosophical signifi-
   cance of speech acts is treated in an important book, Speec/z acts (Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press, 1969), by John Searle, who is currently developing a
   new general classification; cf also Q. Skinner, "On performing and explaining
   linguistic actions," The Philosophical Quarterly 21 (82): 1-21 (/ 97 I) for an analy-
   sis of philosophical issues that affect sociolinguistic explanation.
       Two special publications of the American Anthropological Association present
  a broad picture of anthropological interests and contributions to the ethnographic
   analysis of meaning: A. K. Romney and R. G. D'Andrade (eds.), Transcultural
  studies in cognition (Washington, D.C., 1964) and E. A. Hammel (ed.), Formal
  senumtic analysis (Washington, D.C., 1965). Representative basic papers are
  collected in S. Tyler (ed.), Cognitive anthropology (New York: Holt, Rinehart
  and Winston, Inc., 1969). R. Burling, Man's many voices (New York: Holt,
  Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1970) is an introduction to this field as well as to sev-
  eral other areas of sociolinguistics. A sociolinguistic perspective on ethnographic
· semantics and cognitive anthropology is sketched in Hymes, "A perspective for
  linguistic anthropology," in S. Tax (ed.), Horizons in anthropology (Chicago: Al-
         544    Appendix 1

dine, 1964) and "Two types of linguistic relativity," in W. Bright (ed.)
Sociolinguistics (The Hague: Mouton, 1966).
   The contributions of folkloristic materials to the analysis of meaning in texts
and events have experienced a renascence in the work of C. Levi-Strauss on myth
and of Victor Turner and Mary Douglas on ritual. E. Leach, U:vi-Strauss (New
York: Viking Press, 1970) is a critical introduction to Levi-Strauss' approach; for
Levi-Strauss' own work, see the series Myt/10/{igiques, beginning with The raw
and the cooked (New York: Harper & Row, 1968). On ritual, see V. Turner, The
ritual process (Ithaca, N .Y.: Cornell University Press, 1967) and Mary Douglas,
 Purity and danger (London: Penguin Press, 1968) and N atllral symbols (New
York: Pantheon, 1970), in the latter of which use is made of Bernstein's socio-
linguistic categories. A general series in anthropological analysis of symbolism has
 been launched through Cornell University Press under Turner's editorship. On
 the analysis of a specific genre of event, cf J. Peacock, Rites of modernization
 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968). For developments within folklore
 proper, cf Americo Paredes and Richard Bauman (eds.), Towards new perspec-
 tives in folklore (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971; also, Journal of A meri-
 can Folklore 84(1) (1971 ), and K. Goldstein, special editor, "Folklore and com-
 munication," in S emiotica 5 (I 972, in press). See also the major study by A.
 Lomax, Folk song style and culture (Washington, D.C.: American Association
 for the Advancement of Science, 1968), which unites textual detail and event
 structure, and T. Kochman, Language and exriressive role behavior in the black
 inner city (in preparation), showing application of a folkloristic perspective to
 sociolinguistic material.
    Guides to ethnographic research· oriented toward speech include, first of all, D.
 Slobin (ed.), A field mamwl for cross-cultural study of the acquisition of com-
 nwnicative competence (Berkeley: ASUC Bookstore, 1967), comprising elicita-
 tion procedures for a number of aspects of language acquisition. See also D.
 Hymes, R. Darnell, and J. Sherzer, A guide to the field swdy of speech use (N cw
  York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., in preparation). J. Flavell et al., The
 development of communication and role-taking skills in children (New York:
 Wiley, 1968) provides many useful examples of situations for eliciting role-taking
  and role-switching behavior. R. G. Barker and H. F. Wright, Midwest and its
  children (New York: Harper & Row, 1954) remains an unrivalled source of in-
  sight into the observation of behavior in relation to community settings. Aspects
  of ethnographic method are discussed by Frake, Metzer, Conklin, and others in
  Tyler, Cognitive anthropology (cited above). See also M. Freilich, (ed.), Marginal
  natives (New York: Harper & Row, 1970) and A. Epstein (ed.), The craft of
  social anthropology (London: Tavistock, 1967). A book in an ethnographic spirit
  is E. J. Webb, D. T. Campbell, R. D. Schwartz, and L. Sechrest, Unobtrusive
  measures (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1966).
     C. A. Ferguson, Language structure and language use (Palo Alto, Calif.: Stan-
  ford University Press, 1971) contains articles on problems of sociolinguistic
  description and measurement by a pioneer in' the field. J. Rubin, National
   bilingualism in Paraguay (The Hague: Mouton, 1968) shows the use of a survey
   and questionnaire method in a community and at a national level. Major aspects of
   survey and related methods of description are treated in papers in J. Fishman
   (ed.), Advances in the sociology of language (The Hague: Mouton, 1971). W.
   Labov, The social stratification of English in New York City offers many insights
   into the process of obtaining socially relevant and valid speech; see also the meth-
   odological observations in his "The study of language in its social context,"
   St11diu111 G enerale 23: 30-87 ( 1970) and "Some principles of linguistic methodol-
                                                                    Appendix I     545

             ogy," Language in society I (1972, in press). Problems of fieldwork are also dis-
             cussed in R. Shuy, W. Wolfram and W. K. Riley, Field techniques in an urban lan-
             guage study (Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics, 1968). 1

               6. Sociological Perspective
                A useful general introduction to social anthropology is R. Firth, Elements of
             social organization (Boston: Beacon Press, I 96 I (2d ed.)). The social theory rele-
             vant to sociolinguistics depends heavily on notions of diversity developed in the
             work of E. R. Leach, Political systems of highland Burma (Cambridge, Mass.:
             Harvard University Press, I 954) and A. F. C. Wallace, Culture and personality
             (New York: Random House, 1961; 2d ed., I 970). A pungent review of present
             social theory is provided by P. S. Cohen, Modern social theory (London: Heine-
             mann, 1968). Two contrastive perspectives in cultural anthropology are devel-
             oped cogently by M. Harris, The rise of anthropological theory (New York:
             Crowell, 1968) and W. H. Goodenough, Method in cultural anthropology
             (Chicago: Aldine, 1970). Basic to the analysis of linguistic interaction is the per-
             spective developed in the writings of E. Goffman, such as Presentation of self in
             everyday life (New York: Doubleday, 1959) and Behavior in public places (New
             York: Free Press, 1963), as to the underlying structure of social gatherings; ,so
             also the perspective developed by F. Barth in Models of social organization
             (London: Royal Anthropological Institute, Occasional Paper 23, I 966), and in
             Barth (ed.), Ethnic groups and boundaries: the social organization of culture dif-
            ference (London: Allen & Unwin, I 969), as to the larger social processes the con-
             dition and arise from interaction. A recent collection concerned with sociological
             approaches to interaction is H. P. Blumer (ed.), Symbolic interaction (Englewood
             Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1969). G. Bateson deals with so:me of the basic con-
             cepts of communication relevant to sociolinguistics in his contribution in D. D.
            Jackson (ed.), Communication, family and marriage (Palo Alto, Calif.: Science
            and Behavior Books, 1968); cf also J. Ruesch and G. Bateson, Communication:
            the social matrix of psychiatry (New York: Norton, 1951 ).
               A major sociological trend interacting with sociolinguistics is ethno-
            methodology. See H. Garfinkel, Studies in etluwmethodology (Englewood
            Cliffs, N .J.: Prentice-Hall, 1967); J. Douglas (ed.), Understanding everyday life
            (Chicago: Aldine, 1971); H. P. Dreitzel (ed.), Recent sociology no. 2: patterns of
            communicative behavior (New York: Macmillan, 1970), M. Speier and R. Turner
            (eds.), Stlldies in socialization (New York: Basic Books, 1971), and H. Garfinkel
            and H. Sacks (eds.), Contributions to ethnomethodology (Bloomington: Indiana
            University Press, forthcoming). See also A. Cicourel, Method and measurement
            in sociology (New York: Free Press, 1966) for a critique of sociological research
            from ethnomethodological perspective. H. Sacks 1 Social aspects of language: the
            organization of sequencing in language (Englewood Cliffs, N .J.: Prentice-Hall, in
            press) gives a more complete exposition of the principles presented in Chapter 11
            of this volume.
               Some of the impetus to sociolinguistics has come from work by social psycholo-
            gists. Notable among these is R. W. Brown, whose Words and things (New York:
            Free Press, 1958) remains a valuable discussion of many topics. Brown's Social
            psychology (New York: Free Press, 1970) is a textbook that contains extensive
            discussion of issues pertinent to sociolinguistics. A. Diebold's survey of psycho-
        /
    I       linguistic work in the second edition of C. Osgood and T. A. Sebeok (eds.),
/           Psycholinguistics (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1966), takes up a
            number of sociolinguistic topics. An excellent introduction to the field of socio-
        546    Appendix I

linguistics by a scholar versed in sociolinguistics is D. Slobin, Psycholinguistics
(Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1971). The papers in J. Macnamara (ed.),
Problems of bilingualism (Jou ma I of Social Issues 23(2) (1967) ) offer socio-
logical perspective on what is often conceived as a purely psychological problem;
Lj. especially W. E. Lambert, "A social psychology of bilingualism," pp. 91-109.
 Lambert's work generally is an outstanding contribution from social psychology
 to sociolinguistics.

  7. A Short List of Principal Collections, M(nwgraphs, and Journals in the
     Development of Sociolinguistics in the United States, 1953-1972 (chrono-
     logically arranged)
U. Weinreich, Languages in contact. New York: Linguistic Circle of New York,
   1953.
E. Haugen, The Norwegian language in America: a study in bilingual behavior.
   2 vols. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1953; 2d ed., Bloom-
   ington: Indiana University Press, 1969.
H. Hoijer (ed.), Language in culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1954.
K. L. Pike, Language in relation to a unified theory of the structure of human
    behavior. Part I, Preliminary edition. Santa Ana, Calif.: Summer Institute of
    Linguistics, 1954.
E. Haugen, Bi!illgualism in the Americas: a bibliography and research guide.
    (American Dialect Society, 26). Montgomery, Alabama: University of Ala-
    bama Press, 1956.
C. A. Ferguson and J. J. Gumperz (eds.), Linguistic diversity in South Asia:
    swdies in regional, social, and functional variation. (Research Center in
    Anthropology, Folklore, and Linguistics, Publication 13; International Journal
    of A 111erican Linguistics 26 (3), Part 3). Bloomington, 1960.
 F. A. Rice (ed.), Study of the role of second languages in Asia, Africa and Latin
    America. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics, 1962.
 D. Hymes (ed.), Lllnguage in culture and society. New York: Harper Row, 1964.
 A. K. Romney and R. G. D'Andrade (eds.), Transcultural studies of cognition.
     Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological Association, 1964.
 J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of com1111111ication. Wash-
     ington, D.C.: American Anthropological Association, 1964.
 R. Shuy (ed.), Social dialects and language lellrning. Champaign, Ill.: National
     Council of Teachers of English, 1965.
 W. Bright (ed.), Sociolinguistics. The Hague: Mouton, 1966.
 J. A. Fishman, Laniuage loyalty in the United States. The Hague: Mouton, 1966.
 W. Labov, Social strlltification of English in New York City. Washington, D.C.:
     Center for Applied Linguistics, 1966.
 S. Lieberson (ed.), Explorations in sociolinguistics. Sociological Inquiry 36 (2)
     (1966); also, Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore and Linguistics,
      Publication 44, llltemational Journal of American Linguistics 33 (2), Part 2,
      Bloomington, Indiana, 1967.
 J. Macnamara (ed.), Problems of bilingualism. Journal of Social Issues 33, (2)
      (1967).
 J. Fishman (ed.), Readings in the sociology of langullge. The Hague: Mouton,
      1968.
 J. A. Fishman, C. A. Ferguson, R. Das Gupta (eds.), Language problems in
      developing nations. New York: Wiley, 1968.
                                                             Appendix I    547

      J. Fishman, Sociolinguistics. Rowley, Mass: Newberry House, 1970.
      E. Ardener (ed.), Social anthropology and language. (Association of Social
         Anthropologists Monographs 10). London: Tavistock Press, 1971.
      J. A. Fishman (ed.), Advances in the sociology of language. The Hague: Mouton,
         1971.
      D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and creolization of languages. Cambridge: Cam-
         bridge University Press, 197 I.
      T. A. Sebeok (ed.), Current Trends in linguistics 12: Linguistics and adjacent arts
         and sciences. The Hague: Mouton, 1972. (Section on sociology and anthropol-
         ogy.)

        A variety of journals publish articles in sociolinguistics. The principal English
      language journals are:

      Aj,'ican Language Review. London: School of Oriental and African Studies.
      American Anthropologist. Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological Associ-
        ation.
      Anthropological Linguistics. Bloomington: Department of Anthropology, Indiana
        University.
      Joumal of Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Language. Washington, D.C.: Linguistic Society of America.
      Language in Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Le Mondo Lingvo-Problemo. The Hague: Mouton.
      Linguistics. The Hague: Mouton.
      Man. London: Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland.
      S outhwestem J oumal <~f Anthropology. Albuquerque: Department of Anthropol-
         ogy, University of New Mexico.




  (


/
  J
        appendix 2

       ·Outline Guide
        for the Ethnographic Study
        of Speech Use
        JOEL SHERZER AND REGNA DARNELL




          This guide stems from a search of ethnographic literature to obtain infor-
mation documenting the range of cross-cultural variability in the use of speech. 1
Ethnographies seldom explicitly describe speech use, but information was ob-
tained from some seventy-five societies (iri different degrees of detail). On the
basis of those examples, the questions presented here have been devised. The
questions are intended to serve as a stimulus for much-needed fieldwork focused
on speech, and to indicate lineslalong which such work might proceed. The ques-
tions are not a check list to be followed mechanically. The ways in which individ-
ual questions must be phrased will vary from society to society. Moreover, not
every possible question about the use of speech has been included. Within the
general range indicated by the questions in the guide, an investigator in a given
society may well focus on certain areas of particular significance.
   To avoid awkward phrasing, many questions appear in a "yes" or "no" form.
All such questions should be understood to be asking not only for a report of
 presence or absence but also for details: under what circumstances or conditions,
for what group, for what purpose, etc.? Thus, when it is asked, "Is speaking
 regarded as a satisfying activity?" the intended answer is not simply "yes" or
 "no". Probably, the answer is "yes" under some conditions for some persons in
 every society. A full answer might include "more so for older people than for
 younger," "for men but not for women," "during the winter ceremonial season,"
etc.
   The questions are accompanied by paragraphs labeled "Discussion." These
 paragraphs indicate some of the motivation for the questions, and ways in which
 they might be interpreted.

1
 The original version of the full guide was prepared under an Office of Education Grant
during 1966-1967 with Dell Hymes as the principle investigator. Research assistants were
Rcgna Darnell, Helen Hogan, Virginia Hymes, Sheila Seitel, Joel Sherzer, and K. M.
Tiwary. A full version of the guide (the questions presented here together with the eth-
nographic cx;imples on which they are based) with more detailed theoretical discussion, is
currently being prepared for publication. The authors alone arc responsible for any short-
comings in the present version of the guide.                                                 _.,

                                           548
                                                            Appendix 2     549

       The guide is subdivided into five sections:

             I. Analysis of the use of speech
             2. Attitudes toward the use of speech
             3. Acquisition of speaking competence
             4. The use of speech in education and social control
             5. Typological generalizations


    1. Analysis of the V se of Speech

        Discussion: Much of linguistic theory has been concerned with study of lan-
     guage in abstraction from its use in speech. Here we are concerned with the kinds
    of questions one would ask if language is not abstracted in such a way. We do not
     think that we are merely adding a level to the traditional linguistic description.
     Rather, we are looking at linguistic data from a different perspective, one which
    integrates language with the other components involved in its use: features of set-
    ting, participant, etc. Instead of postulating "an ideal speaker-listener, in a com-
    pletely homogeneous speech-community" (Chomsky 1965), and describing what
    is in effect the code of a single, limited form of speech, we assume a diversified
    speech community and take our goal to be a description of the many different
    ways of speaking which exist in the community. These ways of speaking and the
    relations among them are structured, or "rule-governed," just as is language. The
    usual description of a language, from this point of view, deals with only a portion,
    sometimes a somewhat arbitrary portion, of the structure of speaking in a commu-
    nity.
       The questions that follow are intended to suggest the analytical steps an eth-
    nographer might take in attempting to characterize the use of speech among a par-
    ticular group of people. (I) He or she must first discover the components (or
    dimensions) that are relevant to speech use, and what in the particular group count
    as instances of these. (2) He or she must describe the relationships or rules among
    the various relevant components. 2
    I. What are the compo11e11ts involved in the use of speech?
   Discussion: The potential components of speech use listed later have proven
useful (necessary?) to analysis of the material on which the present guide is based.
They are not to be used as a check list but rather as a guide to the kinds of factors
which enter into the relationships or rules governing the use of speech. They stand
to a complete analysis as does a phonetic grid to a phonological description; but at
the present preliminary stage of work in this field the list cannot be either exhaus-
tively specific or discrete. The items of the present list are clearly interdependent
and possibly overlapping. They have been identified at a level sufficiently general
to be maximally useful now.                 .
   In different cases, different components and different numbers of components
will prove to be relevant. It is the task of the ethnographer to show which are rele-
vant, and in what relationships, in the society under consideration. These various
relationships among components are the ways of speaking for that society. The
2See Hymes, Chapter I, for a more complete discussion of the problems involved in a de-
scription of speech usage.
         550    Appendix 2

present terminology is necessarily provisional. Work is still at a stage in which
choice among existing terms, and creation of needed new terms, is problematic.
One of the urgent tasks is development of an adequate terminology.
   A. Linguistic varieties: What are the linguistic varieties in use in the com-
       munity?
   Discussion: The community, and its members, are conceived as having
linguistic repertoires, composed of linguistic varieties. Varieties are defined in
terms of their functional roles, independently of historical provenience (same or
related languages, dialects) and of structural connection (Pig Latin, Mazateco
whistle speech). Research has shown that the same contrast in function may be
served, and the same underlying other relations entailed, by what in one case are
wholly unrelated languages, in another related dialects, in another shift in phono-
logical styles or in just certain elements (e.g., pronouns) within a single dialect and
style. What is asked for here, then, are the linguistic varieties which function in the
community, placed first of all in terms of such dimensions as formal/informal,
public/private, out-group/in-group, etc.

          I. To wh~tt extent are the identities and relationships of the linguistic
          varieties known or conscious?
          2. What language-derived verbal or nonverbal codes are in use (i.e., Pig
          Latin, thieves' cant, whistle speech, sign language, drum signaling, etc.)?

   B. Linguistic units of description: What are the local categories of speech acts,
      speech events, speech situations, and genres?
   Discussion: Neither linguists noranthropologists have as yet developed adequate
units of description for speech use. The sentence, as ordinarily treated by
linguists, is valid only for a narrowly referential function of language. It is ab-
stracted from social meaning and relationships of use of concern to us here. And it
is increasingly clear that limitation to the sentence misses generalizations, even of
the narrowly syntactic sort. The text, or discourse, is more promising, but prob-
ably too gross. The various purposes accomplished in language-how people in-
sult, show deference, command, request information, curse, greet, take leave,
etc.-do not come in sentences or whole texts. We are not sure what they do come
in, but would suggest the speech act as the minimal structural unity in a descrip-
tion of speech use. 3 In terms of conventional linguistic units (phonological, gram-
matical) it may range greatly in locus and size. Speech acts may be embedded in
larger units such as genres, on the one hand, and discourse structures, speech
events, and speech situations, on the other. It is clearly a task of the linguistic eth-
nographer, and also, we believe, of the linguist, to describe the structure of such
units. Note that the unit of description (the speech act) is included among the com-
ponents; this is because we believe that speech acts and speech events can be ade-
quately described only in relation to the other components of speech use with
which they interact.                       ·

   C. Topic: What is the topic (or topics) of the message, act, or event?
   D. Channel: Through what channels may a message be transmitted (i.e.,
      spoken, written, sung, whistled, drummed, etc.)?

" See Hymes, Chapter I, for a discussion of this and other terms needed for a description of
speech usage.
                                                         Appendix 2     551

  E. Key: What are the various keys, tones, or nwnners in which a message may
      be delivered?
  F. Participants: What are the possible categories of participants in the uses of
      speech?
        Discussion: Audience and spokesman must be considered as well as the
      more traditional sender and receiver, addressor, and addressee.
  G. Setting: What are the times and places which serve as bounds or contexts of
      speech usages?
  H. Ends: What are the ends, goals, or purposes of the speech usage under con-
      sideration?
   I. Norms of interaction: What are the specific behaviors and proprieties that
      accompany speech usages?
I I. Rules for the use of speech: What relationships exist among the components
     just described?


2. Attitudes Toward the Use of Speech
  Discussion: It must be stressed that the answers to questions in this or any
other section are often relevant to other sections as well. Thus a particular fact
about the use of speech (e.g., that children may not speak on certain occasions)
can be seen as

         I. A rule for the use of speech which can be expressed in terms of rela-
         tionships among components
         2. An attitude about the place of certain members of the community vis-
         a-vis communication or
         3. Part of the process of the learning of the use of speech

I. General attitudes toward speaking
  A. What aspects of speaking (if any) are related to conceptions of the ideal or
     typical individual, man, woman, or child? Ideal exemplars of particular roles
     (i.e., chief, warrior, spokesman, herald, father, etc.)?

       I. Is the use of speech important in the definition of roles, i.e., is the use
       of speech part of the qualification for membership?
       2. Is the use of speech instrumental in the social marking of roles?
  B. What are the characteristics of speaking well?
       Discussion: At least two foci seem possible here:

        I. Focus on the pe1formance or message, i.e., what is it about the per-
        formance or message that makes it good or effective?
        2. Focus on participant, i.e., what personal characteristics of partici-
        pants make them good or effective speakers?
        These two foci are not intended to represent two different questions;
        rather they are put forth as two aspects of a single one.

 C. What is the permissible range of speech behavior? Are there conceptions of
    idiosyncracies, exceptions, speech defects? What are the individual and/or
    societal consequences of aberrant behavior with regard to speaking?
         552    Appendix 2

 D. Is speaking regarded as a satisfying activity? Easy or difficult? Rewarding
     or not? What aspects of speaking are considered satisfying? Is speaking
     considered more satisfying under certain circumstances or for certain
     groups of people? Do people seek or are they given opportunities to display
     competence in speaking?
  E. When are people taciturn or voluble?
        Discussion: Actually, we are asking here two different questions: (1) Are
     there cross-cultural differences regarding when people are voluble and when
     they are taciturn? and (2) is the dimension taciturnity-volubility relevant to
     the society under investigation, i.e., do such concepts exist?
         I. What personality traits or personal characteristics are associated with
         differences on this dimension?
         2. Are there differences associated with different roles, social categories,
         or different stages in the life cycle?
I I. Attitudes toward languages, dialects, varieties, etc.
    A. Are there beliefs concerning the nature and origin of language and
       speech? What are they?
    B. What are the attitudes taken toward each of the linguistic varieties used in
       the community? How are these attitudes expressed? Are there concepts of
       correctness (or other normative notions) with regard to the varieties in use?
       Is one variety considered correct or standard? What are the criteria of cor-
       rectness? Who may judge correctness? Do hypercorrect forms arise?
    C. What are the attitudes takj:!n toward neighboring languages or languages
       known to exist?
          Discussion: The boundary between this question and the previous one is
       not always clear. If community A uses the language of its neighbor, commu-
       nity B, for certain functions (even if not all members of A speak B), we often
       would want to consider B one of the varieties in use in A. 4
   Final discussion for section 2: A full description of attitudes toward language
and speech would include the relative importance of speech among other means of
communication as well as of the place of speaking within social interaction as a
whole. The question of over-all communication is considered here only when it
clarifies the use of speech in a given society or when one culture does with speech
what another does with facial gesture, another through body movements, etc.


3. Acquisition of Speaking Competence

  Discussion: The use of the terms infant and child in italics in this section is in-
tended to indicate that they are ethnocentric. Our own society expects a child to
respond to training only when he can walk and talk; an infant is not expected to
meet such demands. Other societies do not make this distinction in the same way.
(See section 4, part I.) The terms thus are understood to refer to whatever cat-
egories the society recognizes, whether or not they are named.
I. Is the notion infant (distinct from child) relevant to the society's conception of
   the life cycle with reference to the acquisition of speaking competence?

,, For a fuller treatment of this problem, see Hymes 1968b:23-48.
                                                          Appendix 2     553

 II. Is there an explicit native theory (or theories) with regard to the acquisition of
     speaking competence?
    A. How are an infant's first cries or words interpreted?

          I. Is it believed that the infant will always utter certain words first?
          What are these words?
          2. What interpretation (if any) is given to an infant's crying?
          3. What interpretation (if any) is given to a child's first (or early) utter-
          ance (or utterances)'!

   B. Are there ways of explaining or contributing to [apart from explicit teaching
      (see part III)] the distribution or acquisition of speaking competence?

         1. Are any characteristics (physical, social, etc.) of the infant (child) or
         of its circumstances of birth, etc., thought to predispose or predetermine
         its later communicative behavior, especially its verbal ability? What and
         how?
         2. Are there practices [apart from explicit teaching (see part Ill)]
         thought to encourage or discourage, ensure or prevent particular kinds.of
         communicative behavior? Particular speaking skills?

II I. How are speaking skills transmitted?
   A. How are skills in language (abstracted from use) transmitted? In other
       words, how are grammar and vocabulary acquired?
    B. Are the various linguistic varieties used in the community learned in dif-
       ferent ways, in a particular order?
   C. How are skills in the use of language transmitted? In other words, how do
       people learn to greet, converse, curse, gossip, etc.?
   D. Is the learning of speaking skills a source of pride, a focus of concern?

IV. What is the general place of children in communication?
  A. Are there special varieties or uses of speech restricted to use among infants
      (children)? restricted to use between children and adults? Is there a special
      baby talk? Is it intentionally taught? Is it approved or disapproved?
  B. Can children participate in all uses of speech? If only some, which ones?
     Are there some speech situations at which children may be present but not
     participate?



4. The Use of Speech in Education and Social Control

  Discussion: Much of the ethnographic literature dealing with children or
acquisition of culture in general has been done from the point of view of culture
and personality studies in anthropology. This section attempts to show how
speech might be relevant to the description of socialization as well as how
socialization might be relevant to the study of speech use.

I. Life cycle
   A. What is the relation of speech to the definition of stages, periods, or transi-
      tions in life? Are the stages named?
         554    Appendix 2

         1. Is the use of speech important in the definition of stages, i.e., is the use
         of speech part of the qualification for membership in a class of persons at
         a given stage of the life cycle?
         2. Is the use of speech instrumental to the social marking of stages in the
         life cycle?

II. Learning and teaching
   A. Does the society have an explicitly formulated philosophy of education?
      For what purposes is it formulated (i.e., for use in child training or only in
      response to inquiry by the ethnographer)? What is the place of language and
      speech in the native theory of learning and teaching?
   B. What is the role of language (explicit verbalization) and speech in the actual
      transmission of knowledge or skills?
         Discussion: The distinction between learning by participation and obser-
      vation and learning by explicit verbalization is not always clear-cut. Rather,
      we envisage here a continuum with societies tending toward one end or the
      other.
   C. Do methods of teaching vary with recognized stages in the life cycle? Set-
      ting? According to what is being taught?

II I. Social control
   A. Does the society have an explicitly formulated philosophy of social control?
    B. What is the role of language and speech in social control?
    C. Do means of social control vary with recognized stages in the life cycle,
       membership in various social categories, setting, etc.? Do they vary ac-
       cording to the offense?


5. Typological Generalizations
I. What broad patterns in the use of speech emerge from analysis of a particular
   culture? Note especially attitudes toward speaking common throughout a
   given society, ritual idioms cross-cutting many speech events, certain social
   dimensions which are always relevant.
II. Are there. patterns of speech use characteristic of culture areas? Culture area
    is understood here to mean such broad areas as North America, South
    America~ Africa, and Oceania.
Ill. Are there patterns of speech use characteristic of par_ticular kinds of speech
     community, e.g., societies with a particular level of sociocultural complexity
     or particular types of social organization?
          Bibliography


Abasolo-Domingo, Maria, 1961, Child-rearing practices in barrio Cruz Na Ligas.
   Master's thesis, University of the Philippines, Quezon City.
Abrahams, Roger D., 1962, Playing the dozens. Journal of American Folklore
   75:209-220.
- - - , 1964, Deep down in the jungle. Negro narrative folklore from the streets
   of Philadelphia. Hatboro, Pa: Folklore Associates.
- - - , 1968, Introductory remarks to a rhetorical theory of folklore . .Journal of
  American Folklore 81:143-158.
Abrahams, Roger, and Richard Bauman, 1971, Sense and nonsense in St. Vin-
  cent: speech behavior and decorum in a Caribbean community. American
   Anthropologist 73 :762-772.
Albert, Ethel, 1964, "Rhetoric," "logic," and "poetics" in Burundi: culture pat-
  terning of speech behavior. In John J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The
  ethnography of communication. American Anthropologist. 66, pt. 2 (6):35-54.
Arewa, E. Ojo, and Alan Dundes, 1964, Proverbs and the ethnography of
  speaking folklore. In John J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The ethnography
  of communication. American Anthropologist 66, 6:70-85.
Ausubel, Nathan (ed.), 1948, A treasury of Jewish folklore. New York: Crown.
Ayoub, Milla, 1962, Bi-polarity in Arabic kinship terms. Proceedings of the Ninth
  lntemational Congress of Linguists (edited by H. G. Lunt), The Hague:
  Mouton.
Babbitt, E. H., 1896, The English of the lower classes in New York City and
  vicinity. Dialect Notes, 1:457-464.
Bach, Adolf, 1960, Deutsche Dialectgeographie. Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Bach, Emmon, and Robert T. Harms (eds.), 1968, Universals in linguistic theory.
  New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
Bales, R. F., 1951, Interaction process analysis. Cambridge, Mass.: Addison-
  Wesley.
Bales, R. F., F. Strodtbeck, T. Mills, and Mary E. Roseborough, 1951, Channels
  of communication in small groups. American Sociological Review 16:461-468.
Baluchistan Gazeteer, 1907, Baluchistan District Gazeteer Series II. Allahabad:
 The Pioneer Press.
Baratz, Joan C., and Roger W. Shuy (eds.), 1969, Teaching Black children to
  read. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics.

                                       555
         556    Bibliography

Barber, Carrol, 1952, Trilingualism in Pascua; social functions of language in an
  Arizona Yaqui village. M.A. thesis, University of Arizona, Tucson.
Barker, G. C., 1947, Social functions of language in a Mexican American commu-
  nity. Acta Americana 5:185-202.
Barnard, F. M., 1965, Herders' social and political thought:from enlightenment
  to nationalism. London: Clarendon Press.
Barnes, Douglas, James Britton, and Harold Rosen, 1969, Language, the lea mer,
  and the school. London: Penguin.
Barnes, John A., 1954, Class and committees in a Norwegian island parish.
  Human Relations 8:39-58.
Barry I I I, Herbert, Margaret K. Bacon, and Irvin L. Child, 1967, Definitions, rat-
  ings, and bibliographic sources for child-training practices of 110 cultures. In
  Clellan S. Ford (ed.), Cross-cultllral approaches: readings in comparative
  research. New Haven, Conn: HR.AF Press.
Barth, Fredrik, 1959a, Political leaders/zip among Swat Pathans. London:
   London School of Economics and Political Science.
- - - , 1959b, Segmentary opposition and the theory of games. Journals of the
   Royal Anthropological / nstitute 89:5-21.
- - - , 1961, Nomads of South Persia. London: G. Allen.
- - - , (ed.), 1963, The role of the entrepeneur in social change in northern
   Norway. Bergen: Norweigna Universities Press.
- - - , 1964, Ethnic processes in the Pathan-Baluchi boundary. In lndo-lranica:
   melanges presentes a Georg Morgenstierne a /'occasion de son soixante-dix-
   ie111e anniversaire. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
- - - , 1966, Models of social organization. Royal Anthropological Institute of
   Great Britain and Ireland, Occasional Papers, London.
- - - , (ed.), 1969, Ethnic groups and boundaries. The social organization of cul-
   tllre difference. London: Allen & Unwin.                                ·
 Barthes, Roland, 1966, Introduction a !'analyse structurale des recits. Com-
   munications, Centre D'Etudes Des Communications de Masse, Paris.
 Bascom, William R., 1965, Ponape: A Pacific economy in transition. University
   of California Publications, Anthropological Records, 22. Berkeley: University
   of California Press.
 Basso, Keith, 1970, To give up on words: silence in the Western Apache culture.
   Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 26 (3):213-230.
 Bateson, Gregory, and Margaret Mead, 1942, Balinese character. Special Publi-
   cation of the New York Academy of Sciences 2, New York.
 Bateson, Grego,ry, D. D. Jackson, J. Haley, and J. Weakland, i968, Toward a
   theory of schizophrenia. In Don D. Jackson (ed.), Communicatio11,fa111i/y and
    marriage. (Human Communication, Vol. I). Palo Alto, Calif. Science and
    Behavior Books, pp. 31-54. [ 1956, Behavioral Science 1:251-264:]
 Beardsley, Monroe, 1962, The metaphorical twist. Philosophy and Phenome-
    nological Research 22 (3):293.
 Bellugi, Ursula, 1967, The acquisition of negation. Ph.D dissertation, Harvard
    Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Mass.
 Ben-Amos, Dan, 1969, Analytical categories and ethnic genres. Genre
    2:275-301.
 Berger, Peter, 1967, The sacred canopy. New York: Doubleday.
 Bergler, L., 1938, On the resistance situation: the patient is silent. Psychoanalytic
    Review 25:170-186.
                                                       Bibliography    557

  Berlyne, D. E., 1960, Conffict, arousal, and curiosity. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Bernstein, Basil, 1961, Social structure, language, and learning. Educational
     Research 3:163-176.
 - - - , 1962, Linguistic codes, hesitation phenomena, and intelligence. Language
     and Speech 5:31-46.
 - - - , 1963, Family role systems, socialization, and communication. *Paper
     presented at Conference on Cross-Cultural Research into Childhood and Ado-
     lescence, University of Chicago, Chicago.
 - - - , 1964a, Elaborated and restricted codes: their social origins and some
     consequences. In John J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of
     communication. American Anthropologist 66, 6, 2: 55-69.
 - - - , 1964b, Aspects of language in the genesis of the social process. In Dell
     Hymes (ed.), Language in culture and society, pp. 251-263. New York:
    Harper & Row.
 - - - , 1965, A socio-linguistic approach to social learning. In J. Gould (ed.),
     Penguin Survey of the Social Sciences. Harmondsworth: London: Penguin.
 - - - , 1968, Language, primary socialization, and education. University of
     London Institute of Education, Sociological Research Unit Monographs.
     London: Routledge.
 - - - , 1969, A critique of the concept of compensatory education. Mimeo-
    graphed.
 - - - , (ed.), 1971, Class codes and control, vols. l and 2. London: Routledge.
 Bernstein, Basil, and W. Brandis, 1968, Social class, commu11icatio11, and control.
    In Social class, language, and con1mm1icatio11. University of London, Institute
    of Education, Sociological Research Unit Monographs. London: .Routledge.
 Bernstein, Basil, and Dorothy Henderson, 1969, Social class differences in the
    relevance of language to socialization. Sociology 3: 1-20.
Bettelheim, Bruno, 1962, Symbolic wounds: Puberty rites and the envious male.
   New York: Collier.
Birdwhistell, Ray L., 1952, Introduction to kinesics (photo-offset). Foreign Ser-
   vice Institute. Louisville: University of Louisville Press. (Available in micro-
   film only from University Microfilms, Inc., 313 North First Street, Ann Arbor,
   Michigan.)
- - - , 1958, Implications of recent developments in communication research for
   evolutionary theory. Report on the ninth a11111wl round table 111eeting 011
   linguistics and language studies (edited by W. M. Austin). Washington, D.C:
   Georgetown University Press.
- - - , 1961, Paralanguage: 25 years after Sapir. In Henry Brosin (ed.), Lectures
  in experimental psychiatry. Pittsburgh, Pa: University of Pittsburgh Press.
- - - , 1968, Communication: a continuous multi-channc.I process. In Co11cep-
  t1wl bases and applications of the co111111w1icational sciences. New York:
  Wiley.
- - - , 1970, Kinesics and context: Essays on body motion co1111111111icatio11.
   Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bloomfield, Leonard, 1933, La11g11age. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
  Inc.
Bock, Philip K., 1964, Social structure and language structure. Southwestern
  Jo11mal of Anthropology 20 (4):393-403.
Bolinger, Dwight, 1958, Interrogative stmctures of A 111erica11 English.
  Montgomery: University of Alabama Press.
                  .. - -·-· ···-   ··-·- -- - .--- - -



      :..:.:.:_cc:_=_                                                                                                                                        ~~
                    ==-~-:i:-:::·-~-~-=-=·-=-:::_i__=_=--=·=-·=--=-=--==-=··~========-====···=--=·=--=-==···=-·==-'=·==.:::.c;~_c...;.;..·-·_·...·__'-"~~~:-...



                                      558                Bibliography

                  Bott, E., 1957, Family and social network. London: Tavistoc~ Press:
                  Bradburn, Norman M., 1963, Achievment and father dominance m Turkey.
                    Journal of Abnornwl and Social Psychology 67:464-468.
                  Brandis, W., and Dorothy Henderson (eds.), 1968, Social class, language, and
                    com11u111ication. University of London, Institute of Education, Sociological
                    Research Unit Monographs. London: Routledge.
                  Braunshausen, Nicolas, 1928, Le bilinguisme et le famille. In Le bi(inguisme el
                    l' education. Geneva-Luxembourg: Bureau International d'Educat1on.
                  Brent, S. B., and Evelyn W. Katz, 1967, A study of language deviations and cogni-
                     tive processes. OEO-Job Corps Project 1209, Progress Report No. 3., Wayne
                    State University, Detroit, Michigan.
                  Bright, William (ed.), 1966, Sociolinguistics. The Hague: Mouton.
• I
 ,i               Bright, J. 0, and William Bright, 1965, Semantic structures in Northwestern
                    California and the Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis. American Anthropologist 67, 5
                    (2):249-258 ..
                  Bronfenbrenner, U., 1958, Socialization and social class in time and space. In E.
                     Maccoby et al. (eds.), Readings in soqial psychology. New York: Holt, Rine-
                     hart and Winston, Inc.
                  Brown, Roger W., 1958, Words and things. New York.: Free Press.
                  - - - , 1965, Social psychology. New York: Free Press.
                  Brown, Roger W., and Marguerite Ford, 1961, Address fo American English.
                    Journal of Abnorrnal and Social Psychology 62:375-385. [Reprinted in Dell
                     Hymes (ed.), Language in culture and society, pp. 234-244. New York:
                    Harper & Row.]
                  Brown, Roger W., and A. Gilman, 1960, The pronouns of power and solidarity. Io
                    T. Sebeok (ed.), Style in language, pp. 253-276. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T.
                    Press.
                  Bruce, R. I., 1900, The forward policy and its results. London: Longmans.
                  Brudner, Lilyan, 1969, The ethnic component of social transactions. Ph. D. dis-
                    sertation, Department of Anthropology, University of California, Berkeley.
                  Bruner, Edward M., 1955, Two processes of change in Mandan-Hidatsa kinship
                    terminology. American Anthropologist 57:840-850.
                  Buchler, Ira R., and R. Freeze, 1966, The distinctive features of pronominal
                    systems. Anthropological Linguistics 8, 8:78-105.
                  Bulatao, Jaime, 1962, Philippine values: the Manileno's mainsprings. In Frank
                    Lynch (ed.), Four readings on Philippine values. Institute of Philippine Culture
                    Papers 2. Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
                  Burke, Kenneth,'. 1941, Philosophy of literary form. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
                    State University Press.
                  - - - , 1945, A gramnzar of motives. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
                    (Republished by University of California Press, Berkeley, 1969.)
                  - - - , 1950, A rhetoric of motives. Englewood Cliffs, N,J.: Prentice-Hall.
                    (Republished by University of California Press, Berkeley, 1969.)
                  Burton, Roger V., and John W. M. Whiting, 1961, The absent father and cross-sex
                    identity. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 7:85-95.
                  Calame-Griaule, Genevieve, 1965, Ethnologie et langage. La parole chez /es
                    Dagon. Bibliotheque des sciences humaines. Paris: Gallimard.
                  Cambridge University Reporter, January 15, 1969, p. 890.
                  Cansever, Gocke, 1965, Psychological effects of circumcision. British Joumal of
                    Medical Psychology 38:321-331.
                  Capell, A., 1966, Studies in socio-linguistics. The Hague: Mouton.
                                                       Bibliography    559

  Cassirer, Ernst, 1961, The logic of the lwmanities. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
     versity Press. (Translated from Zur Logik des Kulturwissenschaften Goteborg,
     1942.)
  Cazden, Courtney, Vera John, and Dell Hymes (eds.), 1971, The functions of
     language in the classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.
 Chatman, Seymour, and Samuel E. Levin (eds.), 1967, Essays 011 the language of
     literature. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
 Chomsky, Noam, 1965, Aspects of the theory <>f syntax. Cambridge, Mass.:
     M.I.T. Press.
 - - - , 1966, Cartesian linguistics. New York: Harper & Row.
 - - - , 1968, Language and 1ni11d. New York: Harcourt.
 Chomsky, Noam, and M. Halle, 1968, The sounds of American English. New
     York: Harper & Row.
 Christiansen, Hallfried, 1962, Mttlet i Rana. Oslo: lnstitut for Sociologi, Univer-
    sitetet i Oslo.
 Cicourel, Aaron, 1970, The acquisition of social structure: towards a develop-
    mental sociology of language and meaning. In Jack Douglas (ed.), Existential
    Society. New York: Appleton.
 Cicourel, Aaron, and Robert Boese, 1971, Sign language acquisition and the
    teaching of deaf children. In C. Cazden, V. John, and Dell Hymes (eds.), The
   functions of language: an anthropological and psychological approach. New
    York: Teachers College Press.
 Cohen, Percy S., 1968, Modern social theory. London: Heinemann.
 Colby, Benjamin N., 1966, Ethnographic semantics: a preliminary survey. Cur-
    rent Anthropology 7 (1):3-32.
Coldevin, Axel, 1958, Et bidrag til Ra11a-bygde11s Socialhistorie. Oslo: lnstitutt
   for Sociologi, Universitetet i Oslo.
Conklin, Harold C., 1962, Lexicographical treatment of folk taxonomies. In F. W.
   Householder, Jr., and Sal Saporta (eds.), Problems in lexicography. Interna-
   tional Journal of A ,nerican Linguistics 18, 2, pt. IV: 119-14 I.
- - , 1964, Ethnogenealogical method. In Ward Goodenough (ed.), Explora-
   tions in cultural anthropology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cook, Jenny, 1972, Social Control and Socialization. London: Routledge.
Cooper, Robert L., 1968, How can we measure the roles which a bilingual's lan-
   guages play in his everyday behavior? In William Mackey (ed.), Proceedings of
   the /11tematio11al Seminar on the Measurenzent and Description of Bilingual-
   ism. Ottawa: Canadian Commission for UNESCO, 1968.
Corpuz, Onofre D., 1965, The Philippines. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Crystal, David, 1969, Prosodic systems and intonation in English. London:
   Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, David, and Randolph Quirk, 1964, Systems of prosodic and para-
   linguistic features in English. The Hague: Mouton.
Dalby, David, 1970, Black through white. Bloomington: Indiana University Afri-
  can Studies Program.
Dalby, David, in preparation, Americanisms that may once have been Afri-
  canisms. In Thomas Kochman (ed.), Language and expressive role behavior in
  the black inner city.
Dames, M. L., 1904, The Baloch race. Asiatic Society Monographs, 4. London:
  Royal Asiatic Society.
Dance, Frank X. W. (ed.), 1968, Human co11unw1icatio11 theory. New York:
  Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
        560    Bibliography

Das Gupta, J yotirindra, 1970, Language conflict and national development: group
  politics and national language policy in India. Berkeley, Calif.: University of
  California Press.
Das Gupta, Jyotirindra, and John J. Gumperz, 1969, "Language communication
  and control in North India." In J. A. Fishman, C. A. Ferguson, and J. Das
  Gupta (eds.), Language problems in developing nations. New York: Wiley.
Dennis, Wayne, 1940, The Hopi child. Charlotteville, Va: University of Virginia
  Press.
De Saussure, Ferdinand, 1916, Cours de linguistique generale. Paris: Payot. ·
  [Course ill general linguistics (translated by Wade Baskin). New York: Philo-
  sophical Library, 1958.]
Diebold, A. R., 1963, Code-switching in Greek-English bilingual speech. Reports
  of the thirteenth annual round table meetings on linguistics and language study.
  Georgetown University Monograph 15. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown Uni-
  versity Press.
Dikemari, Bessie; and Patricia Parker, 1964, Request forms. Term paper for
  Speech 160B. University of California, Berkeley.
Dohrenwend, Bruce P., and Robert J. Smith, 1962, Toward a theory of accultura-
  tion. Southwest Journal of Anthropology 18:30-39.
Dollard, J., and F. Auld, Jr., 1959, Scoring hwnan.motives: a manual. New
   Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Douglas, Jack, 1971, U ndersta11ding social life. Chicago: Al dine.
Douglas, Mary, 1967, The contempt of ritual. Aquinas lecture. Oxford: Black
                                            1
   Friars.
Drach, K., B. Kobashigawa, C. Pfuderer, and D. Slobin, 1969, The structure of
   linguistic input to children. Language Behavior Research Laboratory working
   paper no. 14, University of California, Berkeley.
Duncan, Hugh Dalziel, 1968, Symbols in society. New York: Oxford.
Dundes, Alan, 1966a, Here I sit: a study of American latrinalia. Papers of the
   Kroeber Anthropological Society 34:91-105.
- - - , 1966b, Metafolklore and oral literary criticism. The Monist 60:505-516.
 Durkheim, E., 1933, On the division of labour in society. London: Macmillan.
- - - , 1950, The rules of sociological method (translated from the French by
   Sarah A. Solovay and John H. Mueller and edited by George E. G. Catlin).
   New York: Free Press.
 Du Toit, Brian M., 1966, Riddling traditions in an isolated South African commu-
   nity. Jotirnal of American Folklore 79:471-475.
 Dyen, Isidore, 1965, Sketch of Trukese grammar. American Oriental Society,
   Essay 4. From typed version, Washington, D.C.: Pacific Science Board, 1948.
 Ebeling, Gerhard, 1966, Theology and proclamation. Philadelphia: Fortress
   Press. (Translated from Theologie wzd Verkiindigung. Tiibingen: 1962).
 Edelman, Martin, 1968, The contextualization of children's bilingualism. In
   Joshua Fishman, R. L. Cooper, Roxana Ma, et al. (eds.), Bilingualism in the
   barrio. Final report to D,HEW under contract no. OEC-l-7-062817-0297. New
   York: Yeshiva University.
 Eggan, Dorothy, 1948, The general problem of Hopi adjustment. American
   Anthropologist 45:357-373. [Cited from "Clyde Kluckhohn and Henry
    Murray (eds.), Personality in nature, society, and culture, pp. 220-235. New
   York: Knopf, 1943.]
 Ekman, Paul, and Wallace Friesen, 1968, Nonverbal behavior in psychotherapy
    research. In J. Shlien (ed.), Research in psychotherapy, vol. Ill, pp. 179-216.
    American Psychological Association.
                                                     Bibliography    561

 - - - , - - - , 1969, The repertoire of non-verbal behavior: Categories, origins,
    usage and coding. Semiotica 1 (1):49-98.
 Ekman, Paul, Wallace Friesen, and T. Tausig, 1969, VID-R and SCAN: Tools
   and methods for the automated analysis of visual records. In G. Gerbner, 0.
   Holsti, K. Krippendorf, W. Paisley, and P. Stone (eds.), The analysis of com-
   munication content, pp. 297-312. New York: Wiley.
Ervin, Susan M., 1964, Language and TAT content in bilinguals. Journal of Ab-
   normal Social Psychology 68:500-507.
Ervin-Tripp, Susan M., 1964, An analysis of the interaction of language, topic,
   and listener. In John J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of
   communication. American Anthropologist 66, 6, pt. 11:86-102.
- - - , 1967, As Issie learns English. In John Macnamara (ed.), Problems of
bilingualism, Joumal of Social Issues 23 (2):78-90.
- - - , 1968, Becoming a bilingual. Working paper no. 9, Language Behavior
   Research Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley.
- - - , 1968, Proceedings of the 1967 UNESCO conference on the description
   and measurement of bilingualism.
- - - , 1969, Sociolinguistics. In L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in experimental
   social psychology. vol. 4, pp. 91-165. New York: Academic Press, Inc.
- - - , 1970a, Social dialects in developmental sociolinguistics. In Roger W.
   Shuy, Irwin Feigenbaum, and Allene Grognet (Investigators), Sociolinguistic
   Theory, Materials, and Training Programs: Three related studies. [Final
   Report, OEC-3-9-180357-0400 (010), U.S. Department of Health, Education
   and Welfare.] Center for Applied Linguistics, Washington, D.C.
- - - , 1970b, Structure and process in language acquisition. Twenty-first
   Annual Round Table Meeting on Linguistics and Language Studies. School of
   Languages and Linguistics. Georgetown University. Washington, D!C.
Eslao, Nena B., 1962, Child-rearing among the Sama! of Manubul, Siasi, Sulu.
  Philippine Sociological Review 10:80-91.
Evans, I. H. N., 1951, Fifty Dusun riddles. Sarawak Museum Journal
  5 :553-561.
- - - , 1954, More Dusun riddles. Sarawak Museunz Journal 6:20-35.
- - - , 1955, Some Dusun proverbs and proverbial sayings. Sarawak M11se11m
  Journal 6:233-244.
Faris, James, 1966, The dynamics of verbal exchange: a Newfoundland example.
  Anthropologica 8:235-248.
- - - , 1968, Validation in ethnographical description: the lexicon of "oc-
  casions" in Cat Harbour. Man (new series) 3: 112-124.
Fay, Percival 1918-1920, The use of t11 and vous in Moliere. Berkeley University
  of California Publications in Modern Philology, 7, pp. 227-286.
Ferguson, Charles A., 1964a, Diglossia. In Dell Hymes (ed.), Language in cul-
  ture and society, pp. 429-437. New York: Harper & Row.
- - , 1964b, Baby talk in six languages. In John J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes
  (eds.), The ethnography of communication. American Anthropologist 66, 6, pt.
  Il:103-114.
- - - , 1966, National sociolinguistic profile formulas. In William Bright (ed.),
  Sociolinguistics, pp. 309-314. The Hague: Mouton.
- - - , J971, Language stmcture and language use. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
  University Press.
Ferguson, Charles A., and John J. Gumperz, 1959, Linguistic diversity in south
  Asia: Studies in Regional, and Functional Variation. [RCAFL-P 13; Interna-
  tional Journal of American Linguistics 26 (3), pt. Ill].
         562    Bibliography

Fischer, J. L., 1957, The eastern Carolines. New Haven, Conn: Human Relations
  Area Files.
- - - , 1958, Social influence in the choice of a linguistic variant. Word
   14:47-56. [Reprinted in Dell Hymes (ed.), 1964, Language in culture and soci-
   ety, pp. 483-488. New York: Harper & Row.]
- - - , 1964, Words for self and others in some Japanese families. In John J.
   Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.). American Anthropologist 66, 6, pt.
   II:I 15-132.
- - - , I 965, The stylistic significance of consonantal Sandhi in Trukese and
    Ponapean. American Anthropologist 67: 1495-1502.
- - - , I 966, Syntax and social structure: Truk and Ponape. In William Bright
    (ed.), Sociolinguistics, pp. 168-182. The Hague: Mouton. (Proceedings of the
    UCLA Sociolinguistics Conference, 1964.)
 Fishman, Joshua A., 1964, Language maintenance and language shift as fields of
    inquiry. Linguistics 9:32-70.
 - - - , 1965, Who speaks what language to whom and when. La Linguistique
    2:67-88.                               .
- - - , 1966, Language loyalty in the United States. The Hague: Mouton.
 - - - , 1967, Bilingualism with and without diglossia; diglossia with and without
    bilingualism. In J. Macnamara (ed.), Problems of bilingualism. Journal of Social
     Issues 23, 2:29-38.
 - - - , I 968a, A sociolinguistic census of a bilingual neighborhood. In J. A.
     Fishman, R. L. Cooper, Roxana Ma, et al. (eds.), Bilingualisnz in the barrio.
     Final report to DHEW under contract no·. OEC-1-7-062817-0297. New York:
     Yeshiva University.
 - - - , 1968b, Sociolinguistic perspective on the study of bilingualism.
     Linguistics 39:21-49.
 Fishman, Joshua, Charles A. Ferguson, and Jyotirindra Das Gupta, 1968, Lan-
     guage problems of developing nations. New York: Wiley.
 Fock, Niels, 1965, Cultural aspects of the "oho" institution among the Waiwai.
      Proceedings of the International Congress of Americanists, pp. 136-140.
 Foote, N. N. (ed.), 1961, Household decision-making: consumer behavior. vol. 4.
      New York: New York University Press.
  Ford, Clellan S. (ed.), 1967, Cross-cultural approaches: readings in comparative
      research. New Haven, Conn.: HRAF Press.
 Frake, Charles 0., 1960, The eastern Subanun of Mindanao. In G. P. Murdock
     (ed.), Social structure in Southeast Asia. Chicago: Quadrangle Books.
 - - - , 1962; The ethnographic study of cognitive systems. In T. Gladwin and W.
      C. Sturtevant (eds.), Anthropology and lz11man behavior. Washington, D.C.:
      Anthropological Society.
  - - - , 1963, Litigation in Lipay: A study in Subanun law. The proceedings of the
      Ninth Pacific Science Congress, 1957, vol. 3, Bangkok.
  - - - , 1964a, How to ask for a drink in Subanun. In John J. Gumperz and Dell
      Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of communication. American Anthropologist
      66, 6, pt. II:127-132.
  - - - , 1964b, A structural description of Subanun "religious behavior." In Ward
       H. Goodenough (ed.), Exp/orations in cultllral anthropology: essays in honor of
      George Peter Murdock. New York: McGraw-Hill.
  - - - , 1964c, Notes on queries in ethnography. In A. Kimball Romney and R.
  G. D'Andrade (eds.), Transcultural studies in cognition. Arnerican Anthropol-
       ogist (special publication), 66, 3, pt. II.
  - - - , 1964d, The diagnosis of disease among the Subanun of Mindanao. In Dell
                                                     Bibliography    563

    Hymes (ed.), Language in culture and society, pp. 193-211. New York:
    Harper & Row.
- - - , 1966, Review of riddles in Filipino folklore. American Anthropologist
   68:245-246.
 Frank, Y. A., 1948, The speech of New York City. University of Michigan Ph.D.
   dissertation, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
 Frey, J. William, 1945, Amish triple talk. American Speech 20:85-98.
 Friedrich, Paul, 1964, Semantic structure and social structure: an instance from
    Russian. In Ward H. Goodenough (ed.), Explorations in cultural anthropology.
    New York: McGraw-Hill.
- - - , 1966, Structural implications of Russian pronominal usage. In William
    Bright (ed.), Sociolinguistics, pp. 214-253. The Hague; Mouton.
 Fries, Charles C., 1952, Tlze structure of English. New York: Harcourt.
Gardner, Peter M., 1966, Symmetric respect and memorate knowledge: the struc-
   ture and ecology of individualistic culture. Southwestern Journal of Anthropol-
   ogy 22:389-415.
Garfinkel, Harold, 1966, Comments. In William Bright (ed.), Sociolinguistics, pp.
   322-333. The Hague: Mouton.
- - - , 1967, Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-
   Hall.
Garfinkel, Harold, and Harvey Sacks, 1969, On formal structures of practical ac-
   tions. In John C. McKinney and Edward Tiryakian (eds.), Theoretical sociol-
   ogy: perspectives and developments. New York: Appleton.
Garvin, Paul L., 1949, Linguistic study of Ponape. Washington, D.C.: Pacific Sci-
   ence Board. Typed.
- - - , (ed.), 1969. A Prague school reader. Washington, D.C 1: Georgetown
   University Press.
- - - , 1952, Respect behavior on Ponape. American Anthropologist
   54:201-220.
Gauchat, L., 1905, L'unite plwnetique dans le patois d'une commune. Halle.
Gayton, Ann H., and Stanley Newman, 1940, Yokuts and western Mono myths.
   University of California Publications, Anthropological Records, 5, Berkeley.
Geertz, C., 1960, The religion of Java. New York: The Free Press.
Geoghegan, William, 1970, Balangingi' Sama! address terminology. Ph.D. disser-
   tation, University of California, Berkeley.
- - - , 197 la, Information processing systems in culture. In Paul Kay (ed.),
  Explorations in matlzematical antlzropology. Cambridge, Mass.: M. I.T. Press.
- - - , 1971 b, Natural information processing rules: Formal theory in applica-
  tions to ethnography. Monograph I I I. Language Behavior Research Labora-
  tory. University of California, Berkeley.
                                                      a
Georges, Robert A., and Alan Dundes, 1963, Toward structural definition of the
  riddle. Journal of American Folklore 76:111-118.
Goffman, Erving, 1953. Communication conduct in an island community. Ph.D.
  dissertation, Department of Sociology, University of Chicago.
- - - , 1959, The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Doubleday.
- - - , 1961, Encounters: Two Studies in the Sociology of interaction. Indianap-
  olis: Bobbs-Merrill.
- - - , 1963, Behavior in public places. New York: Free Press.
- - - , 1964, The neglected situation. In John J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes
  (eds.), The ethnography of communication. American A nt/zropo/ogist 66, 6, pt.
  II: 133-137.
         564    Bibliouraphy

- - - , (ed.), 1967, Alienation from interaction. In Interaction ritual: essays in
  face to face behavior, pp. 113-136. Chicago: Aldine. [ 1957, Human Relations
   10:47-59.]
Goldthorpe, J., and D. Lockwood, 1963, Allluence and the class structure.
  Sociological Review 11: 133-163.
Goodenough, Ward H., 1951, Property, kin, and community ofTruk. Yale Uni-
   versity Publications in Anthropology, 46. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
   Press.
- - - , 1964, Cultural anthropology and linguistics. In Dell Hymes (ed.), Lan-
   guage in culture and society, pp. 36-39. New York: Harper & Row. [Reprinted
   from Report of the Seventh Annual Round Table Meeting on Linguistics and
   Language Study, Monograph Series on Languages and Linguistics, 9 (edited by
   Paul L. Garvin), pp. 109-173. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University
   Press, 1957.]
 - - - , 1965a, Rethinking "status" and "role": toward a general model of the cul-
    tural organization of social relationships. In M. Banton (ed.), The rele\'(/nce of
    models of anthropoloiy. London: Tavistock.
 - - - , 1965b, Personal names and modes of address in two Oceanic societies. In
    Melford Spiro (ed.), Context and meanini in cultural anthropoloiy. New York:
    Free Press.
 Greenberg, J. H ., 1963, Some universals of grammar with particular reference to
    the order of meaningful elements. In Joseph Greenberg (ed.), Universals of
    languaie. Cambridge, Mass.: M.l.T. Press.
 - - - , 1966, Language universals. In T. Sebeok (ed.), Current trends in
    liniuistics, vol. 3, pp. 61-112. The Hague: Mouton.
 - - - , 1968, Anthropological liniuistics. New York: Random House, Inc.
 Greenfield, Lawrence, 1968, Spanish and English usage self-ratings in various sit-
    uational contexts. In J. A. Fishman, R. L. Cooper. Roxana Ma, et al. (eds.),
    Bilingualism in the barrio. Final report to DHEW under contract no.
    OEC-J-7-062817-0297. New York: Yeshiva University.
 Greimas, A. G ., 1968, Gesture. Conznumications. Paris.
 Grimshaw, Allen, 1968, Sociolinguistics. In Wilber Schramm, et al. (eds.), fl and-
     book of co1111nunication. New York: Rand McNally & Co.
 - - - , I 969, Language as obstacle and as data in sociological research. Items
     23, 2.
 Gross, Feliks 1951, Language and value changes among the Arapho. Interna-
     tional Joumal of American Linguistics 17:10-17.
 Guiraud, Piei-re, 1961, Lastylistic. 3d ed. Paris: Presses Universitaire de France.
 - - - , 1967, Structures etymologiques du lexique ji-a,u;ais. Paris: Librairie
     Larousse.
  Gumperz, John J ., 1961, Speech variation and the study of Indian civilization.
     American Anthropologist 63 :976-988. [Reprinted in Dell Hymes (ed.), 1964,
      Laniuage in culture and society, pp. 416-428. New York: Harper & Row.
 - - - , 1962, Types of linguistic communities. Anthropological linguistics 4,
      1:28-40.
  - - - , 1964a, Hindi-Punjabi code-switching in Delhi. In H. G. Lunt (ed.), Pro-
     ceedinis of the ninth intemational congress <~f' linguists, pp. 1115-1124. The
      Hague: Mouton.
  - - - , 1964b, Linguistic and social interaction in two communities. In John J.
      Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of communication. Ameri-
      can Anthropologist 66, 6, pt. 11:137-154.
                                                      Bibliography    565

 - - - , I 966, On the ethnology of linguistic change. In William Bright (ed.),
    Sociolinguistics, pp. 27-49. The Hague: Mouton.
 - - - , 1967, On the linguistic markers of bilingual communication. In J. Mac-
    namara (ed.), Problems of bilingualism. Journal of Social Issues 23, 2:48-57.
 - - - , I 969, Communication in multilingual societies. In Stephen Tyler (ed.),
    Cognitive a11thropology. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
 - - - , 1970a, Sociolinguistics and communication in small groups. Working
     paper no. 33, Language Behavior Research Laboratory, University of Cali-
    fornia, Berkeley.
 - - - , 1970b, Verbal strategies in multilingual communication. Working paper
    no. 36, Language Behavior Research Laboratory, University of California,
 Berkeley. [Report of the Twenty-First Annual Round Table Meeting on
    Linguistics and Language Studies (Monograph Series on Languages and
    Linguistics, Number 23), James Alatis (ed.). Georgetown University, Washing-
    ton, D.C., 1970.]
    [In Roger Abrahams and Rudy Troike (eds.), La11guage, culture, and educa-
    tio11. Prentice-Hall. In preparation.]
 - - - , I 97 I, Language in social groups: Essays by J aim J. G u1nperz. Language
    Science and National Development Series, Anwar S. Oil, General Editor. Palo
    Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
 Gumperz, John J., and Eduardo Hernandez, I 97 I, Bilingualism, bidialectalism,
    and classroom interaction. In Courtney, Cazden, Dell Hymes, and Vera John
    (eds.), The function of language in the classroom. New York: Teachers College
    Press.
 Gumperz, John J., and Dell Hymes (eds.), 1964, The ethnography of com-
    munication. American Anthropologist 66, 6, pt. II.
 Gumperz, John J., and C. M. Nairn, I 960, Formal and informal standards in Hindi
    regional language area. In Charles A. Ferguson and John J. Gumperz (eds.),
    Linguistic diversity in South Asia. RCAFL-P 13 lntemationcil Jou/'llal of
   American Linguistics 26 (3), pt. I II :92-118.
Gunter, R., I 966, On the placement of accent in dialogue: a feature of context
   grammar. Journal of Linguistics 2: 159-179.
Guthrie, George, and Peptia Jiminez Jacobs, 1966, Child-rearing and personality
   development in the Philippines. University Park: Pennsylvania State Univer-
   sity Press.
Haas, Mary R., 1964, Men's and women's speech in Koasati. In Dell Hymes
   (ed.), Language in culture a11d society, pp. 228-232. New York: Harper &
   Row.
Hakulinen, A., B. Lewis, and S. Taylor, in preparation, Seven-year-old children
   and the contextual use of language. University of London, Institute of Educa-
  tion, Sociological Research Unit Monographs. London: Routledge, 1968.
Hall, Edward T., 1959, The silent language. New York: Doubleday.
- - - , 1963, A system for the notation of proxemic behavior. American Anthro-
  pologist 65: 1003-1026.
- - - , 1964, Adumbration as a feature of intercultural communication. In John
  J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of communication. Amer-
  ican A nthropo/ogist 66, 6, pt. I I: 154-163.
- - - , 1966, The hidde11 dimensio11. New York: Doubleday.
- - - , I 968, Proxemics. Current Anthropology 9:83-108.
Halle, Morris, 1962, Phonology in a generative grammar. Word 18:54-72.
Halliday, Michael A., 1967-1968, Notes on transitivity and the theme in English.
  Joul'llal of Linguistics 3:37-81, 199-245; 4:179-215.
         566   Bibliography

- - - , 1972, An outlook 011 modem English. London: Oxford.
Halliday, Michael A., Angus McIntosh, and Peter Strevens, 1964, The linguistic
  sciences and language teaching. London: Longmans.
Hammel, Eugene A. (ed.), 1965, Formal semantic analysis. American A nthropo/-
  ogist 67, 5, Part I I.
Hampshire, Stuart, 1967, Thought and action. New York: Viking.
Hanson, D., 1965, Personal and positional influences in informal groups. Social
  Forces 44:246-258.
- - - , 1963, Freedorn and reason. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Harrah, David, 1961, A logic of questions and answers. Philosophy and Science
  28:40-46.
Harris, Marvin, 1964, The nature of cultural things. New York: Random House,
  Inc.                               ·
Hart, Donn V., 1956, Halfway to uncertainty: a short autobiography of a
  Cebuano Filipino. Journal of East Asiatic Studies 5:255-277.
- - - , 1964, Riddles in Filipino folklore: an anthropological analysis. Syracuse,
  N.Y.: Syracuse University Press.
Hassan, Ruquaiya, 1968, Grammatical cohesion in spoken and written English.
  pt. I. (Programme in Linguistics and English teaching, Paper 7.) London: Uni-
   versity College and Longmans. ,
- - - , 1972, Language in the imaginative context: A sociolinguistic study of
  stories told by seven year old children. London: Routledge.
Haugen, Einar, 1953, The Norwegian language in America: a study in bilingual
  behavior. 2 vols. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- - - , 1956, Bilingualism in the Americas: a bibliography and research guide.
  American Dialect Society 26.
- - - , 1957, The semantics of Icelandic orientation. Word 13:447-459.
- - - , 1966, Language conflict and language planning:· the case of modern
   Norwegian. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Hawkins, P., 1968, Social class the nominal group and reference. Language and
   speech.
 Hawkins, P., and G. Turner, in preparation, Aspects of the nominal, verbal, and
   adverbial group. Sociological Research Unit Monograph. University of
   London, Institute of Education, Sociological Research Unit Monographs.
   London: Routledge.
 Haxthausen, August F. von, 1956, The Russian Empire (translated by R. Farrie).
   2 vols. London: Chapman and Hall.
 Henderson, D., 1968, Social class differences in form-class usage. In W. Brandis
   and Dorothy Henderson (eds.), Social Class, Language and Communication.
   University of London, Institute of Education, Sociological Research Unit
   Monographs. London: Routledge.
 - - - , in press, Parental definitions of the relevance of speech in socialization.
   Sociology.
 Henrie, Samuel N ., 1969, A study of verb phrases used by five year old non stan-
    dard Negro English speaking children. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cali-
   fornia, Berkeley.                                     ·
 Hermann, M. E., 1929, Lautveranderungen in der Individualsprache einer Mun-
    dart. Nachrichten der Gesellschaft der Wissenshcaften zu Gottigen,
    Philosophisch-historische Klasse 11: 195-214.
 Hilger, Sister Inez, 1957, Araucanian child life and its cultural background.
    Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 135, Pub!. 4297, Washington, D.C.
 Hill, Richard, and Kathleen S. Crittenden, 1968, Proceedings of the Purdue sym-
                                                       Bibliography     567

     posium on ethnomethodology. Institute for the Study of Social Change, Mono-
     graph I. West Lafayette, Ind.: Purdue University.
  Hill, Trevor, 1958, Institutional linguistics. Orbis 7:444-455.
  Hockett, C. F., 1950, Age grading and linguistic continuity. Language 26,
     4:449-457.
 - - - , 1955, A man1wl of phonology. Indiana University Publications in Anthro-
     pology and Linguistics, II, Bloomington, Ind.
 - - - , 1958, A course in modem linguistics. New York: Macmillan.
  Hogan, Sister Helen Marie, 1967, An ethnography of communication among the
     Ashanti, M.A. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Penn-
     sylvania, Philadelphia.
 Hoijer, Harry (ed.), 1954, Language in culture. Comparative Studies of Cultures
     and Civilizations, no. 3, Memoirs of the American Anthropological Associa-
     tion, no. 79. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Hollensteiner, Mary R., 1962, Reciprocity in the lowland Philippines. In Frank
     Lynch (ed.), Four readings on Philippine values. Institute of Philippine Culture
     Papers 2. Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
 Homans, G. C., 1958, Social behavior as exchange. Arnerican Journal of Sociol-
    ogy 62:597-606.
 Howell, Richard, 1967, Linguistic choice as an index to social change. Ph.D. dis-
    sertation, University of California, Berkeley.
 - - - , 1968, Linguistic choice and levels of social change. American Anthropol-
    ogist 70:553-559.
 Hubbell, A. F., 1950, The pronunciation of English in New York City. New
    York: King's Crown Press.
 Human Relations Area Files (HRAF), New Haven, Conn.
 Hyman, Herbert H., et al., 1954, lntervie1ving in social research. Chicago: Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press.                                    ·
 Hymes, Dell, 1961a, Functions of speech: an evolutionary approach. In F. C.
   Gruber (ed.), Anthropology and education, pp. 55-83. Philadelphia: Univer-
    sity of Pennsylvania Press.
- - - , 1961 b, Linguistic aspects of cross-cultural personality study. In Bert
    Kaplan (ed.), Studying personality cross-culturally, pp. 313-359. New York:
   Harper & Row.
- - - , 1962, The ethnography of speaking. In T. Gladwin and W. C. Sturtevant
   (eds.), Anthropology and human behavior, pp. 13-53. Anthropological Society
  ofWashington. Washington, D.C. (Reprinted inJ. A. Fishman, Readings in the
   sociology of language, pp. 99-138. The Hague: Mouton, 1968.)
- - - , 1964a, A perspective for linguistic anthropology. In Sol Tax (ed.), Hori-
   wns of anthropology, pp. 92-107. London: Aldine.
- - - , 1964b, Directions in (ethno-) linguistic theory. In A. K. Romney and R.
  G. D'Andrade (eds.), Transcultural studies in cognition. American Anthropol-
  ogist 66, 3, pt. II:6-56.
- - - (ed.), 1964c, Modes of address (reference note). Language in culture and
  society, pp. 225-227. New York: Harper & Row.
- - - , (ed.), 1964d, Language in culture and society. New York: Harper &
  Row.
- - - , I 964e, Introduction: toward ethnographies of communication. In John J.
  Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of communication. Ameri-
  can Anthropologist 66, 6, pt. II: 1-34.
- - - , 1966a, Two types of linguistic relativity. In William Bright (ed.),
  Sociolinguistics, pp. 114-165. The Hague: Mouton.
         568    Bibliography

        , 1966b, On "anthropological linguistics" and congeners. American
   Anthropologist 68: 143-153.
- - - , 1967, Models of the interaction of language and social setting. Journal of
   Social Issues 23 (2):8-28.
- - - , 1968a, The "wife" who "goes out" like a man: reinterpretation of a
   Clackamas Chinook myth. Studies in Semiotics 7 (3): 173-199.
- - - , 1968b, Linguistic problems in defining the concept of "tribe." In June
    Helm (ed.), Essays 011 the problem of tribe. Seattle: University of Washington
    Press.
- - - , 1968c, Linguistics-the field. International Encyclopedia of the Social
   Sciences 9:351-371.
- - - , 1969, Linguistic aspects of comparative political research. In Robert T.
    Holt and John Turner (eds.), Methodology of comparative research. New
   York: Free Press.
- - - , 1970, Linguistic theory and the functions of speech. Proceedings of i11-
   ternatio11al days of sociolinguistics, Rome: Instituto Luigi Sturzo.
- - - , 1971 a, The contribution of folklore to sociolinguistics. Journal of Ameri-
   can Folklore 84 (1):42-50.
- - - , 1971 b, Sociolinguistics and the ethnography of speaking. In Edwin
   Ardener (ed.), Social anthropology and linguistics, pp. 47-93. Association of
   Social Anthropologists Monograph IO. London: Tavistock.
- - - , 1972, Towards co1nmu11icative competence. Philadelphia: University of
   Pennsylvania Press.
-·- - , typescript, On personal pronouns; formal and phonesthematic aspects.
- - - , (ed.), 1971, Creolization and pidginization of language. London: Cam-
   bridge University Press.             ,
Ingham, John Michael, 1968, Culture and personality in a Mexican village. Un-
   published Ph.D dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
 Irvine, Judith Temkin, 1968, Speech and music in two cultures. Unpublished
   manuscript.
Jaberg, Karl, 1936, Aspects geographique du langage. Paris: Droz.
Jain, Dhanesh, 1969, Verbalization of respect in Hindi. Anthropological
   linguistics 11, 3 :79-97.
Jakobson, Roman, Kindersprache, Aplzasie und allgemeine Laugesetze, Uppsala
   U niversitets Aarsskrift.
- - - , 1957, Shifters, verbal categories, and the Russian verb. Russian Lan-
   guage Project. Harvard University, Cambridge.
- - - , 1959, Boas' view of grammatical meaning. The anthropology of Franz
   Boas, essays on the centennial of his birth (edited by Walter Goldschmidt).
   American Anthropological Association memoir 89.
- - - , 1960, Linguistics and poetics. In T. Sebeok (ed.), Style in language, pp.
   350-377. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press.
- - - , 1962, Retrospect. Selected writings I: Phonology. The Hague: Mouton.
Jakobson, Roman, and Morris Halle, 1956, Fundamentals of language. (Janua
   Linguarum, I.) The Hague: Mouton.                    ·
- - - , [1962] In retrospect. Selected writings I: Phonology. The Hague:
   Mouton.
Jesperson, Otto, 1924, The philosophy of grammar. New York: Holt, Rinehart
   and Winston, Inc.
Joos, M., 1962, The five clocks. International Journal of American Linguistics
   28, pt V.
                                                        Bibliography    569

   Joseph, Sister Miriam, 1962, Rhetoric in Shakespeare's time. Literary theory in
       Renaissance Europe. New York: Harcourt.
   Kantorovich, V., 1966, ty i vy: A metki pisatelya ('Ty and vy: a writer's notes').
       Moscow: Izd-vo pol. lit.
   Kaspar, Walter, 1969, The methods of dogmatic theology. Shannon: Ecclesia
       Press. (Translated from Die M etlzoden der Dogrnatik-Einlzeit-und-Vielheit.
       Munich: Kosel Verlag, 1967.)                                        ,
   Katz, Evelyn, 1966, A content-analytic method for studying themes of interper-
      sonal behavior. Psychological Bulletin 66:419-422.
   Keesing, F. M., and M. M. Keesing, 1956, Elite co,nmunication in Samoa: a
      study in leaders/zip. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
  Key, Mary (ed.), in press, Nonverbal communication: a reader in paralanguage
      and kinesics.
  Kiparsky, Paul, 1968, Tense and aspect in Indo-European syntax. Foundations of
     Language 4:30-57.
  Kjolseth, J. R., 1967, Structure and process in conversation. Paper presented at
      the American Sociological Society meetings, San Francisco.
  Klima, E. S., 1964, Relatedness between grammatical systems. Language
     40:1-29.
  Kloss, Heinz, 1929, Sprachtabellen als Grundlage fur Sprachstatistik, Sprachen-
     karten and fur eine allgemeine Sociologie der Sprachgemeinschaften. Vietel-
    jahrschrift fur Politik 111u/e G esclzic/zte I, 7: 103-117.
  Kochman, Thomas, 1969, "Rapping" in the black ghetto. Trans-Action, February
      1969:26-34.
 - - - (ed.), in preparation, Language and expressive role behavior in the black
     inner city.
 Kohl, Herbert, 1967, Thirty-six children. New York: New American Library.
 Kohn, M. L., 1959a, Social class and parental values. American Journal qfSociol-
    ogy 64:337-351.                                                      .
 - - - , 1959b, Social class and the exercise of parental authority. American
    Sociological Review 24:352-366.
 Kostomarov, V. G., 1967, Russkiy rechevoy stiket ('Russian speech etiquette').
    Russkiy yazyk w rubez/w,n I :56-62.
 Kramer, M., H. Goldstein, R.H. Israel, and N. A. Johnson, 1956, Applications of
    life table methodology to the study of mental hospital populations. Psychiatric
   research reports of the American Psychiatric Association, June. 46-76.
 Kreider, Charles W. (ed.), 1965, Report of the Sixteenth Annual Round Table
   Meeting on Linguistics and Language Studies. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown
   University Press.
 Kroeber, Alfred L., 1909, Classificatory systems of relationship. Journal <~f the
   Royal Anthropological Institute 3 :77-85.
- - - , 1960, Evolution, history and culture. In Sol Tax (ed.), Ew1lution qfier
   Darwin, pp. 1-16. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kurath, Hans, et al., 1941, Linguistic atlas of New England. Providence, R. I.:
   Brown University Press.
Kurath, Hans, and R. A. McDavid, Jr., 1961, The pronunciation <d'English in the
  Atlantic States. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Press.
La Barre, Weston, 1964, Paralinguistics, kinesics, and cultural anthropology. In
  T. A. Sebeok, A. S. Hayes, and Mary C. Bateson (eds.), Approaches to
  semiotics, pp. 191-220. The Hague: Mouton.




                                                                                        J
           570    Bibliography

  Labov, William, 1963, The social motivation of a sound change. Word
     19:273-309.
  - '- - , 1964a, The aims of sociolinguistic research. Paper prepared for the
     Sociolinguistics Seminar held at Bloomington, Ind., in the summer of 1964
     under the auspices of the Social Science Research Council.
  - - - , 1964b, Phonological correlates of social stratification. In John J. Gum-
     perz and Dell Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of communication. Americlln
    Anthropologist 66, 6, pt. II: 164-176. ·
  - - - , 1964c, The linguistic variable as a structural unit. Paper given before the
     Washington, D.C., Linguistics Club, October.
  - - - , 1965, Stages in the acquisition of standard English. In Roger Shuy (ed.),
     Socilll dialects and language learning, pp. 77-103. Champaign, Ill.: National
     Council of Teachers of English.
  - - - , 1966a, H ypercorrection by the lower middle class as a factor in linguistic
    change. In William Bright (ed.), Sociolinguistics. The Hague: Mouton.
  - - - , 1966b, The social stratification of English in New York City. Center for
     Applied Linguistics, Washington, D.C.
  - - - , 1968, The reflections of .social processes in linguistic structures. In
    Joshua Fishman (ed.), A reader in the sociology of language. The Hague:
     Mouton.
  - - - , 1969a, The logic of non-standard English. Report on the Twentieth
    Annual Round Table Meeting on Linguistics and Language Studies, James
    Alatis (ed.), School of Language and Linguistics, Georgetown University.
    Washington, D.C.
  - - - , 1969b, Contraction, deletion, and inherent variability of the copula. Lan-
    guage 45 (4):715-762.
  - - - , in preparation, Rules for ritual insults. In Thomas Kochman (ed.), Lan-
    guage and expressive role behavior in tlze black inner city.
  Labov, William, and Joshua Waletsky, 1967, Narrative analysis: oral versions of
    personal experience. In Essays 011 the verblll llnd visulll arts. (Proceedings of
    1966 spring meeting, American Ethnological Society.) Seattle: University of
    Washington Press.
  Labov, William, Paul Cohen, Clarence Robins, and John Lewis, 1968, A study of
    the non-standard English of Negro and Puerto Rican speakers in New York
    City. vol. II. pp. 76-152. Department of Linguistics, Columbia University,
    New York.
  Lamb, S., 1966, Outline of stratificational grammar. Washington, D.C.: George-
    town University Press.
/ Lambert, W., 1963, Psychological approaches to the study of language, pt. I I, On
    second-language learning and bilingualism. Modern Language J 011rnal
    47: 114-121.
  - - - , 1967a, A psychology of bilingualism. In John Macnamara (ed.), Problems
    of bilingualism. Journal of Socilll Issues 23, 2:91-109.
  - - - , 1967b, The use of tu and vous as forms of address in French Canada: a
    pilot study. Journal of Verblll Lellrning and Verbal Behavior 6:614-617.
  Lambert, W., and G. R. Tucker, in press, A social-psyclzological study of interper-
    sonal modes of llddress. A French-Canadian illustration.
  Lambert, W. E., M. Anisfeld, and G. Yeni-Komshian, 1965, Evaluational reac-
    tions of Jewish and Arab adolescents to dialect and language variations. Journal
    of Personality and Social Psyclzology 2.
  Landis, M. H., and H. E. Burtt, 1924, A study of conversations.Journal of Com-        /
    parative Psychology 4:81-89.
                                                        Bibliography    571

   Lanham, Richard A., 1968, A hancllist of rhetorical terms. Berkeley: University
      of California Press.
   Leach, Edmund, 1954, Political systems <~f highland Burma. Cambridge, Mass.:
      Harvard University Press.
  - - - , 1960, The Sinhalese of the dry zone of northern Ceylon. In George Mur-
      dock (ed.), Social structure in Southeast Asia. Chicago: Quadrangle Books.
   Leary, T., 1957, Interpersonal diagnosis of personality. New York: Ronald.
  - - - , 1966, Le langage et la societe. Paris: Gallimard.
  Lefebvre, Henri, 1968, The sociology of Marx. London: Allen Lane, The Penguin
      Press.
  Leroy-Bequlieu, Anatole, 1881, L'empire des tsars et /es Russes, vol. I. Paris:
      Hachette.
  Lieberson, Stanley, 1964, An extension of Greenberg's measures of linguistic
     diversity. Language 40:526-531.
  - - - , 1966a, Language questions in census. Sociological Inquiry 36:262-279.
  - - - , (ed.), 1966b, Explorations in sociolinguistics. Sociological Inquiry 36, 2.
  Loban, W., 1966, Language ability. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
     Health, Education and Welfare.
  Lounsbury, F. G., 1964, The formal analysis of Crow- and Omaha-type kinship
     terminologies. In G. P. Murdock (ed.), Explorations in rnltural anthropology.
    New York: McGraw-Hill.
  Lowie, R. H., 1917, Notes on the social organization of.the Mandan, Hidatsa, and
    Crow Indians. American Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Papers,
    21 (I).
 - - - , 1937, A history of ethnological theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
    Winston, Inc.
 Lynch, Frank, 1962a, Lowland Philippine values: social acceptance. In Frank
    Lynch (ed.), Four readings on Philippine values. Institute of Philippine Culture
    Papers 2. Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
 ---(ed.), 1962b, Four readings in Philippine values. Institute of Philippine
· Culture Papers 2. Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
 McCawley, James, 1968, The role of semantics in grammar. In Emmon Bach and
    Robert Harms (eds.), Universals in linguistic theory, pp. 125-170. New York:
    Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
 Mcilwraith, T. F., 1948, The Bella Coo/a Indians. Toronto: University of
   Toronto Press.
 Mack, John E., 1969, T. E. Lawrence: A study of heroism and conflict. American
   Journal of Psychiatry 125:1083-I092.
 Mackey, William F., 1962, The description of bilingualism. Canadian Journal of
   Linguistics 7:58-85.
- - - , 1965, Bilingual interference: its analysis and measurement. Journal of
   Communication 15 :239-249.
- - - , 1966, The measurement of bilingual behavior. The Canadian Psycholo-
   gist 7:75-90.
Maclay, H., and S. Newman, 1960, Two variables affecting the message in com-
  munication. In Dorothy K. Wilner (ed.), Decisions, values, and groups. New
  York: Pergamon.
Macnamara, John (ed.), 1967, Problems of bilingualism. Journal of Social Issues
  23:2.
McNeil!, D., 1963, The psychology of you and I; a case history of small language
  system. American Psychological Association meeting.




                                                                                        J'
         572    Bibliography

McQuown, Norman (ed.), in preparation, The natural history of an interview.
  (1956-       ).
Mahl, G. F., 1968, Gestures and body movements in interviews. Paper presented
  at the Third Research in Psychotherapy Conference. (Chicago, June 1966; in
  Vol. III, American Psychological Association.)
Mak, Wilhelm, 1935, Zweisprachigkeit und Mischmundart in Oberschlesien,
  Schlesisches Jahrbuch j11r deut.~che Kulturarbeit 7:41-52.
Malay, Paula Carolina, 1957, Some Tagalog folkways. Journal <~f East Asiatic
  Studies 6:69-88.
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 1935, Coral gardens and their magic, vol. II. London:
  Allen and Unwin.
- - - , 1964, The dilemma of contemporary linguistics. In Dell Hymes (ed.),
  Language in culture and society, pp. 63-64. New York: Harper & Row.
  (Reprinted from Nature 140:172-173, 1937.)
Malkiel, Yakov, 1960, Paradigmatic resistance to sound change. Language
  36:281-346.
Mandelbaum, David G. (ed.), 1949, Selected writings of Edward Sapir in lan-
  guage, culture and personality. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Manuel, E. Arsenio, 1955, Notes on Philippine folk literature. Journal of East
  Asiatic Studies 4:137-153.
Marsden, G., 1965, Content-analysis studies of therapeutic interviews:
  1954-1964. Psychological Bulletin 63:298-321.
Martin, Samuel E., 1964, Speech levels in Japan and Korea. In Dell Hymes (ed.),
  Language in culture and society, pp. 407-415. New York: Harper & Row.
- - - , 1958,. Speech level and social structure in Japan and Korea. Paper read at
  annual meeting, Asian Studies Association, New York.
Martinet, Andre, 1952, Function, structure, and sound change. Word 8:1-32.
- - - , 1955, Economie des changements phonetiques. Bibliotheca Romanica.
  Ser. Prima, Manualia et Commentationes, Vol X. Bern: Francke.
Mascall, E. L., 1968, Words and images. London: Darton, Longman, and Todd,
  Ltd. [1957, New York: Ronald Press Co.]
Mayer, Philip, 1951, The joking of "pals" in Gusii age-sets. African Studies
   10:27-41.
Mead, Margaret, 1937, Public opinion mechanisms among primitive peoples.
  Public Opinion Quarterly 1:5-16.
- - - , 1942, And keep your powder dry. New York: Morrow.
- - - , 1948, Some cultural approaches to communications problems. In Lyman
  Bryson (ed.), The communication of ideas, pp. 9-26. New York: Harper &
  Row.
- - - , 1964a, Vicissitudes of the study of the total communication process. In T.
  A. Sebeok, A. S. Hayes, and M. C. Bateson (eds.), Approaches to semiotics,
  pp. 277-287. The Hague: Mouton.
- - - , 1964b, Continuities in cultw:al evolution. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
  versity Press.
Meillet, Antoine, 1921, Linguistique historique et linguistique generale. Revista di
  Scienzia 4 (8).
Merleau-Ponty, M., 1967, Introduction to the prose ofthe world. La Revue de
  Metaphysique et de Morale 2: 139-153, Paris. [Reprinted in La prose du monde
  (Paris: Gallimard) and in English as Prose of the world (Evanston, Ill.: North-
  western University Press, 1970.]                                             .
Messenger, John C., Jr., 1960, Anang proverb riddles. Journal of American
  Folklore 73:225-235.
                                                        Bibliography     573

 Metcalf, George J., 1938, Forms of address in German (1500-1800). Washington
     University Studies, n.s., Language and Literature 7, St. Louis, Mo.
 Metzger, Duane, 1965, Review of Harris 1964. Atnerican 'Anthropologist
    67:1293-1296.
 Metzger Duane, and Gerald Williams, 1963, Tenejapa medicine: the curer. South-
     western Journal of Anthropology 19:216-234.
 Meyers, George C., and John M. Roberts, 1968, A technique for measuring pref-
    erential family size and composition. Eugenics Quarterly 15: 164-172.
 Miller, D., and G. E. Swanson, 1958, The changing American parent. New York:
    Wiley.
 Miller, G. A., 1956, The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on
    our capacity for processing information. The Psychological Review 63 :81-97.
Miller, G. A., E. Calanter, and R. Pribham, 1960, Plans and structure of behavior.
    New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
Miner, Horace M., and George de Vos, 1960, Oasis and casbah: Algerian culture
   and personality in change. Anthropological papers, no. 15, Museum of Anthro-
    pology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
Moerman, Michael, 1965, Ethnic identification in a complex civilization: who are
   the Lue? American Anthropologist 6:1215-1230. (Reprint no. 214, Institute of
    International Studies. University of California, Berkeley.)
- - - , 1968a, Being Lue: uses and abuses of ethnic identification. American
   Ethnological Society, Proceedings of 1967 spring meeting, pp. 153-169. (Re-
   print no. 27 5, Southeast Asia Series, Institute of International Studies, U niver-
   sity of California, Berkeley.)
- - - , 1968b, Analysis of Lue conversation: Providing accounts, finding
    breaches, and taking sides. Working Paper no. 12. Language-Behavior Re-
    search Laboratory. University of California, Berkeley.
- - - , 1969, Analysis of Thai conversation. In D. Sudnow (ed.), Studies in in-
   teraction. New York: Free Press.
Morgenstierne, G., 1932, Report on a linguistic mission to Northwestern India.
   Oslo: H. Aschehoug and Co., Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Moulton, William A., I 962, Dialect geography and the concept of phonological
   space. Word 18:23-33.
Murdock, George P., 1967, Ethnographic atlas: a summary. Ethnology 6:2.
Nader, Laura (ed.), 1969, Law in culture and society. London: Aldine.
Nahirny, Vladimir C., and Joshua A. Fishman, 1965, American immigrant
  groups: ethnic identification and the problem of generations. Sociological
  RevielV 13 :311-326.
Neustupny, Jiri, 1968, Politeness patterns in the system of communication. Pro-
  ceedings of the Eighth International Congress of Anthropological and Ethno-
   logical Sciences, Tokyo and Kyoto.
Newman, Stanley S., 1964, Vocabulary levels: Zuni sacred and slang usage. In
  Dell Hymes (ed.), Language in culture and society. New York: Harper & Row.
  [ 1954, Reprinted from Soutlzwestem Journal of Anthropology, 11 :345-354.]
Nurge, Ethel, 1965, Life in a Leyte village. Monograph 40, American Ethno-
  logical Society. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Nydegger, William F., and Corinne Nydegger, 1966, Tarong: an llokos barrio in
  the Philippines. Six Cultures Series, vol. VI. New York: Wiley.
Nye, F. I., and F. M. Berardo, 1966, Emerging conceptual framelVorks infwni/y
  analysis. New York: Macmillan.
Oakshott, M., 1959, The voice of poetry in the conversation ofnumkind. London:
  Bowes and Bowes.
         574    Bibliography

Oztiirk, Orhan M., 1964, Folk treatment of mental illness in Turkey. In Ari Kiev
   (ed.), Ma,:ic, faith, and healing: studies in primitive psychiatry today, pp.
   343-363. New York: Free Press.
Parain, Brice, 1969, Petite metaphysique de la parole. Paris: Gallimard. (Re-
   viewed in Times Literary Supplement, Sept. 25, 1969: I 084.)
 Parsons, Talcott, 1964, Personality and social structure. New York: Free Press.
 Passin, Herbert, 1966, Intra-familial linguistic usage in Japan. Monumenta Nip-
   ponica Monographs. Studies in Japanese Culture, 21 :97-113, Tokyo: Sophia
   University.
Paulhan, Jean, 1913, Les Hain-teny. Paris: Gallimard.
Pehrson, R. N., 1966, The social organization of Marri Baluch (compiled by
   Fredrik Barth). Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology 43. New York:
   Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.
Perelman, Charles, 1963, The idea of justice and the problem of argument.
   London: Routledge.
Petrovitch, Gajo, 1967, Marx in the mid-twentieth century. New York: Anchor
   Books.
Pfuderer, Carol, 1968, A scale of politeness forms in English. Term paper for
   Speech I 64A. University of California, Berkeley.
Phelan, John L., 1959, The Hispanization of the Philippines: Spanish aims and
   Filipino responses, 1565-1700. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Philips, Susan U ., 1970, Acquisition of rules for appropriate speech usage. Report
  on Round Table Meeting on Linguistics and Language Studies, George Alatis
  (ed.), School of Languages and Linguistics. Georgetown University. Washing-
  ton, D.C.
Pierce, Joe E., 1964, Life in a Turkish village. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
  Winston, Inc.
Pike, Kenneth L., 1945, The intonation of American English. Ann Arbor, Mich:
  University of Michigan Press.
- - - , 1964, Towards a theory of the structure of human behavior. In Dell
   Hymes (ed.), Language in culture and society. New York: Harper & Row.
- - - , 1967, Language in relation to the unified theory of the stmcture of human
   behavior. (2nd rev. ed.). The Hague: Mouton.
Pike, Kenneth L., and C. C. Fries, 1949, Coexistent phonemic systems. Lan-
  guage 26:29-50.
Pilch, Herbert, 1955, The rise of the American English vowel pattern. Word
   11 :57-93.
Pitcher, E. G., and E. Prelinger, 1963, Children tell stories: An analysis of fan-
  tasy. New York: International Universities Press.
Polgar, Steven A., 1960, Biculturation of Mesquakie teenage boys. American
  A11thropolo,:ist 62:217-235.
Pool, I, 1959, Trends in content analysis. Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois
   Press.
Pop, Sever, 1950, La dialectologie. Apen;u historique et methodes d'enquetes
   linguistiques. pt. I, Dialectologie Romane; pt. II: Dialectologie non-Romane.
   Louvain: Chez !'auteur.
Post, Emily, 1922, Etiquette. New York: Funk & Wagnalls.
Postal, Paul, 1968,Aspects ofphonolo,:ical theory. New York: Harper & Row.
Potter, Charles F., 1950, Riddles. In Maria Leach and Jerome Fried (eds.), Stan-
   dard dictionary of folklore, mytlwlo,:y, and legend, vol. 2. New York: Funk &
   Wagnalls.
                                                         Bibliograplzy   575

     Poussaint, A. F., 1967, A Negro psychiatrist explains the Negro psyche. New
         York Times magazine, August 20, p. 52ff.
     Prator, Clifford H., 1970, The survey of language use and language teaching in
        East Africa. Journal of the Language Association of Eastem Aj,·ica I (2): 1-7.
     Pride, J. B., 1971, Customs and cases of verbal behavior. In Edwin Ardener
        (ed.), Social anthropology and linguistics, pp. 95-117. Association of Social
       Anthropologists Monograph 10. London: Tavistock.
     Priestly, J. B., 1926, Talking. New York: Harper & Row.
    Ramanujan, A. K., 1967, The structure of variation: a study in caste dialects. In
       B. Cohn and M. Singer (eds.), Social structure and social change in India.
       London: Aldine.
    Redard, G. (ed.), 1964, lndo-lranica. Melange presentes a Georg Morgenstierne
       a f' occasion de son soixante-diexieme anniversaire. Wiesbaden: Otto Har-
       raesowitz.
   Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo, and Alicia Reichel-Dolmatoff, 1961, Tlze people of
      Aritanw. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Rensky, Miroslav, 1966, The systematics of paralanguage. Travaux Linguistique
      de Prngue 2:97-102.
   Revill, P. M., 1966, Preliminary report on paralinguistics in Mbembe (Eastern
      Nigeria). Tagmemic and matrix linguistics applied to selected African lan-
      guages, by K. L. Pike, 245-254, appendix VIII. Final report, contract no.
      OE-5-14-065. Washington, D.C., U.S. Deptartment of Health, Education and
     Welfare, Office of Education, Bureau of Research.
  Richards, I. A., 1955, Speculative instruments. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press.
  Richardson, Alan, 1964, The Bible in the age of science. London: SCM Press.
  Roberts, John M., 1964, The self-management of cultures. In Ward H. Goode-
     nough (ed.), Explorations in cultural anthropology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
  - - - , 1965, Oaths, autonomic ordeals, and power. In Laura Nader (ed.), Ameri-
     can Anthropologist 67, pt. 2, 6.
  Roberts, John M., and Malcolm J. Arth, 1966, Dyadic elicitation in Zuni. El
     Palacio 73 (2):27-41.
 Roberts, John M., and Fredrick Koenig, 1968, Focused and distributed status af-
    finity. Sociological Quarterly 9: 150-157.
 Roberts, John M., and Brian Sutton-Smith, 1962, Child training and game
    involvement. Ethnology I: 166-185.
 - - - , 1966, Cross-cultural correlates of games of chance. Behavior Science
   Notes 3:131-144.
 Roberts, John M., Malcolm J. Arth, and Robert R. Bush, 1959, Games in culture.
   American Anthropologist 61 :597-605.
 Roberts, John M., Hans Hoffman, and Brian Sutton-Smith, 1965, Pattern and
   competence: a consideration of tick tack toe. El Palacio 72, 3: 17-30.
Roberts, John M., Fredrick Koenig, and Richard B. Stark, n.d., Judged display: a
   consideration of a craft show. Manuscript.
Roberts, John M., Richard F. Strand, and Edwin Burmeister, 1971, Preferential
  pattern analysis. In Paul Kay (ed.), Explorations in mathematical allfhropol-
  ogy, pp. 242-268. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press.
Roberts, John M., Brian Sutton-Smith, and Adam Kendon, 1963, Strategy in
  games and folktales. Journal of Social Psychology 61: 185-199.




                                                                                         r
                                                                                          __
                                                                                 -----~_,..




        576    lliblio1;raphy

Roberts, John M., Wayne Thompson, and Brian Sutton-Smith, I 966, Expressive
  self-testing in driving. Human Or1;a11ization 25:54-63.
Robinson, P., and S. Rackstraw, I 972, A question of answers. London: Rout-
  ledge.
Romney, A. K., and Roy G. D' Andrade, I 964, Cognitive aspects of English kin
  terms. In A. K. Romney and Roy G. D'Andrade (eds.), Transcultural studies in
  cognition. A 1nerica11 A nthropolo1;ist 66 (3) pt. 2: I 46- I 70.
Rona, Jose Pedro, I 966, The social and cultural status of Guarani in Paraguay. In
   William Bright (ed.), Sociolinguistics. The Hague: Mouton.
Royal Anthropological Institute, I 95 I, Notes and queries of anthropolo1;y. 6th
  ed. London: Routledge.
Rubin, Joan, I 962, Bilingualism in Paraguay. Anthropological Linguistics 4
   (I ):52-58.
- - - , I 968, National bilin1;ualism in Para1;uay. The Hague: Mouton.
Sachs, Jacqueline, I 967, Recognition memory for syntactic and semantic aspects
   of connected discourse. Perception and Psychophysics 2:437-442.
Sacks, Harvey, n.d., The diagnosis of depression. Manuscript.
---·, in press, Social ,~spects of language; the organization of sequencing in
   conversation. Englewood Cliffs, N .J.: Prentice-Hall.
- - - , I 969, An initial investigation of the usability of conversational data for
   doing sociology. In D. Sudnow (ed.), Studies in interaction. New York: Free
   Press.
 Salisbury, R. F., 1962, Notes on bilingualism and linguistic change in New
   Guinea. Anthropolo1;ical Linguistics 4 (7): J-13.
 Samarin, William, 1965, The language of silence. Practical A ntlzropolo1;y
    12:115-119.
 - - - , 1967, Field linguistics: a guide to linguisticfield work. New York: Holt,
    Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
 - - - , I 969, The art of Gbeya insults. International Joumal of American
    Lin1;uistics 35 :323-329.
 Sandys, Sir John Edwyn, I 920, A history of classical scholars/zip, vol. 1. 3d ed.
    New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Sankoff, Gillian, 1968, Social aspects of multilingualism in New Guinea. Ph.D.
    thesis, McGill University, Montreal.
 Santos, Angeles S., 1958, Tsang libo at isang butong ('One thousand and one
    riddles'). Malabon, Rizal, epifanio de los Santos College Kapariz Publica-
  ~ tion 2.
 Sapir, Edward, 1949a, The emergence of the concept of personality in a study of
    cultures. In David G. Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected writings of Edward Sapir,
    pp. 590-597. Berkeley: University of California Press. (Reprinted from Journal
    of Social Psychology 5:408-415, 1934.)
  - - - , I 949b, Culture, genuine and spurious. In David G. Mandelbaum (ed.),
    Selected writings of Edward Sapir, pp. 308-331. Berkeley: University of
    California Press. (Reprinted from American Journal of Sociology 29:491-492,
    1924.)
  - - - , I 949c, The unconscious patterning of behavior in society. In David G.
     Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected writin1;s of Edward Sapir, pp. 544-559. Berkeley:
     University of California Press. (Reprinted from E. S. Dummer (ed.), The
     wzconscious, pp. 114-142. New York: Knopf, 1927.)
                                                        Bibliography     577

  - - - , 1949d, Psychiatric and cultural pitfalls in the business of getting a living.
      In David Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected writings of Edward Sapir, pp. 578-589.
      Berkeley: University of California Press. (Reprinted from Mental Health,
      Publication no. 9, pp. 237-244. American Association for the Advancement of
     Science, 1939.)
 - - - , I 949e, Communication. In David Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected writings of
      Edward Sapir, pp. I 04-109. Berkeley: University of California Press. (Re-
     printed from Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 4, pp. 78-81. New York:
     Macmillan, 1933.)
 - - - , 1949f, Why cultural anthropology needs the psychiatrist. In David Man-
     delbaum (ed.), Selected writings of Edward Sapir, pp. 590-597. Berkeley: Uni-
     versity of California Press. (Reprinted from Psychiatry I (1938):7-12.)
 - - - , 1949g, Sound patterns in language. In David Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected
     Writings of Edward Sapir, pp. 33-45. Berkeley: University of California Press.
     (Reprinted from Language I (1925):37-51.)
 - - - , 1949h, Speech as a personality trait. In David Mandelbaum (ed.),
    Selected writings of Edward Sapir, pp. 533-543. Berkeley: University of
    California Press. (Reprinted from American Journal of Sociology 32
     ( 1927):892-905.)
 - - - , I 949i, Language. In David Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected writings of
    Ed,vard Sapir, pp. 7-32. Berkeley: University of California Press. (Reprinted
    from Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 9, pp. 155-169. New York:
    Macmillan, 1933.)
 - - - , 1957, Language, rnlture, and personality. Berkeley: University of
    California Press. [Selections from the larger Selected Writings of Edward Sapir
    (edited by David B. Mandelbaum).]
 - - - , 1964, Conceptual categories in primitive languages. In Dell Hymes (ed.),
    Language in culture and society. New York: Harper & Row. [ 1931, reprinted
    from Science 74:578.]
 Sartre, Jean-Paul, 1963, Search for a method. New York: Knopf. (Translated
    from Question de met!wde. Paris: Gallimard, 1960.)
 Scheflen, Albert E., 1964, Communication and regulation in psychotherapy. Psy-
    c/1iatry 27: 126-136.
- - - , 1965, Stream and structure of communicational behavior: context analy-
    sis of a psychotherapy session. Behavioral Studies Monograph I. Philadelphia:
    Eastern Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute.
- - - , 1966, Natural history method in psychotherapy: communicational re-
   search. In Louis A. Gottschalk and A. H. Auerbach (eds.), Methods of
   research in psychotherapy. New York: Appleton.
Schegloff, Emmanuel A., 1967, The first five seconds: the order of conversational
   openings. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Sociology, Univer-
   sity of California, Berkeley.
Schmidt-Rohr, George, 1963, Mutter Spraclze. Jena: Eugen Diederichs Verlag.
   (Title of first edition: Die Sprache als Bildnerin der VD/ker. Munich, 1932.)
Schneider, D. M., 1953, Yap kinship terminology and kin groups. American
  Anthropologist 55 :215-236.
- - - , 1955, Kinship terminology and the American kinship system. American
  Anthropologist 57: 1194-1208.
- - - , 1968, American kinship. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
- - - , 1969, Componential analysis-a state-of-the-art review. Prepared for
  Wenner-Gren Symposium on "Cognitive studies and artificial intelligence
  research," Chicago.
        578    Bibliography

Schneider, D. M., and J. M. Roberts, 1956, Zuni kin terms. Monograph I,
  Notebook No. 3, Laboratory of Anthropology, University of Nebraska,
  Lincoln, Neb.
Schutz, Alfred, I 962. In Maurice Nateson (ed.), Collected papers I: the problem
  of social reality, p. 76. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
- - - , 1964, Making music together. In Arvid Broderson (ed.), Collected papers
   II: studies in social theory. The Hague: Marti nus Nijhoff.
- - - , 1966, Studies in phenomenological philosophy. In Ilse Schutz (ed.),
   Collected papers II I: studies in phenomenological philosophy. The Hague:
   Martinus Nijhoff.                            ·
- - - , 1967, The phenomenology of the social world. Chicago: Northwestern
   University Press.
Scott, Charles T., 1965, Persian and Arabic riddles: a language-centered ap-
   proach to genre definition. The Hague: Mouton. [Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana
   University Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore and Linguistics Publi-
   cation 39], [International Journal of American Linguisitcs 31 :4.]
Searle, John R., 1969, Speech acts: an essay in the philosophy of language. New
   York: Cambridge University Press.
Sebeok, Thomas A. (ed.), 1960, Style in language. Cambridge, Mass.: M.l.T.
   Press.
Sebeok, Thomas A.; Alfred S. Hayes; and Mary Catherine Bateson (eds.), 1964,
   Approaches to semiotics. The Hague: Mouton.
Seitel, Peter, 1971, An ethnographic report of one aspect of proverb usage among
   the Haya of Tanzania. Manuscript.
Seitel, Sheila, 1969, Ethnography of communication in four African societies. In
   Working Paper no. 16, Studies of Interaction. Language Behavior Research
   Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley.
 Sherzer, Joel, 1967, An ethnography of communication of the Abipon. M.A.
    thesis, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania (published in French as La
    parole chez /es Abipone. L'Homme 10 (1970):42-76).
 Shuy, R., W. A. Wolfram, W. K. Riley, 1969, Met hods for the analysis of social
    dialect. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics.
 Silverberg, William, 1940, On the psychological significance of Du and Sic. The
    Psychoanalytic Quarterly 9:509-525.
 Simmons, Donald C., 1958, Cultural functions of the Efik tone riddie. Joumal of
   American Folklore 71:133-138.
 Sinclair, Angus, 1951, The conditions of knowing. London: Routledge.
 Skinner, B. F., 1957, Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton.
 Skinner, Quentin, 1970, Conventions and the understanding of speech acts. Philo-
    sopj1ical Quarterly 20 (79): 118-138.
 Slobin, D. I., I 963, Some aspects of the use of pronouns of address in Yiddish.
     Word 19: 193-202.
 - - - , A field manual for cross-cultural study of the acquisition of com-
     municative competence. University of California, Berkeley. (A.S.U.C. Book-
     store.)
 Smith, Frank, and George A. Miller, 1966, The genesis of language. Cambridge,
     Mass.: M.I.T. Press.
 Snyder, Gary, 1969, Earth household: technical notes and queries to fellow
     Dlwnna revolutionaries. New York: New Directions.
 Sonnino, Lee A., 1968, A handbook to sixteenth century rhetoric. London:
     Routledge.
                                                                    Bibliography     579

              Soskin, W. F., and Vera John, 1963, The study. of spontaneous talk. In R. G.
                 Barker (ed.), The stream of behavior. New York: Appleton.
              Spoehr, A., 1947, Changing kinship systems. Anthropological Series, Chicago
                 Natural History Museum, vol. 33, no. 4.
              Stankiewicz, Edward, 1964, Problems of emotive language. In Thomas A.
                 Sebeok, Alfred S. Hayes, and Mary Cathe1ine Bateson (eds.), Approaches to
                 semiotics, pp. 239-264. The Hague: Mouton.
              Steinmann, Martin, Jr. (ed.), 1967, New rhetorics. New York: Scribner.
             Steinzor, B., 1949, The development and evaluation of a measure of social in-
                 teraction. Human relations 2:103-122, 319-347.
             Stephan, F. F., and E. G. Mischler, 1952, The distribution of participation in
                 small groups: an exponential approximation. American Sociological Review
                 17:598-608.
             Stewart, W. A. 1964, Urban Negro speech: sociolinguistic factors affecting
                 English teaching. In R. Shuy (ed.), Social dialects and language learning.
                 Champaign, Ill.: National Council of Teachers of English.
             - - - , 1967, Sociolinguistic factors in the history of American Negro dialects.
                The Florida FL Reporter 5, 2: 1-4.
             Stirling, Paul, 1953, Social ranking in a Turkish village. British Journal of Sociol-
                ogy 4:31-44.
             Strauss, Anselm, and Leonard Schatzmann, 1955, Cross-cultural interviewing: an
                analysis of interaction and communicative styles. Human Organization 14,
                2:28-31.                                                                    '
             Stross, Brian, 1964, Waiter-to-cook speech in restaurants. Term paper, Speech
                1608, University of California, Berkeley.
             Sturtevant, Wm., 1964, Studies in ethnoscience. American Anthropologist 66, 3,
                pt. 2.
             Sutton-Smith, Brian, and John M. Roberts, 1964, Rubrics of competitive behav-
                ior. Journal of Genetic Psychology I 05: 13-37.
             Sutton-Smith, Brian, John M. Roberts, and Robert M. Kozelka, 1963, Game
                involvement in adults. Journal of Social Psychology 60: 15-30.
            Sutton-Smith, Brian, and John M. Roberts, 1967, Studies ofan elementary game
               of strategy. Genetic Psychology Monographs 75:3-42.
            Sutton-Smith, Brian, John M. Roberts, and B. G. Rosenberg, 1964, Sibling associ-
               ation and role involvement.Merrill-Palmer Quarterly of Behavior and Develop-
               ment 1:25-38.
            Swartz, Marc J ., 1960, Situational determinants of kinship terminology. South-
               western Journal of Anthropology 16:393-397.
            Tanner, Nancy, 1967, Speech and society among the Indonesian elite: a case
               study of a multilingual community. Anthropological linguistics 9, pt. Ill: 15-40.
            Trager, George L., 1958, Paralanguage: a first approximation. Studies in
               Linguistics 13: 1-12. [Reprinted in Dell Hymes (ed.), Language in cultllre and
               society, 274-279, with bibliography. New York: Harper & Row, 1964.]
            Trager, George L., and Henry Lee Smith, Jr., 1951, An outline of English struc-
               ture. Studies in Linguistics, Occasional Papers, 3. Norman, Okla.: Battenburg
               Press. [Reprinted by the Americaq Council of Learned Societies, Washington,
               o.c., 1956-1957.]
            Tulisano, R., and J. T. Cole, 1965, Is terminology enough? American A nthropol-
               ogist 67:747-748.
            Turner, G., and B. Mohan, 1971, A linguistic description and compwer pro-
        /      gram for children's speech. London: Routledge.
/
    /


                                                                                                     J
        580    Bibliography

Tylor, Edward B., 1871, Primitive culture. London: John Murray.
Tyler, Stephen A., 1964, Koya kinship: the relation between roles and behavior.
  Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif.
- - - , 1965, Koy a language morphology and patterns of kinship behavior. A mer-
  ican Anthropologist 67: 1428-1440.
- - - , 1966, Context and variation in Koya kinship terminology. American
  Anthropologist 68:693-707.
- - - , 19_67, Formal analysis of Koya kinship terminology. Emeneau Felicita-
  tion Volume (Edited by B. H. Krishnamurty). Poona, India: Linguistic Society
  of India.
- - - , 1969, Cognitive anthropology. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
   Inc.
Urban, Wilbur M., 1939, Language and reality. New York: Macmillan.
Veron, E., C. E. Sluzki, F. Korn, A. Kornblit, and R. Malfe, 1965, Com-
  munications and neurosis. Buenos Aires: University of Buenos Aires Institute
  Sociologia.
Wallace, Anthony F. C., I 961, The psychic unity of human groups. In Bert
  Kaplan (ed.), Studying personality cross-culturally, pp. 129-164. New York:
   Harper & Row.
Wallace, A. F. C., and John Atkins, 1960, The meaning of kinship terms. Ameri-
   can Anthropologist 62:58-'-80.
Wallace, David, 1905, The Russian empire. 2 vols. New York: Henry Holt.
Watson, Jeanne, and R. J. Potter, 1962, An analytic unit for the study of interac-
   tion. Human Relations 15:245-263.
Watson, 0. Michael, and T. D. Graves, 1966, Quantitative research in proxemic
   behavior. American Anthropologist 68:971-985.
Webster's third new international dictionary, 1967. Springfield, Mass.: G. & C.
   Merriam Company.
Weinreich, Uriel, 1953, Languages in contact. Linguistic Circle of New York.
- - - , 1963, On the semantic structure of language. In Joseph H. Greenberg
    (ed.), Universals of language, pp. 114-171. Cambridge, Mass.: M.l.T. Press.
 - - - , 1968, Semantics and semiotics. / nternational encyclopedia of the social
    sciences 14:164-169. New York: Macmillan.
 Weinreich, Uriel, William Labov, and Marvin Herzog, I 968, Empirical founda-
    tions for a theory of language change. In W. Lehmann (ed.), Proceedings of the
    Texas Conference 011 Historical Linguistics, pp. 97-195. Austin: University of
    Texas Press.
 Wheeler, Alva, 1967, Grammatical structure in Siona discourse. Lingua
    19:60-77.
 Whitely, W. H., 1966, Social anthropology, meaning, and linguistics. MAN
    J:139-157.
 ___, (ed.), 1971, Language use and social change. London: Oxford.
 Whiting, Beatrice Blyth (ed.), 1963, Six cultures: studies in child rearing. New
    York: Wiley.
 Whiting, John W. M., and Irving L. Child, 1953, Child training and personality: a
    cross-cultural study. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
 Who,f, Benjamin, I 957, Language, thought, and reality: selected writings of Ben-
   jamin Lee Who1f(edited by John B. Carroll). Cambridge, Mass.: M.l.T. Press.
 Wilkinson, R. J., 1932, A Malay-English dictionary (Romanized). Mytilene,
    Greece.
 Williams, Frederick, 1969, Psychological correlates of speech characteristics: on
                                                            Bibliography    581

           sounding "disadvantaged." Institute for Research on poverty, University of
           Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. Typescript.
         Williams, Thomas R., 1963, The form and function ofTambunan Dusun riddles.
           Joumal of Arnerican Folklore 76:95-110.
         Withers, Carl, and Sula Benet, 1954, The American riddle book. New York:
           Abelard-Schuman.
         Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1953, Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
         Wolfram, Walter A., 1969, A sociolinguistic description of Detroit Negro speech.
           Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics.
         - - - , I 970, The Detroit dialect survey. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied
           Linguistics.




     I
 J
_/
                          Name Index
                Abasolo-Domingo, Maria, 193                  Blom, Jan-Petter, 15, 21, 25, 30, 39,
                Abrahams, Roger, 50, I 09, 132, 134,              61, 81,215,233,241,242,245,
                    162, 165, 173, 181                            248,249,250,271,304,407-433,
                Agar, Michael, 109                                435,436,446,450,473,514,515
                Aksakov, Sergej, 281, 300                    Bloomfield, Leonard, 3-4, 5, 54, 326,
                Albert, Ethel, 16, 17, 24, 25, 27,                520
                    72-105, 409, 424                         Blum, Alan, 346n
                Arewa, E., 66, 134                           Boas, Franz, 6,275,515
                Arth, Malcolm J., 182n, 186                  Bock, Philip K., 444
                Atkins, John, 254                            Boese, R., 383
                Auld, F., 244                                Bolinger, Dwight, 185, 358n
                Austin, J. L., 51                            Bott, E., 22, 489n
                Ausubel, Nathan, 377n                        Bradburn, Norman M., 157
                Ayoub, Milla, 247                            Brandis, W., 465,491
                                                             Braunshausen, Nicolas, 443-444,
                Babbitt, E. H., 519,536                           48911
                Bach, Adolf, 3, 5                            Brent, S. B., 238
                Bach, Emmon, 10                              Bright, J. 0., 112
                Bacon, Margaret K., 191                      Bright, William, 112, 436
                Bales, R. F., 350, 372                       Brosin, Henry, 38511, 387n, 391
                Baratz, Joan C., 161                         Brown, Roger, 20,169,218,221,225,
                Barber, Carrol, 442                               230,232,270,275,278,280,300
                Barker, G. C., 442, 452                      Bruce, R. I., 459
                Barnes, John A., 418,433,468                 Brudner, Lilyan, 457
                Barry, Herbert, III, 191                     Bruner, Edward M., 254
                Barth, Fredrik, 16, 30, 54,407, 419,         Buchler, Ira R., 271
                     423, 454-464,499                        Biihler, Karl, 51
                Bascom, William R., 504                      Bulatao, Jaime, 193
                Basgoz, Ilhan, 134n                          Burke, Kenneth, 51, 54, 62, 307
                Basso, Keith, 40                             Burmeister, Edwin, 184
                Bateson, Gregory, 214,305, 385n,             Burton, Roger V., 159
                     38711, 388,389,467                      Burtt, H. E., 349
                Bateson, Mary C., 384                        Bush, Robert R., 182n
                Bauman, Richard, 50, 109
                Beardsley, Monroe, 321n                      Calame-Griaule, Genieve, 50, 73
                Bellugi, Ursula, 238                         Cansever, Gocke, 157, 158
                Ben-Amos, Dan, 65                            Capell, A., 232
                Benet, Sula, 199                             Cazden, Courtney, 384
                Berardo, F. M., 489n                         Chatman, Seymour, 215
                Berger, Peter, 70n, 71                       Chekhov, Anton, 274
                Bergler, L., 350                             Child, Irving L., 49n, 191
                Berlyn, D. E., 183, 184                      Chomsky, Noam, 8, 9, 10, 28, 49, 66,
                Bernstein, Basil, 21-22, 25, 30, 31, 36,         70,239,304,305,382,466,471,
                    47,49,73,225,409,432,456,                    475
                    465-497,514,515                          Christiansen, Hallfried, 411, 413
                Bettelheim, Bruno, 159                       Cicourel, Aaron, 15, 22, 383, 407n
                Birdwhistell, Ray, 27, 28, 381-404           Cohen, Percy S., 7011
        (
            /
    (

/                                                          583
          584   Name Index

Colby, Benjamin, 301                        Firth, J. R., 11, 40, 244
Cole, J. T., 253                            Fisher, John L., 3, 19, 31, 37, 235, 254,
Condon, William, 383,387,389, 396                498-511, 516
Conklin, Harold, 107, 268, 272              Fishman, Joshua, 15, 30, 241, 300n,
Cook,Jenny, 22,465,466,485                       435-453,455
Corpuz, Onofre, 194                         Fock, Niels, 61
Crittenden, Kathleen, 309                   Foote, N. N ., 489n
Crystal, David, 384                         Ford, Marguerite, 218, 221,225, 232,
                                                 270
Dahl, V., 300                               Forman, Michael, 27, 180-209, 470
Dalby, David, 64, 163                       Fox, J. R., 54
Dames, M. L., 459                           Frake, C. 0., 15, 17, 24, 27, 60, 61,
Dance, Frank S. W., 384                          106-129, 131,185,186,194,195,
D'Andrate, Roy, 253                              253,254,268,301,302,327,329,
Darnell, Regna, 27, 37                           436
Day, David, 248                             Frank, Y. A., 519
Dennis, Wayne, 49n                          Freeze, R., 271
De Yoo, George, 159                         Frey, J. William, 441
Diebold, A. R., 234                         Friedrich, Paul, 20, 27, 28, 37,215,
Dikeman, Bessie, 246                             226,235,248, 270-300,425
Dohrenwend, Bruce P., 442                   Fries, Charles C., 19, 185
Dollard, J., 244                            Friesen, Wallace, 383, 384
Dostojevsky, Fedor, 274,275,279,            Fromm-Reichmann, Frieda, 38511,
    281, 292-294, 295,296,297,300                38711, 390,391
Douglas, Jack, 348
Douglas, Mary, 497
Drach, Kerry, 240                           Galanter, E., 9
Duncan, Hugh, 309                           Gardner, Peter M., 40, 472
Dundes, Alan, 17, 27, 66, 130-160,          Garfinkel, Harold, 15, 22, 27, 28, 36,
    162, 181, 184n, 186n, 328                    64,73, 108, 163,301-324,325,
Durkheim, Emile, 5, 30,367,476                   34611, 352,446
du Toit, Brian M., 186n                     Garvin, Paul L., 10, 49, 50011, 504
Dyen, Isidore, 500n                         Gauchat, L., 519
                                            Gayton, Ann H., 47
  Ebeling, Gerhard, 308                     Geertz, C., 19, 235
  Edelman, Martin, 448-450                  Geoghegan, William, 37,212,214,
  Edmond, E., 4                                  218,219,224, 22511,231, 252,
  Eggan, Dorothy, 4911                           253
  Ekman, Paul, 383, 384                     Georges, R. A., 18411, 186n
; Ervin, Susan, 248                         Gillieron, 4, 6
  Ervin-Tripp, Susan, 16, 21, 27, 28, 36,   Gilman, A., 20,225,275,278,280,
      58,66, 131, 163,213-250,268,               300n
      271,327,382,417,421,440n,             Goffman, Erving, 15, 182, 34611, 348,
      444,473,514                                350,351,368,372,384,407,409,
  Eslao, Nena B., 19311                          432,455
  Evans, I. H. N ., 198                     Gogol, Nikolai, 274,275,281,
                                                 288-289, 295,296,300
 Faris, James, 48, 109                      Goldstein, H., 309
 Fay, Percival, 275                         Goldthorpe, J., 49311
 Ferguson, Charles, 10, 11, 19, 24, 43,     Goodenough, Ward H., 16, 28,108,
     63,240,438                                  231,232,272,304,444,504
                                                             Name Index     585

          Gorki, Maxim, 274,279,284,286,          Hockett, Charles F., 382, 38511, 38711,
              289-290, 296, 297-298, 300              390,391,392,401,402,403,520
          Graves, T. D., 64                       Hoffmann, Hans, 18211
          Greenburg, Joseph, 43,185,510           Hogan, Helen Marie, 38, 39, 51, 73
          Greenfield, Lawrence, 445-448           Hollensteiner, Mary, 193
          Greimas, A.G., 384                      Homans, G. C., 237
          Grimshaw, Allen, 182                    Howell, Richard W., 19, 20, 224-225,
    I.    Gross, Feliks, 444
          Guiraud, Pierre, 215,500
                                                      232,235, 271,40711
                                                  Hubbell, A. F., 519
    i     Gumperz, John J., 15, 16, 18, 19, 20,
              21,24,25,30,39,54,55,61,63,
                                                  Hyman, Herbert H., 185
                                                  Hymes, Dell H., IO, 13, 16, 17, 18, 24,
    '         72, 163,179,214,215,233,234,            26, 27, 35-71, 163,164,182, 185,
              241,242,245,248,249,250,                218,219,221,225,231-232,235,
    A         25111,252,255,268,271,304,              238,240,244,254,268,272,349,
    i         329,349,407-433,435,436,438,
              44011,444,446,450,455,457,
                                                      379,384,421,432,452,457,467,
                                                     471,472,473,475,50011,503,

    I
    '
              467,473,499,514,515,538
          Gunter, R., 329
          Gupta,J. Das, II, 16
          Guthrie, George, 193
                                                     516,517

                                                  Ingham, John Michael, 155, 159
                                                  Irvine, Judith Temkin, 40n
                                                  lsachenko, A. V., 273, 300
          Hakulinen, A., 475n                     Israel, R. H., 309
          Haley, J., 214
          Hall, Edward, 388                       Jaberg, Karl, 3
          Halle, Morris, IO, 214,239,382,517,     Jackson, Don D., 214
                518,537                           Jackson, Hughlings, 468
          Halliday, Michael A. K., IO, 17,216,    Jain, Dhanesh, 272
                329                               Jakobson, Roman, 40, 51,213,273,
          Hammel, Eugene, 25111, 252                   295,514
          Hampshire, Stuart, 308                  Jesperson, Otto, 275
          Hanson, D., 482                         John, Vera, 51, 238, 245, 384
         Hare, A. P., 308                         Johnson, N. A., 309
         Harms, Robert T., 10                     Joos, M., 8, 57, 235
         Harrah, David, 31311                     Joseph, Sister Miriam, 51
         Harris, Marvin, 38711                    Kafka, Franz, 36211
         Hart, Donn V., 18411, 191, 194, 195      Kantorovich, V., 227-228, 247, 249
         Hassan, Ruquaiya, 17, 22, 325, 465       Kaspar, Walter, 308
         Haugen, Einer, 10, 11,326, 407n,         Katz, Evelyn, 238, 244, 245
               44011                              Keesing, F. M. and M. M., 48, 50
         Hawkins, P., 47511, 47811                Kendon, Adam, 18211
         Haxthausen, August von, 273              Key, Mary, 384
         Henderson, Dorothy, 465,466, 475n,       Kiparsky, Paul, 348
               49111                              Kjolseth, J. R., 243
         Henrie, Samuel N., 163                   Klima, E. S., 236
         Hermann, M. E., 519                      Kloss, Heinz, 448
         Hertzler, J. 0., 4311                    Kochman, Thomas, 132, 133, 162,
         Herzog, Marvin, 7011, 512                    163, 165, 171, 174
         Hilger, Sister Inez, 45                  Koenig, Fredrick, 18211, 184
         Hill, Richard, 309                       Kohl, Herbert, 214
         Hill, Trevor, 457                        Kostomarov, V. G., 249




i                                                                                           J
         586    Name Index

Kozelka, Robert M., 18211, 183, 187n         Marsden, G., 244
Kramer, M., 309, 310                         Martin, Samuel, 20, 232, 272
Kreidler, Charles, 513, 538                  Martinet, Andre, 516,518,537,539
Kroeber, Alfred L., 41, 278                   Mascall, E. L., 308
Kurath, Hans, 519                             Mayer, Philip, 155
                                              Mead, Margaret, 47-48, 50, 388, 472
LaBarre, Weston, 384                          Meillet, Antoine, 5 17
 Labov, William, 12, 19, 22, 25, 30, 3 l,     Merleau-Ponty, M., 71
      37,'54, 7011, 132, 133, 161, 173,       Messinger, John C., 42
      181,212,236-237,240,250,308,            Metcalf, George J., 214, 270
      329,408,415,467,468,499,                Metzger, Duane, 268, 38711
      50011, 512-537, 538-539                 Meyers, George C., 184
 Lambert, Wallace, 12, 18011, 21311,          Miller, D., 492
      228-230                               . Miller, G. A., 59
 Landis, M. H., 349                           Miner, Horace M., 159
 Lanham, Richard, 51                          Mishler, E. G., 351
  Leach, Edmund, 254, 407                     Mitchell-Kernan, Claudia, 17, 18, 27,
 Leach, Jerry W., 130                              161-179,499
  Leary, T., 244                              Moerman, Michael, 16, 73, 34611, 348,
  Lefebvre, Henri, 70, 71, 308                     349,357,455
  Lermontov, Mikhajl, 279,286,                Morgenstierne, Georg, 454, 457
      287-288, 295,300                        Morris, Charles, 51
  Leroy-Beaulieu, Anatole, 273                Moulton, William A., 537
  Levi-Strauss, Claude, 515                   Murdock, George P., 189
  Levine, B., 215
  Lewis, B., 47511                           Nahirny, Vladimir C., 441
  Lieberson, Stanley, 438, 448               Neuman, Stanley S., 19, 39, 47,235,
  Loban, W., 47811                               238
  Lockwood, D., 49311                        Neustupny, Jiri, 54, 272
· Lounsbury, F. G., 254                      Nurge, Ethel, 19n
  Lowie, R. H., 46, 4711, 50                 Nydegger, William F. and Corinne,
  Lowman, Guy, 521                               193n
  Lynch, Frank, 193                          Nye, F. I., 489n

 McCawley, James, 57                         Oakeshott, M., 349
 McDavid, R., Jr., 519                       Ogden, C. K., 51
 Mcllwraith, T. F., 44, 50                   Ozkok, Bora, 130, 13411
 McIntosh, Angus, 10, 216                    Oztiirk, Orhan M., 157, 159
 Mackey, William F., 44011, 444
 Macnamara, John, 35                         Parnin, Brice, 43n
 McNeill, D., 229                            Parker, Patricia, 246
 McQuown, Norman, 27511, 382, 385,           Parsons, Talcott, 493n
     386,390,396                             Passin, Herbert, 253, 271
 MacRae, Donald, 70n                         Paulhan, Jean, 133
 Mahl, G. F., 383                            Pehrson, Robert N., 457
 Mak, Wilhelm, 441                           Perelman, Charles, 371 n
 Malay, Paula C., 194                        Petrovich, Gajo, 70
 Malinowski, Bronislaw, 28, 40, 51, 64,      Pfuderer, Carol, 246
     476                                     Phelan, John L., 194
 Malkiel, Yakov, 516, 518                    Philips, Susan, 214
 Manuel, E. Arsenio, 195                     Pierce, Joe E., 157
                                                       Name Index      587

 Pike,KennethL.,5, 19,51,58, 185,            Schegloff, Emanuel A., 14, 17, 27, 28,
      308,418                                      131,301,309,326, 346-380
 Pilch, Herbert, 5 17                        Schmidt-Rohr, Georg, 441, 442
 Pitcher, E. G., 330n                        Schneider, David M., 25111, 252, 254
 Pitt-Rivers, Julian, 285, 30011             Schutz, Alfred, 308
 Polgar, Steven A., 214                      Scott, Charles T., 184n, 186n
 Pool, I., 244                               Searle, John R., 17, 51,218
 Post, Emily, 221                            Sebok, Thomas A., 10,215, 384
 Postal, Paul, 309,514,515,516               Seitel, Peter, 73, 133
 Potter, Charles F., l 8611                  Seitel, Sheila, 38
 Potter, R. J., 17, 247, 349                 Sherzer, Joel, 27, 37, 51, 66, 68, 69
 Prelinger, E., 33011                        Sholokhov, Mikhajl, 274, 300
 Pribham, R., 9                              Shuy, Roger, 12, 161
 Pride, J. B., 457                           Silverberg, William, 28411
 Priestly, J. B., 349                        Simmons, Donald C., 18611
 Pushkin, Aleksander, 282, 297, 300          Sinclair, Angus, 308
                                             Skinner, B. F., 51
 Quirk, Randolph, 384                        Skinner, Quentin, 245, 309
                                             Slobin, Dan, 38, 50, 51, 161, 21211,
                                                  226,230
Ramamijan, A. K., 14,416                    Smith, Henry Lee, Jr., 382,387, 390,
Redard, G., 454                                   397
Reichel-Dolmatoff, Alicia, 45               Smith, Robert J., 442
Rensky, Miroslav, 384                       Snyder, Gary, 64
Revill, P. M., 62                           Sologub, Fjodor, 284, 300
Richards, I. A., 51, 307                    Sonnino, Lee A., 51
Riesenberg, S. H., 504                      Soskin, William F., 238, 245
Roberts, John M., 27, 180-209, 470          Spoehr, A., 254
Romney, A. K., 253, 25811, 259              Stankiewicz, Edward, 500
Rona, Jose Pedro, 438                       Steinmann, Martin, Jr., 215
Rosenberg, B. G., 18211                     Steinzor B., 351
Rubin, Joan, 39, 232, 438                   Stephen, F. F., 351
                                            Stewart, W. A., 11, 161
 Sachs, Harvey, 17, 18, 27, 28, 37, 132,    Stirling, Paul, 157
     163,249,250,301,307,309,               Strauss, Anselm, 4 72
     325-345,34611,348,350,356,             Strevens, Peter, 10, 216
     360n, 363,365,378,379                  Stross, Brian, 239, 247
Sachs, Jacqueline, 250                      Sturtevant, William, I 07, 30 I
Salisbury, R. F., 39, 457                   Sutton-Smith, Brian, 180n, 18211, 183,
Saltykov-Shchedrin, M. E., 281, 282,              184, 18711, 196, 206
     283,297,300                            Swanson, G. E., 492
Samarin, William, 7, 40, 42, 73, 185        Swartz, Marc J., 254
Sankoff, Gillian, 38
Santos, Angeles S., 196                     Tanner, Nancy, 38, 232
Sapir, Edward, 6, 7, 18, 28, 40, 62, 181,   Tausig, T., 383
     275,309,326,347,382,396,472,           Taylor, S., 47511
    476, 512-513, 515                       Thompson, Wayne, 18211, 184
Sarles, Harvey, 38711                       Tolstoy, Leo, 274,276,278,280,283,
de Saussure, Ferdinand, 5                       286, 290-292, 296,297,300
Schatzmann, Leonard, 472                    Trager, George L., 382,387,390, 391,
Scheflen, A. E., 383, 388, 393                  392,397,401,402
        588   Name Index

Tucker, Richard, 213n               Weakland, J., 214
Tulisano, R., 253                   Weinreich, Uriel, 10, 54, 70n, 185,
Turner, G., 22, 465                     326,4401!, 512
Tyler, Edward B., 20, 27, 28, 50,   Wheeler, Alva, 329
    66, 71                          Whiting,John W. M., 159, 187, 336n,
Tyler, Stephen A., 232,249, 250,        340n
     251-269, 301                   Whorf, Benjamin A., 7,40, 57,275,
                                        471, 494-495
Urban, Wilbur M., 43n               Wilkinson, R. J., 117n
                                    Williams, Frederick, 163
Veron, E., 244                      Williams, Gerald, 269
Vigotsky, L. S., 476                Williams, Thomas R., 186n, 193, 198
                                    Withers, Carl, 199
Waletsky, Joshua, 329               Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 308
Wallace, Anthony F. C., 254         Wolfram, Walter A., 12, 161
Wallace, David, 273, 304
Watson, Jeanne, 247, 349            Zlatovratsky, N. N., 274,278,281,
Watson, 0. Michael, 64                  283,284,285,296,300
    I               Subject Index
    I
          Ad hoeing, 302-303, 304, 312-315                  234,241,242,243,414,435-450,
          Address, rules of, 214, 216, 218-230,             455,456
               270-300                                  Body motion (see Kines)
             comparative studies, 223-230               Boundaries, ethnic, 455
            and deference, 232, 234                     Burundi, speech behavior in, 72-105
            and identity, 221-222
            and rank, 22 l, 23 2
            and status-marked situations,               Categorization device, 328, 332-335
               220-221                                  Category-bound activities, 328,
            two-choice system, 225-230                        335-338
            See also Speaking, rules of                 Chaining, 343-344, 369, 379
          Adaptors, 383                                 Characterization, 176
          Address, terms of, 254, 358, 359, 361,        Cigarette lighting, interactional,
               362                                            384-385, 387,389,395,403
         Address systems, typologizing                  Circumcision, related to Turkish verbal
               properties of, 230                            dueling rhymes, 157-159
         Affective displays, 383                        Code, folklore as, 134
          Afro-American speech, 161-179                 Code selection, 172, 175,430
            artistic component of, 164                  Code switching, 479, 494-495, 496
         Allokines (see Kinemes)                          metaphorical, 409, 424-434, 450
         Allo-locales, 44411                              in Norway, 407-434
         Allophones, 19,412,415, 500-501                  situational, 409, 424-434
         Allo-topics, 444n                                See also Shifting within discourse
         Alternating context, 388                       Codes, 63,163,175,176,179,
         Alternation, 213-250, 251-269, 381,                 240-241, 438
              409,499                                     commuilication, 465-497
           lexical, 256-263                                 and educability, 480-481
           metaphoric, 216                                   social origins of, 473-477,
           rules of, 408, 466                                  479-480
           types of, 255-256                                 and social roles, 477-497
         American kinesic system, 387-404                 communicative, 327
         Analysis, situational, 444-445                   concept, 474
         Appeals, 485-490                                elaborated, 22, 23, 31, 47-49, 50,
         Availability to interact (see Talk,                   465-497 passim
              availability to)                              and cross-cultural communication,
                                                               467
                                                            defined,474
         Baluch tribal organization (see Tribal             person and object oriented, 470,
              organization, Baluch)                            489-490
         Behavior, demonstrative, 388                    interaction, 390
           instrumental, 387-388                         linguistic, 22, 30, 108, 109, 164, 382,
           interactional, 388-389                            \ 408, 414-418
           primate, 384                                     change of, 26, 29-31
           visible communicative (see Signals,              consequences of change of
              nonverbal)                                       habitual, 494-495
         Bidialectalism, IO, 12, 163, 175                   as creators of social identity,
         Bilingualism, IO, 12, 13, 38,163,233,                 494-495

                                                  589

    .!

L
         590    Subject Index

Codes (co11ti11ued)                          Consistency rules, 328, 333-334, 337
     relation to content and function,       Consonant clusters, 506-510
         163                                   functional load of, 507-508
     variance in, 26                           intracultural variation in uses of,
  restricted, 22, 23, 31, 47-49, 50,              505-506
         465-497 passim                        possible universal expressive value
     defined,474                                  of types of, 506-507
     person and object oriented,             Context, 251-269
         489-490                               alternating, 388
      simplification and rigidity of           as control upon syntactic and lexical
         syntax of, 475-476                        selection, 466
Coding instructions, following,                 of situation, 11
      310-315                                Conversation
Communication, content in, 13 I                 natural, 325,328,346, 381
   cross-cultural, 467                          single focus in, 350
   ethnography of, 130                       Contractions, 238
   ethnology of, 349                         Conversation sequence, coordinated
   nonverbal (see Signals, nonverbal)              entry into, 350,356, 366-367,
   overt topic in, 131                             370,371,373,378,379
   phatic, 244                                Conversational openings, sequencing
   study of, in ethnically diverse                 in, 346-380
      societies, 383                          Conversations, alternating sequencing
   vertical, 462                                    in two party, 350
Communication codes (see Codes,               Co-occurrence, 213-250
       communication)                            behavioral, 442
 Communication problems,                         patterns of, 418
       cross-cultural, 327                       rules of, 21, 233-235, 381,408,
 Communication process, social and                  429-430,431,433
       linguistic factors involved in, 409    Creativity, rule-governed, 28
 Communication systems, 468-469,              Creoles, 3, 11, 12-13
       474                                    Cues, paralinguistic (see Paralinguistic
    closed, 483-484, 489, 492                        cues)
    open,482-483,489                          Culture as background knowledge,
 Communicative acts, analysis of, 348                163, 328-329
 Communicative goal (see Function)
 Communicative intent (see Function)          Decision making, 481-482
 Communicative sequences, 326                 Deferrals, 363
 Communicative strategies, 163                Demonstratives, 388
 Complementary distribution, 3 86             Derivative suffixes, Koya and Telugu,
 Componential analysis, 252                       267-268
 Conditional relevance inferences made        Descriptions
        on basis of, 367-369                    constructing, 329
    property of immediate juxtaposition         identifying, 338-340
        of, 364, 365, 366                       problems in recognizing, 330-332
    in summons-answer sequences,              Devices, duplicatively organized, 334
        363-370, 371                               335
  Configurations, dominance (see              Di~ectboundaries, 3, 4, 5
        Dominance configurations)             Dialect questionnaires, 12
  Conflict, psychology of, 183-184            Dialect surveys, 2-5, 11
  Conflict enculturation, 183, 206-207        Dialect variables, 12
  Congruent situations, 445                   Dialectology, social, 12
                                                       Subject Index     591

     Dialects, 30, 63, 277-278                 new (see Ethnographic semantics)
       black (see Afro-American speech)        of speaking (see Speaking,
       English language, 161                      ethnography of)
       Norwegian, 411-434                    Ethnomethodology, 301-324
       social, 11-14                         Ethnophilosophy, I 05
     Di~ogue, 349-350, 371                   Ethnoscience (see Ethnographic
     Diglossia, 240-241                           semantics)
     Discourse, categories of (see Folk      Etic categories, 8
          categories)                        Etic frameworks, 384
     Discussion, Yakan concept of, 114       Etic units, 5
     Distribution rule, 347, 349, 351-357,   Etic-emic distinction, 386
          370,371                            Etics, 49, 51
     Domains, 30, 435-453                    Event, social, 408, 423, 436
      construct validity of, 445-450
      defined,441-443                        Facial signs, 383
      education, 445-448, 451-452            Family role systems (see Role systems,
      employment, 445-448                        family)
      family, 443-444, 445-448               Family types, 469-497
      formal, 442                            Field elicitation techniques (see
      friendship, 445-448                         Fieldwork)
      governmental administration, 443       Fieldwork, 4, 5, 7-8, 10, 12, 13, 19, 22,
      intergroup, 442                             23-25,73,75,97-100, 185-186,
      at level of sociopsychological              411,413, 426-431, 513
         analysis, 442-443                   Folk categories, 100-102
      and locales, 444-445                   Folklore, 130, 132,133,134, 154-155,
      religions, 444, 445-448                     162, 176, 184, 37711
      and role relations, 443-444              ethnography of speaking, 134
      at societal-institutional level,       Folk themes (see Folklore)
          442-443                            Formulas for visiting, in Burundi,
     Dominance configurations, 441               79-81
     Duplicative organization, 328           Free variation, 398
                                             Function, 131,163,215,217,242,
     Economy rule, 333                           244-250, 382
     Educability, 465-497
       and communication codes, 480-481      Games of strategy, 187, 191
     Elaboration, 237                        Genres, verbal, 27, 180, 181,456
     Ellipsis, 237-238                       Gestural mapping, 388
     Emblems, 383                            Glossing, 307-309, 372
     Ernie categories, 8                     Grammar, 31
     Ernie units, 5, 6                         deep, 275
     Emics, 398                               generative, 8-10, 305
     Episodes, 215, 247-249                   transformational-generative, 304,
     Ethnic boundaries, 455                      382
     Ethnic processes, 454-464               Grammatical structures, 7, 8
     Ethnoepistemology, 72       !           Grammatical systems, 6
     Ethnographic description of speech,     Guilt, related to personal appeals, 488
          41-52
     Ethnographic diversity, 41              Hearer's maxim, 333, 334,337,347
     Ethnographic semantics, I 06-108,       Hesitations, 392
          301,327                            Homonymy, 254
     Ethnography, 301,303,305,306,407        Honor, principles of, 460
 J
,/
         592    Subject Index

Hypercorrection, 533-534, 535               Kinesics, 381-404
                                              macro shapes in, 396
Identity, 457                                 methodology of, 385
Idioms, 95, 108                               microanalysis in, 396
Illustrators, 383                           Kinship, 28, 251-269
Indexicality, 22-23                         Kinship terminology, 251-269, 298,
Indicator, 514                                  299
Instrumental behavior, 387-388              Kinship terms of address, 274
Interaction      ·                          Knowledge, social, 326
   function of, 244-250
   norms of, 348                            Language boundaries, 5, 454-464
   social, 413, 417-434                     Language community, 55, 326
   sociolinguistic study of, 28             Language development related to
   strategies of, 348                            social structure, 457-464
   synchrony and dissynchrony in, 389       Language distribution, 10, 11
Interactional behavior (see Behavior,       Language field, 55
      interactional)                        Language learning, ethnographers', 99
Interactional sequences, visual and         Language mastery (see Members)
      audio records in interpretation of,   Language mixture, 2, 241
      381,382,383,384-385,386,              Language profiles, 11
      395-396, 399                          Language reform, 11
 Interpretation, rules of, 28, 309, 328     Language situations, typology of,
 Interrogation, 185, 194                         10-11
   oral, 206, 208                           Language structure, 5, 6
   riddles as expressive models of,         Languages, 5, 29
       180-209                                classical, 11
 Intonation contours, 418                     classification of, 11, 43
 Isogloss bundles, 3, 5, 278                  creative uses of, 471
                                              function of, 503-504
Juncture, kinesic, 393-397                    local, 11
  double .bar, 393-394                        phonological systems of, 31
  double cross, 393-394                       and social life, interaction of, 35-71
  hold, 394                                   standard, 11
  single bar, 393-394, 395                    structural uniformity of, 13
  tie, 394                                  Law, ethnography of, 107
  triple cross, 393, 395                    Legal terms, Yakan, 117
                                            Lexicon, 31, 105,108,233,234,235
Kinemes, 385-386                            Linguist-informant elicitation (see
  stress, 385, 395-403                            Fieldwork)
Kinemorphemes, 386                          Linguistic analysis, 7
  suprasegmental, 385, 399                  Linguistic change, 70
Kinemorphic constructions, 395                embedding problem in, 514,518,
Kinemorphology, distributional                   524~525, 530-532
     qualities of units of, 386               evaluation problem in, 514, 518,
Kinemorphs, 386, 395                              525-526, 532-534
Kines, 385-386                                mechanism of, 512-537
Kinesic junctures (see Juncture,              self-evaluation at the root of, 514
     kinesic)                                 and social structure, 500, 509-511
Kinesic markers, 390                           strategy for the study of, 518-519
Kinesic stress phonemes, 396                   transition problem in, 514,518,
Kinesic system, American, 387-404                 521-524, 529


                                                                                       /
                                                          Subject Index   593

      Linguistic choice, meaning of, 407-           situated, 302
            434                                     social (see Social significance)
      Linguistic codes (see Codes,               Members, 304-305
            linguistic)                          Membership categorization device (see
     Linguistic competence, 9                          Categorization device)
     Linguistic constraints, 6                   Message, natural, 351
     Linguistic deprivation, 161                 Message from, related to content and
     Linguistic elicitation procedures (see           function, 179
            Fieldwork)                           Messages, 216, 244
     Linguistic expression, 178                  Metalinguistic responses, 173, I 79
     Linguistic form, 37                         Metaphor, 174, 175, 179, 199
     Linguistic innovations, 2-3                 Metaphorical switching (see Code
     Linguistic and kinesic                           switching, metaphorical)
           interdependence, 3 81-404            Microkinesic recording and analysis,
     Linguistic repertoires, 20-2 I, 38-41,           386
          215, 240-241                          Microsociolinguistics (see
     Linguistic signs, 37                             Macrosociolinguistics)
     Linguistic structure, social meaning in,   Mimicry, paralinguistic, 176
          407-434                               Mocking, I 76
    Linguistic values, 37                       Models, I 82-184
    Linguistic variable (see Variable,          Morphemes, grammatical, 234, 236
          linguistic)                           Morphological variation, 263-264
    Linguistics, 9, 40                          Morphology, 40, I 12
       behavioristic descriptive, 298           Morphophonemic alternation (see
       descriptive, 5-8, 9, 10, 302, 306             Sandhi, consonantal)
       paradigmatic and syntagmatic axes        Movement, illustrative, 388
         in, 212-213                            Movements, 388-389
       theoretical, 13, 29                      Multiculturalism, 162
    Linguists, 325, 328                         Multilingual speech communities (see
    Litigation                                       Speech communities, multilingual)
       Subanun concept of, I 28-129             Multilingualism, 162, 435-450, 47 I
       Yakan concept of, 106-129                  intergroup, 438
    Loan words, I I 7                           Myth, structural analysis of, 472
    Locales, 443, 444-445
    Logic, 75, 87, 88
                                                Negotiation, Yakan concept of, 115,
    Macrolinguistics, 435-453                        I 16-117, 120-121
    Macroparameters, 450-453                    Neo-grammarian hypothesis, 2
    Macrosemantics, 72                          New York City, study oflinguistic
    Mands, 217, 245-247                             changein,513-514,515,516,519,
    Marker, 514,535                                 526-537, 538-539
    Marking, 161,162,163,164, 176-179,          Nonterminality, 359-363, 364
        499                                     Nonverbal behavior (see Signals,
    Martha's Vineyard, study of linguistic          nonverbal)
       changein,514,516,519,521-526,            Nonverbal communication (see
       533                                          Signals, nonverbal)
    Meaning                                     Nonverbal signals (see Signals,
     apparent, I 73                                nonverbal)
     description of, 326                        Norms
     expressive, 499                             social, 326-327
     relation to sound of, 382                   viewer's use of, 339

(


J

                                                                                         r
          594    Subject Index

Norway, code-switching in, 407-434             Question-answer sequences (see
Nouns, as markers of social                        Sequences, question-answer)
   relationships, 325-326                      Questioning, expressive and
Now-coding, 468                                    non-expressive, 184
                                               Questions, borrowing properties of,
Obligation, principles of, 460                     375
Ordering, sequential, 340-345                    open-ended, 342-344, 378
                                               Quotation, direct, I 76
Parakinesic phenomena, 382, 390
Paralinguistic cues, I 72, I 79, 2 I 7, 240,   Rapping, 164, 171-172, 174
     270,272,298,467                           Reasoning, practical, 325
Pathan tribal organization (see Tribal         Reference, 333
     organization, Pathan)                       See also Semantics, proper
Patrilineal principles, 460                    Reference satisfactoriness, 3 3 3
Pauses, 351, 392                               Referential perspective, 303
Petition, forms of, in Burundi, 77-78          Referrent, 3 I 9
Phatic communication, 40                       Register, 63, 216
Phonemes, 6, I 9                               Regnone,245
  kinesic stress, 396                          Regulators, 383
Phonemic structures, 8                         Relevance, conditional (see
Phonemics, 298                                      Conditional relevance)
Phones, 19                                     Relevance rule, 333
Phonetic reality, 6                            Repertoire, linguistic, 408, 409, 438
Phonetic recording and analysis, 386             community, 411-434
Phonological process, and sound                Rhetoric, 75, 87, 88, 101-102
     sequence, 500                             Rhetorical device, 147
Phonological structures, 7                     Rhetorical strategy, folk, 134
Phonology, 8, 20, 31, 40, I 12,216,            Rhymes, verbal dueling, 130-160
     217,236,254,326                           Rhythmic-disrhythmic parakinesic
Pidgins, 2, 3, 12-i3, 30                            category, 385
Poetics, 7 5, 94                               Riddle involvement, theory of, 208
Ponapean, consonantal sandhi in,               Riddles, 180-209
     498-511                                     in American culture, I 99-205, 208,
Pragmatics, 4 I 7                                   209
Prague School, IO, 274, 292, 295                 and child-training practices, I 92,
Processes, ethnic, 454-464                          193,206
Pronominal breakthrough, 272,273,                competence with, 208
     287-298, 299                                and cultural complexity, 206
Pronominal sets, 298                             cultural history of, 205
Pronominal signals, 279                          cultures with and without, 188
Pronominal switching, 272,273,                   and games of strategy, 191, 202-203,
     287-298, 299                                   206,207
Pronominal usage, 270-300                         and high responsibility training, 206
Pronominalization, anaphoric, 238                 interest in, and attitudes toward oral
Pronunciation, intracommunity                        interrogation; I 99-203
     variation in, 4                              interest in, and nagging, 204-205,
Pronouns, possessive, 264-267                        206
Proverbs, I 33                                    and jurisdictional hierarchy, 189,
Proxemics, 388                                       191,206
Psycholinguistics, 59                             and levels of political integration,
Psychology, cognitive, 9                             189, 191,193,206
                                                    Subject Index   595

  metaphoric nature of, 199                Sequencing, alternating, in two party
  and oaths and ordeals, 190, 191, 206           conversations, 350
  and oral interrogation, 206, 207            in conversational openings, 346-380
  and oral questioning, 193, 205           Setting, 408,~22-423,436
  and oral socialization, 206              Shared agreement, 320
  patterns of, 205                         Shifting, situational, 215, 241-242
  and presence of domesticated             Shifting within discourse, 215,
     animals, 190-191, 206                       241-244, 249-250, 261
  in Tag:ilog culture, 186, 191-199           See also Code switching
Role relations, 443-444, 451               Sign functions, 314
Role structure, in Subanun litigation,     Sign language, deaf and dumb, 383
     129                                   Signaling, extralinguistic (see
Role systems                                     Paralinguistic cues)
  and communication codes, 481-484         Signaling across species, 384
 family, 482-497                           Signaling devices, 375
  open and closed, 468-469, 477-480        Signals
Roles, social, as coding activity, 474        interactional communicative, 389
Rule, conceptions of the notion of, 217,      nonverbal, 28, 3 81-404
    250                                         with direct verbal translation,
Rules                                              383
 context-sensitive, 252                    Significance, social (see Social
 of speaking (see Speaking, rules of)            significance)
Russian pronominal usage, 270-300          Signifying, 161, 162, 163, 164,
                                                 165-176
Sandhi, consonantal, 498-511                 artistic characteristics of, 173-176
  cultural significance of, 503            Signs, 319
  expressive omission of, 505-506             kinesic, 85, 102
   marked, 499                               linguistic, 3 7
  and phonetic economy, 508                  linked to bodily needs, 383
  rules for, 500-503                         paralinguistic, 85, 102
  unmarked, 498, 499                       Silence, studies of, 392
Semantic analysis, 326                     Simultaneous talk, 355-356
Semantic compression, 238                  Situation, social, 408, 423, 436
Semantic fields, delimitation of, 325      Situational analysis, 444-445
Semantic perspective, 303                  Situational shifting (see Shifting,
Semantics, 8, 112-117, 270-300                  situational)
  ethnographic, 301, 302                   Situational switching (see Code
  proper, 417-418                               switching, situational)
Sequence, conversation (see                Situations, congruent, 445
    Conversation sequence)                 Slang, 238
  temporal organization of the             Social control, and family types,
    opening, 363, 365                           484-485
Sequences, question-answer, 359,             modes of, 485-497
    364-365                                     imperative, 485-497. See also
  summons-answer, 347,348, 349,                    Appeals
       357-380                               resting upon appeals, 485-489, 490
    conditional relevance in, 363-370      Social fact, 367
    internal structure of, 363             Social identity and linguistic codes,
    nonterminality of, 359-363, 364             494-495
    repetitions in, 366, 369, 370          Social interaction, coordinated
    terminating rule in, 365-366                character of, 366




                                                                                    J
         596    Subject Index

Social meaning (see Social                        addressee, 60-61
     significance)                                addressor, 60-61
Social protest, language of, 493                  channels, 62-63
Social relationships and linguistic               forms of speech, 63
      structures, 409                             genres, 65
Social significance, 233, 417-418, 433,           hearer, 60-61
      434                                         key, 62
Social structure, cultural attitudes              message content, 60
      toward speech influenced by,                message form, 59-60
      503-504                                     norms of interaction, 63-64
Social systems, fundamental properties            norms of interpretation, 64
      of, 465                                      purposes-goals, 61-62
Social theory, 15-16                               purposes-outcomes, 61
Sociolinguistic analysis, 26                       scene, 60
Sociolinguistic concept, basic, 14-23              setting, 60
Sociolinguistic description, 52-53, 58             speaker, 60-61
Sociolinguistic restatement, 51                ethnological description of, 41-52
Sociolinguistic rules, 213-250                 expressive function of, 178
   integrated, 231-233                         fictional forms for factual data in,
 Sociolinguistic systems, 35, 164                 95-97
 Sociolinguistic value, 37                     indirect reference in, 93
 Sociolinguistic variables, 18-20, 24          in interaction, 28
 Sociolinguistics, 40-41                       literary form and literal truth in, 93
   correlation, 14                             movements tied to, 383
 Socialization, oral, 206                      referential function of, 178
   sociolinguistic approach to, 465-           respect patterns of, and role
       497                                         relativism in Burundi, 83-84
 Sound change, 514,516,518, 519-             Speech acts, 56-57, 60,215,216,
       537                                          242-243
 Sound sequence and phonological                analysis of, 348
       process, 500                             indirection in, 173
 Speaking, acts which regulate the act          style of, in Afro-American Speech,
       of, 383                                      164
    ethnography of, 37,108,303               Speech act neutralization, 246-247
       descriptive theory, 52-71             Speech area, 55
    form beyond grammar in, 303              Speech behavior, 102-104
    rules of, 36, 65-70, 304,320,               cultural patterning of, in Burundi,
          340-345                                   72-105
       in Burundi, 81-86                        dimensions of, among the Yakan,
       comparative studies, 127-129                 114-116
    ways of, 58, 315-321                         esthetic-emotive values in, 75, 76,
        indexical, 306                              91
        open-ended, 307                          learning, 98
        reflexive, 306                           patterns of, and cultural world view
  Speech, 5                                          and value system, 105
     amenities and conventions in                sampling and patterning, 104
        Burundi, 84-85                           study of, 13
     artificial, 409, 430                     Speech communities, 53-55, 303,309,
     Burundi, stylistic conventions in, 95           319,439,458-459, 513,516,519
     casual or unmarked, 65                      definition of, 16
     components of, 58-70                        diglossic, 446n, 452
                                                     Subject Index    597

   ecology of, 255                         Switching, role, 425-426, 476, 479
   multilingual, 438, 442                  Switching, rules for (see Shifting within
   studies of, 1-14                              discourse)
Speech differences, genesis and            Symbolism, social, 408, 417-418
     maintenance of, 21-23                 Symbols, I 08
Speech diversity, 38-41                       communicative, 15
Speech effort, 396                         Synchronic systems, 287
Speech events, 16-18, 21, 24.:...25, 27, • Synchrony, 383, 514
     62,65, 102,107,131,133,163,           Synonymy, 254
      165,166,252,307,421,451              Syntactic structuring, levels of, 9
  definition of, 56                        Syntax,8, 19,20,40, 105,216,217,
   segmentation in, I 09                         348
   selection and organization, 474         Systems, role (see Role systems)
  social context of, 276
  Subanun, 128                             Tagalog culture, riddles in, 186,
Speech field, 55                                  191-199,208-209
Speech flow, 397                           Talk, availability to, 362, 363, 370-
Speech forms, esthetic hierarchy of,              380
     93                                       constraints on, 378
   multiplicity of, 29                        simultaneous, 355-356
Speech learning, 473                          state of, 350
Speech network, 55                         Targeting, 372
Speech patterns, 26                        Taxonomic analysis, 8
  change in, 407                           Taxonomy, 41-43
Speech play, 130, 132                      Telephone conversation, 347, 349,
Speech situations, definition of, 56             351-357, 365, 370-371, 374,378
  semantic features of, 113-117            Terminological choice, 175
  social structural definitions of, 76     Terminologies, folk, 302
  types of, 76-81, 111                     Terminology, kinship (see Kinship
Speech skills, 456, 465-497                      terminology)
Speech socialization, 76-77, 230-231       Testing, expressive, 184
Speech styles, 57-58                       Texts, coherence of, 325
Sprechbund (see Speech area)               Then-coding, 468
Stereotype, 514                            Tickets, 344-345
Stereotypy, 390                            Titles, occupational, 357
Stories, children's, 325-345               Topics, 215,216,243,436,438,
Stress kinemes, 395-403                         440-441,442,443
Stress patterning, 398                     Translating, denotations for, 99-100
Structural analyisis (see Linguistics,     Tribal organization, 460-463
     descriptive)                          Trukese, consonantal sandhi in,
Structural reality, 6                           498-511
St0e, 215, 235-240                         Turkish dueling rhymes, 130-160
  literary, 101                            Typology, 307
  related to occupation, 239
Style shifting (see Shifting within        Values, 86-97
     discourse)                              ethnoepistemological, in Burundi,
Styleme, 235                                    86-88;. 100
Summoning, 361-362, 375-380                  logical and rethorical, in Burundi,
Summons-answer sequences (see                   88-89
     Sequences, summons-answer)             survival, of discretion and falsehood,
Switching, code (see Code switching)            in Burundi, 90-92
         598    Subject Index

Variables, linguistic, 21, 4 I 5, 514,   Verbal skills, duels as tests of, 152-
     518-537 passim                           156
Variants, means and ends, 489-490        Verbs, as markers of social
Varieties, 63                                relationships, 325-326
Verbal art, 173-176                      Vernaculars, 11, 30
Verbal dueling, 180,181,328              Vertical communication, 462
  cultural meaning in Afro-American      Viewer's maxim, 338-340, 347
     speech, 132, I 34                   Visible communicative behavior (see
  and signifying, 174, 175-176, 179          Signals, nonverbal)
Verbal dueling rhymes, 130-160           Vocabulary, borrowed, 250
  cultural meanings of, 156-160
  sequence of exchanges in, 134          Word morphology, 8
  strategy in, 134
                                         Word usage, intracommunity variation
 symbolic content of, l 32, 135- I 55
                                            in, 4
Verbal formulas, 103
Verbal interaction, 3-4, 28
 norms of, 456                           Yakan concept of litigation, 106-127
