

===== PAGE 1 =====

The Rise oMnthropological Theory

+—

e
@R

A History of Theories of Culture | Marvin Harris

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

Thomas Y. Crowell Company “

|
NEW YORK ESTABLISHED 1834


===== PAGE 2 =====

Copyright © 1968 by Thomas Y. Crowell Company, Inc.
All Rights Reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or
utilization of this work in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system is
forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.

L.C. Card 68-17392

ISBN o0-690-70322-8 (Text)

0-690-70323-6 (Trade)

Designed by Judith Woracek Barry. Manufactured in the United States
of America.

First Printing, May, 1968

Second Printing, May, 1969
Third Printing, August, 1970
Fourth Printing, April, 1971

Acknowledgments are gratefully made to the following authors and publishers
who have granted permission to use selections from copyrighted pub-
lications.

BOAS, F., Race, Language and Culture (New York: The Macmillan Company,
1940). Copyright © 1940 by Franz Boas.

pusors, c., ed., Lowie's Selected Papers in Anthropology (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1960).

DURKHEIM, k., The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, trans. J. W. Swain
(London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1915).

DURKHEIM, E., The Rules of Sociological Method, trans. S. Solovay and J. Mueller
(Glencoe, Tl.: The Free Press, 1938). Copyright © 1938 by George
Catlin.

FORDE, C. D., Habitat, Economy and Society (London: Methuen & Company, Ltd,;
New York: E.P. Dutton, Inc., 1934).
KROEBER, A., The Nature of Culture (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
1952). Copyright @ 1952 by The University of Chicago Press.
LEVI-STRAUSS, C., Totemism, trans. R. Needham (Boston: Beacon Press, 1963).
Copyright © 1962 by Presses Universitaires de France; translation copy-
right © 1963 by Beacon Press.

LOWIE, R., History of Ethnological Theory (New York: Farrar and Rinchart,
1937).

MURDOCK, G. P., Social Structure (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1949).
Copyright © 1949 by The Macmillan Company.

PIKE, K., With Heart and Mind (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Pub-
lishing Company, 1962).

RADCLIFFE-BROWN, A.R., Structure and Function in Primitive Society (London:
Cohen and West Ltd.; New York: The Macmillan Company, 1952).

SAPIR, E., “Review of W. H. R. Rivers ‘Instinct and the Unconscious: A Contribu-
tion to a Biological Theory of Psycho-Neurosis,’ ” ed. D. Mandelbaum,
Selected Writings of Edward Sapir (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1949).

STEWARD, J., “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands,” ed. R. Lowie,
Essays in Anthropology Presented to A.L. Kroeber (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1936).

STEWARD, J., and ¥. sELTZER, “Function and Configuration in Archaeology,”
American Antiquity, IV (1938), 4-10.

SUMNER, W. G., and A. G. KELLER, The Science of Society (New Haven: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1927).

TYLOR, E. B., Primitive Culture (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1958).


===== PAGE 3 =====

Acknowledgments

When an author has completed his book, it would seem a simple task
to thank those who have helped him in its preparation. In actuality
the task is not an easy one at all. Apart from all the advice and assist-
ance received from colleagues, I am indebted in many ways to those
men and women whose ideas and conclusions are the subject of this
book. It was their writings and research that helped shape and define
the discipline of anthropology; and though I disagree with many of
their formulations, this book is in a sense a result of these disagree-
ments.

It is not possible to name all those who have helped in the prepara-
tion of this volume, but I would like to single out those who made
specific suggestions for the improvement of the manuscript. I bene-
fited especially from the contributions of Elman Service, Robert
Carneiro, Morton Fried, Harvey Pitkin, Eric R. Wolf, Robert Cum-
ming, Victor Barnouw, Abraham Rosman, Robert Murphy, Nan
Pendrell, Alexander Alland, Michael Harner, William Willis, Alexan-
der Lesser, and Barbara Price.

I should also like to thank my students and associates for their
help and encouragement, especially Rolf Knight, Richard Davis, and
Adrian DeWind for their invaluable assistance in all matters pertain-
ing to references and the bibliography, and to Amelia Hess and
Esther Modell for their general patience and fortitude.


===== PAGE 4 =====

Contents

1 Introduction 1

2 Enlightenment 8

3 Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth
Century 53

4 Rise of Racial Determinism 8o
5 Spencerism 108

6 Evolutionism: Methods 142

7 The Evolutionists: Results 180

8 Dialectical Materialism 217


===== PAGE 5 =====

Contents

10
11

O 0 N N v b

20
21

22
23

Historical Particularism: Boas 250

The Boasian Milieu 290

The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism 301
Kroeber 319

Lowie 343

Diffusionism 373

Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian 393
Culture and Personality: Freudian 422
Culture and Personality: New Directions 449
French Structuralism 464

British Social Anthropology 514

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography 568

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic
Revival 6os

Cultural Materialism: General Evolution 643
Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology 654
Bibliography 688

Index 765

~ Introduction

s
Slie

Anthropology began as the science of history. Inspired by the tri-

umphs of the scientific method in the physical and organic domains,
nineteenth-century anthropologists believed that sociocultural phe-
nomena were governed by discoverable lawful principles. This con-
viction joined their interests with the aspiration of a still earlier
period, extending back before the social sciences had been named, to
the epochal stirrings of the cighteenth-century Enlightenment and
the vision of a universal history of mankind. Whatever the weaknesses
of the theories propounded by the early anthropologists under the
sway of nineteenth-century scientism, we must concede that the issues
addressed—origins and causes—gave their writings an enduring sig-
nificance. Commencing with the twentieth century, however, and
continuing through the early forties, efforts were made to alter the
strategic premise upon which the scientism of anthropological theory
depended. Almost simultaneously, there arose in England, France,
Germany, and the United States, schools of anthropology that in one
way or another rejected the scientific mandate. It came to be widely
believed that anthropology could never discover the origins of institu-

1


===== PAGE 6 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tions or explain their causes. In the United States, the dominant
school flatly asserted that there were no historical laws and that there
could not be a science of history.

It has been said in defense of this period that anthropological
theory had become overspeculative and that an interval of intense dedi-
cation to the collection of empirical data was precisely what was most
needed at the time. In retrospect, however, it is apparent that the
data were not collected without theoretical bias, or theoretical
consequence. While ostensibly operating within a restricted theoretical
frame, conclusions of the widest possible significance bearing on the
nature of history and culture were formulated. These spread to adja-
cent disciplines and were incorporated into the intellectual prospectus
of the public at large. On the basis of partial, incorrect, or misinter-
preted ethnographic evidence, there emerged a view of culture that
exaggerated all the quixotic, irrational, and inscrutable ingredients in
human life. Delighting in diversity of pattern, anthropologists sought
out divergent and incomparable events. They stressed the inner, sub-
jective meaning of experience to the exclusion of objective effects
and relations. They denied historical determinism in general, and
above all, they denied the determinism of the material conditions of
life. By emphasizing inscrutable values, vain prestige, irrational motives,
they discredited the economic interpretation of history. Anthropology
came increasingly to concern itself with idiographic phenomena, that
is, with the study of the unique and the nonrepetitive aspects of
history.

This state of affairs did not for long go unchallenged. A strong
countercurrent tending toward the reinstatement of nomothetic—
that is, generalizing—interests was already making itself felt in the
1930’s. Since then, the interest in regularities has spread, and the
form, if not the substance, of scientism is once more in the ascen-
dancy. Yet, it remains uncertain to what extent anthropology is about
to resume its eminence as the science of history. The resistance to
this formulation of the grand strategy of anthropological research has
acquired the strength of habit. Many anthropologists find it sufficient
to apply themselves to limited problems cast in an ostensibly scientific
idiom but deliberately detached from questions of causality and
origins. Various strategems have been introduced that avoid state-
ments of causality, while conveying the impression that an explanation
is being offered. Rather. than explanations of sociocultural differences
and similarities in terms of true nomothetic principles, we have so-
called functional explanations; we have correlations in which it is not
known how the causal arrow points, and we have “accounting for” in

2

1. Introduction
e

terms of paradigmatic cognitive frames, which are accepted as givens,
although nothing is known about how long they have existed.

My main reason for writing this book is to reassert the methodologi-
cal priority of the search for the laws of history in the science of
man. There is an urgency associated with this rededication, which
grows in direct proportion to the increase in the funding and plan-
ning of anthropological research and especially to the role .anthro—
pologists have been asked to assume in the planning and carrying out
of international development programs. A general theory of history is
required if the expansion of disposable research funds is to result in
something other than the rapid growth in the amount of trivia being
published in the leamed journals. The publishing of more and more
about less and less is an acceptable consequence of affluence only if
specialization does not lead to an actual neglect or even obfuscation
of fundamental issues.

Needless to say, if the anthropological contribution to interna-
tional development programs continues without benefit of a general
theory of sociocultural change, the consequences could be disastrous
in a more literal sense. It may be possible to defend the so-called
middle-range theories in relation to pure research, the idea being
that work can proceed on an eclectic, piecemeal basis in the expecta-
tion that the fragments will eventually fall into place when macro-
theory is created. But the middle-range, piecemeal approach to
directed cultural change exposes anthropologists to the charge of ir-
responsibility. Actually, there is little to commend the idea of middle-
ground theory, even without the possible onus of development
programs that result in underdevelopment. In theoretical as well as
applied anthropology, eclecticism is frequently nothing more than a
convenient excuse for not having to bother with the question of the
scientific importance of a particular research option.

Were mere exhortation on behalf of macro-theory the subject of
this volume, I should not have troubled myself with its writing. But
the matter is considerably more advanced. The burden of my argu-
ment is that the basic principle of a macro-theory of sociocultural
evolution is already known. This is not to say that it is known in the
form that is familiar to us from physics—as the Newtonian laws of
motion, or as the laws of -quantum mechanics—but rather in a
fashion that closely approximates the kind of principle that has
governed research in evolutionary biology since the time of Darwin.
The kind of principle to which I refer, in other words, has its precise
analogue in the doctrine of natural selection. In this analogy, the
meaning of “principle” is not equivalent to the statement of the spe-

3


===== PAGE 7 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

cific “laws” of evolution, but rather to the statement of a basic research
strategy, from the application of which there is an expectation that a
nomothetic causal understanding of sociocultural phenomena may
be achieved. Darwin’s contribution, which we shall have occasion to
discuss later on, was to direct attention to the general conditions re-
sponsible for bio-evolution, namely, differential reproductive success.
It remains for the biological researcher to discover the particular con-
catenation of causes in any given instance of speciation responsible for
the reproductive success of later over earlier forms.

I believe that the analogue of the Darwinian strategy in the realm of
sociocultural phenomena is the principle of techno-environmental
and techno-economic determinism. This principle holds that sjmilar
technologies applied to_similar environments tend to produce similar
_arrangements_of labor in_production and distribution, and that these
in turn call forth similar kinds of social groupings; Which justify and
coordinate their activities by means of similar systems of values and
beliefs. Translated into rgsearch strategy, the principle of techno-
environmental, techno-cconomic determinism assigns priority to the
study of the material conditions of sociocultural life, much as the
principle of natural selection assigns priority to the study of differential
reproductive success.

The strategy in question will at once strike the sensitized reader as

a form of materialism, indee fer to it throughout this
book as the strategy of|{‘cultural materialism.] Although I am tempted
to avoid the term “materialism” in deference to the reflexive oppro-

brium which it elicits among the public at large as well as among
many social scientists, to do so would be pusillanimous.

It may be said that one of the central purposes of the present
volume is to decontaminate, so to speak, the materialist approach to
history. This result can be achieved only if the strategy of cultural
materialism is carefully separated from philosophical materialism on
the one hand, and dialectical materialism on the other. In the former
case, we deal with metaphysical disputations concerning the essence of
being—the question of the ontological priority of matter over mind.
This issue may well be left to the philosophers, since it has no direct
bearing on the statement of the laws of sociocultural evolution. To
take a position concerning the direction of the causal arrow in socio-
cultural systems does not oblige us to enter into a discussion of the
ultimate nature of reality. In the case of dialectical materialism, how-
ever, there is much that requires our closest attention. Dialectical
materialism is a sub-case of cultural materialism, which has been
incorporated into the political creed of Marxist communism. The

4

1. Introduction
R

dialectical and revolutionary components in this brand of materialism
have not been confirmed by anthropological research. Indeed, the
mystification of world historical processes under dialectical materialism
is no less severe than under bourgeois cultural idealism. My aim has
been resolutely to steer a course independent of the ideologues of the
cold war. I shall recognize in the writings of Marx and Engels achieve-
ments of unparalleled importance for a science of man; but I shall
also insist on the error of Marx and Engels’s attempt to shackle
cultural materialism to the spooks of Hegel’s dialectic. T am con-
vinced that the coming generation of social scientists is prepared to
say to party hacks and bourgeois toadies, “a plague on both your
houses,” and to get on with the business of secking the truth, wherever
the search may lead.

In order to achieve a fair hearing for the cultural-materialist strategy,
we are compelled to embark upon an historical survey of the develop-
ment of anthropological theories of culture. The reason for thus
passing in review the major anthropological theories of the past two
hundred years is to prove that the principle of techno-economic and
techno-environmental determinism has never been consistently ap-
plied across the range of phenomena with which anthropologists are
familiar, despite the fact that anthropologists have played a crucial
role in discrediting this option. I shall demonstrate that the failure to
apply the cultural-materialist strategy resulted not from any reasonable
program of oriented research, but from the covert pressures of the
sociocultural milieu in which anthropology achieved its disciplinary
identity. This failure is all the more remarkable in view of the ad-
mitted and demonstrable inability of the science of man to develop a
viable alternative to the prematurely discredited strategy, and in view
of the passion with which anthropologists have argued that they have
remained free of ideological bias.

The reader has now been forewarned that, while this book is a
history of anthropological theories, it is intended to prove a point
rather than to provide an encyclopedic inventory of all the figures who
have in any degree ever made suggestions concerning the causes of
sociocultural phenomena. While there are useful purposes to be ful-
filled by a compendium approach, it appears to me far more urgent
for anthropologists and all those who feel the need for resuming and
carrying forward the search for the principles governing the trajectory
of sociocultural evolution to devote themselves to a critique, rather
than a summary, of where we have come from and where we are
going.

This larger enterprise obliges us to view anthropology in a fashion

5


===== PAGE 8 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

to which its practitioners have all too readily grown unaccustomed. As a
discipline which above all others is competent to concern itself with
the fundamental questions of sociocultural causality, anthropology
must cease to regard itself as being somehow outside of and detached
from and above the main currents of Western thought. During the
idiographic interlude at the beginning of this century, an image of
anthropology as a new discipline contributed greatly to the élan of the
pioneering fieldworkers. The achievements of the present were
stressed almost to the complete neglect of the historical conditions
out of which the discipline had arisen. The result has been that
many anthropologists have suffered a form of deculturation—they
have been cut off from their own cultural roots. The penalty for
this discontinuity is a form of naiveté similar to ethnocentrism. The
“culture” of the latest research design and practice is taken as natural,
while alternatives are barely considered or remain unimagined.
The provincialism of this situation is intensified by the scientific
community’s disposition to regard research as the summum bonum of
all scientific activity. A kind of pragmatism has resulted, in which it is
held that a bit of research is to be judged only on its own merits—that
is, for what it has accomplished. But by returning to the historical
sources of our discipline, we shall come to understand that research
must be evaluated not only by what it has done, but also by what it
has not done. One might argue that the choice of a particular research
topic and research strategy does not prevent others from making a
different set of choices. But the limitations on deployable time and
manpower oblige us to consider carefully the relative contributions
of alternative rescarch options and strategies to the development of
nomothetic theory. It is only by a study of how currently acceptable
fashions in anthropological research developed within the wider in-
tellectual habitat that we shall learn to appreciate what has been
achieved as well as what has not been achieved in anthropological
theory.

It follows from the importance of an ample vision of the history of
ideas that the selection of key figures in the history of anthropological
theory should be guided by criteria of intellectual relevance and in-
fluence, as well as by disciplinary identity. For this reason, certain
explicitly anthropological personalities have been omitted, while philos-
ophers, economists, historians, etc., are discussed at length. A certain
amount of calculated indifference to disciplinary boundaries is abso-
lutely essential for an understanding of the viewpoint of the period
which predated the formal crystallization of social-science specialties.
It would undoubtedly be useful to sustain this coverage through to

1. Introduction

the present moment, since many features of contemporary anthro-
pological theory are shared by adjacent disciplines. Most regrettable in
this regard is the omission of relevant twentieth-century sociological
theory. But the prospect of further enlarging the present volume
acted as a deterrent, giving rise to a result which the reader may
wish to regard as a merciful inconsistency.

I should like to take this opportunity to apologize for what may
appear at times as unnecessarily severe criticism of venerated col-
leagues, in both present and past generations. Although I have sought
to avoid ad hominem discussions, it has scemed to me at this par-
ticular moment in the development of anthropological theory that
critical judgments deserve priority over politc ones. It has certainly
not been my intention to be disrespectful of the men and women
who have devoted themselves, frequently with great personal courage
and sacrifice, to the ideal of furthering the understanding of the ways
of mankind. My interest throughout the writing of this book has been
to advance the theoretical standing of anthropology among the social
sciences. Nothing said herein may properly be construed as demeaning
anthropology’s universalistic and comparative mission, nor as de-
tracting from the personal stature of the extraordinarily talented,
enlightened, and humanly involved scholars with whom anthropology
has always been so well endowed.


===== PAGE 9 =====

Enlightenment >

S
503

rI}:e tise of anthropological theory began during that hallowed epoch
in Western culture known as the Enlightenment—the period
roughly coincident with the one hundred years from the writing of
John Locke’s An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (169o) to
the outbreak of the French Revolution. Yet the importance of this
epoch in the formation of the science of culture has gone unrecog-
nized, principally because of the prolonged influence of anthropolo-
gists who were uninterested in such a science or who denied that it
was possible. For there have been many anthropologists who believed
that the human actor’s free will, the uncertainties of national character,
and the tangle of chance and circumstance in history thwart all
scientific efforts in this domain. Those who believe that it is man’s
unique destination to live outside the determinate order of nature
will not concede the importance of the eighteenth century. Many
contemporary anthropologists regard the scientific aspirations of the
Enlightenment as the very quintessence of that vanity to which
the prophet of Ecclesiastes referred all new ideas. Thus, Margaret
Hodgen (1964:484) has written about the eighteenth century as if

8

2. Enlightenment

it were a mere “aftermath” to the Middle Ages, asserting furthermore
that “recent centuries have witnessed little that warrants the title of
theoretical innovation.” But for Hodgen and the anthropologists upon
whom she relied for her misunderstanding of contemporary theories
of culture, all scientism in sociocultural matters is a delusion. This
book is predicated on a contrary belief; and hence, for us, all that is
new in anthropological theory begins with the Enlightenment. We
shall see in the present chapter how the social philosophers of the
eighteenth century first brought the central issues of contemporary
anthropology into focus, and how they sought resolutely, but without
success, to formulate the laws governing the course of human history
and the evolution of sociocultural differences and similarities.

The issues of sociocultural inquiry brought forth during the En-
lightenment embrace most of the themes that serve either as the
foundation of contemporary theory or as the basic frame of reference
in terms of which modern sociocultural research is still being carried
out. In the present chapter, we shall review these contributions as
they relate to vitally important aspects of modern theory. We shall
inquire into the degree of success with which the Enlightenment
philosophers were able to identify the sociocultural domain as a
distinct field of inquiry characterized by a uniquely human elabora-
tion of culturally determined behavior; to what extent and upon what
philosophical and epistemological grounds the proto-anthropologists of
the Enlightenment believed that sociocultural phenomena were a legit-
imate domain for scientific study; the extent to which ideas concerning
the nature and direction of sociocultural evolution were set forth in
the Enlightenment, a hundred years before Darwin. Finally, we shall
describe and evaluate the first halting approximations to a theory of
sociocultural causation based on naturalistic premises.

THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE
CULTURE CONCEPT

According to Alfred Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn, the
concept of culture, in the sense of a “set of attributes and products of
human socicties, and therewith of mankind, which are extrasomatic
and transmissible by mechanisms other than biological heredity . . .
did not exist anywhere in 1750” (1952:145). Although these authors
recognize and cite the use of the term “culture” (only in the Ger-
manic Kultur form) and “civilization” (in both French and English)
during the eighteenth century, they postpone the emergence of the
modern concept until well into the nineteenth century. They concede

9


===== PAGE 10 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment

only that “By 1850 it was de facto being held in some quarters in
Germany, though never quite explicitly . . .” (ibid.).

There is actually no reason why a definition of culture must or
should emphasize the extrasomatic and nonhereditary factors, even
though most twentieth-century anthropologists regard these as essen-
tial to the concept. Since we have yet to discover how to separate
hereditary from acquired influences in a given human or infrahuman
population’s entire repertory of behavior, we can scarcely hope to
delimit an operationally valid cultural field of inquiry in such theoreti-
cal terms. The definition that Kroeber and Kluckhohn propose is one
step beyond a mere concept of culture; it is rather a theory of culture,
namely, an explanation of how the features of a particular popula-
tion’s behavioral repertory are established, i.e., by learning rather than
by genetic processes. It is not particularly vital in the present context,
however, to argue whether the prevailing formula is a concept of
culture or a partial theory of culture; rather let us determine to what
extent the ideas to which Kroeber and Kluckhohn refer are anticipated
in the years preceding the French Revolution.

A more generous concern with de facto or implicit, as opposed to
formal or explicit, definitions justifies a much earlier historical thresh-
old for the culture concept than that set by these two authors. The
principal defect in their history of the concept is that they fail to
locate its development within the main currents of the scientific
awakening. They neglect to point out that the implicit, or de facto,
formulation was not a mere appendage of an occasional interest in
customs and institutions, which has to be ferreted out of obscure
passages in the collected works of forgotten authors. On the contrary,
from our vantage point, it is apparent that a nascent version of
the concept and theory of culture was the major theme in the intel-
lectual ferment that preceded the French Revolution. Indeed, these
ideas have always had revolutionary political, as well as intellectual,
auspices and consequences. Not only is the modern culture concept
implicit in the ideological antecedents of the French Revolution
(and of the American Revolution as well), but the very substance of
the revolutionary program proclaimed the validity of the concept and
testified to its importance.

THE EMPTY CABINET

Tt was actually the seventeenth-century English philosopher
John Locke who provided the metaphysical foundation upon which an-
thropologists over two hundred years later were to rear the first formal

10

definitions of culture. In fact, Locke’s An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding was the midwife of all those modern behavioral disci-
plines, including psychology, sociology, and cultural anthropology,
which stress the relationship between conditioning environment and
human thought and actions. “He stood in relation to the eighteenth
century much as Freud and Marx stand to ours. Even his enemies
were obliged to employ his terms” (HART 1964:6). What Locke
attempted to prove was that the human mind at birth was an “empty
cabinet” (rocke 1894 I:48; orig. 1690). The knowledge or the ideas
with which the mind later comes to be filled are all acquired during
the process of what we would call today enculturation. Although
there are distinctly human, as opposed to animal, capacities, there
are no innate ideas. This applies equally to such abstract logical
principles as “It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be,”
as to what Locke calls practical principles, or moral rules of conduct:

Whether there be any such moral principles, wherein all men do
agree, I appeal to any who have been but moderately conversant
in the history of mankind, and looked abroad beyond the smoke
of their own chimneys. Where is that practical truth that is uni-
versally received without doubt or question, as it must be if in-
nate? Have there not been whole nations, and those of the most
civilized people, amongst whom the exposing their children, and
leaving them in the fields to perish by want or wild beasts has
been the practice; as little condemned or scrupled as the beget-
ting them? Do they not still, in some countries, put them into the
same graves with their mothers, if they die in childbirth; or des-
patch them, if a pretended astrologer declares them to have un-
happy stars? And are there not places where, at a certain age, they
kill or expose their parents, without any remorse at all? In a part
of Asia, the sick, when their case comes to be thought desperate,
are carried out and laid on the earth before they are dead; and
left there, exposed to wind and weather, to perish without assis-
tance or pity. It is familiar among the Mingrelians, a people pro-
fessing Christianity, to bury their children alive without scruple.
There are places where they eat their own children. The Carib-
bees were wont to geld their children, on purpose to fat and eat
them. And Garcilaso de la Vega tells us of a people in Peru
which were wont to fat and eat the children they got on their
female captives, whom they kept as concubines for that purpose,
and when they were past breeding, the mothers themselves were
killed too and eaten. The virtues whereby the Tououpinambas
believed they merited paradise, were revenge, and eating abun-
dance of their enemies [ibid.:66].

11


===== PAGE 11 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Locke was more concerned with the epistemological issue of how
knowledge or ideas are established than specifically with how indi-
viduals and whole tribes and nations come to possess such (not al-
ways accurately reported) customs. However, since the prevailing
view of the times regarded behavior as the consequence of knowledge,
the answer which he supplied on the origin of understanding served
equally as the answer for verbal and nonverbal behavior.

All of man’s understandings Locke attributed to the perceptions
conveyed through “sense impressions.”

Let us then suppose the mind to be, as we say, white paper,
void of all characters, without any ideas:—How comes it to be
furnished? Whence comes it by that vast store which the busy
and boundless fancy of man has painted on it with an almost end-
less variety? Whence has it all the materials of reason and knowl-
edge? To this I answer, in one word, from EXPERIENCE. In that
all our knowledge is founded; and from that it ultimately derives
itself [ibid.:122].

The inescapable consequence of this doctrine is that different ex-
periences, or, in modern terms, differential environmental exposure,
will produce both individual and national differences in behavior. The
revolutionary sociopolitical implications of Locke’s arid discussion
should be evident: No social order is based upon innate truths; a
change in the environment results in a change in behavior. In the
words of Claude Helvétius, whose On Man (1772) was one of the
most systematic developments of the radical implications of Locke’s
theories:

... Locke and I say: The inequality of minds is the effect of a
known cause, and that cause is the difference in education

[HELVETIUS 1818:71; orig. 1772], . . . all then in us is acquisi-
tion . . . [HELVETIUS 1946:1019]. Our understanding, our tal-
ents, our vices and virtues, our prejudices and characters . . . are

not therefore the effect of our several (hereditary) temperaments.
Our passions themselves are not dependent on them [ibid.:1019)
. . . I have proved that compassion is not either a moral sense,
or an innate sentiment, but the pure effect of self-love. What fol-
lows? That it is this same love, differently modified, according to
the different education we receive, and the circumstances, and sit-
uations in which chance has placed us, which renders us humane
or obdurate: that man is not born compassionate, but that all
may or will become so when the laws, the form of government
and their education lead them to it [ibid.:1022].

12

2. Enlightenment

TOLERATION VERSUS RELATIVISM

Perhaps the reason why anthropologists have been reluctant to
trace the culture concept to Locke’s Essay is that Locke, in company
with all of the eighteenth century’s formal and de facto students of
culture, despite the power they attributed to experience to shape
customs and beliefs, did not abandon the notion that there were
universally valid moral beliefs and right and wrong rules and modes
of conduct. It was not the concept of culture that was absent in 1750,
but rather the moral indifference of cultural relativism. Neither Locke
nor his followers cared to leap from the elusiveness of innate ideas to
the abeyance of moral censure. And thus, during the next century
and a half social science followed Locke in his conviction that despite
differences in experience, reason, correctly applied, would eventually
lead man, everywhere, to the same social institutions, moral beliefs,
and scientific technical truths. Just as the information of the senses
worked over by reason leads to an understanding of the laws of mo-
tion, so too would empirical inquiry eventually lead one to a knowledge
of religious and moral verities. In the meantime, however, before these
truths are demonstrated, the watchword is tolerance.

For where is the man that has incontestable evidence of the truth
of all that he holds, or of the falsehood of all he condemns . . .?
The necessity of believing without knowledge, nay often upon
very slight grounds, in this fleeting state of action and blindness
we are in, should make us more busy and careful to inform our-
selves than constrain others [Locke 1894, II:373; orig. 1690].

Toleration of alien ways is a characteristic attitude among Des-
cartes, Vico, Voltaire, Diderot, Montesquicu, Turgot, Helvétius, and
many other famous Enlightenment authors; but this toleration should
not be confused with moral indifference or genuine cultural relativ-
ism. By the same token, moral commitment should not be equated
with the lack of a culture concept.

TREASURE OF SIGNS

The very year for which Kroeber and Kluckhohn assert that
there was no culture concept anywhere in existence is the year when
the culture concept implicit in Locke’s metaphysics was given its clear-
est and most enduring expression. This achievement, too long ignored
by anthropologists, was the work of a twenty-five-year-old genius who
later became one of France’s most famous statesmen—Anne Robert

13


===== PAGE 12 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Jacques Turgot. It was in 1750 that Turgot conceived his Plan for
Two Discourses on Universal History, a project that his duties as
finance minister under Louis XV prevented him from completing,
but which, even as a sketch, formulates several theories that are still
essential to cultural anthropology. The subject matter of the universal
history which Turgot planned corresponds precisely to what was in
fact cultural anthropology’s subject matter during the second half of
the nineteenth century and to what perhaps has once again become
its principal concern:

Universal history embraces the consideration of the successive
progress of humanity, and the detailed causes which have contrib-
uted to it: the earliest beginnings of man, the formation and mix-
ture of nations; the origins and revolutions of government; the
development of language; of morality, custom, arts and sciences;
the revolutions which have brought about the succession of
empires, nations, and religions [TURGOT 1844:627; orig. 1750].

This is followed by a statement that corresponds to one of the
accepted modern definitions of culture:

Possessor of a treasure of signs which he has the faculty of multi-
plying to infinity, he [man] is able to assure the retention of his
acquired ideas, to communicate them to other men, and to trans-

mit them to his successors as a constantly expanding heritage
[ibid.].

At least two categories of definitions in Kroeber and Kluckhohn’s
compendium—*“Emphasis on Social Heritage or Tradition” and “Em-
phasis on Symbols”—are clearly in debt to Turgot. Bronislaw Malinow-
ski defined culture as follows: “This social heritage is the key concept
of cultural anthropology. It is usually called culture” (kroEBER and
KLUCKHOHN 1952:47). According to Leslie White, “The cultural cate-
gory, or order, of phenomena is made up of certain events that are
dependent upon a faculty peculiar to the human species, namely the
ability to use symbols” (ibid.:69). Kroeber himself, in contrasting
human with biological evolution, stressed the cumulative effects of
culture or what Turgot calls a “constantly expa;g:ng heritage” (cf.
KROEBER 1948a:5).

As in the case of Helvétius, the relationship of all these ideas to
Locke is explicit in Turgot’s explanation of how individuals come to
display behavioral differences:

A lucky arrangement of the fibers in the brain, a greater or lesser
quickness of the blood, these are probably the only differences
which nature establishes among men. Their spirits, or the power
and capacity of their minds, display real inequality, the causes of

14

2. Enlightenment

P —

which we shall never know and never be able to reason about.
All the rest is the effect of education, and that education is the
result of all our sense experience, of all the ideas we have been
able to acquire from the cradle onward. All the objects which sur-
round us contribute to that education; the instructions of our
parents and teachers are only a small part of it [TURGOT 1844:645].

ENCULTURATION

It is clear that when “education” is equated with an individual’s
entire history of sense experience, a concept very similar to that of
enculturation is being employed. This radical belief in the power of
enculturation is one of the great themes of the Enlightenment. From
it there issues the whole liberal as well as socialist tradition of class
and racial democracy. One of its most important technical expressions
is the doctrine of “psychic unity,” the belief that in the study of
sociocultural differences, hereditary (genetic) differences cancel each
other out, leaving “experience” as the most significant variable. The
origin of this doctrine has been associated quite erroneously with the
writings of some of the mid- and late- nineteenth-century cultural
evolutionists. Indeed, as I shall endeavor to show in subsequent chap-
ters, the main nineteenth-century trend was to deny what the eigh-
teenth century had established in this regard. As we shall see, the
pristine fervor with which the idea of psychic unity was advanced by
Turgot and his immediate successors, especially Helvétius, was not
recaptured until the Boasian period. But by then, the consciousness of
continuity with the Enlightenment had been thoroughly shattered.
When Franz Boas wrote his Mind of Primitive Man in 1911, the only
two eighteenth-century writers he deemed it relevant to mention were
Boulainvilliers and Linnaeus, neither of whose ideas were especially
representative of the Enlightenment (Boas 1938c:19ff.). Yet, the fol-
lowing passage from Turgot would, except for style, serve as a summary
of Boas’ position:

The primitive dispositions are equally active among barbarians
and civilized peoples. They are probably the same in every place
and time. Genius is spread throughout humankind somewhat
like gold in a mine. The more ore you mine, the more metal you
extract. The more men you have, the more great ones or ones fit-
ting to become great. The chances of education and circum-
stances develop them or let them be buried in obscurity
[TurcoT 1844:645].

One of the most intriguing by-products of Locke’s environmentalism
was the popular surmise that races of men might exist whose cultural
exposure was so impoverished that they would be indistinguishable

15


===== PAGE 13 =====

D

>

2. Enlightenment
s s -

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

from animals. Jean Jacques Rousseau, in his Discourse on the Origin
and Foundation of Inequality among Men (1755), implied that it
was not beyond the power of education to accomplish the transition
from ape to man. This possibility had its most ardent advocate in
the Scotsman James Burnett, Lord Monboddo. In his Of the Origin
and Progress of Language (1774), Monboddo argued that the great
apes were really uncultured human beings. Monboddo’s life-long
belief that with proper conditioning apes could learn to talk, and his
insistence that a race of men with tails would be found in Asia and
Africa drew forth the scom of many of his contemporaries (TINKER
1922:12fF.). Monboddo’s flights of fancy, however, were grounded in
a very solid appreciation of the power of enculturation and the plastic-
ity and indefiniteness of human nature: the conviction that orangu-
tans were wild men is merely an extreme instance of the popular
faith in human perfectibility.

It is . . . difficult to determine how far the natural capacities
of the brutes may go with proper culture; but man, we know, may,
by education and culture continued for many years, be trans-
formed almost into an animal of another species. Thus with
respect to his body, though he is undoubtedly by nature a terres-
trial animal, yet he may be so accustomed to the water, as to be-
come as perfectly amphibious as a seal or an otter—And, with
respect to the mind, it is impossible to say how far science and
philosophy may carry it. The Stoics pretended, in that way, to
make a god of a man [MONBODDO 1774:22-23].

ETHNOGRAPHY

As T have previously indicated, there is no compelling reason
for insisting that the culture concept be made to include theories of
psychic unity, dependence on learning, and extrasomatic heritage.
Stripped of these factors, the culture concept comes down to behavior
patterns associated with particular groups of peoples, that is, to “cus-
toms,” or to a people’s “way of life.” In this sense, a de facto concept
of culture is probably universal. Certainly, the practice of ethnog-
raphy, the description of culture, is not dependent upon the theory
that custon is a strictly extrasomatic heritage. It is doubtful that the
great eighteenth-century Jesuit ethnographers, upon whom the philo-
sophes were so dependent for their comparative information about
primitive institutions, shared Locke’s philosophy, despite their own
educational mission and despite the papal dogma that the American
Indian had a human soul and hence should be instructed in the sacra-
ments. Nonetheless, it would be rather difficult to establish the point
that these industrious ethnographers lacked a de facto notion of

16

culture. For example, Martin Dobrizhoffer’s Account of the Abipones
is certainly not recommended for its secular scientism. Noting the
diversity of Paraguayan languages, Dobrizhoffer comments:

Truly admirable is their varied structure, of which no rational per-
son can suppose these stupid savages to have been the architects
and inventors. Led by this consideration, 1 have often affirmed
that the variety and artful construction of languages should be
reckoned amongst the other arguments to prove the existence of
an eternal and omniscient God [1822, II:157].

Such views, however, did not prevent Dobrizhoffer from rendering a
fairly accurate account of Abipone economy, material culture, wedding
ceremonies, marriage, death and mourning ceremonies, warfare, and
dozens of other standard ethnographic categories. The ethnographic
coverage achieved by Joseph Lafitau in his influential account of the
Customs of Amierican Savages Compared with Those of Earliest
Times (1724) should be considered in the same light. The table of
contents of this book provides an interesting precedent for the uni-
versal pattern which Clark Wissler elaborated in 1923 (p. 74):

Lafitau’s categories Wissler's categories

Religion Speech
Political government Material traits
Marriage and education Art
Occupations of men Knowledge
Occupations of women Religion
Warfare Society
Commerce Property
Games Government
Death, burial, and mourning War
Sickness and medicine

Language

The problem with Lafitau was not so much that he lacked a concept
of culture, but that his view of American Indian cultural processes
was completely trammeled by belief in the fall and the Biblical
version of the dispersal of the tribes of Israel. This did not prevent
him, as Sol Tax (1955b:445) has noted, from being the first European
to describe a classificatory kinship terminology.

Probably the greatest ethnographer of the eighteenth century was
the French scholar J. N. Démeunier. Although a stay-at-home himself,
Démeunier rendered an invaluable service to his contemporaries by
translating numerous ethnographic and travel reports. Démeunier
and his works were widely cited before the close of the eighteenth
century, but fell into an oblivion from which they were not rescued
until Van Gennep found and bought The Customs and Manners of

17


===== PAGE 14 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment
[

Different Peoples (1776) on a Paris quai for a “ridiculous price”
(VAN GENNEP 1910:23). Obscurity descended once again when Lowic
neglected to mention Démeunier’s name, much less accord him prece-
dence as an ethnographer over C. Meiners. The latter's Outline of the
History of Mankind (1785) is modeled after Turgot’s and Voltaire's
essays on “universal history” and contrasts sharply with Démeu-
nier’s essentially synchronic and cthnographic interests. Démeunier’s
working categories include: Food and Cookery, Women, Marriage,
Birth and Education of Infants, Chicfs and Rulers, Distinction of
Rank, Nobility, Warfare, Servitude and Slavery, Standards of Beauty,
Modesty, Pody Adornment and Disfigurement, Astrology, Magic,
Society, Domestic Manners, Pcnal Codes, Trials, Punishment, Sui-
cide, Homicide, Human Sacrifice, Sickness, Medicine, Death, Fu-
nerals, Scpulchres, and Burials. Dozens of non-Europcan peoples are
cited, including the Kalmucks, Mexicans, Ethiopians, Tartars, Hotten-
tots, Tahitians, Ostyaks, Samoyeds, Auracanians, Yakuts, Tupinam-
bas, Siamese, Chinesc, Caribs, Dahomey, Jaggas, New Zealanders
(Maori), Lapps, Maldive Islanders, Japanese, Kamchatkans, Gaunches
(Canary Islanders), Omaguas, Moxes, Koryaks, Indian Fakirs, Illinois,
Loango, Ambrym Islanders, Bukarians, Hurons, Iroquois, Javanese,
Senegalese, Congo, Mandingo, Nayars, Tibetans, Mariana Islanders,
Benin, Ceylonese, Natchez, Peruvians and Surinam Bush Negroes.
Can one do this kind of comparative cthnography and not have a
concept of culture? What Démeunier lacks, in company with other
great ethnographers of his own and former times such as Herodotus,
al Idrisi, Gabriel Soares de Souza, Cieza de Leon, Hans Staden,
Bernal Dias, William Dampier, Frangois Raynal, Cadwallader Colden,
and Frangois Xavier de Charlevois, is not a concept of culture, but
rather the slightest cluc as to how cultural differences might be
scientifically explained. It was the philosopher Locke and his direct
intellectual heirs, and not the ancient or modern cthnographers, who
cleared the way to the scientific study of culture.

HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND NATURAL LAW

The possibility of creating a branch of learning that would do
for human affairs what physics had done for inanimate nature—“dis-
cover” its laws—acted as a powerful stimulus upon the best minds
of the Enlightenment. In its earlicst stages, the search for this
natural order was guided by Descartes’s emphasis upon mathematico-
deductive logic. In retrospect the results of Cartesian social science are

18

scarcely more commendable than the medieval reckoning of the num-
ber of angels on a pinhead. But at least issues were joined and
problems defined. Thus, Baruch Spinoza’s attempt to apply Des-
cartes’s geometric method to human behavior has had no lasting
influence upon the social sciences, but Spinoza’s vision of nature, one
and continuous, including man and his products, constituted a funda-
mental break with the past. Spinoza remarked in his Ethics (1632):

Most writers on the emotions and on human conduct seem to be
treating rather of matters outside nature than of natural phe-
nomena following nature’s general laws. They appear to conceive
man to be situated in nature as a kingdom within a kingdom: for
they believe that he disturbs rather than follows nature’s order,
that he has absolute control over his actions, and that he is de-
termined solely by himself . . . [quoted in NAGEL 1948:272].

Spinoza flatly rejected such views:

Nothing comes to pass in nature, which can be set down to a flaw
therein; for nature is always the same, and everywhere one and
the same in her efficacy and power of action; that is, nature’s laws
and ordinances, whereby all things come to pass and change from
one form to another, are everywhere and always the same; so that
there should be one and the same method of understanding the
nature of all things whatsoever, namely, through nature’s uni-
versal laws and rules [ibid.].

By “method of understanding,” however, Spinoza meant the kind of
Cartesian excrcise which he had previously employed to furnish a
geometric proof of God’s existence. His science of man was to enjoy
the same prospectus, as though human behavior were a matter of
“lines, planes and solids” (ibid.).

More modern in its attitude toward sociocultural phenomena was
the landmark magnum opus of Giambattista Vico: The New Science
(1725). Vico specifically warned against “subjecting everything to
the method of geometry” (GARDINER 1959:10). His new science was
to be concerned with the empirical synchronic regularities of social
life—“the perennial springs of the natural law of nations” (vico 1948:
92; orig. 1725)—as well as with the regularities of history. This new
“queen of the sciences” was in one of its two principal aspects “a
history of human ideas, on which it seems the mectaphysics of the
human mind must proceed” (ibid.). The natural determinism, which
Vico believed he had discovered, was so awe-inspiring that it required
a divine providence to set it in motion; but once begun, history un-
folded with unswerving regularity:

19


===== PAGE 15 =====

>
!

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

2. Enlightenment
[l At ———

The decisive sort of proof in our science is therefore this: that
once these orders were established by divine providence, the
course of the affairs of the nations had to be, must now be and
will have to be such as our science demonstrates, even if infinite
worlds were produced from time to time through eternity . . .

[ibid.:92-93].

It is not for the mere notion of historical determinism that Vico
and other eighteenth-century founders of social science command our
attention. In Western theology, doctrines of national predestination are
as old as the belief in a “chosen people,” or a world running its
downward course toward Armageddon and the second coming. The
point is not merely that there is a direction or intelligibility to
human history, but rather, that this orderliness is a consequence of
natural rather than divine conditions. In actual practice, as we shall
see, none of the eighteenth-century heralds of the “new science”
was capable of sustained adherence to the emergent conception of
undeviating orderliness. Throughout the period there runs a counter-
current that threatens to efface the mechanistic posture. This was
the widely held belief that men in general at all times possessed the
ability to change their social orders by exercising choice, rational or
irrational, as the case might be. The paradox of a determined order in
which the actors respond to unidentifiable causes, or willful inspira-
tions, is beyond the capabilities of most of the philosophes to resolve.
This difficulty helps to explain more precisely what Vico meant by his
new science. It was Vico’s belief that since man was the author of
human history, he had a better chance of understanding cultural
than physical events. “He believed that really to know the nature of
something, it was necessary to have made it” (GARDINER 1959:10). Yet,
paradoxically, the autonomous self-creativeness of man was to be recon-
ciled with the fact that “law exists in nature” (vico 1948:1).

A similar problem is evident in the work of Montesquieu, whose
The Spirit of Laws (1748) is one of the most famous monu-
ments of the age. In the preface, Montesquieu announces the orderli-
ness he has discovered in the realm of sociocultural events:

I have first of all considered mankind, and the result of my
thoughts has been that amidst such an infinite diversity of laws
and manners, they were not solely conducted by the caprice of
fancy. I have laid down the first principles, and have found that
the particular cases follow naturally from them; that the histories
of all nations are only consequences of them; and that every par-
ticular law is connected with another law, or depends on some
other of more general extent . . . [1949:Ixvii; orig. 1748].

20

Montesquieu then proceeds to invoke material causative factors,
most of which, as we shall see (p. 42), relate to climatic conditions.
Nonetheless, neither his faith in universal law nor his essentially secular
orientation prevents him from urging in effect that culture is, after
all, inscrutable: “It is in the nature of human laws to be subject to all
the accidents which can happen, and to vary in proportion as the
will of man changes” (ibid.:58-59). The paradox of this position was
expressed in Emile Durkheim’s summary of Montesquieu’s contribu-
tion to social science:

He is convinced that this sphere of the universe is governed by
laws, but his conception of them is confused. According to him,
they do not tell us how the nature of a society gives rise to social
institutions, but rather indicate the institutions that the nature of
a society requires, as if their efficient cause were to be sought only
in the will of the lawgiver [DURKHEIM 1960:63; orig. 1892].

Durkheim also correctly. noted that since the time of Montesquieu
“all social science has endeavored to dissipate this ambiguity.” One
can scarcely agree with Durkheim, however, that it was the nineteenth-
century sociologist Auguste Comte who first “established that the laws
of societies are no different from those governing the rest of nature”
(ibid.). Moreover, Comte, whose faith in natural law was based on
a dozen or more eighteenth-century predecessors, was no more suc-
cessful in establishing the empirical vindication for such a belief, nor
in resolving the paradox of cultural determinism and free will. Cer-
tainly, as we shall see, there were among Comte’s contemporaries
bolder approximations to the physicalist model.

The hesitancy with which eighteenth-century writers applied the
Newtonian model to history is well illustrated in the work of Vol-
taire and Rousseau, two of the brightest luminaries of the age.
Voltaire’s Essay on the Customs and Spirit of Nations (182¢; orig.
1745) is an important contribution to the development of modern
historiography, especially in its attack on the then prevailing theologi-
cal views of history. But Voltaire’s fundamental orientation to the
past is that time proclaims the omnipresence of stupidity. The
author of the phantasmagoric travesty Candide (1759), despite his
powerful influence in spreading the Newtonian gospel, did not take
kindly to a science of culture. Similarly, Jean Jacques Rousseau, whose
political doctrines were widely invoked by the Jacobins, contributed
little, if anything, to the growth of this aspect of cultural theory.
Rousseau’s concem in The Social Contract (1762) with establishing
the general or popular will as the legitimatizing force in political

21


===== PAGE 16 =====

r""

2. Enlightenment
s

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

organization belongs, rather, with those romantic mystifications of
history which replace the notion of natural law with unpredictable
and ungovernable national or tribal collective souls. We shall meet
again with this form of mystification in Chapter 8.

MATERIALIST MODELS

A fundamental influence in the expansion of the cighteenth
century’s natural-determinist outlook was exerted by J. O. de La Met-
trie’s Man a Machine (1748). La Mettrie was a practicing physician
with medical experience. Thus, his concern with the man-machine idea
had practical as well as philosophical motivation. Although Descartes’s
“animal machine” was an obvious forerunner, it is important to note
that La Mettrie did not propose any comprehensive philosophical sys-
tem, but, rather, that he regarded the man-machine as the best possible
hypothesis to account for such recently discovered facts as the irritabil-
ity of detached muscles and the peristalsis of the intestines (ra
METTRIE 1912:129; orig. 1748). Experience and observation are the
only guides he admits (ibid.:88). “The author of L’Homme Machine
became the first to launch the medical sciences fatefully and creatively,
as others had already done with mathematics, physics, and astronomy,
onto the vast and brightly lit stage of Enlightenment thought”
(VARTANIAN 1960:94). But it is as an argument for the continuity of
man’s behavioral capacities with those of infrahuman organisms and in-
ert matter that the man-machine thesis made its mark upon the social
sciences. The doctrine that “the transition from animal to man is
not violent” (LA METTRIE 1912:103) is pregnant with consequences
that are still unfolding in such fields as physiology, physical anthro-
pology, and primatology. In the case of the social sciences, there is a
well-charted path of intellectual awakening running from La Mettrie
to D'Holbach and Diderot (cf. LANGE 1925, IT:49fF.).

Perhaps the most uninhibited and systematic discussion of man’s
place in nature’s determinate order came from the pen of Paul Henri
Thiry, Baron d’Holbach. Written under the name of the dead aca-
demican M. Miraboud, and published under secret auspices, The
System of Nature, or The Laws of the Physical and Moral World
(1770) steadfastly embraced the full consequences of La Mettrie's
materialism:

Man is the work of nature; he exists within nature and is subject
to nature’s laws . . . [p’HoLBACH 1770, I:1]. There is neither ac-
cident nor chance in nature; in nature there is no effect without

22

sufficient cause, and all causes act according to fixed laws . . .
[ibid.:75]. Man is therefore not free for a single instant of his
life . . . [ibid.:219].

Unlike La Mettrie, who was a deist and who simply did not think it
was proﬁtable to discuss the unknowable, D’Holbach intended to
destroy every vestige of traditional religion, including prime movers,
as well as souls, ghosts, and demons. “The universe,” he declared,
“consists of nothing but matter and motion” (ibid.:10). It is in
this brusque abandonment of the skeptical mode that modern philo-
sophical critiques of metaphysical materialism find most grist for
their mill. For D'Holbach apparently accepted the forms in which
the external world presents itself to human consciousness as ultimate
reality. Matter was for him the literal universe of macro-objects; force
the push-and-pull experience of human muscle.

As many twentieth-century philosophers of science have noted,
modern physics itself is no longer committed to the kind of solidity
which to philosophical materialists made matter seem more real than
intangible thoughts. From the point of view of the social sciences, how-
ever, the literature of philosophical disputation concerned with proving
the inadequacy of D’Holbach’s metaphysical materialism is no more
relevant than the somewhat lesser output concerned with preserving
D’Holbach’s metaphysical honor.

It would seem obvious that D’Holbach’s materialism was intended
to rid the scientific community of the debilitating effect of super-
naturalism. That this is the only working assumption by which mod-
ern physical science proceeds remains as unassailable today as in the
cighteenth century. That matter and energy are interchangeable is
not expressed by a formula in which devils and angels constitute
variables. Nor has the discovery that the orbits of individual electrons
are unpredictable (in conformity with the Heisenberg principle) dis-
couraged physicists from attempting to state the general determinate
principles which govern all large samples of subatomic events. But I
shall have more to say on this in subsequent chapters.

SOCIAL SCIENCE AND FREE WILL

The lingering disrepute of D’Holbach’s uncompromising athe-
ism still stands between him and a proper recognition of his influence
upon behavioral science. In particular, the manner in which he
avoided the paradox that Durkheim attributes to Montesquieu had an
important effect on the theories of Marx. Since the behavior of the

23


===== PAGE 17 =====

_———————_'—*r—ﬁ"

2. Enlightenment
[ an—

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

human organism is not exempted from the reign of universal law, it
follows that the material influences impinging upon an individual,
together with his innate physical character, are theoretically sufficient
to account for his actions. What then accounts for the subjectively
perceived impression of voluntary performance and choice? We do
exercise choice, D'Holbach concedes; but it is a choice dictated by our
wants and needs. Since we usually “want” what we choose, we ex-
perience the illusion of free choice. Actually, however, freedom is
nothing more than the liberty to choose or act on behalf of wants that
have been established by processes over which we have had no control
(p'HOLBACH 1770:202fF.). The significance of this viewpoint for the
development of the concept of culture has already been discussed.
Here, let it suffice to say that most of the modern behavioral sciences
have in large measure concerned themselves with untangling the
conditions and processes which make an individual’s or group’s choice
predictable, despite the apparent absence of material constraint in so
much of what we do.

PREDICTABILITY

With the possible exception of D’Holbach and Helvétius (see
Pp- 43fF.) the philosophes invariably equated the orderliness of human
history with the progressive perfection of mankind’s rational decision-
making policies. The expansion of science to include human affairs was,
therefore, in itself the most important source of sociocultural change
in the process by which humanity would eventually come to be en-
dowed with “rational” social systems. According to some students of
the Enlightenment, the consummate equation of natural law with
right reason was achieved in Marquis de Condorcet’s Esquisse d'un
Tableau Historique des Progrés de U'Esprit Humain (Outline of the
Intellectual Progress of Mankind) (1795). “No other volume pro-
duced in eighteenth-century France presents so faithfully the views of
man and of the world held by the philosopher. Its attitude toward hu-
man society was inspired by the physics of Newton, in which the con-
ception of uniform, universal, natural laws that governed the universe,
was made to apply to social organization” (SHAPIRO 1934:259).

After sketching the advances achieved during the ninth epoch of
world history, i.e., from the time of Descartes to the formation of
the French Republic, Condorcet’s faith in the uniformity of nature em-
boldens him to predict the main events of the next, or tenth, epoch.
Why should it not be possible, he inquires, to foretell man’s future?
Since the only grounds for belief in the truth of the natural sciences is

24

“that universal laws . . . which regulate the phenomena of the uni-
verse are necessary and constant” (CONDORCET 1822:262; orig. 1795),
knowledge of the future should be as certain as that of the present and
past: “If man is able to predict with almost complete certainty the
phenomenon whose laws are known . . . why regard it as a chimerical
enterprise to foretell the future destiny of the human species . . . ?”
(Ibid.) There is a rather sad irony surrounding the circumstances under
which Condorcet’s Outline, called by Croce the “last will and testa-
ment” of the eighteenth century (smAPIRO 1934:260), was composed.
In 1793, Condorcet, urging lawfulness and moderation, stumbled into
the crossfire between the anything but lawful and moderate leaders of
the second phase of the French Revolution. Hunted by the Jacobins
during the nine months of writing the Outline, he was finally caught in
1794 and died in jail, despite his stubborn faith in the power of reason
to guide human behavior. He failed to sce that Robespierre, who char-
acterized Condorcet as a timid conspirator working “ceaselessly to
darken the light of philosophy by means of the perfidious rubbish of
his paid-for rhapsodies” (ibid.:97) was no less rational than he. Nature,
at least, had sponsored both of them.

EARLY THEORIES OF SOCIOCULTURAL
EVOLUTION

Evolution, taken to mean the change of one form into an-
other, is a concept which few, if any, ideological traditions have
failed to apply to sociocultural phenomena. That this understanding
of evolution is the historically critical one in Western culture, despite
its simplicity, is evidenced by the resistance with which the bare
notion of biological transformation was greeted. The mere proposal
that one biological species might have had its origin in another was
regarded as a grave threat to Europe’s traditional ideological order.
This, however, was an oddity of the Judeo-Christian tradition.
Nothing comparable occurred when theories were proposed concern-
ing the transformation of institutions and customs.

Evolutionary doctrines were, after all, an essential part of the
Biblical account of the origin of humanity. It will be recalled that
according to the Old Testament, among the first men there was
neither sex nor family nor economics, government, warfare, etc. Sub-
sistence activities required practically no effort. This state of affairs
was terminated by a foreign migration resulting in family life and
onerous subsistence tasks. Economic specialization is announced

25


===== PAGE 18 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Enlightenment

A

shortly thereafter, with Cain the hunter and tiller of fields, and Abel
the keeper of flocks. Then, the first crime occurred. This led, among
Cain’s descendants, to the development of urban life. Cities flour-
ished until they were destroyed by a catastrophic flood. They sprang
up again, however, with a high tower as safeguard against future
inundations. This provoked a supernatural retribution, whereby the
previous linguistic unity of the world was shattered, and men found
themselves speaking mutually unintelligible languages. Polytheistic
religions developed among the linguistically distinct tribes and na-
tions. Later, monotheism was instituted among one of them by
supernatural act. At the same time, new basic legal and moral princi-
ples were established.

Although the New Testament is not concerned with sociocultural
evolution to the same extent, there is certainly no doctrinal negation
of the possibility of fundamental changes in customs and institutions.
In itself, the Christian Bible proclaims the orthodoxy of the notion
that old religious patterns are subject to evolutionary change.

The novel contribution of the eighteenth century to historical per-
spective, therefore, cannot have been the mere notion of fundamental
sociocultural change; much less was this the achievement of the nine-
teenth-century evolutionists. Rather, it was in the eighteenth century
that a particular construal of the superorganic evolutionary process
was achieved, which not only influenced all subsequent cultural evolu-
tionary doctrines, but which also channeled the belated awakening in
biology along special and quite inappropriate lines. The Enlightenment
version of sociocultural evolution challenged the orthodox European
outlook in two fundamental ways: The substance of the Biblical
version of the origin of institutions, and the order in which they
unfolded were systematically contradicted. Secondly, as I have already
emphasized, the mechanisms responsible for sociocultural transfor-
mation were now regarded as purely natural expressions of cause and
effect relations.

In effect, in the matter of sociocultural evolution, the Enlighten-
ment merely restored an existing ancient doctrine to a position of
intellectual respectability. Thus, all evolutionary thought during the
Enlightenment betrays the influence of the great first-century-B.c.
Roman materialist-poet-philosopher, Lucretius. In his On the Nature of
Things, Lucretius, drawing upon still earlier evolutionary notions
advanced by the Greek Epicurus, achieved a level of sociocultural and
bio-evolutionary understanding that set him ahead of his times by at
least eighteen centuries. For Lucretius’ evolution was a cosmic process,

26

responsible for the diversity of all levels of phenomena. A conflu-
ence of atoms formed the world. In the warm, damp soil of the
young earth, vegetable life appeared. Later came the animals, includ-
ing man. Spontaneous generation ceased and the earth no longer bore
new life. Monstrous variations on existing forms appeared, but they
did not survive. Early man started as a brute, hardier than modern
man, larger-boned, strongersinewed, and less affected by climatic
extremes. At first, men lived like beasts, without the plow and without
iron tools with which to work the fields, plant, or cut down trees.
These early men ate only what the sun and rain provided: they
lacked clothing and built no permanent houses, but lived, instead, in
caves and in brushwood shelters. Lacking the institution of marriage,
they followed a career of sexual promiscuity. But their lot was not a
happy one, for food was scarce and many died of hunger. Lucretius
sought the beginnings of human speech in animal communication.
Although he was unable to solve the problem (no one ever has), he
surmised that language could not have been the invention of one
man, but must, rather, have been the result of a long evolutionary
process (LUCRETIUS 1910:197-215).

UNIVERSAL HISTORY

Enlightenment evolutionary reconstructions were concerned
with a wide variety of evolutionary change. Voltaire’s Essay on the
Customs and Spirit of Nations (1745), for example, emphasized the
development of Christianity in Europe, including the growth of the
clergy and the origin of the Sacraments, the development of European
feudal systems, and the growth of the French and English parlia-
ments. Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
(1776-88) also represents a mature product of this new approach to
institutional history. Vico, on the other hand, was concerned more
?Vith recurring sociocultural transformations. Following precedents
in Herodotus, he postulated that each nation evolves through three
stages: the ages of the gods, heroes, and men—ages distinguished
by the characteristic relationship between man and the supematural
and somewhat resembling Comte’s theological, metaphysical, and posi-
tivist phases. Thus, “the first men among the gentiles, simple and
crude, and under the powerful spell of most vigorous imaginations
encumbered with frightful superstitions, actually believed they saw the
gods on earth.” As a result of the uniformity of ideas, “the Orientals,
Egyptians, Greeks and Latins, each in ignorance of the others, after-

27


===== PAGE 19 =====

2. Enlightenment
s ——

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

wards raised the gods to the planets and the heroes to the fixed stars”;
ie., their religions made the supernatural increasingly more remote
(vico 1948:4).

Turgot's Universal History is an example of Lucretian evolutionary
thought which provides many striking precedents from nineteenth-
and twenticth-century formulations. According to Turgot, mankind
had evolved through the stages of hunting, pastoralism, and farming.

[The hunters,] without provisions, and in the middle of the for-
est, are only able to occupy themselves with subsistence. The
foods which the carth produces without agriculture are very
meagre; it is necessary to resort to hunting animals; the latter
within a given area are very sparse and unable to supply nourish-
ment for many men; as a result, the dispersal and diffusion of
peoples is accelerated . . . families or nations are very far re-
moved from each other because each requires a vast space to
nourish itsclf—that is the state of the hunters. They have mo
fixed point of abode and they move about with extreme facility
from one place to another. The difficulty of living; a quarrel; fear
of an enemy is sufficient to separate the families of hunters from

the rest of their nation [1844:629).

It is interesting to note the resemblance between Turgot's descrip-
tion of the hunting stage and Julian Steward’s (1955:122-23) ecologi-
cal interpretation of the patrilineal band, especially in view of the
latter’s insistence upon a rather sharp distinction between “universal”
evolutionist and “multilinear” evolutionist approaches (see p. 642).
It is clear that Turgot, with a universal stage in mind, nonetheless
foreshadows Steward’s ecological orientation:

They follow where the hunt leads them, without fixed destina-
tion. If the hunt takes them in a given direction they continue to
get further apart. It is this which accounts for the fact that peo-
ples who speak the same languages are sometimes found sepa-
rated by distances of over six hundred leagues, and are surrounded
by people who don’t understand them. This is common among
the American savages, where one finds, for the same reason, na-
tions of 15 to 20 men [TURGOT 1844:629].

Wherever there are domesticable species, men gradually find it more
advantageous to gather animals into herds than to chase after them:

The life of the pastoralist is before long introduced everywhere
these animals are found; [but] the life of the hunting peoples is
preserved in the parts of America where these species are absent.

28

Only in Peru, where nature has provided a species of sheep called
llamas, is pastoralism found. This is probably the reason why that
part of America was more readily civilized [ihid.].

Evidently, Turgot’s evolutionism also embraced a fairly modern no-
tion of the relationship between economic surplus and social strati-
fication: “Pastoral people, with their subsistence more abundant and
secure, are more populous. They become more familiar with the spirit
of property” (ibid.). This tendency is increased in the agricultural
stage: “The earth was able to sustain many more men than were
required to till it. Hence, to a greater extent than among pastoral
peoples, men were free for other work: hence towns, commerce . . .
a greater ability in war; the division of labor, the inequality of men,
domestic slavery and precise ideas of government” (ibid.:631).

EVOLUTIONARY STAGES

A generation of anthropologists in the United States has been
brought up to believe that the division of cultural history into the
stages of savagery, barbarism, and civilization was the ill-advised late-
nineteenth-century accomplishment of Lewis Henry Morgan. But this
trisection had already been performed by Montesquieu who noted:
“There is this difference between savage and barbarous nations: the
former are dispersed clans, which . . . cannot be joined in a body;
and the latter are commonly small nations, capable of being united.
The savages are generally hunters; the barbarians are herdsmen and
shepherds” (1949:176). In Turgot’s writing, the hunting, pastoral,
an_d agricultural phases are still more prominent, and a culmination of
this trend occurred with the publication in 1767 of Adam Fergu-
son’s An Essay on the History of Civil Society. Drawing upon Charle-
voix, Colden, Lafitau, Dampier, Wafer, and classical Greek and Roman
sources, Ferguson sought to improve upon the conjectural reconstruc-
tions of man’s primeval “state of nature.” Like Montesquieu, Ferguson
was well aware of the dangers of ethnocentric distortions in accounts
of primitive peoples:

Our method . . . too frequently, is to rest the whole on con-
jecture; to impute every advantage of our nature to those arts
which we ourselves possess; and to imagine, that a mere negation
of all our virtues is a sufficient description of man in his original
state. We are ourselves the supposed standards of politeness and
civilization; and where our own features do not appear, we appre-
hend, that there is nothing which deserves to be known . . .
[1819:138; orig. 1767].

29


===== PAGE 20 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Ferguson, unlike many of his contemporaries, refused to regard the
savage cither as a simpleton or a superman. He possessed a true an-
thropological vision in that he saw the primitive as a whole human
being:
Who would, from mere conjecture, suppose, that the naked sav-
age would be a coxcomb and a gamester? That he would be proud

or vain, without the distinction of title or fortune? And that his
principal care would be to adorn his person, and to find an amuse-

ment . . . that he would thus share in our vices, and, in the
midst of the forest, vie with the follies that are practised in the
town . . . that he would likewise . . . excell us in talents and

virtues; that he would have a penetration, a force of imagination
and elocution, an ardour of mind, an affection and courage, which
the arts, the discipline, and the policy of few nations would be
able to improve. Yet these particulars are a part in the description
which is delivered by those who have had opportunities of seeing
mankind in their rudest condition [ibid.:138-39].

Ferguson, perhaps more clearly than any of his predecessors, correctly
surmised the essential features of primitive economic and social organi-
zations. Moreover, with greater certainty than Morgan, he correlated
the principal evolutionary stages with economic and social organi-
zation and the “means of subsistence” (ibid.:175)—a phrase widely
in use long before Marx made it unfashionable. Among the people
of the world there are those who

entrust their subsistence chiefly to hunting, fishing, or the natural
produce of the soil. They have little attention to property, and
scarcely any beginnings of subordination or government. Others,
having possessed themselves of herbs, and depending for their
provision on pasture, know what it is to be poor and rich. They
know the relations of patron and client, of servant and master,
and by the measures of fortune determine their station. This dis-
tinction must create a material difference of character, and may
furnish two scparate heads, under which to consider the history
of mankind in their rudest state; that of the savage, who is not yet
acquainted with property; and that of the barbarian, to whom it is,
although not ascertained by laws, a principal object of care and
desire [ibid.:149].

Ferguson, unlike many modern critics of the concept of primitive com-
munism, did not confuse the communal ownership of strategic re-
sources among hunters and gatherers with complete absence of private
property. Arms, utensils, and clothing are not shared communally.
Erroneously, however, he equated matrilineality and matrilocality with

30

2. Enlightenment
[

this most primitive stage. But his phrasing of the political characteris-
tics of low-energy hunters and incipient farmers is remarkably modern:

They have in fact no degree of subordination different from the
distribution of function which follows the differences of age,
talents, and dispositions. Personal qualities give an ascendant in
the midst of occasions which require their exertion; but in times

of relaxation, leave mno vestige of power or prerogative.
[ibid.:153].

Ferguson also saw, although only in barest outline, that the transition
from primitive to state-organized social systems involved fundamental
changes in the role of the family and kinship. Thus, prior to the
formation of the state, among savages and barbarians, “Families, like
so many separate tribes, are subject to no inspection or government
from abroad; whatever passes at home, even bloodshed and murder,
are only supposed to concern themselves” (ibid.:156).

EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION

Ferguson’s analysis of the evolution of social organization was
surpassed with the publication in 1771 of John Millar’s Observa-
tions Concerning the Distinction of Ranks in Society. Millar attempted
to trace the evolution of the family, including sex relations and mar-
riage forms, as well as the development of class differences and political
systems. This great Scottish jurist-philosopher was probably the first
social scientist to stress the economic and educational (enculturative)
functions of the family, over against sexual passions and romantic
love: “The Savage is seldom or never determined to marry from the
particular inclinations of sex; but commonly enters into that connec-
tion when he arrives at an age, and finds himself in circumstances
which render the acquisition of a family expedient or necessary, in
order to his comfortable subsistence” (MILLAR 1771:7). He notes the
prevalence of premarital sexual license among primitives and properly
efnphasizes the frequent harsh punishment for postmarital infidelity
(ibid.:10). He also identifies and discusses a surprisingly wide spec-
trum. of primitive kinship and marital institutions, including wife-
lending, polygyny, polyandry, brideprice, and matrilineality. In most
of his interpretations and postulations of sequence, Millar is, in retro-
spect, quite wrong. He advances the incorrect opinion that the more
primitive the group, the more degraded the women are in relation to
men. From this there follows the further error, that brideprice is an
expression of female servitude. Matrilineality is said to arise from the

31


===== PAGE 21 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment

-

weakness of marital bonds (ibid.:30). Polyandry is supposed to result
when women in matrilineal systems become powerful through having
many sons, and these females then indulge their passions by retaining
a number of male concubines. Millar’s picture of the primitive father’s
relations with his children is also severely distorted. The father is pre-
sented as a callous, emotionally detached tyrant, and old men are errone-
ously reported as universally feared and respected. Just as the increasingly
greater leisurc made possible by improved means of subsistence sup-
posedly leads to a softening of the relation between the sexes, so too the
life and death powers of father over children are gradually relinquished
(ibid.:102). More compatible with modern theories is Millar’s conten-
tion that the advent of commerce and a heightened division of labor
promoted the geographical mobility of the sons and thereby reduced
their subordination to the patriarch. Like Turgot and Ferguson, Millar
emphasized the lack of permanent extrafamilial centers of authority
among hunting peoples, and more explicitly than his predecessors,
he associated the beginning of political control with the accumulation
of wealth and the establishment of hereditary private property during
the agricultural and pastoral stages. As the amount of wealth increases
the communal systems of production and distribution become un-
wieldy:

They grow weary of acting in concert with each other, by which
they are subject to continual disputes concerning the distribution
and management of their common property; while everyone is
desirous of employing his labor for his own advantage, and of
having a separate possession, which he may enjoy according to his
inclination. Thus, by a sort of tacit agreement, the different fami-
lies of a village are led to cultivate their lands apart from each

other . . . [ibid.:135].

Among the peoples with communal ownership, cultivated lands
“fa] of course under the management of the chief, who superintends
their labor, and assumes the privilege of distributing the produce
among the several members of the community” (ibid.:135-36). Millar,
in other words, had come to an understanding of the relationship be-
tween social stratification and what we today call “redistribution” (sec
p. 313). Millar further suggests in effect that when private holdings
develop, the power of the redistributor-chief is augmented by his ability
to deprive individuals of access to strategic resources. Gradually, this
power attracts to itsclf a religious aura, culminating in the deification
of the godking ruler (ibid.:140-41). Millar also went beyond his
predecessors in grasping the essence of the relationship between kin-
ship and the rise of the state:

32

. . . the distinctions of families were soon extinguished and for-
gotten. The power of the chiefs, or nobility, which depended
upon the attachment of their respective clans, was therefore
quickly destroyed; and the monarch, who remained at the head of
the nation without a rival to counterbalance his influence, had no
difficulty in extending his authority over the whole of his domin-
ions [ibid.:164].

Millar viewed feudalism as a recurrent political system, associated with
the process by which smaller social units are linked together into larger
communities. He expected to “find something of the same kind in
every extensive kingdom that is formed by the association of many
different tribes or families” and cites as examples the Congo, Loango
Benin, Angola, Laos, and Siam (ibid.:174-77). '

Perhaps the most brilliant part of Millar’s book is the last chapter
in which the origin of servitude and slavery is discussed. His remarks
on the relationship between slavery and the liberal creed of the
English colonists are reserved for the final section of this chapter. In
general, let it be said that Millar saw slavery as an ancient institution
which was gradually modified and eliminated in Europe by the dis-
covery that wage labor and cash rents are more lucrative institutions.
HlS. explanation of the absence of slavery among the most primitive
societies is repeated by Hobhouse, Wheeler, and Ginsberg (1915)
and remains essentially unchallenged today:

There are indecd but few slaves among the greater part of the
savages of America; because from the situation of that people,
they have no opportunity of accumulating wealth for maintaining
any number of servants. As, in ordinary cases, they find it burden-
some to give subsistence to an enemy whom they have subdued,
H?ey are accustomed to indulge their natural ferocity by putting
him to death, even in cold blood. If ever they behave with more
humanity to their captives, it is when they have been greatly re-
duced by war, or by uncommon accidents; and as this rarely hap-
pens, the persons whose lives have been thus preserved, are not
distinguished from the children of the family into which they
are brought; but are formally adopted into the place of the de-
ceased relations whose loss they are intended to supply
[MILLAR 1771:198-99].

METHODOLOGY OF EVOLUTIONISM

tigh Reference to one additional figure in the great Scottish En-
}ig tenment, whose contribution to the rise of anthropological theory
Eas only recently been pointed out, must suffice. We are indebted to

- Adamson Hocbel (1960:648) for the recognition that William

33


===== PAGE 22 =====

F———————————?———

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment

S

Robertson’s History of America (1777) is “a significant landmark
in the development of cultural anthropology.” Robertson’s evolu-
tionary typology went from “savagery” to “barbarism” to “civilization,”
the evidence for this sequence being derived from both ethnology and
archacology. His presentation of an archacological justification for this
sequence does much to refute Hodgen’s (1964:505ff.) charge that the
Scottish historians had nothing to go on but logic and that they were
all equally guilty of the vice of “speculative history”:

It is only by tradition, or by digging up some rude instruments of
our forefathers, that we learn that mankind were originally un-
acquainted with the use of metals, and endeavored to supply the
want of them by employing flints, shells, bones, and other hard
substances, for the same purposes which metals serve among
polished nations. Nature completes the formation of some metals.
Gold, silver, and copper . . . were accordingly the first metals
known, and first applied to use [quoted in HOEBEL 1960:649].

As we shall see in Chapter 6, further archaeological vindication of
the eighteenth century’s evolutionary hypotheses played a crucial role
in establishing the so-called comparative method as the basic strategy
of the nineteenth-century anthropologists. Ignorance of this aspect of
anthropological rescarch may account for Hodgen’s (1964:511) as-
tounding claim that when the concept of an evolutionary hierarchy
entered “into the work of social scientists in the nineteenth and twen-
tieth centuries, it lost none of its scholastic, philosophical, or conjec-
tural characteristics.”

Robertson’s evolutionary views are also distinguished by a remark-
ably advanced discussion of the conditions under which cultural sim-
ilarities in different parts of the world could be treated as evidence
of independent evolution as opposed to some form of convergence or
survival through diffusion or migration. In general, Robertson believed
that similarities found on different continents argued for independent
invention and parallel evolution:

The character and occupations of the hunter in America must be
little different from those of an Asiatic, who depends for subsis-
tence on the chase. A tribe of savages on the banks of the Danube
must nearly resemble one upon the plain washed by the Missis-
sippi. Instead then of presuming from this similarity, that there is
any affinity between them, we should only conclude, that the
disposition and manners of men are formed by their situation,
and arise from the state of society in which they live [ibid.:652].

But this rule cannot be applied where the traits in question do not
reflect widespread determinate processes. Thus, provision must be

34

made for “customs which, as they do not flow from any natural want
or desire peculiar to their situation, may be denominated usages of
arbitrary institution” (ibid.:652-53). The best way to account for
such “arbitrary” or, as we might say today, “nonadaptive” traits, when
they occur in widely dispersed areas, is to suppose, argued Robertson
that they resulted from previous contact. '

No summary of Enlightenment evolutionary thought would be
complete without mention of Condorcet’s ten-stage scheme as in-
cluded in the Outline of the Intellectual Progress of Mankind
(orig. 1795). Although this work is regarded by many as an outstanding
contribution to the literature of the social sciences (cf. sHAPIRO
1934:262), its method and content present little of specifically an-
thropological interest. Of the ten stages that Condorcet describes, the
first three, during which mankind passes from tribal to pastoral to
agricultural society, up to the invention of the alphabet, are precisely
the ones that least interest him. In Condorcet’s perspective, the more
remote the age, the duller the mind, the less enlightened is man’s
social life. For the Outline is above all an intellectual history, con-
cerned with the emancipation of man’s reason from the shackles of
superstition and ignorance. It exhibits none of the portents of so-
ciological analysis which distinguish Ferguson’s and Millar’s work.
Beyond the invention of the alphabet, Condorcet’s “stages” become
increasingly ethnocentric and confined to European history as follows:

4th  The progress of the human mind in Greece up to the divi-
sion of the sciences about the time of Alexander the Great.

sth  The progress of the sciences from their division to their
decline.

6th The decadence of knowledge to the restoration about the
time of the Crusades.

7th  The early progress of science from its revival in the West
to the invention of printing.

8th From the invention of printing to the time when philosophy
and the sciences shook off the yoke of authority.

oth  From Descartes to the foundation of the French Republic.

Tl}lS work, nonetheless, remains an important landmark in the social
sciences. It will long be remembered for its role in provoking Malthus
to write his An Essay on the Principle of Population (1798) and, hence,
f_or its indirect effect upon Spencer and Darwin (see Chap. 4). The Out-
line is also justifiably regarded as the Enlightenment’s culminating at-
ten'lpt to interpret sociocultural evolution in terms of increments in the
fatxonal content of thoughts, customs, and institutions. As such, its
idealism is unmitigated; and, as we shall see in a moment, its notion
of sociocultural causality, inadequate.

35


===== PAGE 23 =====

2. Enlightenment

e

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

CONFOUNDING EVOLUTION WITH

PROGRESS

The word evolution is rarely employed in the writings of the
philosophers and their contemporaries. Yet, it is beyond dispute that it
is sociocultural evolution that is the main subject of their historical
concern. According to Peter Gay (1964:24), “Voltaire’s histories are
histories of the ‘mind’ of an age; they portray a network of institutions
in which political forms, social ambitions, artistic productions, and
foreign policy all act upon one another and are, collectively and sep-
arately, more important than details of battles, court intrigues, or
the history of the Chosen People.” This special kind of history is
history in evolutionary perspective. Voltaire himself said that he
wanted by his history to “know what were the steps by which men
passed from barbarism to civilization” (as quoted in BUCKLE 1857:736).
Indeed, so powerful is the evolutionary mode during the Enlighten-
ment that the interest in fundamental sociocultural transformation
threatens on occasion to violate the sanctuary into which biological
thought had retreated. By 1774 the great compiler of the Encyclopédie,
Denis Diderot, had begun to speculate that “the vegetable kingdom
might well be and have been the first source of the animal kingdom,
and have had its own source in the mineral kingdom; and the latter
have originated from universal heterogeneous matter” (DmEROT 1875-
79, IX:265). The Enlightenment philosopher Immanuel Kant noted
“the agreement of so many genera of animals in a common scheme
which appears to be fundamental not only in the structure of their
bodies but also in the disposition of their remaining parts . .. "
(quoted in FOTHERGILL 1952:56). Kant proposed that “this analogy
of forms, which with all their differences seem to have been produced
according to a common original type, strengthen our suspicions of an
actual relationship between them in their production from a common
parent . . . (ibid.) Kant’s views on organic evolution were also sub-
scribed to by Goethe. As Darwin himself came to appreciate, the
eighteenth century ended with a veritable burst of evolutionary pro-
posals: “It is rather a singular instance of the manner in which similar
views arise at about the same time, that Goethe in Germany, Dr.
Darwin, in England [Erasmus Darwin, Charles’s grandfather] and
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire . . . in France, came to the same conclusion
on the origin of species in the years 1794-5” (DARWIN 1958:18). With
the first of Lamarck’s publications in 1801, the consequences of the
general evolutionary outlook irresistibly swept biological thought along

36

toward its great nineteenth-century synthesis. But by that time, the
notion of organic transformation had long since become hopelessly
infected with the virus of “progress.” Neither organic nor superor-
ganic evolutionist formulations have yet recovered fully from this
childhood affliction.

The word progress is an essential element in the vocabulary of the
Enlightenment. It was employed by the philosophes to convey a sense
of moral satisfaction with certain evolutionary trends. Thus, the emer-
gence of representative parliaments was widely regarded as a progres-
sive change; similarly, for Condorcet, Newton’s laws represent a stage
in the progress of the mind. On the other hand, the burning of
Rousseau’s books and the expansion of slave-systems in the New World
were not examples of progress. ’

When presented in its most sophisticated form, the decision that a
particular change is progressive requires two steps. First, a judgment
must be rendered as to whether or not the change had modified the
form in question in a particular direction as established by quanti-
tative or qualitative measures. Thus, any change whose direction is
defined, by whatever arbitrary criteria, is potentially a progressive
change. Consider, for example, the changes involved in continental
gl_aciations. As the glaciers retreat, the earth may be regarded as ex-
hibiting progress toward a tropical climate; or with no less justification,
the very same retreat may be regarded as a retrogression away from
an arctic climate. By the same token, it is altogether a matter of no
scientific consequence for us to describe the recent evolution of
American agriculture as progress toward corporate monopolies or
retrogression away from small family units. From a scientific point of
wew_nothing is added or subtracted by calling a particular trend pro-
gressive or retrogressive. What counts is an adequate description and
correct understanding of the direction of the change as defined by
Intersubjectively valid criteria. It is equally superfluous for us to de-
cide that a particular instance of progress merits our moral or aesthetic
endorsement. Usually, of course, progress is already cryptically iden-
tified with conditions which go from bad to better in terms of a
cultural or idiosyncratic value system. Thus large farms usually repre-
sent progress only to those who approve of their social consequences,
andv this certainly was the way in which the term was used in its
Enhghtenment milieu. That is, not only was a direction of change
Spemﬁed, but progress in that direction was regarded as valuable and
emotionally gratifying. The risk incurred through this dispensable pro-
cedure was that frequently enough there was a neglect of the first step
whereby the direction of change was only vaguely defined; the second

37


===== PAGE 24 =====

———_—_"_——r’“

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment

N ——

step was then taken without loss of enthusiasm, and the result was a
purely idiosyncratic expression of approval or disapproval for a par-
ticular historical event. Thus, the prevailing criterion of progress
during the Enlightenment was change in the direction of greater
rationality. The latter was a fairly serviceable measure of change, as long
as one stuck to the evolution of physical or astronomical theory, but
it was hopelessly vague when it came to judgments about institutions.
Was the league of the Iroquois or the French Republic the more ra-
tional political system? Condorcet was convinced the French Revo-
lution had produced the world’s most rational and hence most
progressive social order; but this judgment was not more (or should
one say, not less?) than the ethnocentric prejudice of a revolutionary
partisan. In the nineteenth century, as we shall sce, reasonability
ceased to be the measure of progressive change. Instead, with Marx,
Spencer, and Darwin progress became somewhat less vague, centering,
respectively, around the notions of the advance toward the commu-
nist millennium, organizational complexity, and efficiency in the strug-
gle for survival. But the partisan involvement of these value judgments
remained undiminished. Neither Spencer nor Darwin, two of the last
century’s greatest minds, could rise to the understanding of the fact
that the moral order they perceived in history was the moral order
that their society and not their science required them to see. Marx
alone rendered his judgments of progress in full awareness of their
culture-bound (class-bound) origins. But this made him, if anything,
even more determined to uphold “progressive” change, and indeed,
to fight for it.

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY THEORIES OF
SOCIOCULTURAL CAUSALITY

It was a conviction common to all of the advanced social phi-
losophers of the Enlightenment that in a more or less remote past the
world’s peoples had enjoyed a social life which by its general simplicity
and by the absence of certain specific institutions, such as private own-
ership of land, centralized government, sharp class differences, and
priest-directed religions, contrasted markedly with Europe’s modern
social order. This early phase in cultural evolution was referred to as
the “state of nature.” Although considerable difference existed as to
the specific characterization of this primitive condition, ranging from
Hobbes's “war of all against all” to Rousseau’s “noble savage,” the
explanation of how some men had terminated the state of nature and

38

arrived at their present customs and institutions was approached in a
fairly uniform fashion. In general it was accepted that the grand mover
of history and the prime cause of continuing differences in manners
and customs was variation in the effectiveness of ratiocination. Civi-
lized man was supposed to have literally thought himself out of the
state of nature by steadily inventing more and more clever and rea-
sonable institutions, customs, and subsistence processes. It is on this
account that the title of Condorcet’s sketch contains the word
Tesprit, which is translated as intellect or mind—Outline of the Intellec-
tual Progress of Mankind—and that Voltaire had made it his objective
to “know the history of the human mind” (quoted in BUCKLE
1857:736). From whence derives the unwarranted ease with which
freshmen in college survey courses are taught to roll off phrases about
the “mind of modern man” or the “mind of Europe.”

THE FALLACY OF CULTURAL IDEALISM

A few preliminary comments concerning the problems that an
emphasis upon “mind” and “reason” present to the theory-building
endeavors of cultural anthropology are needed at this point. Let us
agree that scientific explanations are statements of the conditions
under which predicted or retrodicted events will occur. To explain
sociocultural differences and similarities exclusively in terms of more
or less reasonable thought and action is to omit any statement of con-
ditions. In the view of many eighteenth-century social philosophers, the
explanation of why the Iroquois did not behave like Frenchmen was
the Indians’ self-imposed failure to think their way far enough out
of the state of nature. But under what conditions will a group think
themselves into bilaterality rather than matrilineality, monogamy
rather than polygamy, private property rather than communal own-
ership, etc.? Unless such conditions are specified, appeal to the effects
of rational inventiveness scrve merely to obscure an enduring igno-
rance of scientifically admissible explanations. Thus, to Immanuel
Kant, the revolutionary times through which he was living were char-
acterized by “man’s emergence from his self-imposed nonage.” All
ﬂlaF was necessary for Europe’s Enlightenment to modify social life
tadically was for the public to be given the freedom to think: “in-
fleeq, if it [the public] is only given freedom, enlightenment is almost
Inevitable. There will always be a few independent thinkers, even
among the self-appointed guardians of the multitude. Once such men

39


===== PAGE 25 =====

—————————-———-————ﬁr——

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment

R ————

have thrown off the yoke of nonage, they will spread about them the
spirit of a reasonable appreciation of man’s value and of his duty to
think for himself” (KANT 1946:1071-72).

The fatal potentialities of this approach are realized as soon as an
attempt is made to explain customs which because they are totally
unfamiliar appear to be totally irrational. It is like the case of the
American psychiatrist of my acquaintance who asked his interpreter
what a mental patient in a Bahian hospital had just said: “Nothing,
doctor, it's too stupid to repeat,” was the answer. That was precisely
the quandary of Démeunier. For a brief moment, this great ethnog-
rapher stood, a hundred years before his time, on the threshold of the
study of totemism. It was reported in many accounts that men be-
lieve they have animals as ancestors. But how can one take such ideas
seriously? “It is not mecessary to examine how some men and even
whole nations are able to believe that they are descended from cer-
tain animals. . . . It is clear that this is nonsense, and one is not able
to give a reason for nonsense” (DEMEUNIER 1776, I1:105).

The approach to sociocultural differences through the unfolding of
man’s reasoning potential is best understood as a special variety of
nondeterministic idealism. It should be noted once again for com-
parison with future developments, that for Condorcet, Voltaire, and
Montesquieu it is rational human mental choice that directs history.
As a consequence men are free to shape their social world any way they
see fit. Why, then, is Condorcet able to predict the content of his tenth
epoch? Because men tend eventually to choose what is more rational,
or at least, that was what the philosophes hoped would happen. For
as Peter Gay has pointed out, the notion that the Age of the Enlighten-
ment preached the inevitability of progress is a myth:

Locke, Montesquieu, Hume, Diderot had no theory of progress;
Rousseau’s thought stressed the fact of man’s retrogression and
the hope for man’s regeneration; Voltaire saw human history as a
long string of miseries broken by four happy ages. Only Kant,
with his speculative world history, Turgot with his three stages, and
Condorcet with his ten epochs, may be said to have held a theory
of progress, and these three thinkers stood not at the center but
at the bright end of the spectrum of enlightenment thought

[1964:270-71].
It is obvious that the optimism so often erroneously attributed to
the Enlightenment could only have been a sort of whistling in the

dark. Unable to state the conditions under which men would opt for
“progress,” for peace over war, intelligence against superstition,

40

democracy over tyranny, they could only hope for “progress” bereft of
the deterministic comfort that Hegel, Marx, and the Social Darwin-
ists later gave themselves. In this context, Malthus with his emphasis
on the uncontrollable sexuality of human populations seems not atyp-
ical of the Enlightenment. If history proved anything about the ex-
ercise of the power of rational free choice, it was that man tended to
make a fool of himself (at least in the Enlightenment’s frame of ref-
erence) quite as often as not. This then was the grand paradox of the
times: law governed the universe, determining the smallest motion of
the least grain of sand, but men need not necessarily believe this to
be true, and even if they do, they are free to ignore its consequences.
On the other hand, no age which insisted that man was a part of
nature and that nature was governed by immutable law could totally
abandon history to the vagaries of the human will.

GEOGRAPHICAL DETERMINISM

There are many crosscurrents of material causation stirred up
by the Enlightenment, some of which lead directly to the first full-scale
material-determinist theories of sociocultural evolution. One of the
best elaborated of the determinist positions is that of the influence of
geographical conditions on sociocultural life. Theories of geographical
causation were of course first advanced long before the Enlightenment.
Hippocrates’ treatise On Airs, Waters, and Places was regarded as an
authoritative work well into the seventeenth century. Polybius, the
Greek historian, asserted that “we mortals have an irresistible ten-
dency to yield to climatic influences; and to this cause, and no other,
may be traced the great distinctions that prevail among us in charac-
ter, physical formation, complexion, as well as in most of our
habits . . .7 (quoted in F. THOMAS 1925:34). Among the Romans, the
afchitect Marcus Vitruvius Pollio contributed one of the most extensive
flxscussions, including such tidbits as, “Southern peoples have a keen
intelligence, owing to the rarity of the atmosphere and the heat, while
northern nations, being enveloped in a dense atmosphere, and chilled
b}’ moisture from the obstructing air, have but a sluggish intelligence”
(ibid.:35). Eighteenth-century notions of geographical determinism
were also indebted to the work of Arab geographers such as the
twelfth-century al Idrisi and the fourteenth-century Ibn Khaldun.
The‘lattcr believed that the inhabitants of the warm climates have
passionate natures while those of the colder climates are stolid and
lack vivacity. These contrasts arise from the differential effect of heat

41


===== PAGE 26 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment
- s

upon the animal spirits (ibid.:46). Much of the influence of these
early sources was transmitted to the Enlightenment through the efforts
of the sixteenth-century French political philosopher Jean Bodin.
Working on the theory that for northemers the dominant life fluid
was phlegm, while for southerners it was black bile, Bodin tried to
explain why northern peoples were faithful, loyal to government,
cruel, and sexually uninterested, and why southern peoples were ma-
licious, crafty, wise, expert in science but ill-adapted to political activ-
ity (ibid.:52). Similar problems occupied John Arbuthnot, whose
An Essay Concerning the Effects of the Air on Human Bodies
(1733) was evidently an important source for Montesquieu’s The
Spirit of Laws (1748). Arbuthnot believed that languages as well
as national temperaments were subject to climatological influences.
Northern peoples have languages that abound in consonants because
they are afraid to open their mouths and let in the cold air, while
tropical peoples, who need the extra ventilation, specialize in vowels.
The most sustained Enlightenment claboration of geographical deter-
minism was the contribution of Montesquieu. Northern peoples tend
to be brave, vigorous, insensitive to pain, weakly sexed, intelligent
and drunkards; southern peoples are the opposite. Since the women of
warm countries mature eatly, they are much younger than their hus-
bands and hence less wise; this gives them an inferior status, which,
occurring together with a preponderance of female births and the
cheapness of tropical living, stimulates the development of polygyny
(THOMAS 1925:68).

But this point of view was not without its critics. Helvétius, as we
shall see, derided Montesquieu’s theories while D’Holbach would also
have none of them: “Can it be claimed that the sun which once shone
on the freedom loving Greeks or Romans is today shedding different
rays upon their degenerate descendants?” (p'morsacH 1774, IIL:6).
Yet it would be rather pointless to refute the determinism Montes-
quicu attributes to geographical factors. Neither The Spirit of Laws
nor any of its antecedents amounts to a self-consistent exposition
of cultural causation. Montesquieu’s approach was essentially con-
cerned with how legislators ought to adjust their laws to the condi-
tion of climate and soil. In company with all his contemporaries,
Montesquieu was not capable of rising to a genuinely superorganic
view of history. In the final analysis, the human social order was the
product of actors who might or might not consent to what natural
law suggested was the rational arrangement of a particular time and
place. Ultimately it would be the will and sense of the legislator that
would decide the course of history.

42

ON THE THRESHOLD OF CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

The great luminaries of the eighteenth century struggled toward
the concepts which unlock the secrets of superorganic causality only
to be beaten back by their own implacable dedication to the poWer of
individual rational choice. Turgot, claborating his conception of uni-
versal history, urges us on to unveil the influence of general, necessary,
and particular causes, but he cannot avoid adding at the same time,
“and of the actions of great men” (1844:627). He believed: “One is
forced to admit that if Corneille . . . had been brought up in a vil-
lage and spent his life behind a plow, and that if Racine had been born
in Canada among the Hurons or in Europe in the eleventh century,
they would never have displayed their genius.” But he also implies that
if Newton had died at fifteen, or if Columbus had died in his youth,
the transformations of the Enlightenment and of the age of diséovery
would have been substantially altered (ibid.:45-46).

The inability of the Enlightenment to generate a system of super-
organic causality is especially striking in the case of D’Holbach, whose
programmatic statements on behalf of materialist determinism have al-
ready been cited. In his Systéme de la Nature, D'Holbach argues in
typical Enlightenment fashion that man is a product of his encultura-
tion experience. “We are born without our consent, our ideas come
to us involuntarily, our customs are controlled by those who stipulate
them to us” (1770, I:202). And again in the Systéme Social: “It is in
education that we should seck for the chief sources of the passions
and virtues in man, of the errors or truths which fill his head, of the
habits praiseworthy or demanding of censure . . . (1774, Iiiz).
But how does this social environment arise? D’Holbach’s sociological
imagination can only struggle back to another point on the treadmill:
Hul:nfm beings, individually and collectively, make decisions, and their
decisions create institutions which constitute the cultural environ-

ment. G. V. Plekhanov’s description of the circularity of this argu-
ment cannot be improved:

Man is the product of social environment. The character of this
environment is, by hypothesis, determined by the action of the
“government.” The actions of the government, for example legis-
lative activity, belong to the sphere of conscious human activity.
This conscious activity in its turn, depends on the “opinions” of
the persons acting. . . . Unnoticed one of the sides of the antin-
omy has turned into its opposite. The difficulty is evidently set

43


===== PAGE 27 =====

“_—————-—?———f

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 2. Enlightenment

—_

aside and the “philosopher” continues his “investigations” with
quiet conscience. . . . The apparent solution of the antinomy is
simply a complete break with materialism. The human brain, that
“soft wax” which assumes different forms under the influence of
impressions coming from the social environment, is finally trans-
formed into the creator of this environment to which it was

obliged for its impressions [1934:73-74)-

D’Holbach’s approach to superorganic causality was surpassed by his
great contemporary Claude Helvétius. This frequently maligned figure
ranks high among those who came closest to elaborating a set of
principles capable of breaking through the mind-culture-mind taut-
ology. Helvétius starts from the assumption that all customs and
morality are ultimately the expression of physical sensations and
the needs of hunger, thirst, and other bodily requirements. These
physical drives establish in man characteristic interests, first of all
ego-centered, but inevitably expanding to embrace social groupings by
which the maximum pleasures and minimum pains per individual are
guaranteed. The only significant variables affecting these interests
which Helvétius admits are those resulting from experience. Although
Helvétius does not categorically deny the possibility of inborn in-
equalities, he insists, in effect, that it is from education that all sig-
nificant interpersonal differences arise. Not again until the twentieth
century is there such a sustained and uncompromising denial of racial
and hereditary influence upon individuals and societies. “The race
theory of human history, the idea that different social classes corres-
pond to different ability levels biologically transmitted forms the oppo-
site extreme to the thoughts of Helvétius” (GROSSMAN 1926:172).
Having mounted the sociocultural treadmill, Helvétius proceeds to
kick away one of the previously most favored escape ladders—geog-
raphy. Montesquieu does not fare well in De I'Esprit:

If the different temperature of climates had such an influence on
the need and its capacities, how comes it that the Romans so
magnanimous, so brave, under a republican government, are now
so dastardly and effeminate? How comes it that the Greeks and
Romans, who were formerly so worthy of esteem for their wit and
virtue, and were the admiration of the earth, are now dwindled
into contempt? How comes it that those Asiatics, so brave under
the name of Elamites, were so cowardly and base in the time of
Alexander, under that of Persians; and yet under the name of
Parthians became the terror of Rome, and that in an age when
the Romans had lost none of their courage and discipline. How
comes it that the Spartans, the most brave and virtuous of the
Greeks, while they were religious observers of the laws of Lycurgus,

44

lost their reputation for both, when, after the Peloponnesian war,
they suffered gold and luxury to be introduced among them?,
e How comes it that the Jews, so often defeated by their ene-
mies shewed under the conduct of the Maccabees a courage
worthy of the most warlike nation? How comes it that the arts
and sciences have been by turns cultivated and neglected by dif-
ferent nations, and have successively run through almost all
climates? . . .

Wh)f did philosophy pass from Greece into Hesperia, from
Hesperia to Constantinople and Arabia? and why, repassing
Arabia into Italy, has it found an asylum in France, England, and
even in the north of Europe? Why do we no longer find a’Pho—
cion at Athens, a Pelopidas at Thebes, and a Decius at Rome? The
temperature of these climates is not changed [HELVETIUS 1810:

340-41]-

IIel'vétius goes on to argue in a similar fashion against the geo-
graphical interpretation of the conquest of southern Europeans by
northerners, and the apathy of Asiatic people before their despotic
m!ers (1810:350ff.). He does not skirt the question which must in-
evitably follow: What then is the cause of these changes in the arts
sciences, courage, virtue, and customs? His general answer is that wé
must look to “moral” causes; i.e., in modern terms, to sociocultural
causes. Very good. Our appetite is whetted, but what precisely are
th?:se'socmcultural causes? We are not destined to be satisfied. On
Asllahf: tyranny, for example, the solution offered is so peculiar in its in-
spiration that it deserves to be quoted in full:

After having in vain exhausted physical causes for the foundation
of the eastern despotism, it is proper to have recourse to moral
causes, and consequently to history. This informs us that the na-
tions, by becoming civilized, insensibly lost their courage, their
virtue and even their love of liberty; that every society, immedi-
ately a.fter its institution, according to the different circumstances
in which it was placed, marched with a slower or more rapid
pace towards slavery. Now the southern nations, being the first
assembled in society, must consequently have been the first sub-
ject to despotic power; because to this every species of govern-
ment tends, and it is a form which every state preserves till its
entire destruction.

But, say those who believe the world more ancient than we do,
ho‘w does it happen that there are still republics upon earth? To
this it may be replied, that if all societies, by being civilized,
tend to despotism, all despotic power tends to depopulation. The
chm?tes subject to this power, after a certain number of ages be-
coming uncultivated and depopulated, are changed into deserts;

45


===== PAGE 28 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the plains in which were cities of immense extent, or where sump-
tuous edifices were raised, became by little and little covered
with forests, in which some families took refuge, who insensibly
formed new nations of savages; and this succession must con-
stantly preserve republics upon earth.

I shall only add to what I have just said, that if the people of
the south have been longer slaves, and if the nations of Europe,
except the Muscovites, may be considered as free, it is because
these nations have been more lately polished: because, in the
time of Tacitus, the Germans and Gauls were still no more than
a kind of savages, and that, unless a nation be at once driven to
slavery by force of arms, this will not be accomplished till after a
long succession of ages, and by insensible but continued attempts
made by tyrants to extinguish in the hearts of their subjects that
virtuons love which all mankind naturally have for liberty, and
thus to debase the mind, so far as to make it bow to oppression

and slavery [ibid.:351-52].

This strange sort of cyclical evolutionism does not, of course, explain
why all nations should march implacably toward slavery. Elsewhere,
in the explanation of why the age of Greek science has passed, Helvé-
tius falls back into the familiar idealist circle:

Tt is because the form of their government is changed; like water
which assumes the shape of all the vessels into which it is poured,
the character of nations is susceptible of all forms, and in every
country the genius of the government constitutes the genius of

the nation [ibid.:353].

(See p. 456 below for Helvétius’s devastating and currently relevant
critique of national character theories.)

Finally, the “government,” vague to begin with, expands to fill the
entire social universe:

The inequality observable among men, therefore, depends on
the government under which they live; on the greater or less hap-
piness of the age in which they are born; on education; on their
desire of improvement, and on the importance of the ideas that
are the subject of their contemplations [ibid.:361].

In this fashion, the material “interests” surmised by Helvétius to lie
at the root of sociocultural differences forever escape concrete formu-
lation. Material interests become instead concrete desires; desires are
specific products of the mind; the mind shapes its products through
legislation, and we are back again to the central dilemma. The spec-
tacle of Helvétius struggling against the limitations of his own culture
is again depicted in a striking fashion by Plekhanov:

46

2. Enlightenment

The insuperable influence of government is a kind of impasse
from which it is only possible to emerge by means of a miracle
that is by means of a government which shall suddenly decide tc;
cure all the ills which it has brought on itself or which have been
inflicted by previous governments [1934:160).

The irony of this recurrent retreat to cultural idealism is that sev-
eral important fragments of cultural-materialist theory were already
being employed with enduring results. Indeed, most of the essential
ingredients of a cultural-materialist strategy were embodied in widely
accepted proposals concerning the relationship between subsistence
and social structure. Turgot, it will be recalled, subscribed to what
may fairly be called an early version of a techno-environmental
theory of social stratification. A similar kind of causal approach had
even been ventured upon by Montesquieu when he noted:

The people of Siberia cannot live in bodies, because they are un-
a‘ble to find subsistence; the Tartars may live in bodies for some
time, because their herds and flocks may for a time be reassem-
bled. [Among noncultivators,] people wander and disperse them-
selves in pasture grounds and forests. Marriage cannot there have
the security it has amongst us, where it is fixed by habitation,
and where the wife continues in one house; they may then more
easily change their wives, possess many, and sometimes mix in-
differently like brutes [1949:176-77].

The same theme was also touched on by Ferguson:

A hoard, collected from the simple productions of nature, or a
herd of cattle, are, in every rude nation, the first species of wealth.
The circumstances of the soil, and the climate, determine whether
the inhabitant shall apply himself chiefly to agriculture or pas-
ture; whether he shall fix his residence, or be moving continually
about with all his possessions [1819:177].

And Helvétius is no stranger to the idea. Indeed, in the case of the
custom of killing off aged parents, Helvétius's method of explanation
provides a tantalizingly clear demonstration of how a general solution
to t.he problem of sociocultural differences and similarities might be
achieved. It is not legislation out of a cloud which established the
C!.IStOm; rather, the custom results from the interaction between a so-
cial group, its subsistence equipment, and its natural habitat. To give
the accepted modern formulation, perfectly anticipated by Helvétius,

low-energy hunting societies frequently cannot support nonfood pro-
ducers other than those destined to replace the adult generation:

47



===== PAGE 29 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

This is the cause of this disgusting custom; for this reason a no-
mad people which is kept by its hunting and lack of means of ex-
istence for six months in a year in impassable forests, sees itself,
as it were, forced to this barbarity; in this way parent-murder in
these countries arises out of, and is carried out on, the basis of the
same principles of humanity which cause us to shudder at the
perpetrators [HELVETIUS, quoted in PLEKHANOV 1934:141].

Here then were the specific “interests,” spelled out not by mind in a
vacuum, but by the whole human organism pitted against an array of
natural forces which would admit only a limited spectrum of indi-
vidual and social responses. But neither Montesquieu, Turgot, Fer-
guson, nor Helvétius really grasped the potentialities of this approach;
instead, it appeared as one element among many, in a puzzle whose
full dimensions had not yet dawned upon the consciousness of the

times.

MILLAR’S CONTRIBUTION

There was, however, at least one tour de force achieved during
the eighteenth century which in practice consistently employed the
principles of techno-economic analysis. The work in question, pre-
viously mentioned, was John Millar's Observations Concerning the
Distinction of Ranks in Society (1771). Millar’s statement of the
surplus theory is similar to that of his contemporaries:

A savage who carns his food by hunting and fishing, or by gather-
ing the spontaneous fruits of the earth, is incapable of attaining
any considerable refinement in his pleasure. He finds so much dif-
ficulty and is exposed to so many hardships, in procuring the
necessaries, that he has no leisure or encouragement to aim at the
Juxuries and conveniences of life. His wants are few, and in pro-
portion to the narrowness of his circumstances. His great object is
to be able to satisfy his hunger; and, after the utmost exertion of
labour and activity, to enjoy the agreeable relicf of idleness and

repose [1771:2].

From differences in productive mode, Millar deduces not only dif-
ferences in settlement pattern, degree of social stratification, and
nature of political organization—all of which are sporadically treated
in a similar fashion by one or another of his contemporaries—but he
also goes on to handle family form, marriage patterns, sexuality, and
patterns of labor utilization in an almost completely consistent fash-
jon. As I have previously suggested, Millar's achievement in treating
the development of slavery is particularly impressive. With the possi-

48

2. Enlightenment

ble exception of Helvétius, the Enlightenment social philosophe

‘tended to regard slavery as the outcome of depraved minds wallop ing
in a sea of Jr{ational decisions. Millar, however, never loses sight ozviﬂg
n-fatenal, social, and individual rewards and disadvantages whigch att de
dxflferenvt ]allmr systems under different techno-economic conditisn

Ml}lar implicitly appears to subscribe less than any of his contem o
raries to the notion that “rational” decisions always result in institutig: ;
that are sanctioned by traditional European norms. It is implicit or:

every hand that the order in histo i i
b ry arises from mate i
conditions rather than from mental exercise: rial and bodily

It is difficult to ascertain the degree of authority which, from th
principles of justice and humanity, we are, in any situation e:
mitted to assume over our fellow creatures. But the fact adm’itls7 of
no question, that people have commonly been disposed to use
Fhexr power in such a manner as appears most conducive to their
interest, and most agreeable to their predominant passions. It is
natural to suppose that the master would set no bounds ‘to his
prerogative over those unhappy persons who, from their circum-
stances, were under the necessity of yielding an implicit obedi-
ence to his commands. He forced them to labor as much, and
gave them as little in return for it as possible [MILLAR 1771 :yxgﬁ]

Ml]l;fr accepts the possibility that “prejudices” and “the blind pre-
possession which is commonly acquired in favor of ancient usa, li:s"
{mght prevent the abolition of slavery even “during the succesgsive
improvements of society in knowledge, arts, and manufacture”
81177.1:'205-6), but he rejects the possibility that it was the advent of

ristianity \.u}uch brought an end to slavery in Europe. Instead of re-
:ortmg to this common ideological deus ex machina, he attempts to
Tace, step by step, how slaves were replaced by serfs and serfs by rent-
Paying peasants, always in conformity with the previously discussed
p]r;nmple tha}t 'the masters, lords, landlords, and employers never
abandon their intent to get the maximum return for the least outlay:

Thus, by degrees, the ancient villenage came to be entirely abol-
ished. The peasants, who cultivated their farms at their own
charges, and at their own hazard, were of course emancipated
from the authority of their master, and could no longer be re-
garded as in the condition of servants. Their personal subjection
was at an end. It was of no consequence to the landlord how they
conducted_themsclves; and, provided they punctually paid his
rent, nothing farther could be required of them. Therepwas no
reason to insist that they should remain in the farm longer than
they pleased; for the profits it afforded made them, ccﬁlmonly

49


===== PAGE 30 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

not more willing to leave it than the proprictor to put them away.
‘When agriculture became so beneficial a trade, when the state of
those who followed that profession was so much improved, no per-
son had any difficulty to procure a sufficient number of tenants
to labour his estate. It was, on the contrary, sometimes difficult for
the farmer to obtain land sufficient for the exercise of his em-
ployment; and, after he had been at pains to improve the soil, he
was in danger of being dispossessed by the proprietor, before he
was indemnified for the trouble and expence which he had sus-
tained [ibid.:220-21].

Millar also correctly drew attention to the special relationship be-
tween slavery and what we would today call “gang labor.” He appreci-
ated the fact that only certain kinds of productive tasks could employ
a labor force that was obliged to work essentially without reward. Thus,
the closest approximation to slavery in eighteenth-century Scotland
was found at the coal and salt mines:

In coal-work, as the different workmen are collected in one place,
instead of being scattered, like the ordinary peasants, over an ex-
tensive territory, they were capable of being put under the care
of an overseer, who might compel them to labour; and the master
did not so immediately feel the necessity of resigning that au-
thority over them with which he was invested [ibid.:230].

Millar was thus able correctly to identify (if somewhat sarcastically)
one of the fundamental ecological bases of Negro slavery in the New

World:

It merits particular attention, that the chief circumstance which
contributed to procure freedom to the slaves in Europe, had no
place in our American plantations. From the manner of working
the mines, a number of slaves are usually collected together and
may therefore be placed under the command of a single person,
who has it in his power to superintend their behaviour, and to
punish their negligence. The same observation is applicable to
the planting of sugar, and to the other occupations in our colonies,
in which the negroes perform the same sort of work which in
Europe is commonly performed by cattle, and in which, of con-
sequence, many servants are kept upon the same plantation. As
the slaves are continually under the lash of their master, he has
not been forced to use the disagreeable expedient of rewarding
their labour, and of improving their condition by those means
which were found so necessary, and which were employed with so
much emolument to encourage the industry of the peasants in
Europe [MILLAR 1771 in W. C. LEEMANN 1960:315].

50

2. Enlightenment

As .]ong as the Enlightenment theoreticians stressed the factor of
conscious rational choice as the key to the explanation of sociocultural
dlﬂercr}ces, they remained cut off from genuine understanding of the
systemic anq adaptive nature of social organization. They coEld onl
seea collection of individuals more or less successfully controllin thei):
passions ur}der the halting influence of reason. They could notgsee a
superorganic system interacting with the natural environment and
res'pondmg with adaptive evolutionary transformations, which were
neither comprehended nor consciously selected by t},le individual
members of the society. Glimpses of such superorganicity are found
here and there throughout the century. Ferguson, for one, had a
fectly clear conception of its importance: ' ’ per

Like the winds that come we know not whence, and blow wither-
soevcr'they list, the forms of society are derived from an obscure
and dlstar.lt origin; they arise long before the date of philosoph
from the instincts, not from the speculations of men. The crgw}cl'ly
of mgnkmd are directed in their establishments and measures, b
the circumstances in which they are placed. . . . Every step ’anc)ll
every movement of the multitude, even in what are termed en-
llgh'tened ages, are made with equal blindness to the future; and
nations stumble upon establishments which are indeed the ;esult
of human action, but not the execution of any human design. If
Cromwell said, that a man never mounts higher than when he
knows not whither he is going; it may with more reason be af-
firmed of communities, that they admit of the greatest revolu-
thl.lS' \'vherc no change is intended, and that the most refined
politicians do not always know whither they are leading the state
by their projects [1819:222-23].

But Ferguson, whpsc faith in rational political solutions is nowhere
exceeded among his contemporaries, scarcely maintained this point of
;’ICW throu_ghm'.\\L his writings. Millar’s efforts, on the other hand, bring
s(e)]r(«]‘.zln?pcsxﬁc 'mstanf:es of howl the Acxpressed intentions of men are
Conclud: equ}‘:tc guides to the.u‘ ultimate performance. Observations
e wes with a dcvastahpg critique of slavery in the English colonies
i T just then' beginning to send out their first cries for inde-
pendence based on liberty and natural rights. In Millar’s final para-

a A
E_T ph there are lessons which since have been rediscovered as many
mes as they have been buried:

. it offers a curious spectacle to observe,
f ; , that the same people
:&]’1110 tgll.( in so ]}lgh a'strain of political liberty, and who colilsiger
! (;]prmlcge of imposing their own taxes as one of the inalienable
tights of mankind, should make no scruple of reducing a great

51


===== PAGE 31 =====

"he Rise of Anthropological Theory

proportion of the inhabitants into circumstances by which they
are not only deprived of property, but almost of every right what-
soever. Fortune perhaps never produced a situation more calcu-
lated to ridicule a grave and even a liberal hypothesis, or to show
how little the conduct of men is at bottom directed by any

philosophical principles [1771:241-42].

It is thus possible to discern, scattered here and there in the writ-
ings of the eighteenth century, implicit in one instance, explicit in
others, ordinarily strewn at random, among contrary and self-defeating
convictions, but occasionally as part of a clear and definite system, the
raw materials, the conceptual tools, and the first faltering practical ex-
periences with the scientific explanation of sociocultural phenomena.

52

Reaction and Recovery:
The Early Nineteenth
Century

3

50

’I:‘IE French Revolution, the Napoleonic wars, the political restora-
tions ushered in by the Congress of Vienna, and the rapid expansion
of industrial manufacture and international trade did not crystallize
any single line of approach to sociocultural studies. Although ‘the po-
litical aftermath of the French Revolution was the occasion for a re-
surgence of some ideas which the philosophes thought had been
permanently laughed out of educated discourse, the trend toward a
natural-science approach to history and sociocultural differences was in
no dfmger of being extinguished. Continuing advances in the applied
physical and chemical sciences, vital to warfare, industry, and com-
mercc, insured safe passage for the nascent social sciences through re-
'f!ctlonary intervals. Moreover, the European bourgeoisie, which came
Increasingly to dominate political life in Europe, had not been so
frightened by the radical phases of the French Revolution as to accept
a full-s‘calc return to the theological doctrines of the ancien régime.
Therf: is no doubt, however, that fear of the urban mobs committed
influential segments of the bourgeoisie to the discouragement of ma-
terialistic interpretations of history.

53


===== PAGE 32 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

The Napoleonic wars and their immediate aftermath slowed, but
did not halt, the movement toward a science of man. During the first
quarter of the century, the balance shifted against the heritage of the
philosophes; but in the second quarter, scientism rallied, gathered new
strengths, and prepared for the decisive battles of the Darwinian era.
While religious revivalism, political conservatism, and romantic na-
tionalism all tended to undermine the foundations of the nascent
social sciences, these were offset by the advances in physics, chem-
istry, and engineering, which enhanced the economic importance and
prestige of the scientific method.

In the perpetuation of the scientific approach, the theory of laissez-
faire must be accorded an important role. It was early in this period
that Jeremy Bentham, James Mill, David Ricardo, and John McCulloch
worked out the classical principles of natural, self-regulating economic
systems. Paradoxically, while serving as the scientific ideology of indus-
trial capitalism, classical economic theory provided the basis and inspi-
ration for socialist and communist attempts at social science. Thus,
John Stuart Mill as well as Marx and Engels reared their interpretations
of sociocultural phenomena on this common foundation. At the same
time, the antiscientific forces found it increasingly difficult to contain
the advances in biological and geological knowledge within the limits
of the Judeo-Christian eschatology. As we shall see in subsequent
chapters, the religious opposition to a science of man was shortly to be
routed by the combined forces of Darwinian biology and Spencerian
sociology.

The triumphs of Darwinism and Spencerism do not relieve us of the
necessity of noting the special nature of the challenge embodied in
the post-Napoleonic period of political and religious reaction. When the
specifically anthropological expression of the science of man comes to
be formulated by Edward Tylor, Lewis Henry Morgan, John Lubbock,
and John McLennan, the frame of reference most vital to their argu-
ments assumes the prior existence of the views of such reactionaries as
Louis De Bonald, Joseph de Maistre, Richard Whately, and W. Cooke
Taylor. This background is essential if we are to understand the special
meaning associated with the distinction between eatly nineteenth-
century theories of “degenerationism” and later nineteenth-century
theories of evolutionism. Degenerationism—the belief that all con-
temporary primitives are descended from peoples who enjoyed civiliza-
tion prior to the construction of the Tower of Babel—was, in its multi-
farious expressions, little more than an attempt to preserve the author-
ity of Biblical history. It was not, in any strict sense, antievolutionary.
That is, it did not deny for the cultural domain the transformation of

54

r—'———‘

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

types so vehemently opposed in biology. When the later nineteenth-
century “evolutionists” argued for evolutionism, their rather vapid
notions of a movement from simple to complex forms acquired intel-
lectual significance only in relation to the prevailing Judeo-Christian
ideology. In the context of the times, to assert that there had been a
general movement from savagery to civilization was to avow that the
Biblical account of the origin of institutions was wrong and that history
could be understood without calling upon God as an active historical
agent. It was this issue and not evolutionism per se which dominated
the century.

THE THEOLOGICAL REACTION

The political reaction to the Napoleonic wars was especially
favorable to the temporary resurgence of theological interpretations of
history. Intense missionization abroad was accompanied by funda-
mentalist and pietistic revivalism at home. In England there was the
“Christian Evidences” movement founded by William Paley, which
aggressively sought to restore faith on the basis of the “argument from
design” (i.e., the wonders of nature could have been made only by a
Creative Intelligence). Later, in the 1830’s, there was the “Oxford
Movement,” whose most famous member, John Henry Newman, urged
thie return of Anglicanism to Catholicism on the grounds that “Outside
of the Catholic Church all things tend to atheism” (quoted in H. E.
BARNES 1965, 11:859). In France, comparable reassertions of orthodoxy
were led by Frangois René de Chateaubriand, who urged that it was
mm‘et yaluable to preserve the mysterious than to achieve enlighten-
ment.

Some of those who won prominence as spokesmen of the theistic
resurgence sought to discredit the total scientific-philosophical contri-
bution of the previous four centuries. The influential Savoy count,
Joseph de Maistre, for example, attacked the Enlightenment in every
aspect, down to its Lockean foundations. Declaring the attempt to
discover the origin of ideas “an enormous ridiculousness,” he accused
John Locke of being the enemy of all moral authority. “By his coarse
;}’St;ﬁm, Locke has unchained materialism” (quoted in MAZLISH 1955:

14).

De Maistre’s know-nothing antiscientism sought to return to the
Pre-Lockean emphasis upon absolute knowledge imparted by unrea-
sonable and unknowable processes. The directing hand of God works
n al} things: “. . . truth, whose name men pronounce so boldly, is
nothing else, at least for us, than that which appears true to the con-

55



===== PAGE 33 =====

56

The Rise of Anthropological Theory ! 3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century
science of the greatest number of people . . .’ (ibid.:77). Science, conclude, al'ong with Martin Dobrizhoffer (see p. 17) that God alone
the brazen upstart, corruptor of truth, ought to be put back in the place must h_ave invented words and grammar—not only spoken language,
it had occupied during Medieval times: but written language as well: “It is thus philosophically and morally
o oo impossible for man to have invented the art of speaking or the art of
If wg ('iut not;] [c}:un:l mfﬂt]]i old n;ammsli :g :glelszgoi‘s‘ :‘50 tn:\t/e:;- writing” (DE BONALD 1826:283). Both De Maistre and De Bonald de-
stored into the hands of the priests, and i r C - \ voted themselves to linking up a people’s language with immutable
where placed in the second mgk’ t]be de"gs ;VC};;;};:‘Z:‘Q :}s;i:l;z ) national character and his%oricpal cfestil;y. Thegir egmphasis upon the
'?lca}culabli{ we Shfa]ljl bc?.ome,b.‘;u‘m IZT 4 g ; mystical maturation of each nation’s language, laws, and customs under
the lowest degree of brutality [ibid.:199]. the guidance of providence was echoed in the Romantic nationalism of
De Maistre insisted that there was no disorder in the universe, since - Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Georg W. F. Hegel. The fundamentally
everything happened according to God’s plan. God was not, however, antiscientific and obscurantist roots of all of these doctrines is perhaps
incapable of miracles, and these happened frequently enough (and at bfast gommunlcgted by reference to De Bonald’s ultimate political vin-
the convenience of the observer) to suspend for all practical purposes | dication, when in 1827 he became State Censor in the government of
belief in the watchmaker model. The “most perfidious temptation” of i Charles X.
the human mind is “that of believing in invariable laws of nature” ‘ It has been inadequately appreciated that the extremist ideological
(ibid.:173). In the realm of sociocultural events, miracles were the count'erattadf represented by lDe' foistre and De Bfmald was properly
order of the day. Indeed, De Maistre’s explanation of the French Revo- f speaking antirational and antiscientific, but not antievolutionist, as far
lution itself is that it was a miracle caused by God’s desire to punish as cultural evolution is concerned. By their insistence upon the essen-
and regenerate man. “It is because of the fall, owing to his evil nature, tial accuracy of the Biblical account of the origin and transformation
that man must suffer wars, famine, and earthquakes; the Revolution is of institutions, these reactionary figures were promulgating cultural
of the same character as these other visitations” (ibid.:79). Belief in eyolutionary doctrines. Despite his opposition to the “banal hypothe-
the fall opposed itself, of course, to the previous century’s doctrine of a sis” that man had raised himself from barbarism to civilization, De
universal evolutionary sequence running from savagery to civilization. T Bonald was perfectly well acquainted with the evolutionary transfor-
For De Maistre, there was no greater error than the postulation of this mations that had occurred in the classical, medieval, and modern
sequence: “We always start from the banal hypothesis that man has worlds. Ol:l the other hand, biological transformism, as presented by
raised himself gradually from barbarism to knowledge and civilization. Jean Baptiste Lamarck, is for De Bonald and his counterrevolutionary
This is the favorite dream, the mothererror . . . of our century” colleagues, anathema, “a monstrous hypothesis”:
(ibid.:qo). Although De Maistre urges that 4the mozal order hasl its They have imagined myriads of centuries during which man . . .
laws as well as the physical, and the investigation of these laws is to- could have been born from the slime of the earth, warmed by the
gether worthy of occupying the meditations of a true philosopher rays of the sun, at first imperceptibly animalcule, then insect, fish,
(ibid.:196), it is clear that the overwhelming drift of his thought is biped or quadruped, finally man; and in this hypothesis it was
toward the suppression of genuine social science. as easy to make man the inventor of his language as to make the
The antiscientism of the counterrevolutionary social philosophers ] sun creator of man [MAZLISH 1955:199].
was not always as evident as in the case of De Maistre. In the writings S T . ) . .
of De Maistre’s fellow royalist, Louis De Bonald, much lip service is i he companion heresy in the superorganic realm is not that cultural
paid to the importance of proper reasoning in sociocultural matters and A foflfls have evolved, one from the ot}}er, but mthef that t}_]cy have
to the need for a science of society. But De Bonald is not free of ani- originated, endured, and/or changed without the design and interven-
mistic flights whenever science might threaten to dislodge a Biblical tion of mell'nbcrs of the Judeo-Christian pantheon. As in the previous
prejudice. Thus, in his Philosophical Reflections on the First Objects century, this heresy was promulgated principally by cultural idealists,
of Moral Understanding (1826), De Bonald pursues at great length who ranged from atheists to deists and pantheists. The immediate
and with some erudition the question of the origin of language, only to enemies of De Bonald and De Maistre were thus not Marx and Engels,

57


===== PAGE 34 =====

—?——

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

but rather all those who had acquired from the Enlightenment the
belief that human history was the natural product and embodiment
of man’s mental and spiritual life.

The theological issue of degeneration versus evolution should also
not be confused with the question of progress and perfectibility.
Nothing prevented the defenders of orthodox theology from viewing
history as an unfolding of successively more perfect moral and physical
states. After the “fall,” in other words, humanity was seen as struggling
to regain the perfection it had once possessed. W. Cooke Taylor’s
Natural History of Society (1840, 11:341), a degenerationist milestone,
was strongly devoted to the Enlightenment principle that “a capacity
for improvement was the essential characteristic of man.” Yet Taylor,
under the inspiration of Richard Whately, the Archbishop of Dublin,
insisted upon a literal sequence of fall, flood, Babel, and diaspora.
Some groups thereafter degenerated into savagery, but others, aided by
God, progressed toward new heights of civilization. Taylor’s views are
summarized in the following passage:

‘We have seen that no savage nation ever emerged from barbarism
by its own unaided exertions; and that the natural tendency of
tribes in such a condition is to grow worse instead of better. Civi-
lization could not have been an invention, for the inventive faculty
proceeds from something already known. . . .

This account of the origin of man, and of civilization, to which
we have attained, by a long course of reasoning, is precisely that
which is contained in the oldest book existing—the Book of
Genesis. “God created man in his own image,”—gave him “do-
minion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and
over every living thing that creepeth on the earth,”—and “he put
him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it,”—and “he
saw that it was not good for man to be alone.” Here we have it
clearly stated, that man, instead of being placed upon the earth
a helpless, untutored savage, was gifted with intelligence,—was
taught the nature of the different beings by which he was sur-
rounded,—was instructed in agriculture, one of the most impor-
tant arts of life,—and was declared to be formed for society. To
the truth of this statement, all the traditions of ancient nations,
and all the investigations of modem science, bear concurrent
testimony; they not only confirm the statement, but they deprive
all other theories of the merit even of plausibility [ibid., 1:309-10].

In Archbishop Whately’s own formulation of the issues, there is no
mistaking the connection between degenerationism and the defense of
Biblical authority:

58

Divine instruction is proved to be necessary, not merely for an
end which we think desirable, or which we think agreeable to
Divine wisdom and goodness, but for an end which we know has
been attained. That man could not have made himself, is ap-

pealed to as a proof of the agency of a Divine Creator; and that
mankind could not in the first instance have civilized them-

selves, is a proof exactly of the same kind and of equal strength,
of the agency of a Divine Instructor [quoted in TAYLOR 1840, I:329].

THE POSITIVIST COMPROMISE

Nineteenth-century anthropological theory was to become
deeply involved in the rebuttal of this theological position. What was
at stake in Whately’s advice that “man could not have made himself”
was really nothing less than the possibilitv of a science of man (cf.
cHILDE 1951b). The reaffirmation of this possibility took shape under
the tutelage of different philosophical and epistemological assump-
tions, many of which, from the standpoint of modem social science,
constitute no great improvement over Whately’s or De Maistre’s bibli-
ology. Most of the rebuttals exhibited evident signs of compromise
with the regnant religious and political ideological establishments. The
element of compromise was clearest and most debilitating in the case
of the philosophical and cultural idealists—Claude Henri Saint-Simon,
Auguste Comte, and Georg W. F. Hegel; others, like John S. Mill,
Adolphe Quételet, and Henry Thomas Buckle, approached the physi-
calist model of science with less embarrassment; finally, but reserved
for discussion in later chapters, are the radical expressions of scientism
embodied in the works of Spencer and Marx.

The curious twisting effects of the intellectual reaction to the French
Revolution and the Napoleonic wars are prominently displayed in
the works of Claude Henri Saint-Simon and his one-time secretary
and collaborator, Auguste Comte. While their scientific inspiration was
clearly pre-Revolutionary, their major concern seems to have been to
avoid being identified with political subversion. To prove themselves
harmless, they adopted eccentricities of behavior and thought that
greatly diminish their stature relative both to the Enlightenment and
to many of their actual or near contemporaries. Like a score of En-
lightenment predecessors, Saint-Simon and Comte argued for the
creation of a new “science of man,” which was to embrace human
affairs with the objectivity that had won notable success in the in-
organic and organic realms. In Saint-Simon’s version, this new science
was conceived as a branch of physiology and hence was called “social
physiology” (MARKkHAM 1952:xxi). It was Saint-Simon’s hope that

59


===== PAGE 35 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

eventually a unifying principle, such as gravity, would be found appli-
cable to all of the sciences. Comte, on the other hand, envisioned
what he called, in the first volume of his Cours de Philosophie Positive,
“social physics,” a discipline which presupposed the existence of all
the inorganic and organic sciences, but which could not be reduced
to the terms or principles of any of them. When Adolphe Quételet
began in 1835 to use the phrase “social physics,” Comte, who was ad-
dicted to slogans, felt obliged to change the name of the new science to
“sociology” (coMTE 1830-42, IV:7n). The innovation was not made
until the appearance of the fourth volume of Cours de Philosophie
Positive (ibid.:252n). This terminological quirk earned for him the
reputation of being the “founder of sociology,” a distinction which, if
not more appropriate for any number of more original predecessors, is
certainly better reserved for Quételet, and his quantified treatment of
European institutions, to which we shall return in a moment.

Saint-Simon called his approach to phenomena “positive” to dis-
tinguish it from the critical or nonconstructive modes of thought he
attributed to the philosophes (cf. MARCUSE 1960:327). Saint-Simon’s
“positivism” represents a phase of human intellectual growth that
follows upon the previous polytheistic and theistic periods. In Comte’s
elaboration of Saint-Simon’s program, positivism is defined as the ded-
ication to the discovery of the “invariable relations among phenom-
ena” as distinct from the search for causes (coMTE 183042, I:14). Pre-
occupation with unknowable causes was the principal defect of the
earlier theological and metaphysical stages of intellectual evolution. It
was Comte’s belief that not only was he the first to suggest this intel-
lectual series, but that it was universally valid, the most important of
all sociological laws:

1 believe I have discovered a great fundamental law. This law is
that each of our principle conceptions, each branch of our knowl-
edge, passes through three different theoretical states: the theolog-
ical or fictive state; the metaphysical or abstract; the scientific or
positive state [ibid.].

Despite the fact that, as Emile Durkheim once observed, “the idea,
the word, and even the outline of positivist philosophy are all found
in Saint-Simon” (PURKHEIM 1¢62:142), Comte attempted to sup-
press all evidence of the influence exerted upon him by his master
and went so far as to call him “a depraved charlatan” (MARKHAM 1952:
xxxiii). Eccentricities of a messianic cast marred the contributions of
both Saint-Simon and Comte, rendering neither of them very palatable

60

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

as scientific paragons. Saint-Simon declared: “I am convinced that I
am fulfilling a divine mission,” and after his death his pronouncements
on the need for a new ethically oriented religion in which scientists
and artists were to be the priests actually led to the establishment of
communistically oriented cults in France, with “missions” in England,
Germany, and Belgium. Comte, who was initially disdainful of pander-
ing to human emotions, underwent a conversion during a love affair, to
emerge finally in his Politique Positive (1851-54), as the “pope” of
positivism.

In his Philosophie Positive, Comte promised his readers that the
empirical evidence for the great law he had discovered would be
elaborated in subsequent publications. After his conversion, however,
Comte had no time for such trifles. When Politique Positive was
published, it contained none of the promised documentation; instead,
Comte referred the reader back to the earlier volumes, as the best one
could hope for under the circumstances. This kind of unfulfilled
promise is, of course, not uncommon in the grandiose scholarly world
of the nineteenth century. What is exceptional about Comte’s case is
ft]hehextmordinary rationalization he used as a license for his conjectural

ights:

The progress I have achieved has procured for me a certain au-
thority; and my conceptions are now sufficiently matured. I am
entitled, therefore, to procced with the same freedom and ra-
pidity as my principle ancestors, Aristotle, Descartes and Leib-
nitz, who confined themselves to a definite expression of their
views, leaving the verification and development of them to the
public [1875-77, III:xi; orig. 1851-54].

Comte’s earlier writings nonetheless contain much that is of per-
manent value. He is at his best when discussing the abstract grounds
and general strategies of sociocultural studies. Although he failed to
translate his theoretical and programmatic statements into substantive
products, more empirically oriented anthropologists and sociologists
may still benefit from his methodological invocations. It remains true
F]'l’flt many a hardheaded empiricist, supposedly dealing only in “facts,”
is just as far from a science of socicty as Saint-Simon, Comte, and other
abstract system-builders. Comte’s understanding of the relationship
between theory and research was fundamentally correct: “No real ob-
servation of any kind of phenomena is possible which is not initially
gu.ided and finally interpreted by some theory” (1830-42, IV:418).
H{s appreciation of the intellectual dangers inherent in a “fact’-
oriented, micro-focused, piecemeal approach to history is certainly

61


===== PAGE 36 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

relevant to the fate of modern academic historiography and the
modern historical and ethnolinguistic schools of cultural anthropology:

The irrational spirit of specialization which has become ascendant
in our times would have the final result of reducing history to a
vain accumulation of unrclated monographs, where all idea of
the real and simultaneous connection between diverse human
events would inevitably be lost in the midst of the sterile encum-
brance of these confused descriptions. In order to have a true
scientific character, historical comparisons of the diverse ages of
civilization must be viewed in relation to social evolution
[ibid.:454=55]-

Comte also merits our admiration for rendering explicit a number
of basic assumptions about sociocultural systems which, although
certainly not original with him, owe much of their modern formulation
to his efforts. Especially striking is Comte’s concern with what we
would call today functional relations.

Anticipating Herbert Spencer, Emile Durkheim, A. R. Radcliffe-
Brown, and the whole modemn British functionalist school, Comte
regarded the study of sociocultural phenomena as having two prag-
matically justified divisions or aspects, the static and dynamic. An
approach to phenomena through the static aspect leads to “the investi-
gation of the laws of action and reaction of the different parts of the
social system—apart, for the occasion, from the fundamental move-
ment which is always gradually modifying them” (comre 1830-42, IV:
324). Social dynamics, on the other hand, are concerned with conceiv-
ing each of the

consecutive social states as the necessary result of the preceding,
and the indispensable mover of the following, according to the
axiom of Leibnitz—the present is big with the future. In this
view, the object of science is to discover the laws which govern
this continuity and the aggregate of which determines the course
of human development [ibid.:365-66].

It should be emphasized that, unlike many twentieth-century func-
tionalists, Comte could not conceive of following a functional at the
expense of a “dynamic” approach. On the contrary, social statics was
of interest only to the extent that it revealed the structures with which
the evolutionary process was involved.

The basic division into statics and dynamics was fitted into the moral
mission of positivism, from which it emerged mystically transmuted
into the highest slogan of the new secular religion: Order and Progress.
This motto, with its implications of a smoothly running social organi-

62

T

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

zation gradually and smoothly undergoing beneficial transformations,
readily garnered the sympathy of the bourgeoisie both at home and
abroad. Its appearance as far away as on the flag of Brazil testified to
the strong appeal that Comte’s views exerted upon liberal politicians
and intellectuals who believed that fundamental change was not in-
compatible with stability.

Comte employed an organismic analogy, the basis of most previous
and succeeding functionalist positions, to elaborate his description of
social statics. In this connection he introduced the terms “social
anatomy,” “social organism,” and “social organization,” and insisted
upon the importance of emphasizing the concatenation of influences
within the social system:

This preliminary aspect of political science evidently thus pre-
sumes, contrary to present-day philosophical habits, that each of
the numerous social elements ceases to be regarded in an absolute
and independent manner and insists that they can only be known
relative to all the others . . . [comTE 1830-42, IV:325].

In Politique Positive Comte succumbed, as Spencer was to do a
number of years later, to the temptation to render the biological
analogy in terms of specific (and quite incomparable) structures.
Wiritten in an epoch before the cell had been identified as a funda-
mental unit of physiology, Comte’s comparison of “elements,” “tis-
sues,” and “organs” respectively to “family,” “class,” and “communi-
ties” is singularly unconvincing (comtE 1875-77, 11:240-42). But this
was true of every attempt Comte made to “flesh out” the bones of
theory.

Many cultural anthropologists have proposed that the distinctive
feature of the anthropological approach is its holistic framework, that
is, the point of view which attempts to describe the parts of a system
by reference to the whole. Comte quite properly discusses this subject
in the context of the organismic analogy. In studying the physiology of
organisms, description of the whole must precede the analysis of the
parts: “It is, therefore, uncontestable that holistic concepts and
studies are alone proper for the establishment of positive sociology.
- .. The study of the parts must always be dominated by the study of
the system” (comtE 1830-42, IV:355).

In actual practice, Comte never attempted the detailed analysis of
any specific social system. Instead, he took over Condorcet’s fatal inven-
tion, “the device of supposing a single nation to which we may refer
a_Il the consecutive social modifications actually witnessed among dis-
tinct peoples” (ibid.:364-65). This unfortunate decision deprived his

63



===== PAGE 37 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

historical law of substantive value. It resulted not only in a superficial
treatment of the history of Western culture, but in the arbitrary exclu-
sion of non-Western societics on the grounds that they were “non-
progressive.” Thus, in Philosophie Positive, Comte declared his
intention of applying his theory of history only to the “most advanced
nations, not allowing our attention to be drawn off to other centers of
independent civilization which have, from any cause whatever, been ar-
rested, and left in an imperfect state” (ibid., V:3-4). In discussing
the remote past, only the population ancestral to the Europeans (and
Western Europeans at that) need be studied! Comte criticized “those
who would produce their whole stock of erudition, and mix up with
the review [of the past] such populations as those of India and China
that have not aided the process of development . . .” (ibid.:5). This
attitude seems to have been common among Comte’s contemporaries.
‘We shall meet with it in Hegel in a moment; and later, we shall detect
its damaging influence in the writings of Marx and Engels. It is an atti-
tude, of course, which runs counter to the basic strategy of any mini-
mum definition of an anthropological approach to a science of culture.
To exclude nine-tenths of the world’s sociocultural systems from con-
sideration can only result in an atrophied and culture-bound under-
standing of history. The argument that only “progressive” societies can
yield an understanding of “progressive change” is totally specious, prob-
ably little more than a rationalization for the lack of knowledge about
primitive and non-Western systems so conspicuous in the writings of
Saint-Simon, Comte, Hegel, Marx, Engels, and many other early nine-
teenth-century figures who are reckoned among the founders of aca-
demic sociology.

Those who would have us regard Comte as the “father of sociology”
burden that discipline with another debilitating heritage in the form
of Comte’s strong cultural-idealist commitment. Disdain of mysticism
on the one hand and fear of the materialist bogey on the other account
for the main thread of the positivist program. As we have already seen,
Comte’s “law” of history is couched in terms of dominant modes of
thought. It remains to be made sufficiently clear that, for Comte and
his followers, antimaterialism was a conscious and much esteemed part
of the positivist system. It was their belief that “positivism . . . recon-
ciles all that is tenable in the rival claims of both materialism and
spiritualism: and having done this, it discards them both. It holds the
one to be as dangerous to Order as the other to Progress” (coMTE
1875-77, I:41). But in casting out the spirits, Comte fell far short of
reaching a neutral position between cultural materialism and its princi-
pal eighteenth-century idealist rivals. Turgot, Voltaire, Condorcet, etc.,

64

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

had all previously shrived themselves of animism, but they all, none-
theless, remained victims of the anthropocentric illusion that societies
propelled themselves through history by thinking now one way, now
another.

Why did the Greeks think up one set of social forms, e.g., the city-
state, while the Persians thought themsclves into oriental despotism
and the Bushmen never thought themselves out of hunting bands?
Comte never really faces the question. To him, it is self-evident that
the analysis of all social change must begin with an examination of the
ideas of the moment. The smugness of his position is memorable:

It cannot be necessary to prove to anybody who reads this work
that ideas govern or overthrow the world; in other words, that all
social mechanism rests on opinions. They know above all that
the great political and moral crises which present-day societies are
experiencing arise in the final analysis from intellectual anarchy.
Our worst problem resides in effect in that profound divergence
which now exists among us relative to fundamental beliefs. . . .
It is equally certain that, once agreement is reached, the appro-
priate institutions will unfold, without shock or resistance . . .
[comTE 1830-42, 1:48-49].

If sociocultural systems take their form from the opinions of their
participants, one might very well suppose, upon noting the variety of
opinions among men, that endless diversity must characterize the
superorganic universe, and that no observer could predict the content
of the consensus achieved in any past or future exchange of ideas. Yet
it is the ultimate irony of Comte’s position that historical determinism
has had no more staunch supporter:

No enlightened man can doubt that in this long succession of
efforts and discoveries the human mind has followed a precisely
determined course, the exact preparatory knowledge of which
would have enabled a sufficiently well-informed intelligence to
predict, before their more or less distant occurrence, the progress
characteristic of each epoch [ibid., IV:372].

So great are the determining influences of history that, to echo Vico,
given a plurality of worlds, they all must evolve in the same way: “This
order of change is remarkably fixed; it leads to the exact comparison of
parallel developments among distinct and independent populations”
[ibid.:370]. Why should thought be thus constrained? If parallelism is
so conspicuous a feature of cultural evolution, there must be powerful
forces that direct human beings to accept certain kinds of “opinions”
rather than others. What are these forces? Ask this question, and the

65


===== PAGE 38 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

whole Comtean edifice goes up in a puff of smoke. Something might
be saved were it possible to invoke the defense that positivism is con-
cemned only with the correlations of events or “their invariant rela-
tions,” rather than with metaphysical causes. Thus, human ideas start
at the theistic level with fetishism and associated institutions and
evolve toward positivism and Comte’s popehood. Why? Because they
do, and let it go at that. Need one demand of Newton’s formula why
the earth and the moon attract each other? But Comte would be the
last to be entitled to such a defense. It is he, first of all, who proposes
that ideas (i.c., opinions) “govern” cultural evolution. That there is
an equivalence between “govern” and “cause” is shown in Comte’s
explanation of the origin of agriculture. “It is usual,” he argues, “to sup-
pose that the condensation of numbers, as the race increased, would
compel the tillage of the soil, as it had before compelled the keeping
of flocks.” But this is insufficient since “no social exigency will find
satisfaction if Man is not already disposed to provide it . . .,” ie,
unless his ““. . . intellectual and moral nature was duly prepared for
it” (COMTE in MARTINEAU 1896, III:21). It is true that Comte occa-
sionally manifests an interest in material conditions, as when among
“the three general sources of social variation” he lists “race” and “cli-
mate.” But the fatally muddled outlook from which he surveys these
influences leads him to cite in familiar tautology “political action” as a
third and possibly equal source. Moreover, he leaves no room for mis-
interpreting the relatively minor effect which “variations”—racial, cli-
matological, or political—exert upon world history.

THE HEGELIAN COMPROMISE

In Germany, the role of adapting the idealist heritage of the
Enlightenment to the post-Napoleonic milieu was taken up by the
philosopher Georg W. F. Hegel. Although Comte regarded Hegel as
an exemplar of the metaphysical phase of thought, the salient influence
of both of these men was the strengthening of idealist versions of
sociocultural determinism. In retrospect, Comte was not very much
less metaphysical than Hegel. Both the positivists and the Hegelians
viewed history as the unfolding of ideas that for unexplained reasons,
in the one case, and unintelligible reasons, in the other, follow a pre-
determined course. But Hegel’s notion of the role played by mental
events in world history is at once more grandiose, obscure, and an-
thropocentric than Comte’s.

“The History of the World,” Hegel declared, “begins with its general
aim—the realization of the Idea of Spirit [Mind]” (HEGEL 1956:25).

66

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

This means (roughly) that the potential everything called the World-
Spirit (Mind) is bringing itsclf into “full existence,” defined as the
pure or abstract idea of mind. The World Mind is, thus, an evolution-
ary process, and all its emanations are, in turn, evolutionary processes.
Like his Enlightenment predecessors, Hegel believed that these proc-
esses beget morally better states of existence in progressive succession,
marked in human affairs by the greater and more perfect use of reason.
Through reason not only man, but the World Mind achieves freedom.
Thus “the history of the world is none other than the progress of the
consciousness of freedom” (quoted in MARCUSE 1960:229).

Most of Hegel's philosophy is a worthless ruin, although it is still, in
some quarters, an object of serious study. Among Marxists, Hegel's
philosophy continues to be regarded as a hallowed steppingstone to
dialectical materialism. This honor was, of course, bestowed by Marx
and Engels, who described themsclves as Hegelians who had stopped
standing on their heads. It is regrettable that Marx, in company with
the young German intellectuals of his generation, studied the Hegelian
system and became habituated to its mental attitudes. Marx, the bold-
est and clearest of the nineteenth-century cultural materialists, never
succeeded in throwing off the metaphysical notions upon which He-
gel’s fame rested. As we shall see in our discussion of Marx, everything
that is scientifically sound in Marxism could just as well have derived
from dozens of social philosophers other than Hegel, while all that is
most conspicuously blighted with antiscientism betrays Hegel’s influ-
ence.

Hegel, like his Enlightenment predecessors, conceived the world in
terms of progressive evolutionary flux. To the pervasive evolutionism
of his times, he added the peculiar notion that entities or events could
be comprehended, or to say the same thing, exist, only by virtue of
their opposite, contradiction or negation. This is the epistemological
basis of Hegel’s famous “dialectical” point of view.

The world consists of entities in “dialectical” relationship with their
opposite, contradictory, or negative ideas. The tension between the
opposites reflects the evolutionary working of the world mind. Out
of the “negation of the negation” there evolves a new entity or state of
existence which in turn is meaningful only in relationship to its con-
tradictory ingredients. As explained by Herbert Marcuse:

Dialectics is a process in a world where the mode of existence of
men and things is made up of contradictory relations, so that any
particular content can be unfolded only by passing through its
opposite. The latter is an integral part of the former, and the

67


===== PAGE 39 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

whole content is the totality of all contradictory relations implied
in it. . . . It exists, as Hegel puts it, in its “otherness” (anders-
sein) [1960:66-67].

As things pass through their opposites, they get progressively better, or
closer to their ideal form. According to Hegel, it is a “necessity of
nature” that:

The logical, and—as still more prominent—the dialectical nature
of the Idea in general, viz., that it is self-determined—that it
assumes successive forms which it successively transcends, and by
this very process of transcending its earlier stages, gains an affirm-
ative, and, in fact, a richer and more concrete shape . . .
[HEGEL 1956:63].

There is no empirical support for the assertion that the evolution of
forms is constrained by the necessity of passing through a series of op-
posite or contradictory stages. Hegel’s attempt to characterize the
course of world evolution in terms of upward spiraling negations was
the result of an infatuation with word and number magic. As Karl Eugen
Diihring, the famous nineteenth-century critic of Marx’s use of the
dialectic, pointed out, “Hegel's first negation is the idea of the fall from
grace, which is taken from the catechism, and his second is the idea of
a higher unity leading to redemption. The logic of facts can hardly be
based on this nonsensical analogy borrowed from the religious sphere”
(quoted in ENGELS 1947:193; orig. 1888). Diihring might also have
noted that Hegel’s dialectic is another example of the cabalistic fixation
upon the number three which is so conspicuous in Western culture.
Thus the thesis, antithesis, and synthesis of the dialectic takes its place
alongside such other holy trinities as the Catholic Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; the psychoanalysts’ id, ego, and superego; the positivists’
theological, metaphysical, and positivist stages; and the anthropolo-
gists’ savagery, barbarism, and civilization.

If the world evolutionary process exemplifies the dialectic of nega-
tion, it does so simply by virtue of the absence of workable rules for
distinguishing between negative and positive changes. Since evolution
means transformation, or difference, it is always possible, in the absence
of definite criteria, to declare that each and every evolutionary product
is the negation of some earlier condition. In this manner, Engels
sought to defend Marx and the Hegelian dialectic against Dithring’s
attack. “What is this fearful negation of the negation which makes life
so bitter for Herr Dithring and fulfills the same role with him of the un-
pardonable crime as the sin against the Holy Ghost does in Christian-
ity?” Engels asked himself. “A very simple process,” he answered,

68

T e

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

“which is taking place everywhere and every day, which any child can
understand, as soon as it is stripped of its veil of mystery in which it
was wrapped by the old idealist philosophy . . .” (ibid.:201). Engels
then proceeded to give some simple examples of the negation of the
negation. Thus, grains of barley are “negated” when the seed germi-
nates and the plant grows. Later on, the plant flowers and puts out
more seeds. “As a result of this negation of the negation, we have
once again the original grain of barley, but not as a single unit, but ten,
twenty, or thirty fold.” This quantitative change is also accompanied
by qualitative changes, which are too slow to be perceived.

But if we take an artificially cultivated ornamental plant, for ex-
ample, a dahlia or an orchid, and if we treat the seed of the plant
which grows from it as a gardener does, we get as a result of this
negation of the negation not only more seeds, but also qualita-
tively better seeds, which produce more beautiful flowers, and
each fresh repetition of this process, each repeated negation of the
negation, increases the improvement [ibid.:201-2].

There follow similar remarks concerning negations of eggs, rock for-
mations, and primitive communal land tenure.

In all of these examples, the description of the evolutionary ‘
processes involved as negations of negations adds nothing to our un-
derstanding of how the transformations have occurred. Moreover, it is
mere poetic analogy which permits one to claim that what ensues
during the development of an embryo or during natural selection is a
“negation.” What all evolutionary processes have in common is not the
“negation” of earlier forms, but simply their transformation. In order
for an evolutionary series to be identified as such, some link between
the earlier and later forms must be preserved. Eventually, the end
product of the series may bear no readily apparent similarity to the
initial forms; however, there is no empirical justification for supposing
that each evolutionary series must inevitably result in drastic changes
regardless of how long the series continues. Certainly, for short-run
f‘eries such as speciation in bio-evolution, emergent forms are scarcely

negations” of their predecessors. Of course, no one can prevent an
Hegelian from calling Homo sapiens the negation of Homo neander-
thalensis, but such a semantic maneuver will not further illuminate
the conditions which were responsible for the evolution of modern
human types. Similarly, nothing is gained but a kind of poetic thrill
when Marx and Engels decide that the emergence of private land
tenure is the negation of primitive communal tenure and that socialist
communal tenure is the negation of the negation, thereby supposedly

69


===== PAGE 40 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

vindicating the genius of Hegel, who despite his idealistic shackles
managed to grasp the dialectical nature of the universe.

The futility of Hegel’s dialectical idealism is nowhere better exhib-
jted than in his own attempts to interpret history. Like Comte, he
evinced a splendidly ethnocentric disdain of all prestate societies.
Africa is dismissed from consideration because “it has no movement
or development to exhibit” (HEGEL 1956:99). There is likewise no
need to be concerned about the pre-Columbian America:

Of America and its grade of civilization, especially in Mexico and
Peru, we have information, but it imparts nothing more than that
this culture was an entirely national one, which must expire as
soon as Spirit approached it [ibid.:81].

Although Hegel deigns to consider China and India worthy of anti-
quarian interest, he is convinced that these countries have no further
role to play in world affairs. For reasons known only to Spirit, “the
history of the world travels from East to West, for Europe is absolutely
the end of History, Asia the beginning” (ibid.:103). The general guide
lines of this movement are provided by the development of the con-
sciousness of freedom. Among the Orientals only one man had free-
dom; among the Greeks some had freedom; and now “the German
world knows that all are frec” (ibid.:103). The final irony of this for-
mula is that Hegelian exegesists are unable to agree on what kind of
German state was intended as the ultimate goal of history. But it does
seem that Hegel believed the Prussian monarchy was the system under
which “all are free” (cf. MARCUSE 1960:235fF.).

In deference to Marx, one is tempted to credit Hegel at least with a
view of history in which the relationship between individual actors and
impersonal sociocultural forces is clarified. Hegel did, of course, plaus-
ibly argue that personal greatness resided in the conjunction of in-
dividual genius and appropriate cultural developments, i.., that the
great man was the agent of history. But similar doctrines had been ad-
vanced by John Millar and Adam Ferguson (see p. 51) without meta-
physical infestation. Similarly, it would scarcely be possible to defend
Hegel on the grounds of his sociocultural evolutionism. In this matter,
he had also not advanced beyond his eighteenth-century predecessors.
The strict determinism of his scheme of course did represent an im-
provement over proposals which provided for God’s frequent miracu-
lous intervention, as in the cases of De Maistre and De Bonald. But the
vagueness of the “World Spirit” is too great a price to pay for an end
to miracles.

There is one aspect of the Hegelian dialectic that requires further

70

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

comment. If we interpret the dialectic mode of thought as an hypothe-
sis concerning human cognitive processes (as distinguished from world
evolutionary processes), we may credit Hegel with a useful suggestion.
There may, in fact, be a tendency for human beings to reason about
themselves and their physical and cultural worlds in terms of binary op-
positions, or dichotomies. Certainly in the history of Western thought,
it frequently appears as if ideas present themselves in both a negative
and positive form and that an advance is made by resolving the con-
tradictions between the extremes. The resolution of the particulate
and wave interpretations of light in quantum theory, or of the polygen-
ist versus monogenist argument in Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species,
and the unresolved dichotomy of the “big bang” versus the “continu-
ous creation of matter” theories in astrophysics might be cited as
scientific examples. It may also be possible that many aspects of myth
and ritual reflect this tendency. At least, in recent years, an elaborate
interpretive literature based on some such assumption has been pro-
duced by Claude Lévi-Strauss and his followers (see Chap. 18). Ad-
ditional cross-cultural research utilizing the techniques of modern
social psychology is badly needed to shed light on this issue. In the
meantime, however, we may note that if it is finally demonstrated that
human cognitive processes are dominated by dialectic modes of
thought, our understanding of historical processes—of sociocultural
evolution—would remain unaffected. Thinking of the world in dialec-
tic terms will not cause it to change dialectically, unless, of course, we
believe in the omnipotence of thought.

CONTINUITY IN THE LIBERAL
TRADITION: JOHN STUART MILL

In the winter of discontent, Saint-Simon, Comte, and Hegel
nourished the hope of spring. The underground currents which flowed
from the prerevolutionary epoch now rose to the surface. The voice of
Locke was heard in the land. It was heard with especially great force
and clarity in another prodigy of the liberal intellect, John Stuart Mill.
It is true that Mill, like Comte, was concerned almost exclusively with
the analysis of the Euro-American capitalist order. Yet in his Principles
of Political Economy (1848) Mill reached out to the perennial central
issues of anthropological inquiry. In the entire nineteenth century, his
contribution to the development of a climate favorable to social
science was surpassed only by that of Herbert Spencer.

Principles of Political Economy was Mill's attempt to write the

71



===== PAGE 41 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

sequel to Adam Smith’s Wedlth of Nations, summing up classical
economic theory, but including an enlarged understanding of, and
sympathy for, the underprivileged segments of the capitalist order.
His eclectic approach, coupled with high standards of evidence and
great logical acumen, exerted, if nothing else, an enormous influence
on the definition of the proper liberal scholarly style.

In his “Preliminary Remarks,” Mill provided an important summary
of the evolution of productive systems, notable for its contribution to
the surplus theory of social stratification. We find first the familiar En-
lightenment scheme of the stage of hunting tribes giving way to pastor-
alism, during which “active and thrifty individuals” first come into
possession of significant wealth differences. Inequality in wealth next
gives tise to a group who are able “to divest themselves of all labor
except that of government and superintendence.” The greater security
and leisure of this more productive system gives rise to “new wants
. . . for better clothing, utensils, and implements.” Next comes the
stage of agriculture, brought about when “the growth of the population
of men and cattle began in time to press upon the earth’s capabilities of
yielding natural pasture.” At this point, however, Mill departs from the
usual formula. Progress during the agricultural phase is not so rapid as
one might suppose, because, except in unusually fertile areas, agricul-
ture is less productive than herding. Furthermore, agricultural produce
is more vulnerable to taxation:

Agriculturists do not, unless in unusually advantageous circum-
stances of climate and soil, produce so great a surplus of food,
beyond their necessary consumption, as to support any large class
of laborers engaged in other departments of industry. The sur-
plus, too, whether small or great, is usually torn from the pro-
ducers, either by the government to which they are subject, or by
individuals, who by superior force, or by availing themselves of
religious or traditional feelings of subordination, have established
themselves as lords of the soil [MILL 1923:12; orig. 1848].

Next there follows a discussion of the role of taxation in “the extensive
monarchies which from a time beyond historical record have occupied
the plains of Asia.” Mentioning the role of Asiatic government in
works of public utility—“tanks, wells, and canals for irrigation, without
which in many tropical climates cultivation could hardly be carried on”
(ibid.:13)—Mill proceeds to give a fair description of the basic ingredi-
ents of “Oriental Despotism.” As Karl Wittfogel has indicated (1957:
372-73), this analysis was based upon precedents in the writings of the
earlier classical economists, James Mill, Richard Jones, and Adam

72

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

Smith. Mill goes on to contrast the Oriental monarchies with the
trajectory of development in Europe which is characterized by “small
town-communities” or by “little communities” (MILL 1923:14-15). As
a result of warfare, these evolve into larger units based on conquest and
slavery, culminating with the Greco-Roman empires. Mill next de-
scribes the characteristics of feudalism and the transition of feudal
Europe into “commercial and manufacturing Europe” (ibid.:18).
Thus implicit in Mill's summary is a techno-environmental, techno-
economic classification of culture into six types: (1) hunting; (2) pas-
toral; (3) Asiatic; (4) Greco-Roman; (5) feudal; and (6) capitalist.

Principles of Political Economy is also of special interest for its
treatment of European and Indian peasant systems of agriculture. In
this enterprise Mill systematically compared the productivity and well-
being of peasant proprictors, renters, share-croppers and cottiers, in an
attempt to disentangle the effects of the relations of production from
those of climate, soil, race, and government. His analysis of the sources
of poverty among the Irish is especially memorable for his clear stand
against racism at a time when, as we shall see in the next chapter, the
drift of the more narrowly anthropological literature was overwhelm-
ingly toward the biologization of history:

Is it not, then, a bitter satire on the mode in which opinions are
formed on the most important problems of human nature and
life, to find public instructors of the greatest pretension, imputing
the backwardness of Irish industry, and the want of energy of the
Irish people in improving their condition, to a peculiar indolence
and insouciance in the Celtic race? Of all vulgar modes of escap-
ing from the consideration of the effect of social and moral influ-
ences on the human mind, the most vulgar is that of attributing
the diversities of conduct and character to inherent natural
differences. What race would not be indolent and insouciant
when things are so arranged, that they derive no advantage from
forethought or exertion? . . . It speaks nothing against the ca-
pacities of industry in human beings, that they will not exert
themselves without motive. No labourers work harder, in England

or America, than the Irish; but not under a cottier system
[ibid.:324].

SCIENTISM REAFFIRMED: QUETELET

The strength of the early nineteenth-century impulse toward
social science is dramatically illustrated in the work of the amazing
Belgian astronomer, meteorologist, and statistician Adolphe Quételet.
As previously mentioned, it was Quételet’s appropriation of “social

73



===== PAGE 42 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

physics” which drove Comte to invent the term “sociology.” While
employed in the task of developing actuarial tables for Brussels life-
insurance companies, Quételet’s attention was drawn to the regulari-
ties of sociocultural phenomena considered en masse. In 1828, he was
greatly impressed by the regularities exhibited in criminological phe-
nomena and quickly grasped their significance in relation to the
problem of free will (cf. HANKIN 108:17). The fact that year after year
predictable numbers of crimes of predictable varicties would be com-
mitted by predictable proportions of the sexes at predictable ages con-
vinced him that the individual’s subjective experience of free will did
not alter the determinate nature of the actions of large numbers of
people considered in the aggregate.

Society includes within itself the germs of all the crimes com-
mitted, and at the same time, the necessary facilities for their de-
velopment. It is the social state, in some measure, which prepares
these crimes, and the criminal is merely the instrument to execute
them. Every social state supposes, then, a certain number and a
certain order of crimes, these being merely the necessary conse-
quences of its organization [QUETELET 1842:6; orig. 1835].

It would seem quite evident that Quételet’s “social physics” involves
an implicit concept of culture viewed as a superorganic domain of
causal relations. The resemblance between his ideas of social causality
and the concept of culture is embodied in the arguments for the pre-
dictability of behavior. Anticipating similar arguments propounded in
Herbert Spencer’s The Study of Sociology (1873), Quételet drew at-
tention to the fact that social life is carried out on the assumption that
even the behavior of specific individuals can be predicted. This expec-
tation snares those who would argue that social science is not possible
because of the volitional nature of human responses. Quételet was
well-credentialed for the task of proving that the larger the number of
individuals considered, the greater the confidence in one’s predictions.
This result can be achieved only if lawful principles govern the domain
under study (if the phenomena were purely random, more cases
should lead to diminishing confidence):

When it is necessary to take the most simple resolve, we are under
the domination of our habitudes, our wants, our social relations,
and a host of causes which, all of them, draw us about in a hun-
dred different ways. These influences are so powerful, that we
have no difficulty in telling, even when referring to persons whom
we are scarcely acquainted with, or even know not at all, what is
the resolution to which they will lead such parties. Whence, then,

74

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

this certainty of foresight, exemplified by you daily, if you were
not convinced, at the outset, that it is extremely probable the em-
pire of causes will carry it over free-will. In considering the moral
world a priori, you give to this free-will the most entire latitude;
and when you come to practice, when you speak of what passes
around you, you constantly fa]l into contradiction with yourselves.

In this connection, it is historically of interest to note that suicide was
one of the crimes studied by Quételet to show how statistical analysis
could reveal unsuspected sociocultural uniformities. Quételet thus an-
ticipated by more than sixty years the famous attempt by Emile Durk-
heim (see Chap. 18) to use suicide as proof of the existence of a
supra-individual “group mind.”

Quételet, like Mill and Comte, had to ward off the accusation of his
critics that his theories led to fatalism and materialism. These pres-
sures adversely affected his program for sociocultural research. His
answer to the charge that he viewed man as a mere automaton was to
separate synchronic from diachronic causality. Thus, he contended that
while our actions are determined by social conditions, it is possible for
man to change those social conditions:

I have always comprehended with difficulty, moreover, how per-
sons, pre-occupied doubtless by other ideas, have seen any tend-
ency to materialism in the exposition of a series of facts deduced
from statistical documents. In giving to my work the title of
Social Physics, 1 have had no other aim than to collect, in a uni-
form order, the phenomena affecting man, nearly as physical
science brings together the phenomena appertaining to the ma-
terial world. If certain deplorable facts present themselves with
an alarming regularity, to whom is blame to be ascribed? Ought
charges of materialism to be brought against him who points out
that regularity? . . .

I repeat, that in a given state of society, resting under the influ-
ence of certain causes, regular effects are produced, which oscil-
late, as it were, around a fixed mean point, without undergoing
any sensible alterations. Observe, that I have said under the in-
fluence of the same causes; if the causes were changed, the effects
also would necessarily be modified. As laws and the principles of
religion and morality are influencing causes, I have then not only
the hope, but, what you have not, the positive conviction, that
society may be ameliorated and reformed [ibid.:vii].

In thus escaping from the opprobrium attached to materialism,
Quételet failed to take up the question of the lawful conditions which
are in turn responsible for changing “law and the principles of religion

75


===== PAGE 43 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and morality.” The little attention which Quételet did bestow upon
the question of the causes of sociocultural differences and similarities
reveals him as hopelessly lost in the typical Enlightenment daydream
of progress through reason. His misunderstanding of historical forces
and his failure to make use of the comparative method, made him an
execrable prophet of what the future had in store for Euro-American
culture. T know of no more striking demonstration of how synchronic
functionalism, carried out with the most meticulous attention to em-
pirical data, can result in a fundamentally false picture of the socio-
cultural universe:

The perfectibility of the human species results as a necessary con-
sequence from all our researches. Defects and monstrosities disap-
pear more and more from the physical world; the frequency and
the severity of diseases are combated with more advantage by the
progress of medical science; the moral qualities of man experience
not less sensible improvements; and the farther we advance, the
less are great politic overthrows and wars (the scourges of hu-
manity) to be feared, either in their immediate effects or in their
ultimate consequences [ibid.:108].

SCIENTISM REAFFIRMED: BUCKLE

By mid-century, the advance of industrial capitalism had cre-
ated an ambience more receptive to social science than that of any
previous epoch. With its technological wonders—its railroads, steam-
ships, telegraph, and thousand-spindled factories—science had already
emerged as the new miracle worker of Western culture. The wave of
secularism and skepticism that had arisen during the Enlightenment
grew once again to tidal proportions. It was this ambience of euphoric
scientism in which anthropology would achieve disciplinary identity.

A final interesting example of the extent to which the pre-Darwinian
assault on religious orthodoxy had advanced is to be found in the work
of Henry Thomas Buckle. Although usually identified as an historian
and neglected by anthropologists, Buckle’s interests were cut from the
cloth of Turgot’s universal history. He was a vigorous advocate of a
scientific approach to history. Buckle dismissed the theological re-
surgence of the twenties and thirties as superficial and temporary set-
backs in the Enlightenment program. Indeed, his influential and
comparative History of Civilization in England (1857) was devoted
mainly toward documenting the struggle between scientism and
politico-religious orthodoxy in postfeudal Europe. While admitting

76

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nincteenth Century

that “an immense majority of the clergy” were still “striving to check
the progress of that scepticism which is now gathering in upon us from
every quarter” (ibid., I:257), he asserted that the “higher order of
minds” among his contemporaries had already passed beyond that
stage (ibid.:258). “The truth is, that the time for these things has
gone by. Theological interests have long ceased to be supreme; and
the affairs of nations are no longer regulated according to ecclesiastical
views” (ibid.:256).

Buckle’s convictions concerning the coming triumph of the scientific
approach to history led him into a premature review of the ecological
determinants of cultural differences on a broadly comparative world-
wide scale, which included Asia, Africa, and the New World. Unfortu-
nately, he lacked both the factual and theoretical basis for such a
survey, and his efforts along these lines ended in one of the worst cases
of naive geographical determinism on record. He attributed to soil,
climate, and dict a direct influence on the quality of mind. Hence, he
explained differences in religious and political behavior as manifesta-
tions of geographically determined propensities toward more or less
imaginative or reasonable national characters. Despite his scientism
and his emphasis on geographical factors, Buckle thus failed to achieve
anything resembling a consistent cultural-materialist outlook. Indeed,
one of his major points is that “mental law” is more important than
“physical law” for an understanding of the history of Europe. But by
mental law, Buckle intended nothing more than the familiar Enlight-
enment concept of progress through reason.

In the context of his times, the most notable quality of Buckle’s
approach was his rejection of racial determinism. Buckle was perfectly
correct in his assessment of the strength of the movement to return
history to science. He failed to realize, however, that the egalitarian en-
vironmentalism of his Enlightenment heroes would not accompany
the coming renaissance in sociocultural theory. As we shall see in the
next chapter, many of Buckle’s contemporaries agreed that a science
of history was now possible, but except for Marx and Engels, they in-
creasingly supposed that the study of racial and hereditary factors
would alone provide the basis for its major generalizations. Uncompro-
misingly environmentalist denials of the significance of racial differ-
ences, such as the following, were destined not to be heard again until
the beginning of the Boasian period:

Whatever, thercfore, the moral and intellectual progress of men
may be, it resolves itself not into a progress of natural capacity,
but into a progress, if I may so say, of opportunity; that is, an

77


===== PAGE 44 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

improvement in the circumstances under which that capacity
after birth comes into play. Here, then, lies the gist of the whole
matter. The progress is one, not of internal power, but of external
advantage. The child born in a civilized land, is not likely, as such,
to be superior to one born among barbarians; and the difference
which ensues between the acts of the two children will be caused,
so far as we know, solely by the pressure of external circumstances;
by which I mean the surrounding opinions, knowledge, associa-
tions, in a word, the entire mental atmosphere in which the two
children are respectively nurtured [ibid.:128].

It is essential for an understanding of the history of anthropological
theory that we appreciate the tension which existed between the racial
egalitarianism of Mill and Buckle and the overarching racial determin-
ism of every major mid-nineteenth-century figure who is customarily
assigned a formative role in the development of anthropology as a
distinctive discipline. The opprobrium attached to Enlightenment
egalitarianism was still so great that Mill and Buckle were denounced
by anthropologists as “materialists.” Thus, according to James Hunt
(1866b:115), Buckle and Mill were merely “the continuation of Helvé-
tius and the French Encyclopedists, who were again but a far-off rever-
beration of Democritus and Epicurus.”

John Stuart Mill cannot help claiming the suffrage for the Negro
—and the woman. Such conclusions are the inevitable result of
the premises whence he started. And had he paused at such a re-
ductio ad absurdum, his school would not. That school, as we
have said, dates from the remotest antiquity. The omnipotence of
circumstances and the natal equality of mankind are not new doc-
trines. They are simply materialism, and the philosophy of the
external ultimated. He who starts from atoms, guided by chance,
must end in absolute democracy, that is, in racial and individual
equality. It is simply the completion of the circle, from chaos to
chaos [ibid.:115-16].

Perhaps the explanation of why anthropologists have characteristi-
cally exhibited such a deep ignorance of the roots of their science is that
the beginnings of disciplinary identity coincided with and are almost
wholly attributable to the mid-century vogue of racialist scientism. As
we shall see, anthropology was in no small measure responsible for
blotting out the great surmise of the Enlightenment environmental-
ists concerning the power of enculturation. Although Buckle and Mill,
as much as Marx and Engels, have hitherto been considered irrelevant
to the rise of anthropological theory, their continued neglect leaves an

78

3. Reaction and Recovery: The Early Nineteenth Century

inexplicable gap between the Boasian concept of culture and the
sources of radical environmentalism in the eighteenth century. It is a
great irony that when the Boasians came to reassert the importance of
enculturation, it was as part of a reaction not only to racialism but to
scientism as well. The issue we next confront, however, is how cultural
theory in the nineteenth century came to be dominated by racism.

79


===== PAGE 45 =====

Rise of Racial

Determinism 4

2993
e

’1_}1: declaration “all men are created equal” is one of the best known
of John Locke’s subversive effects. It was Thomas Jefferson who had
insisted on the phrase, but apparently not without misgivings. His
Notes on the State of Virginia (1786) gave voice to the suspicion “that
the blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time
and circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endowment of body
and mind” (quoted in GOSSETT 1963:42). Although Jefferson later modi-
fied this view, the question of racial differences increasingly conflicted
with Locke’s egalitarian concept of the mind as an “empty cabinet.” On
the crest of reaction to the French Revolution, educated opinion moved
steadily to an opposite extreme: by the middle of the nineteenth
century no “truth” had become more “self-evident” than that all
men were created unequal. And no “truth” was to exert a more noxious
influence upon the course of social science.

~ Racial determinism was the form taken by the advancing wave of
the science of culture, as it broke upon the shores of industrial capital-
ism. It was in this guise that anthropology first achieved a positive role
alongside of physics, chemistry, and the life sciences, in the support

80

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

and spread of capitalist society. Certain Marxists (cf. cox 1948) insist
that racism itself is confined to the capitalist epoch, but such a view
can find no support in ethnographic facts. Folk racism, a popular sys-
tem of prejudice and discrimination directed against one endogamous
descent group by another, is probably as old as humanity. But the
phenomenon with which this chapter deals is,ftzhe elevation of these
ancient ideas to pre-eminent scientific dignity“Prior to the nineteenth
century, nations had never rewarded their wise men to prove that the
supremacy of one people over another was the inevitable outcome of
the biological laws of the universe.

According to the doctrine of scientific racism, the significant socio-
cultural differences and similarities among human populations are the
dependent variables of group-restricted hereditary drives and attitudes.
Racist explanations thus depend on the correlation of hereditary en-
dowment and group behavioral specialties. It is in the difficulties asso+
ciated with the identification of the hereditary components that the
great weaknesses and temptation of the racist approach resides. Since
it is impossible to observe the hereditary factors, their existence must
be inferred from the behavioral traits which they are intended to ex-
plain. Racial determinism is a tempting substitute for genuine socio-
cultural theory because the hereditary components, being inaccessible
to direct observation, can be shaped into whatever quantity or quality
of influence is necessary in order to account for the specialties in
question. If our task is to explain the horse complex among the Crow
and Blackfoot, what is easier and more invulnerable to empirical
challenge than to attribute their horsemanship to an “equestrian in-
stinct”? How can one disprove the assertion that Gypsies keep on the
move because they have a “wanderlust” in their “blood”? Or that Amer-
ican Negroes succeed as musicians because they have an “instinct for
thythm”? By a similar summoning of imaginary hereditary components,
it would be possible to attribute every sociocultural phenomenon to
an hereditary specialty. The basis for the existence of the social sci-
ences, however, is that there are sociocultural explanations of such
phenomena. While the possible effect of hereditary specialties is not
denied, recourse to racial determinism is acceptable only after socio-
cultural theories have proven themselves inadequate to the task.

We should note that the rise of nineteenth-century racist theories did
not obliterate the attempt to understand the sociocultural components
in human behavior. Scientific racism enters the history of social sci-
ences rather as a position along the nature-nurture continuum, with a
considerable degree of natural and cultural environmental influence
sometimes willingly conceded. Racist theoreticians have seldom at-

81


===== PAGE 46 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tempted to establish a causal correlation between specific human
hereditary components (instinct, drives, “blood,” genes, etc.) and
such familiar ethnographic specialties as cross-cousin marriage, bilateral
descent, polyandry, monotheism, brideprice, private property in land,
mother-in-law avoidance, shamanism, or thousands of other cultural
entities of less than universal occurrence. (Lewis Henry Morgan pro-
vides a conspicuous exception.) In fact, the direct association between
heredity and specific cultural traits is rather uncommon even among
doctrinaire racists such as were spawned by the Nazi era. Examples
such as the attribution of West African rhythm to Negro heredity or of
phonemic differences between German and other European languages
to “‘Aryan blood” are relatively rare. The kinds of associations brought
forth have usually been more general in scope. Negroes are said to be
libidinous; whites intelligent; Germans industrious; Japanese imitative;
or Yankees mechanically ingenious. The generalized nature of these
stereotypes is significant for an understanding of the durability of racist
theories. If it were a question of hereditary control over something as
specific as mother-in-law avoidance or circumcision, one would need
only to point out instances of similar behavior in all of the major racial
groupings to discredit the racist approach. But the development of
racial determinism in the nineteenth century was rooted in the pre-
vious century’s concern with progress, and this same preoccupation
with broadly conceived aptitudes for creating, acquiring, or reaching
“civilization” continues to characterize the popular racism of the mid-
twentieth century.

RACISM IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

The evolutionism of the eighteenth century with its “state of
nature” and belief in man’s perfection through enlightenment focused
attention on the degree to which the different branches of humanity
had progressed toward the utopia of reason. Given the grandiose
strategy of Turgot’s universal history, it was inevitable that the nascent
social sciences should center their attention on the explanation of why
certain groups had advanced further than others. Perhaps it was also
inevitable, given the ubiquitous occurrence of folk varieties of racism,
that learned theories of racial determinism should be invoked to ac-
count at least for the more exotic associations of race and culture.

Yet, despite the evolutionary focus of eighteenth-century intellec-
tual life, scientific racism remained a minority point of view until after
the French Revolution. With a radical form of environmentalism as the
guiding doctrine of the philosophes, permanent hereditary disabilities

82

ey, o

| e

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

could not very well be conceived as the key to the understanding of
history. If the misery and social inferiority of the sans-culottes arose
from sociocultural deprivations, there was little inclination to attribute
the misery or nobility of the American Indians or Tahitians largely to
hereditary factors. Throughout the eighteenth century, the balance
on the nature-nurture continuum remained well over on the nurture
side.

One of the most impressive demonstrations of the eighteenth cen-
tury’s commitment to environmentally induced modifications was the
interpretation of race itself as the product of environmental influ-
ences. Both Jean Jacques Rousseau’s and Lord Monboddo’s interest in
orangutans, caudal appendages, and wild men reflected a belief that
man’s physical appearance as well as his behavior varied in conformity
with his surroundings. For Monboddo, as the historian John Greene
(1959:215fF.) has indicated, the most important part of the environ-
ment was the mental or sociocultural heritage. Unlike many of his
contemporaries, however, Monboddo explicitly rejected the idea that
the physical and cultural differences among the peoples of the world
were primarily the result of climate, diet, and other noncultural en-
vironmental factors. Nonetheless, Monboddo did feel that the wild
men who had been captured in the forests of Europe and the orangu-
tan could learn to speak and were capable of arriving at intellect and
science, if only they were accorded, to use Greene’s words, “sufficient
time and favorable circumstances” (ibid.:213).

THE DOCTRINE OF MONOGENESIS

Oddly enough, one of the principal sources of inspiration for
the eighteenth century’s belief in the modifiability of human nature
was the Book of Genesis. In the Mosaic account of creation, all human-
ity shares a common ancestry with Adam and Eve. This was the
doctrine of monogenesis; and all who adhered to it, either actively or
in some inertial fashion, were automatically obliged to think of racial
differences in terms of an evolutionary process involving more or less
rapid environmental feedback. It was only by being an evolutionist
and an environmentalist that one could accept the humanity of non-
Europeans and at the same time account for their failure to conform
to the European physical type. To be sure, the evolutionism of the
monogenist stopped short of species transformation. But there is little
doubt that Lamarck’s use of the idea of acquired characteristics was
merely an extension of the evolutionary mode of thought common to
most of these monogenists. Lamarck’s doctrine of the inheritance of

83


===== PAGE 47 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

acquired characteristics is identical with an environmentalism which
proposes that the life experience of the human organism immediately
and directly modifies our hereditary nature.

Possibly more than any other factor, it was the lingering influence of
bibliotary which guaranteed that the most esteemed naturalists of the
cighteenth century would be monogenists. The impulse to find the
hand of God in human affairs existed side by side with a growing belief

in natural law. As the eighteenth-century anatomist Petrus Camper
expressed it:

No man who contemplated the whole human race as it is now
spread over the face of the earth, without a predilection for hypo-
thesis, can doubt of its having descended from a single pair, that
were formed by the immediate hand of God, long after the
world itself had been created and had passed through numberless
changes. From this pair all the habitable parts of the earth were
gradually propagated [quoted in SLOTKIN 1965:198].

MONOGENESIS, ENVIRONMENTALISM,
AND EVOLUTION

Although the monogenist position could be, and eventually
was, reconciled with severe forms of folk racism, especially in the Amer-
ican Bible belt, fullfledged scientific racial determinism could not
flourish as long as raciation was conceived in terms of the rapid acquisi-
tion of new hereditary characteristics. This is not to say that the pre-
vailing doctrine of the origin of the races would have been reconcilable
with the idiom of the modemn civil-rights movement. On the contrary,
the two outstanding scientific monogenists of the times, Johann Blu-
menbach in Germany and Georges Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, in
France, were in their own fashion white supremacists. Both believed
that Adam and Eve had been white (God’s imaget ). Both regarded the
emergence of other types as a form of “degeneration.” But unlike the
racists of the nineteenth century and thereafter, both Blumenbach and
Buffon believed that the degenerative course of raciation could be
reversed and that under proper environmental control all the con-
temporary forms of man could be made to revert to the original. On
the whole, raciation, they believed, was the result of exposure to the
material conditions of the environment. For example, Negroid pig-
mentation arose as the result of exposure to the tropical sun; wind and
cold produced the tawny color of the Samoieds, the Laplanders, and the
Eskimo; the Chinese were fairer than the Tartars because they live in
towns and protect themselves from the elements. Poor food, disease,

84

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

and other pathogenic influences could also cause racial differences. In
the standard biological text of the philosophes, Georges Buffon’s
Histoire Naturelle (1749-1804), there is even an environmental ex-
planation for why poor Frenchmen are “ugly and ill made” (quoted in
COUNT 1950:15). Buffon repeatedly emphasized the superficial quality
of race differences and the unitary nature of the hominid type:

Upon the whole, every circumstance concurs in proving, that
mankind arc not composed of species essentially different from
cach other; that on the contrary, there was originally but one
species, who, after multiplying and spreading over the whole
surface of the carth, have undergone various changes by the influ-
ence of climate, food, mode of living, epidemic diseases, and the
mixture of dissimilar individuals; that, at first these changes were
not so conspicuous, and produced only individual varieties; that
these varieties become afterwards specific because they were ren-
dered more general, more strongly marked, and more permanent,
by the continual action of the same causes; that they are trans-
mitted from generation to generation, as deformities or disease
pass from parents to children; and that, lastly, as they were orig-
inally produced by a train of external and accidental causes, and
have only been perpetuated by time and the constant operation
of these causes, it is probable that they will gradually disappear,
or, at least, that they will differ from what they are at present, if
the causes which produced them should cease, or their operation
be varied by other circumstances and combinations [ibid.].

In his De generis humani varietate nativa (1775), Johann Blum.enA
bach argued for a similar set of factors—climate, diet, mode of ‘hfc,
hybridization, and disease—as the principal causes of “degeneration”
from the “primitive” Caucasoid stock. To prove that Negroid and Cau-
casoid shared a common origin, the physician John Hunter (1865:372;
orig. 1775) insisted that Negro children were white at birth: “Since all
blacks are born white, and remain so for some little time, it is clear
from this that the sun and the air are necessary agents in turning the
skin to a black color.” Hunter also pointed to the fact that blisters or
burns on a Negro were likely to turn white as further evidence of the
color of the Negro’s ancestors (GOSSETT 1963:37).

As a result of their environmental interests, many of the eighteenth
century’s naturalists anticipated modern views of the adaptive nature
of racial traits. For example, Immanuel Kant (quoted in count 1950:
20) made special note of the “disproportion between the total body
stature and the short legs of the northernmost peoples” in relation to
the problem of heat conservation. In the next century, Carl Bergmann

85


===== PAGE 48 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

(1848) was to consolidate information of this sort on mammalian
varieties in general. “Bergmann’s Rule” now constitutes an essential
ingredient in Carlton Coon’s (1962:59) view of hominid racial adapta-
tions, a view, however, that is contested by other physical anthropolo-
gists (WASHBURN 1963; DOBZHANSKY and MONTAGU 1963).

In order to grasp the difference between eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century doctrines of racial determinism, the all-important matter of
time reckoning must be kept in mind. This is a crucial matter that
arises as soon as hereditary features are interpreted as adaptive traits.
How fast is the environment-heredity feedback? How long did it take
for the adaptation to occur, and how permanent is the change? Com-
pared with all mid-nineteenth-century racist theories, the eighteenth-
century monogenists were inclined to regard racial specialties as re-
cent acquisitions. This followed because the monogenists as a group
tended to accept the Mosaic chronology. For the date of the origin of
the earth they had a choice of 3700 B.c. according to Rabbinical
sources; 5199 B.C. according to Pope Clement’s edition of the Vul-
gate; or 4004 B.C. according to Archbishop Ussher’s marginalia to the
King James Authorized Version (HABER 1959:1). Although Buffon’s
Epochs of Nature (1778) proposed that geological time be extended to
75,000 years, he acquiesced in a date of only 6,000 or 8,000 years since
Adam (HABER 1959:125). Relevant to so short a time span, it is difficult
to conceive the distinction between hereditary and acquired character-
istics as expressed in the modern notion of genotype and phenotype.
It is not surprising therefore that among the monogenist environ-
mentalists there should appear the belief that skin color differences
were subject to change within a single lifetime, given the proper con-
ditions of climate and diet.

In the United States, this ultimate pitch of environmentalism was
achieved by the Reverend Samuel Stanhope Smith, seventh president
of Princeton College. Smith’s Essay on the Causes of the Variety of
Complexion and Figure in the Human Species (1787) was one of the
earliest anthropological essays in the United States (STANTON 1960:4).
Sharing Hunter’s views about the lightness of the Negro skin color at
birth, Smith made much of the correlation between the relatively
lighter complexion of Negroes in the northern states as compared
with their slave ancestors in the South (an effect real enough, but
produced by hybridization and manumission). According to Smith,
Negro pigmentation was nothing more than a huge freckle that covered
the whole body as a result of an oversupply of bile, which was in turn
stimulated by the “putrid exhalations” of tropical climates. Negroid

86

T

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

hair was also formed by climate since the tropical sun caused the skin
to contract which in turn pulled the hair into tight whorls. In a later
edition (1810) Smith was able to point to the case of Henry Moss, a
famous ex-slave who had put himself on exhibition throughout the
North after white patches began to appear on his body. In three
years he had practically become white all over. This case was also re-
ported by Dr. Benjamin Rush (1797) at a special meeting of the
American Philosophical Society to prove that Negroid skin color was
a disease, a mild form of leprosy in fact, from which Moss was said to
be undergoing a spontaneous cure.

POLYGENESIS

Although evolutionary environmentalist interpretations of
racial differences prevailed in biological and philosophical circles, the
eighteenth century also produced its crop of polygenists—those who
rejected the authenticity of the account in Genesis and attributed
racial differences to acts of special creation. Their line of thought grew
out of certain heretical Biblical exegeses of the preceding century. For
example, Isaac La Peyrére’s Praeadamitae (1655) took the position
that Adam was the ancestor only of the Jews, while such ancient
peoples as the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Chinese, and Mexicans had propa-
gated from pre-Adamite ancestors. Since Biblical criticism was part
of the rationalist attack on revealed religion, several of the philosophes
were polygenists. Voltaire, for example, ridiculed the idea that the
Jews, whom he regarded as an insignificant nation of desert tribes-
men, should have been the ancestors of the entire human species.
Other famous polygenists were David Hume, Henry Home, Lord
Kames, Edward Long, and Charles White.

COMPARING POLYGENISTS AND
MONOGENISTS ON THE RACE ISSUE

Although the correlation was not perfect, those who advo-
cated the polygenist point of view tended to be racial determinists.
Voltaire, for example, argued that the Negro’s state of civilization was
a result of their inferior intelligence:

If their understanding is not of a different nature from ours, it is
at least greatly inferior. They are not capable of any great applica-
tion or association of ideas, and seemed formed neither for the ad-
vantages nor the abuses of philosophy [quoted in GossETT 1963:45].

87


===== PAGE 49 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Given David Hume’s uncompromising skepticism, it is not unex-
pected that he should have shared Voltaire’s opinion on both poly-
genesis and racial determinism:

There never was a civilized nation of any other complexion than
white, nor even any individual eminent either in action or specu-
lation. No ingenious manufacturer among them, no arts, no
sciences. . . . Such a uniform and constant difference could not
happen, in so many countries and ages, if nature had not made an
original distinction betwixt these breeds of men [quoted in curTv

1964:42].

Henry Home, Lord Kames, sought to compromise with Genesis by
dating the creation of separate races to the events that followed the
construction of the Tower of Babel. He argued that variation in “na-
tional character of courage or cowardice must depend upon a perma-
nent and invariable cause” (1774:20). To explain the most obvious
instances of physical adaptation to environmental extremes, he sug-
gested that God had equipped each group of men at the time of
dispersal from the Tower of Babel with special hereditary dispositions.
These differences, however, do not appear to have included in-
telligence:

The colour of the Negroes . . . affords a strong presumption of
their being a different species from the Whites; and I once
thought, that the presumption was supported by inferiority of
understanding in the former. But it appears to me doubtful,
upon second thoughts, whether that inferiority may not be occa-
sioned by their condition. A man never ripens in judgment nor
in prudence but by exercising these powers. At home, the Negroes
have little occasion to exercise either . . . [ibid.:32].

In contrast, unequivocal declarations of racial equality were quite
common among the monogenists. Hunter's (1865:342; orig. 1775)
exposure of the weakness of accepting ethnocentric estimates of intel-
ligence creates a strikingly modern effect:

Travelers have exaggerated the mental varieties far beyond the
truth, who have denied good qualities to the inhabitants of other
P countries, because their mode of life, manners, and customs
-~ have been excessively different from their own. For they have
never considered that when the Tartar tames his horse, and the
Indian erects his wigwam, he exhibits the same ingenuity which
an European general does in manoeuvering his army, or Inigo
Jones in building a palace. . . . There is nothing in which men
differ so much as in their customs.

88

e

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

Johann Herder, another firm believer in the unity of the human spe-
cies, also anticipated the Boasian argument against ethnocentrism, but
in an idiom which verged on romantic adulation:

It is but just when we proceed to the country of the blacks that
we lay aside our proud prejudices, and consider the organization
of this quarter of the globe with as much impartiality, as if there
were no other. Since whiteness is a mark of degeneracy in many
animals near the pole, the Negro has as much right to term his
savage robbers albinoes and white devils, as we have to deem him
the emblem of evil, and a descendant of Ham, branded by his
father’s curse. [Well] might he say, I, the black, am the original
man. I have taken the deepest draughts of the force of life, the
Sun: on me, and on everything around me, it has acted with the
greatest energy and vivacity. Behold my country: How fertile in
fruits, how rich in gold! Behold the height of my trees! the
strength of my animals! . . . let us enter the country appropriate
to him with modesty [HERDER 1803:260; orig. 1784].

POLYGENESIS, MONOGENESIS, AND
THE ISSUE OF SLAVERY

Toward the end of the eightcenth century, the polygenist
cause became entwined with the slavery question. Some of the most
rabid defenders of slavery were doctrinal polygenists. Edward Long, a
resident of the British West Indies, claimed in his History of Jamaica
(1774) that European and Negroes belonged to different species.
Long’s opinion of Negroes reflected all of the bitter realities of plan-
tation life and little of the restraint and tolerance characteristic of the
age of reason. Africans in his opinion were “brutish, ignorant, idle,
crafty, treacherous, bloody, thievish, mistrustful, and superstitious”
(quoted in curTIN 1964:43). Long’s racist views were reprinted in
the United States where they became a standard source for arguments
in favor of slavery. They also served to influence the opinion of Charles
White, a Manchester physician, who tried to prove on anatomical
evidence that Europeans, Asians, Americans, and Africans constituted
four scparated species, in descending order of excellence. In his An
Account of the Regular Gradation in Man (1799), White argued that
Negroes occupied a place in the “great chain of being” closer to the
apes than to Caucasians. Although he himself objected to slavery, his
book incorporated the racist stereotypes of the West Indian planters
and lent them a scientific aura that was ill-deserved. White’s insistence
that Negroes had smaller brains, larger sexual organs, an apelike odor,

89


===== PAGE 50 =====

WS

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 4 Rise of Racial Determinism

and an animal immunity to pain was repeated over and over again by
the proslavery forces.

One might suppose that a firm correlation would exist between
polygenesis and proslavery, and monogenesis and antislavery. The his-
torian William Stanton (1960) has shown, however, that polygenesis,
for all its attractions as a rationale for treating some human groups
like animals of another species, never caught on as the ideology of
slavocracy.

POLYGENESIS AND THE AMERICAN
SCHOOL OF ANTHROPOLOGY

The failure of polygenesis to take hold in the antebellum
South was certainly not due to any dearth of interest in the subject. A
vigorous defense of polygenesis lay at the very heart of what was the
first distinctive school of anthropology to flourish in the United
States. Known widely and respectfully throughout Europe as the
“American School,” it was founded by the Philadelphia physician and
professor of anatomy Samuel George Morton. The basis for Morton’s
conclusions was his collection of human crania, an interest he acquired
about the year 1830. Morton’s Crania Americana (1839) referred to
thirteen separate measurements of 276 specimens representative of
Caucasian, Malayan, American, and Ethiopian types. Each of these
races, concluded Morton, had a separate phylogeny stretching back
through at least several thousand years. Morton initially refrained from
asserting that these races lacked a unitary origin; he implied rather, on
the model Lord Kames’s evasion, that there had been divine inter-
vention after Adam to bring about racial differences. In this way Mor-
ton argued that there “was a primal difference among men” which
cannot be effaced by climate or learning; at the same time he avoided
direct conflict with prevailing theological dogma. By 1849, however,
Morton was arguing that the races were separate species, despite their
ability to produce fertile hybrids, and he had, in effect, embraced a
full-fledged theory of divine polygenesis. One of the considerations in
Morton’s change of mind was the dawning appreciation of the an-
tiquity of the Egyptian skelctal material brought about by the de-
cipherment of the Rosetta stone in 1821. Morton’s second book,
Crania Aegyptica (1844), made much of the fact that Negroid and
Caucasoid types were depicted in Egyptian paintings dating back sev-
eral thousand years. Too little time was left over between the creation

and the early dynasties for these racial types to have evolved from a
common ancestor.

90

After 1846, Morton’s position was strongly supported by the presti-
gious figure of the Harvard naturalist Louis Agassiz, who found it
“much more in harmony with the laws of nature” to admit that “in
the beginning the Creator had designed different species of men, as
he had done with all other animals, to occupy a particular geographical
region.” But Morton’s two most devoted disciples were George R.
Gliddon, who as vice-consul in Cairo had kept Morton supplied with
Egyptian skulls, and Josiah Clark Nott, probably the first American
scientist to state publicly a belief that God had made several dif-
ferent human species at the time of creation (cf. sTANTON 1960:69).
Nott and Gliddon (1854) collaborated on a voluminous study entitled
Types of Mankind in which it was argued that the races of man were
separately created species, and that each possessed a “constant and
undeviating” physical and moral nature which could be changed only
by interbreeding.

THE AMERICAN SCHOOL AND SLAVERY

Although Morton regarded the Negro race to be inferior to
the Caucasoid, he denied any interest in contributing to the pro-
slavery position. Nott and Gliddon, on the other hand, were openly
committed to a defense of slavery on the grounds that for an inferior
species, slavery was the most humane condition of life. Agassiz com-
pleted the spectrum of opinion among the polygenists of the Ameri-
can School by insisting that there was no justification for slavery in
man’s polygenetic origin since all the races share a common generic
human nature. Privately, however, Agassiz did not conceal his con-
tempt for the Negro type.

William Stanton’s denial of a correlation between the polygenists
and proslavery rests largely upon the fact that John Bachman (1850),
the most effective opponent of Morton’s school, was a dedicated sup-
porter of the South’s “peculiar institution.” Bachman was both a col-
laborator of John Audubon and the minister of a Lutheran congregation
in Charleston, South Carolina. He not only fought the doctrine of
separate creations, but he also rejected the ancillary arguments that
might have been useful for the slavocracy. For example, Bachman rid-
iculed the idea that Negro-white hybrids were infertile and that there
was a natural sexual aversion between the races. Bachman’s interest in
opposing polygenesis was not to urge abolition, but rather to protect
the prevailing Biblical justification of slavery. Holy Scripture tells how
Noah blessed the descendants of Shem by making them “the parents
of the Caucasian race—the progenitor of the Israelites and our Savior.”

91


===== PAGE 51 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

The Mongolians were the children of Japheth, and as the Bible pre-
dicted, many of them are still living in tents. Ham was the third of
Noah’s sons and the ancestor of the black “servant of servant” race. In
slavery, the superior white race leads the inferior black race by the
hand, protecting and improving them. Bachman’s Biblical exegesis was
the main intellectual pap from which the slavocrats drew their moral
sustenance. Nott and Gliddon who also frankly professed the wisdom
of slavery were apparently more interested in “skinning parsons” than
in defending the South. Their polygenism threatened the ideological
fabric of Christian civilization; it brought into question not only the
origin of the races, but the authority of the Christian priesthood and
the authenticity of the West’s sacred writings. This was too high a
price to pay, even for the defense of slavery.

In 1854 the editor of the hotly secessionist Richmond Enquirer
suspected that many readily accepted the “infidel” doctrine of di-
versity because it seemed to “favor the system of slavery.” But
the system could afford no such defenders as Nott and Gliddon
if the Bible was to be “the price it must pay for them.” The
Bible, he pointed out with some acumen, was now “the grand
object of attack from Abolitionists, because they know it is the
bulwark of Southern principles. . . . Destroy the Bible, and you
lay bare the very citadel of our strength to our foes. . . . Let us
not then allow this shield of strength to be torn from us until we
have something to put in its place.” The Bible did lend consider-
able support to slavery, but so did science. Opting for the Bible
was a mark of the South’s already profound commitment to
religion. Heretofore this had not necessarily been an anti-intellec-
tual position. But when the issue was clearly drawn the South
turned its back on the only intellectually respectable defense of
slavery it could have taken up [STANTON 1960:194].

It was not true, of course, that the abolitionists had made the
Bible “the grand object of attack.” This was nothing but rhetoric. Both
North and South appealed to the Bible for their main arguments; the
question was whose interpretation was the correct one, not whether
the Bible itself was reliable. In this connection, it is important to note
that the abolitionists, unlike the slavocrats, would have been unable to
turn to a scientific justification of their position, had they been so in-
clined. There was no school of anthropologists in the United States
that opposed both Morton and slavery, nor was one to appear for an-
other fifty years. Moral arguments gleaned from the New Testament
were thus the principal weapons of the abolitionists. The importance
of Biblical authority to both the pro- and antislavery forces provides a

92

e

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

preview of the ideological storm that was about to break over Dar-
win's attempt to discredit the Bible in a more vigorous and sweeping

fashion.

POLYGENESIS AND DARWINISM

Almost every major anthropological volume written inl Eu-
rope and the United States between 1800 and 1859 concerned itself
with the controversy between polygenesis and monogenesis. As James
Hunt noted in 1863, many persons still believed “ethnology merely
attempts to solve the question whether there was unity of origin for
different races of man.” It might be thought that with the publication
of the Origin of Species in 1859, the dispute between the monog‘em’sts
and the polygenists would come to an abrupt end. From the point of
view of the new theory, both sides were in error. If mankind had a
common ancestor, it was no longer Adam, but some sort of monkey.
Why argue about whether it was the same kind of monkey- for every-
body? Indeed, Thomas Huxley took the position that Darwin’s theory
had had the effect of “reconciling and combining all that is good in
the Monogenistic and Polygenistic schools” (quoted in HUNT {8661):
320). The monogenists kept their common humanity and their pro-
gressivism; the polygenists were upheld in their Biblical criticism and
their scientism. Actually, Darwin’s reconciliation was not as decisive
as Huxley had made it out to be. James Hunt, president of the An-
thropological Society of London, was quick to accept Darwin’s major
points, but he accused Huxley of being a monogenist in disguise. Ac-
cording to Hunt, Darwin’s theories merely made it more proba})le
than ever that the contemporary races were actually different species.
Moreover, some of them were doomed to meet their extinction at the
hands of the others, just as in the struggle for survival among the mem-
bers of the animal kingdom.

Although it gradually came to be accepted that all contemporary
human groups belong to the same species, even this did not really put
an end to the monogenist-polygenist controversy. The question still
remained as to how long the races have maintained a separate phylog-
eny within the species. An unbroken tradition within physical anthro-
pology connects James Hunt and the pre-Darwinian polygenists with
such figures as Ernest Hooton and Carlton Coon in the twentieth
century. For Hooton, the splitting off of the non-Caucasoids from the
central hominid line (which he identified with Piltdown Man, later
exposed as a hoax) occurred almost a million years ago. Indeed, ac-
cording to Hooton, the Bushmanoid type had split off in the Pliocene,

93


===== PAGE 52 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

even earlier than the beginning of the specific difference between
gorillas and chimpanzees. Coon (1962) preserves this tradition by ar-
guing that the major racial types underwent parallel evolution through-
out the transition from the australopithecine to the Homo sapiens
“grade.” It should be noted that all of these attempts to maintain a
separate genealogy for the Caucasoids rest on pure speculation as
soon as an antiquity in the order of tens of thousands of years is
invoked. Fossils tell us nothing about skin color, hair form, nose and
lip size, or epicanthic folds—precisely the features that provide the
basis for traditional raciological constructs.

Despite twentieth-century polygenist survivals, there is much to be
said for Huxley’s view that Darwinism had saved all that was “good”
in the rivalry between monogenism and polygenism. Only, we must
be careful to confine our understanding of “good” to what was func-
tional in the mid-century context in which Darwin and Huxley found
themselves. Because Darwin’s theory did not address itself directly
to the polygenist or monogenist argument, it appears superficially to
constitute a rather separate phase of intellectual history. Yet Darwin
and the monogenists and polygenists were all being borne along by a
fundamentally similar set of ideological needs. In a functional sense,
the Origin of Species was the culmination of an uninterrupted series
of attempts to satisfy these needs—a culmination toward which the
monogenists and polygenists also tended, but which they were pre-
vented from achieving due to their failure to break away sufficiently
from the confines of Biblically inspired discourse.

THE INGREDIENTS OF THE DARWINIAN
SYNTHESIS

What were these underlying ideological trends? First, there
was increasing dissatisfaction among scientists with the Biblical version
of creation. Another was mounting pressure to return to the doctrine
of human progress, despite its connection with the French Revolu-
tion; and the third was an intensification of racist arrogance, of which
the biologization of sociocultural theory was a symptom.

All three of these trends were embodied in the work of James
Cowles Prichard, the most prominent English anthropologist of the
first half of the nineteenth century. Prichard’s influence, based on
multiple editions of his Researches into the Physical History of Man
(1813), overlapped the Darwinian period. According to J. A. Barnes
(1960:373) it was Prichard rather than Darwin or Alfred Wallace whose
writings provided the background for the discussion of race during the

94

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

sixties. What is remarkable about Prichard’s work is the extent to which
his insistence on monogenetic orthodoxy led him down the path toward
the heresy of bio-evolution. Where Buffon and Blumenbach had
viewed the Negro as a product of degeneration from Adamic perfec-
tion, Prichard introduced the novel proposal that Adam had been a
Negro. Under the influence of civilization, man had gradually turned
white: “. . . it must be concluded that the process of Nature in the
human species is the transmutation of the characters of the Negro
into those of the European, or the evolution of white varieties in
black races of man” (PRICHARD 1813, quoted in GREENE 1959:242).
Prichard was convinced that the lower classes of civilized societies, and
barbarians and savages, represented a continuum of darkening pig-
ments. Anticipating Darwin’s Descent of Man, he sought to explain
this correlation in terms of a principle closely resembling sexual selec-
tion. Providence had implanted in original human nature an idea of
physical beauty by which matings favor the lighter types. As the dark
savages advance toward civilization, their perception of the ideal be-
comes intellectually clearer and they become physically lighter. Be-
cause of Prichard’s firm belief in the potential equality of all the races,
his scheme bears a benign resemblance to the synthesis Spencer was
to achieve some years later. Given enough time, the inferior races will
become civilized and then will even come to resemble their European
conquerors. What was lacking to complete the picture was the utiliza-
tion of the principle of struggle to explain why some races never
“made it.”

Despite Prichard’s belief in the inferiority of the darker races, he
was an outspoken critic of slavery and a staunch advocate of human
rights. Like most of the humanitarians of the period, his scientific
views were heavily dependent on Biblical inspiration. Religion was
for him the chief distinguishing characteristic between man and beast.
The very fact that Christianity could be preached and understood
among so many different peoples proved that the races had psycholog-
ical unity, which in turn proved that they must have had a common
origin,

RACIAL DETERMINISM AND THE ROOTS
OF DARWINISM

The importance of early nineteenth-century theories of racial
determinism as a spawning ground for Darwin’s synthesis is well dem-

onstrated in the work of Prichard’s contemporary, the Anglo-Ameri-
can physician William Charles Wells. On the basis of his examination

95


===== PAGE 53 =====

L

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 4. Rise of Racial Determinism

of a white woman on whose body black patches had begun to appear,
Wells (1818) concluded that climate was not the originating factor in
racial differences. He took skin color to be a rather superficial aspect
of these differences. To account for the color of human skin, Wells
assumed that certain pigments happened to be correlated with resis-
tance to disease. This led him to a theory of natural selection based on
differential survival, a full thirty years before Darwin:

Of the accidental varieties of man, which would occur among the
first few scattered inhabitants of the middle region of Africa,
some one would be better fitted than others to bear the diseases
of the country. This race would consequently multiply, while the
others would decrease, not only from their inability to sustain the
attacks of disease, but from their incapacity of contending with
their more vigorous neighbors. The colour of this race I take for
granted, from what has been already said, would be dark. But the
same disposition to form varieties still existing, a darker and
darker race would in the course of time occur, and as the darkest
would be the best fitted for the climate, this would at length be-
come the most prevalent, if not the only race, in the particular
country in which it had originated [quoted in GREENE 1959:245].

By a similar correlation between skin color and resistance to disease
in the North, the Caucasoids came to dominate the temperate region.
Although Darwin did not mention Wells in his original list of ac-
knowledgments, James Prichard and Robert Knox (see p. 99) were
influenced by him; and both of these evolutionists, in turn, did influ-
ence Darwin (CURTIN 1964:238; SHRYOCK 1944 ).

To the modern temper, racial determinism and humanitarian piety
are not easily reconcilable. But in Darwin’s century there was to be
no limit to Christian charity on behalf of “inferior” races. Sir William
Lawrence, pethaps the sccond-ranking British anthropologist of the
early nineteenth century, was more outspoken than Prichard about the
innate inferiority of the non-Caucasoids. Lawrence subscribed to
Blumenbach’s degeneration theory, but unlike the latter, he was not
inclined to collect examples of Negroes who had gone to school and
written books:

The distinction of colour between the white and black races is
not more striking than the pre-eminence of the former in moral
feelings and in mental endowments. The latter, it is true, exhibit
generally a great acuteness of the external senses, which in some
instances is heightened by exercise to a degree nearly incredible.
Yet they indulge, almost universally, in disgusting debauchery
and sensuality, and display gross selfishness, indifference to the

96

pains and pleasure of others, insensibility to beauty of form, or-
der, and harmony, and an almost entire want of what we compre-
hend altogether under the expression of elevated sentiments,
manly virtues, and moral feelings [quoted in CURTIN 1964: 232].

Lawrence, like Prichard, was an outspoken critic of slavery. Just as a
monogenist like Bachman could support slavery on the grounds of pa-
ternalism, a monogenist like Lawrence could decry slavery, on the same
grounds. Indeed, in British antislavery circles, the more childlike and
savage the “inferior” races, the more they were regarded as needing
the help of the civilized branches of humanity. According to Lawrence,
the proslavery forces were

. . . perverting what should constitute a claim to kindness and
indulgence into justification or palliation of the revolting and
anti-christian practice of traffic in human flesh. . . . Superior
endowments, higher intellect, greater capacity for knowledge, arts
and science, should be employed to extend the blessings of civi-
lization and multiply the enjoyments of social life; not as a means
of oppressing the weak and ignorant, or plunging those who are
naturally low in the intellectual scale still more deeply into the
abysses of barbarianism [ibid.:240].

As Phillip Curtin emphasizes, Lawrence here was expressing a pre-
Darwinian version of “White-man’s burden.” The essential ingredients
of this rationalization of empire were clearly not dependent upon
Darwin’s or even Spencer’s genius. It was merely necessary to believe
that the “inferior” races were retarded branches of humanity; to feel a
strong sense of Christian charity; and to have an unlimited need for
cheap labor and raw materials. All these ingredients were present long
before Darwin and Spencer came on the scene. What remained to be
added was the doctrine of the “survival of the fittest,” by which it
later became possible to relieve the white man of his sense of guilt
for failing to shoulder enough of the weight of charity.

The years leading up to Darwin thus witnessed a steady increase in
the degree of importance attached to racial differences. Few European
or American men of science resisted the trend. More and more, it
came to be accepted that the white race had an innate and almost
permanent advantage over all the rest. The prima-facie case for these
beliefs seemed overwhelming. Since the fifteenth century, Euro-Ameri-
cans had met with countless peoples in Africa, America, Asia, and the
Pacific Islands, not one of whom had been able effectively to ward off
or retaliate against the advance of European military, economic, po-
litical, and religious institutions. As Samuel Morton put it to his an-

97


===== PAGE 54 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

atomy class in 1840: “In Asia, in Africa, in America, in the torrid and
in the frigid zones, have not all the other races of men yiclded and
given place to this one . . .” (quoted in STANTON 1960:41).

RACISM AND THE DOCTRINE OF
PERFECTIBILITY

The men of the Enlightenment, Turgot and Condorcet for
example, had also assumed the superiority of European civilization;
and following Blumenbach and Buffon some had connected race with
culture through a pre-Lamarckian version of the inheritance of ac-
quired characteristics. The racism of the eighteenth century, however,
remained a modest doctrine, circumscribed by environmentalism and
plagued with doubts about the respective merits of the noble savages
and their vice-ridden civilized conquerors (cf. FAIRCHILD 1928). Above
all, the Enlightenment had qualified its racism with the doctrine of
“perfectibility.” Humanity, regardless of the present shape, color, or
institution, could be led through unlimited stages of progress to
earthly beatitude. Although this may have been more of a hope than
a conviction among the philosophes, the opposite point of view was
very much on the defensive. After the French Revolution both sides of
the issue continued to be argued, but the balance seems to have shifted
in favor of those who denied that all the races and classes of men could
participate equally in the progress that one branch was achieving. In-
creasingly it came to be understood that mankind was engaged in a
struggle that would eliminate the inferior and elevate the superior na-
tions and races. As Curtin (1964:374) has remarked:

The exterminated people were all of the colored races, while the
exterminators always appeared to be European. It seemed obvious
that some natural law of race relations was at work, that the ex-
tinction of the non-Europeans was part of the natural evolution
of the world.

For Thomas Carlyle, as for many of those who took the side of the
South in the slavery controversy, it could only be concluded that the
darker races had been created inferior in order to serve the whites.
Their status was fixed at that level for all time.

That, you may depend on it, my obscure Black friends, is and al-
ways was the Law of the World, for you and for all men: to be
servants, the more foolish of us to the more wise; and only sor-
row, futility and disappointment will betide both, till both in
some approximate degree get to conform to same [CARLYLE quoted
in CURTIN 1964:380-81].

98

|

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

RACIOLOGY, PHRENOLOGY, AND THE
CEPHALIC INDEX

One of the symptoms of the drift away from the principle of
perfectibility was the increasing attention being paid to measuring
the head. Through craniometry, anthropologists expressed their inter-
est in the innate components of behavior—they were trying to find out
what was inside the supposedly empty cabinet. Phrenology, founded by
Joseph Gall (1825), was a manifestation of that interest. According to
Gall, the human mind consisted of 37 different faculties, the strength
or weakness of which could be detected by measuring the corresponding
regions of the cranium. Although Gall himself refrained from apply-
ing phrenology to racial groups, his followers were quick to see its
possibilities. It was Gall’s disciple, George Combe (1819), who got
Samuel Morton to start collecting skulls. While Morton himself
turned to the measurement of cranial capacity through the use of pep-
per seed, his Crania Americana included an appendix by Combe in
which the phrenological evidence for Caucasian superiority was set
forth. William Lawrence (1819) also made use of phrenological con-
cepts as did W. F. Edwards (1841), a French writer who was influ-
enced by the French nationalist-racist, Augustin Thierry. Phrenological
measurements were notoriously imprecise, and the entire system func-
tioned as a kind of projective test in which the observer could match
his prejudices to arbitrary eminences and ridges on his subject’s head.
The scientific interest in the skull as the bony container of the brain
culminated with the establishment of the cephalic index, the ratio of
head length to breadth, by Anders Retzius of Stockholm in 1840. With
the use of calipers, the cephalic index can be obtained with consider-
able precision, and this measurement became the mainstay of an-
thropometry throughout the remainder of the century. Thought to be
Tesistant to environmental influences, it was for long the favorite diag-
nostic of racial phylogeny, until Franz Boas’ (1912) studies of immi-
grants to the United States showed that head form responded to
environmental factors within the span of a single generation.

THE IMMINENCE OF DARWIN

In Britain the pre-Darwinian tendency to “biologize” history
culminated in the theories of Robert Knox, an Edinburgh surgeon who
made his living from lecturing on “transcendental anatomy” (1850:34—
35). Knox believed that “race is everything; literature, science—in a
word, civilization depends on it” (ibid.:7). Knox insisted that the Ne-

99


===== PAGE 55 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

groes were members of another species and presented (incorrect)
evidence that successive generations of mulattoes became progressively
infertile. No one can read Knox without sensing the imminence of Dar-
win, for Knox’s interpretation of history involved a physical and cultural
evolutionary progression, produced by a life and death struggle between
the dark and light races of mankind. The dark races had evolved first,
but the whites were destined to surpass them and to bring about their
extinction. In this fashion Knox anticipated both Spencer and Darwin
as far as natural selection applied to human evolution was concerned.
Knox also proposed an evolutionary view of the origin of all other
species, postulating an order of emergence through mollusks, fish, birds,
quadrupeds, and man. But he failed to apply the concept of struggle
and extinction to the process of speciation. His larger evolutionary
model was based on embryology: new creatures emerged in their proper
turn, just as the embryo goes through its phases of maturation.

THE RACIST AND ANTIRACIST
SPECTRUM

Were there no countercurrents? During the 1860’s Britain’s
rapidly growing community of anthropological scholars found itself
sharply divided on the issue of race. Two factions had emerged out of
the crisis produced by the American Civil War. One group carried on
in the tradition of Prichard, favored the doctrine of perfectibility, was
antislavery, and was associated with the Ethnological Society of
London. The other group followed Knox, denied the doctrine of per-
fectibility, and was polygenist, pro-South, and proslavery. In 1863, the
dissidents set up a new journal, the Anthropological Review, in which
they attacked the older school. Under the influence of the syntheses
achieved by Spencer and Darwin, the dispute was resolved toward the
end of the decade and the achievement of unity formally celebrated
in the founding of a mew association, the Anthropological Insti-
tute of Great Britain and Ireland. It cannot be said, however, that
Prichard’s group was antiracist. Both factions during the sixties be-
lieved in the biocultural inferiority of non-Caucasoids, and both as-
sumed that explanations of sociocultural differences and similarities
necessarily involved racial factors. With the founding of the Royal An-
thropological Society, the racist position remained dominant. It is a
fact inadequately appreciated by modern anthropologists who are ac-
customed to viewing their image in the mirror of twentieth-century
relativism that the professionalization of anthropology as a discipline
coincided with, and was intimately associated with, the rise of raciol-

100

v_’

4 Rise of Racial Determinism

ogy. By the sixties, anthropology and racial determinism had become
almost synonyms. Within anthropology, the only issue was whether
the “inferior” races could legitimately aspire to improvement.

To identify the antithesis of Knox and Hunt, one must look be-
yond the boundaries to which a tradition of exaggerated historicism
has confined the formative place of anthropology. When professional
anthropologists finally broke through to an antiracist environmen-
talism in the twentieth century, they often seemed convinced that
such ideas had never been entertained before; and in fact, among those
who had called themselves anthropologists during the preceding fifty
years, no glimmer of egalitarianism could be found. But the tradition
of Helvétius did not die during the nineteenth century, however much
what was then the mainstream of anthropology was dedicated to de-
stroying it. As we have seen, the greatest defender of racial egalitarian-
ism during the first half of the eighteenth century was John Stuart
Mill. Building on the social engineering tradition of the utilitarians
under Jeremy Bentham, Mill advocated a form of political and eco-
nomic liberalism that took into consideration the immediate depen-
dence of human “nature” on the sociopolitical arrangements to which
individuals and groups are exposed. It was Mill and the Benthamites,
not James Prichard or Theodor Waitz, who were the objects of the
most scathing attacks in the Anthropological Review.

One other source of opposition to the nineteenth-century racists
must be mentioned. A shade to the political left of Mill began the
specter of the socialist and communist reformers and revolutionists.
Most of these figures were considered to be too disreputable to be
mentioned in a learned journal. As in the case of Marx, the socialists
adhered to the radical environmentalism that eventually became the
central doctrine of twentieth-century anthropology. But we must defer
our discussion of the relationship between socialist theory and anthro-
pology to a subsequent chapter.

RACISM IN GERMANY

The rise of racial determinism on the Continent paralleled de-
velopments in Great Britain. Both Hegel and Comte included racial
factors in their analysis of world history and were contemptuous of
non-European peoples. In Germany, the main thread of Gustav
Klemm’s (1843) ten-volume culture-history of mankind was the di-
vision of humanity into “active” and “passive” races. The latter in-
cluded Mongoloids, Negroids, Egyptians, Finns, Hindus, and the
lower classes of Furope. The Germanic stock represented the highest

101


===== PAGE 56 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

form of the “active” races. Both the active and passive races were
working their way in a kind of Hegelian process through the stages of
savagery, “tameness,” and freedom. According to Klemm, one race
needs the other, much as men need women, but the highest attain-
ments of each stage are reserved for the active race. Although both
Robert Lowie (1937:14) and Phillip Curtin (1964:377) minimize the
racist ingredient in Klemm, it is clear that he was deeply involved in
biologizing history.

Lowie (1937:17) also attempts to place Klemm's contemporary,
Theodor Waitz, in the same favorable light, asserting that he “dep-
recates rash verdicts on racial disabilities.” He even proposes Waitz's
Anthropologie der Naturvilker (1859-72) as a “worthy forerunner
of Boas’ The Mind of Primitive Man” (1911). It is true that
Waitz, like Prichard, took exception to the more extreme conclusions
of what he calls the “American School”: “According to the teaching
of the American School, the higher races are destined to replace the
lower. . . . The pious manslayer thus enjoys the consolation that he
acts according to the laws of nature which govern the rise of man”
(warrz 1863:351). But Waitz, again like Prichard, never doubted
that there were “higher” and “lower” races of man even though he
believed, as did Prichard, that “the psychic endowment of the various
races was most probably originally the same or nearly so” (ibid.). Waitz
saw the differences in the rate of evolution from the primitive state as
depending on “the natural and social conditions in which they were
placed” (ibid.). Although he further believed that there was no proof
that “the so-called lower races are condemned to remain in their
present state” (ibid.:320), he nonetheless insisted that “the de-
velopment of civilization is, with some few unimportant exceptions,
limited chiefly to the Caucasian race” (ibid.:8). As a compendium of
misinformation about the relationship between race and culture,
Waitz’s books hold their own with those of his contemporaries. It is
difficult to understand how Lowie could have mistaken Waitz’s rather
standard monogenesism as a precedent for Boas’ Mind of Primitive
Man. Waitz was fighting a rear-guard action against the extreme racial
determinists who sought to base all of history on racial differences. Some
idea of how far Waitz stood from Boas may be obtained from Waitz's
assertion that the people of “all uncultured nations possess, in com-
parison with civilized nations, a large mouth and somewhat thick lips”
(ibid.:74). There is also Waitz’s belief that “the voice of the Negro is
low and hoarse in the males, but acute and shrieking among women”
(ibid.:95). Among the mental characteristics of the inferior races,

102

B canll

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

Waitz included improvidence, a condition he supports by reference to
the imagined fact that the “Caribs sell their hammocks cheaper in the
morning than in the evening” (ibid.:295).

RACISM IN FRANCE

In France, pre-Darwinian racism culminates in the writing of
Count J. A. de Gobineau. A bitter foe of the entire Enlightenment
heritage, Gobineau’s ideas were destined to survive into the twentieth
century. They received their ultimate expression in the Nazi attempts
at genocide. It is interesting to note that Pitirim Sorokin, a staunch
supporter of the worst of the racial determinist fallacies, said of Go-
bineau’s book (1928:229) that it was “written brilliantly, with the
charm of an excellent stylist, the fascination of an original thinker, and
marked by clearness and logicity of ideas, and finally by unusual eru-
dition.” It is casy to understand Gobineau, defender of French reac-
tion and sorrower after lost nobility. But history, in anthropological
perspective, must deal more harshly with Sorokin. Gobineau’s self-
appointed task was to rid the world of the idea that a better life could
be achieved by a significant segment of mankind. Race, like original
sin, chains humanity to misery and eternal failure. Even though all na-
tions are doomed eventually to pass away without achieving their
dreams, some are noble, others despicable and brutish. The differences
can never be effaced:

It is said . . . that all branches of the human family are en-
dowed with intellectual capacities of the same nature, which,
though in different stages of development, are all equally suscep-
tible of improvement. This is not, perhaps, the precise language,
but certainly the meaning. Thus, the Huron, by proper culture,
might become the equal of the Englishman and Frenchman.
Why, then, I would ask, did he never, in the course of centuries,
invent the art of printing or apply the power of steam; why,
among the warriors of his tribe, has there never arisen a Caesar ot
a Charlemagne, among his bards and medicine-men, a Homer or
a Hippocrates [coBINEAU 1856:176; orig. 1853]?

Gobineau rejected any significant role for the sociopolitical or geo-

graphical milieu. All is race. Each ethnic group has its own peculiar
capabilities and destiny:

This is what the whole course of history teaches us. Every race
has its own modes of thinking: every race, capable of developing
a civilization, develops one peculiar to itself, and which it cannot

103


===== PAGE 57 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

engraft upon any other, except by amalgamation of blood, and
then in but a modified degree. The European cannot win the
Asiatic to his modes of thinking; he cannot civilize the Australian,
or the Negro; he can transmit but a portion of his intelligence to
his halfbreed offspring of the inferior race; the progeny of that
half-breed and the nobler branch of his ancestry, is but one degree
nearer, but not equal to that branch in capacity: the proportions
of blood are strictly preserved. . . . Are we not, then, autho-
rized to conclude that the diversity observable among them is
constitutional, innate, and not the result of accident or circum-
stances—that there is an absolute inequality in their intellectual
endowments [ibid.:438].

Gobineau’s opposition to the doctrine of perfectibility was reac-
tionary to the point of denying the superiority of modern Europe over
that of Greece and Rome. He admitted only that advances had been
achieved in the technological sphere. In social and political affairs,
there had been little progress, and it was vain to believe that one civi-
lization could surpass the others in all realms of life. Nonetheless, the
perfectibility of the Caucasians, especially of the Aryans, was greater
than that of the inferior races.

As a devout Christian, Gobineau had to reconcile the evident abil-
ity of savages to accept Christianity with the assertion that the inferior
races could not rise to the level of European civilization. Prichard,
‘Waitz, and many others among the scientific racists of the period based
their main arguments for perfectibility on the fact that all men were
susceptible to religious conversion. Gobineau’s exit from this dilemma
was achieved by stressing Christianity’s appeal to the “lowly and
simple.” “Intellect and learning are not necessary to salvation.” The
superiority of Christianity resides in the fact that it can be under-
stood and accepted by the lowest of human types. But this does not
mean that in other matters the lower branches of humanity can aspire
to cquality with Europeans:

It is wrong therefore to consider the equal aptitudes of all races
for the true religion, as proof of their intellectual equality.
Though having embraced it, they will still display the same char-
acteristic differences, and divergent or even opposite tendencies
[ibid.:223].
Although Gobineau’s biologization of history corresponded to one
of the three main pre-Darwin trends, his theories were directly op-
posed to the other two. There was little use in the aggressive bour-

geois ambience of mid-century for a doctrine of despair. It is not
in the nature of cither the entrepreneur or the soldier of fortune to

104

o

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

doubt the idea of progress. In addition, Gobineau was disdainful of
science and had little interest in associating his theories with a secular
outlook. In a sense, Gobineau was far ahead of his time. It was not
until Europe once again grew weary of reason and progress that his
ideas were properly appreciated.

In the meantime the ideological currents, of which carly nineteenth-
century racial determinism was a manifestation, were moving toward
a different climax. Competition, progress, perfection, expansion, strug-
gle, conquest—these were the themes, dynamic and optimistic, which
awaited a joining with the biological interpretation of history. The
fusion of all of these diverse elements into one grand scientific theory
was the achievement of Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin. Yet the
sociocultural need for this synthesis was so clear and the ideological
ground so thoroughly prepared that in the absence of both of these
geniuses, exact replicas of their theories would soon have arisen from
parallel and convergent sources. Evidence in support of this statement
will be presented in a moment.

THE SOCIOCULTURAL ROOTS OF
SPENCER AND DARWIN

It is beyond the scope of the present volume to provide a
panorama of the sociocultural milieu that nourished and rewarded the
theories of Spencer and Darwin. Yet certain general aspects of the
epoch cannot be neglected. The milieu in question was remarkable for
the intensity and geographical expanse of its international wars, its
internecine political struggles and class warfare, its uninhibited eco-
nomic competitiveness, and its rapid pace of technological and scien-
tific change. The gigantic national mobilizations achieved during the
Napoleonic wars had raised the organizational efficiency of the Euro-
pean nation-state to unprecedented levels. At the same time techno-
logical advances had increased the geographic range of military con-
quest and commercial exploitation to encompass the entire carth. But
the European nations were complex heterogencous supersocieties in
which control over the state apparatus lingered on the outcome of
domestic struggles no less fierce than those waged abroad. Within the
rapidly expanding populations sharp differences in wealth and access
Fo strategic natural resources and productive equipment generated
intensely divisive forces. Domestic revolutions or near revolutions
alternated with foreign wars carried out on an ever-increasing scale.

It would seem undeniable that the wedding between racism and the

105


===== PAGE 58 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

doctrine of struggle was in part an excrescence of this class and na-
tional warfare. Racism could be invoked to overcome the class and
ethnic diversities of the modern nation. The fiction of common descent
enshrined in the metaphor of fatherland and motherland, and applied
indiscriminately to the overwhelmingly hybrid populations of Eu-
rope, improved the tone of civil and military organization. The racial
interpretation of nationhood imparted to the physical, cultural, and
linguistic hodgepodges known as England, France, Germany, etc., a
sense of community based on the illusion of a common origin and the
mirage of a common destiny. In the mystique of racially inspired
patriotism, nations made war with increased efficiency while blunting
the divisive effects of class antagonism at home. Romanticism in art and
literature was an essential aspect of this mystique. National destinies,
uncontrolled and uncontrollable, welling up from the racial past, were
stridently proclaimed as the fulfillment of art and life. Racism also had
its uses as a justification for class and caste hierarchies; it was a splendid
explanation of both national and class privilege. It helped to maintain
slavery and serfdom; it smoothed the way for the rape of Africa and
the slaughter of the American Indian; it steeled the nerves of the
Manchester captains of industry as they lowered wages, lengthened the
working day, and hired more women and children.

As the racial interpretation of history cast its spell over the Euro-
American intelligentsia, there arose a parallel doctrine that spread with
equal speed across the same territory. This was the ideology specific to
industrial entrepreneurship, laissez-faire, the justification for economic
competition, wage labor, profits, and capital accumulation. It was the
ideology of an ascendant economic system whose prodigious energies
derived from maximizing rewards and punishments for the outcome of
endless numbers of competitive encounters. Under Adam Smith, the
material welfare of each individual as well as of the total society had
been shown to be dependent upon unfettered competition in the
market place. Progress in material welfare arose only from this endless
economic struggle. Any softening of its conditions in the name of
Christian charity or political sovereignty would inevitably decrease the
well being of the citizenry. For the economic order was governed by
immutable laws; capitalism was a self-regulating machine whose main-
spring was competition.

Prior to Spencer’s and Darwin’s influence, racism and classical eco-
nomic theory unfolded along scparate trajectories. Adam Smith,
Ricardo, and Malthus in their own writings made no contribution to
racist theories of history. On the other hand, Prichard, Lawrence,
Klemm, Waitz, and the other pre-Darwinian racial determinists were

106

Dol

4. Rise of Racial Determinism

uninterested in uniting their ideas with the theory of the industrial
capitalism. What connection after all could exist between such diverse
phenomena as warfare, raciation, and competition in the market place?
It took the combined geniuses of Spencer and Darwin to find the com-
mon ingredient, to see the “struggle for survival” operating in every
sphere of life, to subsume all change, whether inorganic, organic, or
superorganic, under a single law of evolution, and thus to complete
the biologization of history without surrendering the Enlightenment’s
dream of universal progress.

107


===== PAGE 59 =====

Spencerism
P 5

S
5053

T(: propose that Herbert Spencer’s and Charles Darwin’s theories were
an inevitable product of a certain phase of Western history is not to
deny the contribution of cumulative scientific advances to the perfec-
tion of biological and sociocultural evolutionism. The very same forces
that brought the themes of progress, race, and struggle to the forefront
of Spencer’s and Darwin’s attention were also responsible for strength-
ening the authority and prestige of science. Laissez-faire individualism
was related by positive feedback to the development of science. Eco-
nomic and political liberalism, themselves a product of technological
and scientific advance, exerted an immensely stimulating effect on all
forms of scientific inquiry. The technological pay-off resulting from
this inquiry was essential to the maintenance of capitalism. Although
theological dogmas continued to be useful in the control and discipline
of the masses, a veritable cornucopia of technological miracles forced
the theological establishment into an essentially rear-guard action.
Finally, in 1859, Darwin’s materialist explanation of the origin of
species broke the authority of the theologians in the domain of the
life sciences.

108

Dol

5. Spencerism

Why did Charles Darwin succeed where Jean Baptiste Lamarck
had failed? It seems unlikely that it was merely the more advanced
phase of capitalism in which Darwin was privileged to operate. We
must not discount the fact that in the interval between Lamarck and
Darwin a great strengthening of the secular world view had been
quietly going on under the stimulus of continuing scientific advance.
Driven partly underground by the political counterrevolution, it
awaited the first possible opportunity to burst forth and resume the
task that Galileo had begun. J. C. Nott and G. R. Gliddon’s passion for
“parson skinning” is an indication of how far this trend had been able
to progress even under the most adverse conditions. In addition to the
erosion of theological authority as a general consequence of scientific
advance, the way had been prepared for Darwin by a confrontation
between theology and science on an issue of the greatest importance
for the theory of bio-evolution. This issue was the age of the earth. It
was here that Darwin’s main advantage over Lamarck resided. For
Lamarck had to contend with the theologians not only on the ques-
tion of organic evolution, but on the question of geological evolution as
well. Let us pause for a moment, therefore, to consider the new
understanding of the earth’s history.

GEOLOGY SHOWS THE WAY

During most of the cighteenth century, the nascent discipline
of geology languished under the tutelage of scriptural authority. Except
for modifications introduced by the flood, the earth was regarded as
having preserved the form imparted to it at the beginning of the world.
A considerable amount of research effort was dedicated to proving that
Genesis and the earth’s strata both told the same story. Alpine deposits
bearing the remains of marine life were hailed as confirmation of the
former presence of water deep enough to submerge the highest peaks.
Fossils of extinct animals simply proved that not all of the antediluvian
creatures had managed to reach the safety of the ark.

When the history of the earth began to be considered geologi-
cally, it was simply assumed that a universal deluge must have
wrought vast changes and that it had been a primary agent in
forming the present surface of the globe. Its occurrence was
evidence that the Lord was a governor as well as a creator [GILLISPIE

1951:42].

Among geologists, James Hutton’s Theory of the Earth (1788), the
foundation of the so-called Vulcanist school, marked the first sus-

109


===== PAGE 60 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tained refutation of this view. Hutton’s theories challenged the ex-
planation of the earth’s strata given by the Neptunist school. The lat-
ter was represented in Great Britain by Robert Jameson, who was in
turn a student of the founder of Neptunism, Abraham Gottlob Wer-
ner, professor of mineralogy at Freiburg in Saxony. Inspired by the Bib-
lical account, Werner and Jameson argued that all the earth’s rocks had
precipitated out of a briny solution in several well-defined stages, cor-
responding to the stages of creation, and had remained in place ever
since in the form of the geological strata. Hutton on the other hand
avoided the issue of creation altogether and attempted to interpret
geomorphological features in terms of the cumulative effect of na-
tural physical and chemical processes such as heat, pressure, and var-
ious forms of physical and chemical weathering. The implications of
Hutton’s interpretation for the age of the earth were heretical since
relatively minute forces working over long periods of time now were
responsible for the effects hitherto attributed to instantaneous cata-
clysms.

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY PRECEDENTS

It is interesting to note that Hutton’s ideas had been pre-
ceded in the eighteenth century by a number of more outspoken, but
geologically less well-informed, proposals. Georges Buffon, stimulated
by Gottfried Leibniz, had even carried out a series of experiments
with heated iron balls in an attempt to date the earth. Assuming that
the earth had originally been in a molten condition, Buffon sought
to estimate the time that would have had to elapse for it to have
cooled to its present temperature. In Epochs of Nature (1778) Buffon
concluded that a minimum of 75,000 years had passed, but he delib-
erately restrained himself from longer estimates in deference to the
scriptural account. Immanuel Kant was the proponent of a more auda-
cious view. In the Universal Natural History and Theory of the
Heavens he postulated an infinite universe where “millions and whole
myriads of millions of centuries will flow on during which always new
worlds and systems of worlds will be formed” (xANT, quoted in
HABER 1959:153). There were many other stirrings of a similar sort,
especially among philosophes like D’Holbach and Diderot. Indeed,
Haber presents the Wernerian Neptunists as the counterattack against
the anti-Mosaic trends of the mid-eighteenth century. But by the
time Lamarck wrote his Hydrogeology (1802) there was no re-
maining effective challenge to the short chronology. Lamarck’s pro-
posal that the earth had existed for several billion years was greeted

110

ool

5. Spencerism

with even more contempt than his idea that men were descended
from fish. He himself regarded the resistance to the chronology of
billions of years as the main obstacle to the acceptance of his idea on
organic evolution. He despaired of convincing his contemporaries of
the errors in their Wernerian empiricism and their slavish adherence to
the Mosaic account:

These considerations, I know, having never been presented else-
where than in my Hydrogeology, and not having obtained the
serious examination that I believe they deserve, can only appear
extraordinary even to the most enlightened persons.

Indeed, man, who judges the greatness of duration only relative
to himself and not to nature, will undoubtedly never actually find
the slow mutations which I have just presented and consequently
he will believe it necessary to reject without examination my
opinion on these great subjects [LAMARCK, quoted in HABER 1959:

179].

The defenders of the Biblical chronology held the upper hand
through the first two decades of the nineteenth century. Under
Georges Cuvier (1812) and William Buckland (1823), as evidence of
not one “flood” but of dozens accumulated, the doctrine of “catastro-
phism”—a series of miraculous destructions and creations—was
brought in to salvage the Biblical story. It was not until 1820 that
the Vulcanists’ requirements for an expanded chronology became a
respectable position among geologists. Even then, however, geology
continued to maintain an extraordinarily conservative outiook with
tespect to the Mosaic version of the origin of man:

The main positions of providential natural history were still
secure. . . . No one denied the importance of the flood, nor its
intimate connections with the history of the human species. No
one had impugned the recentness of the creation of man. Mu-
tability of other species was seldom if ever mentioned, and the
Creator had still to be immediately responsible for the appear-
ance of new forms of life. . . . Nearly everyone implicitly ac-
cepted . . . the distinction between the present order of causes
and some former, more powerful ones [CILLISPIE 1951:96].

THE CONTRIBUTION OF CHARLES
LYELL

The turning point, marked by the publication of Charles
Lyell's Principles of Geology, did not occur until 1830. Building on
Hutton’s work, Lyell insisted that the processes observable in the

111


===== PAGE 61 =====

Rl

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

present suffice to account for all geomorphological phenomena. It was
Lyell's uncompromising “uniformitarianism” and the consequent
lengthening out of time that converted Darwin from a middle-of-the-
road respecter of scriptural authority to a resolutely independent
scientist.

Lyell’s book went with Darwin on the voyage of the Beagle. It gave
Darwin that liberty with time that had been denied Lamarck. As
Haber (1959:268) writes, “There can be little doubt that it was
through Lyell’s Principles that Darwin’s mind was emancipated from
the shackles of Biblical chronology. . . .” Darwin himself confided:

I always feel as if my books came half out of Lyell’s brain, and
that I never acknowledged this sufficiently; nor do I know how I
can without saying so in so many words—for I have always
thought that the great merit of the Principles was that it altered
the whole tone of one’s mind [ibid.].

Despite Lyell’s advanced ideas about geology, he remained highly
conservative in the matter of biological evolution. Indeed, Lyell de-
voted a whole chapter of the Principles of Geology to a critical review
of Lamarck’s theory of bio-evolution. This chapter, as we shall see,
was to have a profound effect on Herbert Spencer, but Lyell, himself,
had no use for Lamarck’s ideas. In discussing the origin of bio-
forms, Lyell adopted the very position that his uniformitarianism
had destroyed in geology. He accounted for the observed distribution
of bioforms in time and space by postulating a series of continuous
creations by which new species were introduced to replace those
that were continually becoming extinct. According to Lyell, each new
species was pre-adapted by the Creator to endure within a particular
range of environmental conditions associated with a particular time
and region of the world. When environmental change destroyed these
conditions, the species underwent extinction.

Thus despite his dependence on special creationism, Lyell’s bio-
logical theories reflect the main trends leading up to Spencer and
Darwin in more than just the new chronology. Among the changes
that produce extinction Lyell stressed the modifications in the biotic
community as having primary importance. That is, the introduction
of new species was itself the prime cause of the extinction of old
ones. Old and new species engaged in a struggle for survival. Indeed,
it was Lyell's firm belief in the ubiquity of the struggle for survival
that prevented him from accepting Lamarck’s evolutionism. For he
could not understand how a less fit species could survive in the pres-

112

ence of a better fit species long enough to accumulate the modifica-
tions that would have guaranteed its survival.

Thus Lyell, like Spencer and Darwin, was groping toward a synthe-
sis of the themes of struggle and progress. And like both Spencer and
Darwin, Lyell’s model of struggle was derived mainly from the human
condition. Here is a uniformitarianism (sociocultural) of which Lyell
never dreamed: his preferred example of how the struggle for existence
leads to extinction of less-favored types is none other than the conflict
between Europeans and savages!

It is idle to dispute about the abstract possibility of the con-
version of one species into another, where there are known causes
so much more active in their nature, which must always intervene
and prevent the actual accomplishment of such conversions. A
faint image of the certain doom of a species less fitted to struggle
with some new condition in a region which it previously inhab-
ited, and where it has to contend with a more vigorous species, is
presented by the extirpation of savage tribes of men by the ad-
vancing colony of some civilized nation. In this case the contest is
merely between two different races. . . . Yet few future events
are more certain than the speedy extermination of the Indians of
North America and the savages of New Holland in the course of a
few centuries, when these tribes will be remembered only in
poetry and tradition [LYELL 1850:678].

LYELL'S INFLUENCE ON SPENCER

One of the most extraordinary indications of the inevitability
of Darwin’s and Spencer’s evolutionary synthesis is the fact that Lyell's
book loomed as large in Spencer’s formative years as in Darwin’s. As
Spencer wrote in his autobiography (1926:359), it was the reading of
Lyell which convinced him that species evolved and which set him
on the road toward the discovery that evolution was the great law
of nature. Although he had previously given some thought to the
idea that “the human racc had been developed from some lower
race,” reading Lyell’s criticism of Lamarck convinced him that La-
marck was right. Spencer’s belief in bio-evolution “never afterwards
‘(!{;erid, much as I was, in after years, ridiculed for entertaining it”

d. ).

Thus, Lyell's rejection of Lamarck made confirmed evolutionists
out ?f both Darwin and Spencer! Pondering the question of “why
Lyell's arguments produced the opposite effect to that intended,”
Spencer mentions his aversion to “supernaturalism, in whatever

113


===== PAGE 62 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

form” (ibid.). One must also suppose that Lyell’s success in explaining
the history of the earth without calling upon miracles brought
home to both Darwin and Spencer the imminence of a similar tri-
umph in biology.

But there was something else in Lyell’s rejection of Lamarck, to
which Spencer does not allude, but which returns our attention at once
to the major ideological trends leading toward the biocultural evolu-
\tionary synthesis of progress and struggle. In rejecting Lamarck, Lyell
was rejecting the ultimate expression of the eighteenth century’s faith
in the perfectibility of mankind. Nature, according to Lamarck, was
constrained by immutable law to bring forth ever more perfect crea-
tures. As Lyell put it, Lamarck’s

. speculations know no definite bounds; he gives the rein to
conjecture, and fancies that the outward form, internal structure,
instinctive faculties, nay, that reason itself, may have been gradu-
ally developed from some of the simplest states of existence,—
that all animals, that man himself, and the irrational beings, may
have had one common origin; that all may be parts of one con-
tinuous and progressive scheme of development from the most
imperfect to the more complex; in fine, he renounces his belief in
the high genealogy of his species, and looks forward, as if in com-
pensation, to the future perfectibility of man in his physical,
intellectual, and moral attributes [LYELL 1830, quoted in GREENE

1959:251].
What thus seemed most absurd to Lyell was about to appear as the
central theme in Spencer’s lifework: the demonstration that the uni-

verse exhibited “one continuous and progressive scheme of develop-
ment” embracing all inorganic, organic, and superorganic phenomena.

THE CONTRIBUTION OF MALTHUS

It should be stressed that Lyell’s rejection of Lamarck was
consistent with Lyell’s acceptance of the pessimistic theories of the
greatest of all enemies of the doctrines of progress, Thomas Malthus.
It was Malthus who was responsible for the concept of the struggle
for survival, upon which the theories of Lyell, Darwin, Spencer, and
Alfred Wallace depended. But Lyell alone in this group accepted Mal-
thus’s negative conclusions concerning the perfectibility of man,
namely, that a large portion of mankind was forever doomed to misery
by the imbalance between productive and reproductive capacities.

Malthus’s role in the development of Darwin and Spencer’s syn-
thesis may even have been more important than that of Lyell.

114

g B

5. Spencerism

Indeed, it is Malthus’s negative attitude toward progress and perfecti-
bility that explains why both Darwin and Spencer reacted so power-
fully to Lyell's antievolutionism. Both Darwin and Spencer, each in
his own way, were committed to proving that one part of Malthus’s
theory was correct, and the other part wrong. In the familiar history
of the case, Malthus’s contributions to Darwin’s theories are pre-
sented in their positive form, while Malthus’s contributions to
Spencer’s theories are usually neglected altogether. In both cases, how-
ever, the reaction against Malthus was decisive. Let us turn first to
the relationship between Malthus and Darwin.

It is by now well known that Darwin attributed the “discovery”
of the principle of natural selection to his reading of Malthus’s An
Essay on the Principle of Population (1798). “I came to the conclu-
sion,” wrote Darwin (1903, I:118), “that selection was the principle
of change from the study of domesticated productions; and then,
reading Malthus, I saw at once how to apply this principle.” The
reading in question was said by Darwin to have taken place in October,
1838. Now, Malthus’s Essay was emphatically conceived as a ref-
utation of the Enlightenment’s faith in progress. Although it is
today rightly regarded as the foundation of the science of demog-
raphy, it achieved this eminence only as a by-product of Malthus’s
main intent. “My object,” he wrote in the Preface to the enlarged
1803 edition, “was to apply it [the Essay] to the truth of those
speculations on the perfectibility of man and society, which at that
time excited a considerable portion of publick [sic] attention”
(MALTHUS 1803: iii). Addressing himself directly to Marquis de Con-
dorcet’s Outline of the Intellectual Progress of Mankind (see p. 35),
Malthus laid bare the influence of the French Revolution in bringing
about his own disillusionment with the doctrine of perfectibility. To
think of Condorcet writing about perfectibility while in jail “is a
singular instance of the attachment of a man to principles which every
day’s experience was, so fatally for himself, contradicting” (ibid.:354).
Malthus expressed his feelings on the French Revolution in rather
strong terms:

To see the human mind, in one of the most enlightened nations
of the world, debased by such a fermentation of disgusting pas-
sions, of fear, cruelty, malice, revenge, ambition, madness and
folly, as would have disgraced the most savage nations in the most
barbarous age, must have been such a tremendous shock to his
ideas of the nccessary and inevitable progress of the human
mind, that nothing but the firmest conviction of the truth of his
principles, in spite of all appearances, could have withstood [ibid.].

115


===== PAGE 63 =====

e

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

[ S—

It will be recalled that Condorcet’s historical sketch had concluded
with speculation concerning the possibility that cultural improve-
ments might eventually result in changing man’s physical nature.
Malthus ridiculed this idea, basing his arguments on the fixed nature
of species. Although it was true, he admitted, that proper breeding
could change plants, animals, and men to an indefinable extent, it
was nonsense to suppose that these changes were potentially un-
limited. Sheep may be bred for small legs and small heads, but “the
heads and legs of these sheep would never be so small as the head
and legs of a rat” (ibid.:361). Ironically, Darwin’s theories were to
make such hypothetical sheep the least of evolutionary wonders.

In reading Malthus and deriving from him the principle of natural
selection, Darwin could not have been unaware that once again, as
in the case of Lyell, he was attributing part of his theory to a man
with whom he was in considerable disagreement. But the remarkable
appeal of Darwin’s ideas lay precisely in the union of what had
hitherto been regarded as opposites. By applying the struggle for exis-
tence to the explanation of the origin of species, the positions repre-
sented by Condorcet and Malthus could be brought into harmony!
All kinds of additional irreconcilables were reconciled. Following Dar-
win, one could be both a racist, believing in the hereditary limits of a
race or species, and at the same time, one could be an environmental-
ist, secure in the knowledge that there was no limit to the perfecti-
bility of any species, including man. Where Malthus could see only
perpetual misery resulting from the struggle for survival, Darwin
could see perpetual progress. Where Lyell saw extinction, Darwin
saw creation. On the other hand, while Condorcet attributed progress
to the effect of a beneficent environment, Darwin attributed it to
unremitting struggle; and while Lamarck explained progress as the
accumulation of a benign striving for improvement, Darwin saw it
as the product of “nature, red in fang and claw.”

DARWIN'S CONTRIBUTION

Let us not forget that Darwin, standing on the shoulders of
Lyell, Lamarck, and a host of other scholars, put together an argu-
ment for the evolution of species that was unprecedented in detail,
accuracy, and scope. The Origin of Species abided by standards of
evidence and logic that before 1859 had seldom been equaled and
never surpassed. Yet these features would guarantee the book’s
success only within a small technically minded circle capable of ap-

116

preciating the virtue of a monographic tour de force. They do not by
themselves account for the passion with which such prestigious leaders
of the scientific community as Sir Joseph Hooker, Thomas Huxley,
and Charles Lyell rallied to Darwin’s defense, nor for the enthusiasm
of whole cohorts of younger scientists and intellectuals. Origin was
much more than a scientific treatise; it was a great book precisely
because of the diverse cultural themes it consolidated and expressed.
It dramatized and legitimatized what many people from scientists to

politicians had obscurely felt to be true without themselves being
able to put it into words.

I should like to take note here of historian Gertrude Himmelfarb'’s
(1959:373) assertion that Darwin was especially well suited to this
task because he was “without the taint of ulterior ideology” (ibid.).
One may readily admit that Darwin was without the “taint” but not
that he was lacking in ulterior ideology. Having attributed the inspira-
tion for his greatest idea to Malthus, he could not have been unaware
of the larger implications of a “struggle for survival.” Darwin’s great\
book had a rather sharply focused philosophical message, namely the
reaffirmation of the lawfulness of nature, the inevitability of progress,

and the justice of the system of struggle without which progress can-

not be achieved. According to Darwin, nature’s laws are both benefi-

cent and beautiful. Although we cannot control nature, we have
nothing to fear from her.

All that we can do, is to keep steadily in mind that each organic
being is striving to increase in a geometrical ratio; that each at
some period of its life, during some season of the year, during
each generation or at intervals, has to struggle for life and to suf-
fer great destruction. When we reflect on this struggle, we may
console ourselves with the full belief that the war of nature is not
incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is generally prompt, and

that the vigorous, the healthy, and the happy survive and mul-
tiply [DARWIN 1958:86].

In the penultimate paragraph of the Origin of Species, Darwin elabo-
rated on the same theme, implying that his theory supported the

doctrine of perfectibility and that it was opposed to the imi
y v essimism of
both Malthus and Lyell: * '

As all the living forms of life are the lineal descendants of those
which lived long before the Cambrian epoch, we may feel certain
that the ordinary succession by generation has never once been
broken, and that no cataclysm has desolated the whole world.
Hence we may look with some confidence to a secure future of

117


===== PAGE 64 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

great length. And as natural selection works solely by and for the
good of each being, all corporeal and mental endowments will
tend to progress towards perfection [ibid.:449]-

In the last lines of the book, the conversion of Malthus’s nightmare
into Divine. Comedy summons forth the image of a “tangled bank”
filled with tarvelously complex arrangements of plants and animals,
all products of the same natural law. The book ends with an up-beat
that reverberated throughout the remainder of the century:

Thus from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most
exalted object of which we are capable of conceiving, namely the
production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is
grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having
been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into
one; and that whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to
the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms
most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being

evolved [ibid:449]

It can be argued, of course, that Darwin was concerned here only
with organic evolution and that his idea of perfection through struggle
was neither embedded in nor directed toward a theory of sociocultural
evolution. But in Darwin’s first unpublished sketch of the theory of
natural selection written in 1842, he was already convinced that this
theory included all mammals without exception. As Gertrude Him-
melfarb (1959:290) admits, Darwin did not take up the issue of
human evolution in the Origin of Species “because he thought it
would prevent his book from getting a fair hearing.”

Twelve years were to elapse between the Origin of Species and the
appearance of the Descent of Man, the book in which Darwin ad-
dresses himself specifically to the question of the relationship be-
tween natural selection and human evolution. But by 1871, the
blending of sociocultural evolution with biological theory under
Spencer’s version of the “survival of the fittest” had already swept the
field.

DARWIN 'S RACISM

Was Darwin a racial determinist? Did he think of racial
differences in terms of the “survival of the fittest”? It would be most
extraordinary if Darwin, practically alone among his contemporaries,
had been able to escape the thralldom of biologized history. Yet the
issue is raised (cf. HIMMELFARB 1959:298) because in the Descent of
Man, Darwin opposed the long-established belief going back to Blu-

118

5. Spencerism

menbach and Buffon that such traits as skin color and hair form were
useful for survival. Thus he explicitly denied that such racial features
could have been established primarily by natural selection. The

principle he advanced to explain human racial differences was not
natural selection but sexual selection:

For my own part, I conclude that of all the causes which have
led to the differences in external appearance between the races of
man and to a certain extent between man and the lower animals,
sexual selection has been by far the most efficient [pARWIN 1871,

11:367].

It should be made clear, however, that Darwin did not conceive
of sexual selection as being opposed to natural selection any more
than he believed that natural selection ruled out the possibility of
evolution through Lamarckian use and disuse. By introducing the
principle of sexual selection, Darwin hoped to explain those features
of organisms that seemed not to be useful in the struggle for survival.
The stag’s antlers and the peacock’s feathers are the classic examples
with which he concerned himself on the infrahuman level. Such
features could elaborate themselves along diverse pathways as long
as they did not tip the balance against survival, if they conferred an
advantage in mating. The equivalent features in man, Darwin urged,
were those aspects of racial differences—skin color, hair form, eye
color, nose and lip shape—which everyone had for so long assumed
must be connected with something vital in the functioning of the
%mman organisms in different regions of the world. The stated ob-
jective of the Descent of Man, served by a multichapter digression
into examples drawn from lower organisms, was to prove that sexual
selec_tion better accounted for the externdl racial differences among
h_ommids than natural selection. This was a perfectly reputable posi-
tion and one which continues to be supported by many physical
anthropologists and biologists. But Darwin never for a moment
doubted that there were important internal differences between the
races and that these were established by natural selection. Noting
that “not one of the external differences between the races of man
are of any direct service to him,” and that therefore they could not be
acquxred through natural selection, he specifically exempts all those
racial features that are significant for the question of differential
rate?s of progress toward civilization: “The intellectual and moral or
social faculties must of course be excepted from this remark; but
differences in these faculties can have had little or no influence on
external characters” (DARWIN 1871, II:239).

119


===== PAGE 65 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

DARWIN'S VERSION OF PROGRESS
THROUGH STRUGGLE

The ideology of progress through struggle, of which Darwin
was an exponent, received emphasis even when he resorted to the
principle of sexual selection. The most efficacious form of sexual
selection was that of struggle between males for a chance at mating
with the most desirable females. But the other form of struggle—
struggle for survival—is by no means neglected in deference to the
struggle for sex. It is impossible to read the Descent of Man without
being struck by its almost total advocacy of the struggle for survival
as the means of understanding sociocultural evolution. It is a struggle
for survival, moreover, that involves not so much man against nature,
as man against man, in the most direct, Spencerian paradigm. Al-
though Darwin frequently qualifies the importance of this struggle, as
for example in accounting for altruism, he returns always to the under-
lying sanction of survival:

It must not be forgotten that, although a high standard of mo-
rality gives but a slight or no advantage to each individual man
and his children over the other men of the same tribe, yet that
an advancement in the standard of morality and an increase in the
number of well-endowed men will certainly give an immense
advantage to one tribe over another. There can be no doubt that
a tribe including many members who, from possessing in a high
degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and
sympathy, were always ready to give aid to each other and to sac-
rifice themselves for the common good, would be victorious over
most other tribes; and this would be natural selection [ibid.:159-60].

This qualification must be understood to apply as well to the passage
in which Darwin flatly asserts that factors other than natural selec-
tion account for “the highest part of man’s nature”:

. important as the struggle for existence has been and even
still is, yet as far as the highest part of man’s nature is concerned
there are other agencies more important. For the moral qualities
are advanced, cither directly or indirectly, much more through
the cffects of habit, the reasoning powers, instruction, religion,
etc., than through natural selection; though to this latter agency
the social instincts, which afforded the basis for the development
of the moral sense, may be safely attributed [pARwWIN 1871, 11:386].

Darwin’s murky reference to habits, reasoning powers, instruction,
and religion as opposed to natural selection is perhaps an expression
of uneasiness about too blatant an advocacy of struggle both within

120

and between societies. It does not cancel out the main point of the
first half of this same paragraph in which there is an appeal for
maintenance of “open competition”:

Man, like every other animal, has no doubt advanced to his pres-
ent high condition through a struggle for existence consequent on
his rapid multiplication; and if he is to advance still higher he
must remain subject to a severe struggle. Otherwise he would soon
sink into indolence, and the more highly-gifted men would not be
more successful in the battle of life than the less gifted. Hence
our natural rate of increase, though leading to many and obvious
evils, must not be greatly diminished by any means. There
should be open competition for all men; and the most able should
not be prevented by laws or customs from succceding best and
rearing the largest number of offspring [ibid.:385-86].

It also should be pointed out that Darwin separated the evolution
of “moral qualities” from the evolution of what he called the “mental
faculties.” It is to the latter that “man mainly owes . . . his preemi-
nent position in the world”; and it is the struggle for survival in
which the faculty of intelligence is perfected in the individual, made
hereditary, and passed on to succeeding generations:

All that we know about savages, or may infer from their tradi-
tions and from old monuments, the history of which is quite for-
gotten by the present inhabitants, shows that from the remotest
times successful tribes have supplanted other tribes. Relics of
extinct or forgotten tribes have been discovered throughout the
civilized regions of the carth, on the wild plains of America, and
on the isolated islands in the Pacific Ocean. At the present day
civilized nations are everywhere supplanting barbarous nations,
excepting where the climate opposes a deadly barrier; and they
succeed mainly, though not exclusively, through their arts, which
are the products of the intellect. It is, therefore, highly probable
that with mankind the intellectual faculties have been gradually
perfected through natural selection [ibid.:154].

Like all of his contemporaries, Darwin was utterly incapable of sepa-
rating changes in a group’s learned repertory from hereditary modifi-
cations. The idea that contemporary savages might be as intelligent
as civilized people was simply inconceivable. Taking the case of a
newly invented snare weapon, he admits that mere imitation could
induce others to accept it. But cach technical innovation necessarily
also contributes to the perfection of the intellect:

The habitual practice of each new art must likewise in some slight
degree strengthen the intellect. If the new invention were an im-
portant one, the tribe would increase in number, spread, and sup-

121


===== PAGE 66 =====

B . onngll

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

plant other tribes. In a tribe thus rendered more numerous there
would always be a rather better chance of the birth of other su-
perior and inventive members. If each man left children to inherit
their mental superiority, the chance of the birth of still more
ingenious members would be somewhat better, and in a very
small tribe decidedly better. Even if they left no children, the
tribe would still include their blood-relations; and it has been
ascertained by agriculturalists that by preserving and breeding
from the family of an animal, which when slaughtered was found
to be valuable, the desired character has been obtained [ibid.:155].

It would be idle to expect a logical resolution of all the conflicting
statements in the Descent of Man. Darwin’s position was hopelessly
compromised by the prevailing confusion between inherited and
learned traits. It can be said with certainty that he was a racial
determinist; that he believed the preservation of the fit and the
elimination of the unfit produced biocultural progress, and that he
had a deep ideological commitment to laissez-faire. Ashley Montagu’s
estimate of Darwin’s position in the Descent of Man thus appears to
be preferable to that given by Gertrude Himmelfarb. Says Montagu
(1952:46):
The few passages in which Darwin mentions altruism, and co-oper-
ation come exclusively from The Descent of Man, where in a
book of a thousand pages they are virtually crowded out by nu-
merous statements that appear to stand in direct and unequivocal
contradiction to them. Darwin was going to have the cake of
natural selection, which he had baked, and eat it, too. The flavor-
ing was mostly “struggle for existence,” but here and there, there
was a sprinkling of the thinnest kind of co-operation. . . . It was,
however, far too thin to make any more than a fleeting impression
upon the intellectual taste-buds of those who concentrated their
attention upon the consumption of the main body of the cake.
Darwin was, in fact, a struggle-for-survivor. . . .

THE MISNOMER OF SOCIAL DARWINISM

One of the obstacles to a proper understanding of the rela-
tionship between Darwin and the social sciences is that the doctrine
of progress through struggle goes by the name of Social Darwinism.
This phrase both expresses and reinforces the erroneous notion that
after 1859 social scientists, led by Herbert Spencer, “applied the
concepts developed by Darwin to the interpretation of the nature
and functioning of society” (MONTAGU 1952:32-33). The fact that
needs to be established here is that Darwin’s principles were an ap-

122

plication of social-science concepts to biology. The discussion of
sociocultural progress and evolution among such social theorists as
Monboddo, Turgot, Condorcet, Millar, Ferguson, Helvétius, and
D’Holbach provided the matrix for the discussion of biological evolu-
tion by Geoffroy St.-Hilaire, Erasmus Darwin (Charles’s grandfather),
and Lamarck. On Darwin’s own authority we may accept Malthus’s
discussion of the struggle for survival as the inspiration for natural
selection. As Darwin put it, “This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied
to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms” (DARWIN 1958:29).

If there are any lingering doubts about the importance of this
debt (cf. GREENE 1959:258), there is also the testimony of Alfred
Wallace, joint author of the memoir presented to the members of
the Linnaean Society in 1858, at which the discovery of the principle of
natural selection was first announced. It was Wallace who inadver-
tently forced Darwin into publishing the Origin of Species by sending
him a manuscript outlining the very theory on which Darwin had
already been working for some twenty years. Wallace’s theory was so
close to Darwin’s that the latter was moved to exclaim “Even his
terms now stand as heads of my chapters” (quoted in HIMMELFARB
1959:200). It is less well known that the parallelism between Wallace
and Darwin, a striking example of the “principle of the simultaneity
of invention” (see p. 327), extended as well to the reading of Mal-
thus. In 1855, while recuperating from an illness on the island of
Ternate, near New Guinea, Wallace fell to thinking about the checks
on population increase described in Malthus’s Essay on Population.
In his own words:

Then it suddenly flashed upon me that this self-acting process
would necessarily improve the race, because in every generation
the inferior would inevitably be killed off and the superior would
remain—that is the fittest would survive. . . . The more I
thought over it the more I became convinced that I had at length
found the long-sought-for law of nature that solved the problem
of the origin of species [WALLACE 1905:362-63].

THE PRIORITY OF SPENCER

The phrase “Social Darwinism” not only obscures our under-
standing of the functional matrix that inspired Darwin but it also
distorts the actual order of precedence between Spencer’s and Dar-
win's specific contributions to evolutionary theory. In 1842, the
very year in which Darwin completed his first unpublished sketch of
the theory of natural selection, Spencer began to publish a series of

123


===== PAGE 67 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

formative essays entitled “The Proper Sphere of Government.”
Spencer’s first book, Social Statics (1850), consolidated these es-
says and included most of the ideas he is supposed to have taken
from Darwin. By 1850 Spencer was already well embarked upon his
life work of describing the universal laws of development. Moreover,
where Darwin had dealt with the question of human perfectibility as
an extrapolation from his main theme, Spencer deliberately set out to
settle that issue.

He consciously attempted to prove that human nature, like every-
thing else in the universe, was an evolutionary product. The question
of the mutability of “human nature” is, of course, merely another
way of looking at the question of speciation. By arguing for the
mutability of human nature, Spencer was in cffect arguing for bio-
evolution. In Social Statics he insisted not only that human nature
is modifiable, but that it has undergone and will continue to undergo
drastic changes in conformity with a universal law of development:

Nature in its infinite complexity is ever growing to a new de-
velopment. Each successive result becomes the parent of an ad-
ditional influence, destined in some degree to modify all future
results. . . . As we turn over the leaves of the earth’s primeval
history—as we interpret the hieroglyphics in which are recorded
the events of the unknown past, we find this same ever-beginning,
never-ceasing change. We see it alike in the organic and the in-
organic—in the decompositions and recombinations of matter,
and in the constantly-varying forms of animal and vegetable
life. . . . With an altering atmosphere, and a decreasing tem-
perature, land and sea perpetually bring forth fresh races of insects,
plants, and animals. All things are metamorphosed. . . .

Strange indeed would it be, if, in the midst of this universal
mutation, man alone were constant, unchangeable. But it is not
so. He also obeys the law of indefinite variation. His circumstances
are ever changing; and he is ever adapting himself to them [sPENCER
1883:45—46; orig. 1850].

Imperfection, said Spencer, in the same work, is “unfitness to the
conditions of existence” (ibid.: 79). Man achieves a higher degree of
fitness through the process of “adaptation.” These changes constitute
the definition of “progress,” and “the belief in human perfectibility
merely amounts to the belief, that in virtue of this process, man will
eventually become completely suited to his mode of life” (ibid.: 78).

Progress, therefore, is not an accident, but a necessity. Instead
of civilization being artifact, it is part of nature; all of a piece with
the development of the embryo or the unfolding of a flower. The

124

B __anull

5 Spencerism

modifications mankind have undergone, and are still undergoing,
result from a law underlying the whole organic creation; and pro-
vided the human race continues, and the constitution of things
remains the same, those modifications must end in complete-
ness. . . . So surely must the things we call evil and immorality
disappear; so surely must man become perfect [ibid.:80].

While the phrase “struggle for existence” occurs in Social Statics
(ibid.: 252), the context is not relevant to the explanation of human
progress. Nonetheless, Spencer argues at length concerning the need
for a savage stage of human nature as a prelude to the stage of civili-
zation. The idiom is pregnant with struggle-for-survivalism:

. Evidently the aboriginal man must have a constitution adapted
to the work he has to perform, joined with a dormant capability
of developing into the ultimate man when the conditions of ex-
istence permit. To the end that he may prepare the earth for its
future inhabitants—his descendants, he must possess a character
fitting him to clear it of races endangering his life, and races
occupying the space required by mankind. Hence he must have a
desire to kill. . . . He must further be devoid of sympathy, or
must have but the germ of it, for he would otherwise be in-
capacitated for his destructive office. In other words, he must be
what we call a savage, and must be left to acquire fitness for
social life as fast as the conquest of the earth renders social life
possible [ibid.:448-49].

SPENCER'S POLITICAL BELIEFS

In Spencer's earliest as well as in his most mature works,
the discussion of evolution, struggle, and perfectibility takes place
within an avowedly political framework. His open defense of eco-
nomic liberalism and his condemnation of cooperativism, socialism, and
communism again illustrate the futility of isolating the development
of theories of culture from their sociocultural context. To appreciate
Spencer’s contribution, we must see him as the most effective scien-
tific spokesman of early industrial capitalism, just as, to appreciate
Marx’s contribution, we must see him as the most effective scientific
spokesman of revolutionary socialism. In both cases we must guard
against letting the respective political involvements of these men
interfere with our recognition and utilization of the scientifically valid
aspects of their thought. Spencer’s and Marx’s politicization of theory
need not be ours, however much, for both of them, social science
and politics were inseparable.

Social Statics is overtly dedicated to the defense of private property

125


===== PAGE 68 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and free enterprise, warning of the biocultural disasters that will befall
mankind if government is permitted to intercede on behalf of the
poor. There were exceedingly few areas of life in which Spencer was
willing to grant the state legitimate authority. He was opposed to
free public schools, libraries, and hospitals; compulsory sanitation; the
licensing of doctors and nurses; compulsory smallpox vaccination;
“poor laws” and public welfare systems of all sorts. He deemed such
manifestations of state planning to be against the laws of nature
and predicted that they would increase the suffering of the weak and
the underprivileged. The insistence that socialism and communism
were opposed to natural law was, of course, not original with Spencer.
There was an established tradition leading back to Adam Smith
which contended that the role of government must be restricted
virtually to the protection of private property, enforcement of con-
tracts, and defense of the state. Under the leadership of Thomas
Malthus, Edward West, David Ricardo, and James Mill, the prevailing
doctrines also embraced a definite prognosis on the question of
poverty and human suffering. The “iron law of wages,” the “law of
diminishing returns,” and Malthus’s laws of population increase pro-
vided the basis for a pessimistic creed, a “dismal science,” the well-
known features of which were summed up by economist Joseph
Schumpeter (1954:570) as follows:

. . . pressure of population, present already but still more to be
expected; nature’s decreasing response to human effort to increase
the supply of food; hence falling net returns to industry, more or
less constant real wages, and ever-increasing (absolutely and rela-
tively) rents of land.

SPENCER'S ANSWER TO THE DISMAL
SCIENCE

Spencer’s outlook, however, as we have just seen, was any-
thing but dismal. By trusting social life to the laws of nature,
Spencer held that human suffering would eventually be eliminated.
In 1852, Spencer directly confronted the disparity between his own
and Malthus’s views on the perfectibility of man. Out of this con-
frontation, in the essay entitled “A Theory of Population,” Spencer
(1852a) achieved essentially the same sort of resolution that Darwin
had arrived at in 1838, but kept to himsclf until 1858, and which
Wallace was not to arrive at until 1855. Malthus, in other words,
was the basis not for two, but for three, independent “discoveries”
of the idea of progressive evolution resulting from the struggle for

126

- W

5. Spencerism

survival. To be sure, Spencer’s “A Theory of Population” contained a
number of highly original observations concerning the factors govern-
ing population increase, and was, moreover, concerned only with
sociocultural and hominid evolution. But the issue before us is pre-
cisely that of the sources of “Social Darwinism” as it was applied to
human society.

Spencer’s exit from the Malthusian dilemma was the idea that
intelligence and fertility were inversely related. Characteristically, he
gave this relationship a physiological rather than a sociocultural in-
terpretation: Mind cells and sex cells compete for the same materials.
Excess of fertility stimulates greater mental activity because the more
people there are, the more ingenuity is required to stay alive. The
least intelligent individuals and races die off, and the level of intelli-
gence gradually rises. But this increase in intelligence is achieved only
by intensifying the competition between mind cells and sex cells.
Consequently there is a progressive diminution in fertility. By this
means, “in the end, pressure of population and its accompanying evils
will entirely disappear . . .” (1852a:500). Although this is counter to
Malthus and is optimistic far beyond Darwin’s formulation, its uto-
pian climax is reserved for an indefinitely remote future toward
which humanity is making a steady and slow advance. In the mean-
time, the exigencies of the struggle for life produce progress through
the diminution of the unfit and the preservation of the fit, just as
Darwin was to describe it, six years later. According to Spencer:

Those to whom this increasing difficulty of getting a living which
excess of fertility entails, does not stimulate improvements in
production—that is, to greater mental activity—are on the high
road to extinction; and must ultimately be supplanted by those
whom the pressure does so stimulate. . . . And here, indeed,
without further illustration, it will be seen that premature death
under all its forms, and from all its causes, cannot fail to work in
the same direction. For as those prematurely carried off must,
in the average of cases, be those in whom the power of self-pres-
ervation is the least, it unavoidably follows that those left behind
to continue the race are those in whom the power of self-preser-
vation is the greatest—are the select of their generation. So that,
whether the dangers to existence be of the kind produced by ex-
cess of fertility, or of any other kind, it is clear, that by the cease-
less exercise of the faculties needed to contend with them, and
by the death of all men who fail to contend with them success-
fully, there is ensured a constant progress towards a higher degree
of skill, intelligence, and self-regulation—a better coordination of
actions—a more complete life [1852a:459-60].

127


===== PAGE 69 =====

r_’

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 5. Spencerism

In all essentials this passage corresponds to a statement of the prin-
ciple of the “survival of the fittest.” In the same year, 1852, Spencer
published an article in The Leader entitled “The Development Hy-
pothesis” in which he attacked special creationism and set forth a
Lamarckian view of the transformation of species. Oddly enough,
Spencer did not apply the principle of the survival of the fittest to the
origin of species. As he explained in his autobiography (1926, I:390),
his failure to connect the two ideas arose from “the belief that the
inheritance of functionally produced modifications suffices to explain
the facts. Recognizing them as a sufficient cause for many orders of
change in organisms, I concluded that it was a sufficient cause for all
orders of changes.” When the Origin of Species was published, Spen-
cer accepted natural selection as one of the most important sources
of bio-evolutionary change. He continued to place greater emphasis
upon Lamarck’s principle of use and disuse, but it should be remem-
bered that Darwin also regarded the inheritance of acquired charac-
teristics as a valid evolutionary principle. Thus, despite Spencer’s
failure to connect the concept of progress-through-struggle with spe-
ciation, it is clear that he had independently achieved the essential
ingredients of Social Darwinism without Darwin’s assistance.

SPENCER AND EVOLUTIONISM

Let us also take due note of the fact that it was Spencer and
not Darwin who popularized the term “evolution,” using it for the
first time in an article entitled “The Ultimate Laws of Physiology”
in 1857. It was also Spencer and not Darwin who introduced the
phrase “survival of the fittest” (in his Principles of Biology, 1866:444;
orig. 1864), a contribution which Darwin acknowledged by changing
the title of the chapter on natural selection in the fifth edition of the
Origin of Species to read “Natural Selection; or The Survival of the
Fittest,” giving the following explanation:

I have called this principle, by which each slight variation, if
useful, is preserved by the term Natural Selection, in order to
mark its relation to man’s power of selection. But the expression
often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer of the Survival of the Fittest
is more accurate, and is sometimes equally convenient [PARWIN

1958:74)-

Furthermore, as Robert Carneiro (1967) has pointed out, from 1852
onward Spencer was a friend of Thomas Huxley’s, Darwin’s most
effective champion, whose formidable polemical style earned him the

128

sobriquet “Darwin’s Bulldog.” In his autobiography, Spencer de-
scribes the animated discussions during which he tried to convince
Huxley of the truth of “progressive development.” Finally, there is
the esteem in which Darwin himself held Spencer, calling him “about
a dozen times my superior” and insisting that “he will be looked at as
by far the greatest living philosopher in England; perhaps equal to
any that have lived” (parRwiN, quoted in carnEIRO: ix). Taking all
of these factors into consideration, it seems evident not only that
the word “Spencerism” suffices for naming the biocultural theories
that have come to be known as Social Darwinism, but that the term
“Biological Spencerism” would be an appropriate label for that period
of the history of biological theory in which Darwin’s ideas gained
their ascendancy.

SPENCER’S DUBIOUS DISTINCTION

I would not dwell on this point if it merely involved a
matter of convenience of labels. But the issue is worthy of serious
consideration in view of the subordinate role that is today habitually
assigned to the social sciences whenever there is a question of one
discipline having exerted an influence on another. It certainly is not
unimportant to have it clearly understood that in the nineteenth
century the trend toward biologization had nothing to do with the
greater prestige of the biological disciplines. (Indeed, it may very
well have been the other way around.) It was not a matter of one
discipline aping another, but rather a parallel response by both disci-
plines to similar ideological needs. The biologization of sociocultural
theory arose from the need for countering the politically subversive
environmentalism of the eighteenth century. The conversion of bio-
logical theory to evolutionism was an outgrowth of the social scien-
tists’ interest in progress and perfectability, while the concept of
natural selection itself arose from an interest in racial, national, and
class forms of war and conflict. From the point of view of the history
of theories of culture, it is Spencer and not Darwin who bears the
greatest share of the onus of having crippled the explanatory power
of cultural evolutionary theory by merging and mixing it with racial
determinism. This is not to say that Spencer descrves the oblivion
into which he has fallen. As we shall see in the following chapter,
his contribution to the development of anthropological theory and
method clearly equals, if it does not surpass, the contributions of the
more highly regarded figures of Edward Tylor and Lewis Henry
Morgan. Nor, as we shall see in a moment, do Tylor and Morgan

129


===== PAGE 70 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

avoid the worst effects of the racial determinist outlook. Indeed, no
major figure in the social sciences between 1860 and 18go escaped
the influence of evolutionary racism. Within anthropology this thrall-
dom was not broken until the advent of the Boasian movement; in
adjacent disciplines, the struggle to achieve a correct statement of the
relationship between the hereditary and learned components in
sociocultural repertories has by no means been resolved.

THE FALLACY OF SPENCERISM

Spencer’s fundamental error was that he drastically over-
emphasized the importance of hereditary factors as causal elements in
the explanation of the behavioral specialties exhibited by Homo sa-
piens populations. In his Principles of Sociology (1876), Spencer
divided the causes of what he called superorganic phenomena into
“original extrinsic” and “original intrinsic” factors. The latter consist
of the physical, emotional, and intellectual traits characteristic of the
individual members of a given group. Taken together, these intrinsic
traits defined what Spencer frequently called “the nature of the social
units,” that is, the hereditary disposition of the individuals in the
group. The intrinsic factors interacted with the extrinsic factors—
organic and inorganic conditions—to bring about sociocultural evolu-
tion. Each stage of sociocultural evolution thus tended to have its
appropriate version of human nature, and in feedback fashion, the
one could not change without affecting the other:

Inevitably, with [the] forms of social organization and social
action, there go the appropriate ideas and sentiments. To be
stable, the arrangements of a community must be congruous with
the natures of its members. If a fundamental change of circum-
stances produces change in the structure of the community or in
the natures of its members, then the natures of its members or
the structure of the community must presently undergo a cor-
responding change [sPENCER 1896, I1:593; orig. 1876].

This concept of human nature combines and confounds two radi-
cally different aspects of human behavior; namely, on the one hand,
biologically transmitted responses, drives, and capacities for reinforce-
ment; and on the other, socially transmitted responses, drives, and
capacities for reinforcement. The question of social determinism
hinges on the extent of the relationship between the hereditary and
socially transmitted components in human behavior. Spencer, Dar-
win, and every other scientist of consequence among their contempo-
raries who was interested in human behavior correctly concluded that

130

Regll

5. Spencerism

bio-evolution and cultural evolution were intimately connected. That
is, all the weight of modern anthropological opinion supports Spen-
cer's belief that in the transition from hominoid to hominid status
mutually reinforcing biological and sociocultural changes took place.
Such distinctively hominid traits as upright posture, enlarged cranial
capacity, and the capacity for learning elaborate symbol systems
were undoubtedly developed in mutual association with an ever-increas-
ing dependence upon learned cultural repertories as the basis for repro-
ductive success. But the weight of modern opinion supports the
conclusions, totally unrecognized by Spencer and his contemporaries,
that this relationship between hereditary and learned repertory has it-
self undergone an evolution in which the modification of cultural forms
has become less and less dependent upon concomitant genetic changes.

RACISM IN MODERN PERSPECTIVE

In the interest of avoiding any possible confusion concerning
the significance of Spencer’s racial determinism, let us pause to
state the post-Boasian formulations of the race-culture paradigm. At
the present stage of biological and cultural development, the fol-
lowing statement holds true for all known Homo sapiens popula-
tions: the acquisition of the bulk of one group’s learned repertory by
another need not require a single genetic innovation. Furthermore
the modemn consensus concerning the relationship between race and
culture is that the rate and direction of culture change among the
various infraspecies groupings of Homo sapiens are not at present signif-
icantly affected by genetic specialties. Both archaeological and paleon-
tological evidence, none of which was available to Spencer, indicate
that man has evolved through three grades—australopithecine, Homo
erectus, and Homo sapiens. During the passage from one such
grade to another, it may very well be the case that man’s learning
ability, his symbolizing skills, and his culture-bearing capacity were
strengthened and expanded in conformity with the principle of nat-
ural selection. But the total chronology of this process extends back
at least 1,750,000 years. The order of difference in human nature that
Spencer had in mind when he contrasted “savages” with Englishmen
might be relevant when we contrast contemporary Homo sapiens
populations with a group of australopithecoids or sinanthropoids. But
the specialties of human nature that have made it possible to achieve
the dubious blessings of industrial society undoubtedly became the
general property of the species Homo sapiens at least fifty thousand
years ago. On this issue, Helvétius and Monboddo have been thor-

131


===== PAGE 71 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

oughly vindicated, Darwin and Spencer discredited. If all other fac-
tors are held constant except race, similar enculturation processes
will result in similar sociocultural repertories. Indeed, it cannot be
doubted that if perfect control over the enculturative process could
be maintained, only one generation would suffice to equip any
number of different Homo sapiens groups with essentially similar
repertories, regardless of their respective racial phylogenies. Thus if
Hottentot babies were to be substituted at birth for English babies,
their average cultural performance would not differ in any significant
fashion from a control group, except in features that respond to en-
culturation processes. The evidence for this point of view cannot be
reviewed here. Suffice it to say that it is overwhelming. Social groups
and individuals drawn from every Homo sapiens race have shown
themselves in countless instances to be susceptible to acculturation
influences bearing upon every aspect of sociocultural behavior. Amer-
ican Indians brought up in Brazil show no hereditary resistance to
learning African dance rhythms; Englishmen reared in China can
learn to speak flawless Chinese; American Negroes who attend con-
servatories write symphonies in the classical European tradition; the
Japanese display not the slightest hereditary disability in acquiring a
knowledge of Western electronics; Jews brought up in Germany have
German food preferences, while those brought up in Yemen acquire
Yemenite tastes; under the influence of Western missionaries, the
South Sea islanders learned to govern their sexual affairs in conformity
with strict Protestant codes; everywhere the children of illiterate per-
sons, exposed to the proper set of enculturative conditions, acquire
within one lifetime the learning and lore contributed by hundreds of
generations of men from all the races of the world. Although it is not
possible to prove that all large divisions of Homo sapiens have equal
learning ability for all kinds of responses, it is beyond dispute that
the overwhelming bulk of the response repertory of any human popu-
lation can be learned by any other human population. Moreover, if
average differences in learning ability exist, they are demonstrably
insufficient to account for the major cultural and subcultural contrasts
that occupy the attention of the social sciences.

No one familiar with modern ethnography can doubt the prepon-
derant role of enculturative conditioning in the establishment of the
behavioral specialties. No plausible connection has ever even been
proposed between specific human genes and such specialties as cross-
cousin marriage, bilateral descent, polyandry, divine kinship, mono-
theism, brideprice, private property in land, or thousands of other
small and large chains of less than universal human behavior. On the

132

At

5. Spencerism

other hand, the inadequacy of racist explanations of sociocultural dif-
ferences and similarities is further underscored by the growing suc-
cess achieved by strictly cultural or cultural-ecological explanations of
these phenomena. For other than a handful of hereditary pathological
disabilities, there does not exist a single instance of apparent aver-
age differential hereditary learning ability for which numerous counter-
hypotheses involving differential conditioning experiences are mnot
readily available. Certainly this is the case wherever differential scores
on so-called intelligence tests have been correlated with races. Such
scores have been demonstrated over and over again to respond rapidly
to number of years of schooling, quality of academic exposure, specific
training for test situation, nuclear and extended family milieu, and an
abundance of other nongenetic conditioning parameters (KLINEBERG
1935, 1951, 1963; COMAS 1961; 1. C. BROWN 1960; DREGER and MILLER
1960).

THE USES OF SPENCERISM

The peculiar appeal of Spencerism was that it safeguarded
Christian charity by combining Malthusian pessimism about the
immediate present with Helvetian optimism about the distant future.
Human nature was modifiable, but not immediately. Institutions were
modifiable but not immediately. Evolution must run its course. The
survival of the fittest would modify both, but not one without the
other. There was little if anything that could be done to speed up the
process; the best that could be hoped for was that obstacles would
not be thrown in nature’s path by wellintentioned but stupid re-
formess. In Spencer’s own words:

No adequate change of character can be produced in a year, or in
a generation or in a century. All which teaching can do—all which
may, perhaps, be done by a wider diffusion of principles of soci-
ology, is the checking of retrograde action [puNcan 1908, I11:77].

One of the most frequently heard criticisms of Spencer and his
contemporaries was that, believing themselves to represent the ad-
vanced wave of civilization, they judged other peoples by their own
standards. Yet in Spencer’s case, this criticism is contrary to fact.
From the existence of differences in human nature, it followed that
each group had to be judged on its own terms and treated in a
manner that was appropriate to its own stage of development. What
was good for civilized men was not good for the “natives.” Spencer, in
other words, was an advocate of an carly version of cultural relativism,

133


===== PAGE 72 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

an outlook usually associated only with the post-Boasian critique of
evolutionism and unquestionably accepted as the only attitude be-
fitting the modemn fieldworker. In Principles of Sociology, Spencer
wrote:

Though it has become a common-place that the institutions
under which one race prospers will not answer for another, the
recognition of this truth is by no means adequate. Men who have
lost faith in “paper constitutions,” mnevertheless advocate such
conduct towards inferior races, as implies the belief that civilized
social forms can with advantage be imposed on uncivilized peo-
ples; that the arrangements which seem to us vicious are vicious
for them; and that they would benefit by institutions—domestic,
industrial, or political—akin to those which we find beneficial.
But acceptance of the truth that the type of a society is deter-
mined by the natures of its units, forces on us the corollary that a
regime intrinsically of the lowest, may yet be the best possible
under primitive conditions [SPENCER 1896, 1:232-33].

Since other people are so different from us, we must avoid thrusting
our standards of conduct upon them. Our ethical ideas cannot be
meaningful to them. Modern cultural relativists, especially those of us
who are concerned with the preservation of the cultural integrity of
so-called tribal peoples, will ind an ominous note in Spencer’s line
of reasoning:

And since preservation of the society takes precedence of in-
dividual preservation, as being a condition to it, we must, in con-
sidering social phenomena, interpret good and bad rather in their
carlier senses than in their later senses; and so must regard as
relatively good that which furthers survival of the society, great
as may be the suffering inflicted on its members [ibid.:233].

SPENCERISM AND IMPERIALISM

The utility of this position for an empire or a corporation on
which the sun never sets needs no special emphasis. Adumbrated in
colonial policy, it was a perfect rationalization of the status quo of
conquest. Missionaries, merchants, industrialists, and administrators,
each in their own way, used the imagined biocultural specialties of
the “inferior” races as the justification for inferior treatment. Some
of the classic refrains, familiar to anyone who has ever experienced
the reality of a colonial system, go as follows: the natives are lazy;
they do not respond like civilized men to the offer of wages; they
need to be taught the virtues of civilized forms of labor by means

134

B oo

5. Spencerism

other than those appropriate to civilized man. They must be forced
to work by limiting their tribal lands, by imposing head taxes, and
by compulsory contracts. Unlike civilized man, the “inferior” races
suffer moral and spiritual ills if they are educated beyond the primary
level. They therefore should receive advanced training only in manual
skills. Being more childlike than Furopeans, it is dangerous for the
natives to have free access to alcoholic drinks. Such people, if given
a chance, prefer to walk rather than to ride; they like to sleep on the
cold ground rather than on warm beds; they work in the rain without
feeling wet, work in the sun without feeling hot, and carry loads on
their heads without getting tired. Life is not so dear to these people
as to Europeans; when their children die, they are not so deeply
disturbed, and when they themselves suffer injury, it does not hurt as
much as it does in the civilized man:

According to Lichtenstein, the Bushmen do not “appear to have
any fecling of even the most striking changes in the temperature
of the atmosphere.” Gardiner says the Zulus “are perfect sala-
manders”—arranging the burning faggots with their feet and dip-
ping their hands into the boiling contents of the cooking-vessels.
The Abipones, again, are “extremely tolerant of the inclemencies
of the sky.” So it is with the feelings caused by bodily injuries.
Many travellers express surprise at the calmness with which men
of inferior types undergo serious operations. Evidently the suffer-
ings produced are much less than would be produced in men of
higher types [sPENCER 1896, I:51].

Spencer certainly shared in the responsibilities for propagating
these stereotypes of pre-industrial populations. It should not be con-
cluded, however, that he was unable to identify the underlying moti-
vation in the use of evolutionary racism by persons directly involved
in late-nineteenth-century imperialism. He himself believed that with
the advance of “industrial” types of society, a new kind of human
nature, adapted to industrial rather than military competition, would
emerge. It was the lingering on of the military types that was re-
sponsible for corrupting European contact with the “inferior” races
and which led to the exploitation of helpless peoples in the name of a
false civilization. The widely accepted picture of Spencer as a smug
Victorian for whom the benevolence of Furopean colonial dispensa-
tion went unquestioned does not measure his true stature. Spencer’s
sympathies were with the peaceable industrial types; he thought of
himself, despite his opposition to government charities, as a true
friend of the poor; he abhorred the wars and preparations for wars
by the nations of Europe; and he was disgusted by the callousness

135


===== PAGE 73 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and hypocrisy exhibited by the Europeans in their bloody quest for
cheap labor and raw materials. From the following lengthy, but
rewarding, commentary on events associated with the late-nineteenth-
century scramble for Africa, it is clear that Spencer cannot be dis-
missed as a mere propagandist of industrial capitalism:

‘What the social man, even of advanced race, is capable of, has
been again shown while these lines are standing in type. To jus-
tify the destruction of two African towns in Batanga, we are told
that their king, wishing to have a trading factory established, and
disappointed with the promise of a sub-factory, boarded an En-
glish schooner, carried off Mr. Grovier, the mate, and refusing to
release him when asked, “threatened to cut the man’s head off”:
a strange mode, if true, of getting a trading factory established.
Mr. Grovier afterwards escaped; not having been ill-treated dur-
ing his detention. Anchoring the Boadicea and two gunboats off
Kribby’s Town (“King Jack’s” residence) Commodore Richards
demanded of the king that he should come on board and explain:
promising him safety, and threatening serious consequences in
case of refusal. Not trusting the promise, the king failed to come.
Without ascertaining from the natives whether they had any rea-
son for laying hands on Mr. Grovier, save this most improbable
one alleged by our people, Commodore Richards proceeded, after
some hours’ notice, to clear the beach with shells, to burn the
town of 300 houses, to cut down the natives’ crops, and to destroy
their canoes; and then, not satisfied with burning “King Jack’s”
town, went further south and bumnt “King Long-Long’s” town.
These facts are published in the Times of September 10, 1880.
In an article on them, this organ of English respectability regrets
that “the punishment must seem, to the childish mind of the
savage, wholly disproportionate to the offence:” implying that
to the adult mind of the civilized it will not seem disproportion-
ate. Further, this leading journal of ruling classes who hold that,
in the absence of established theological dogmas, there would be
no distinction between right and wrong, remarks that “if it were
not for the dark shadow cast over it by the loss of life” [of two
of our men], “the whole episode would be somewhat humorous.”
Doubtless, after the “childish mind of the savage” has accepted
the “glad tidings” brought by missionaries of “the religion of
love,” there is humour, somewhat of the grimmest, perhaps, in
showing him the practice of this religion by burning his house.
Comments on Christian virtue, uttered by exploding shells, may
fitly be accompanied by a Mephistophelian smile. Possibly the
king, in declining to trust himself on board an English ship, was
swayed by the common Negro belief that the devil is white
[sPENCER 1896, II:239—40].

136

)

5. Spencerism

SPENCERISM AND THE DOCTRINE OF
PSYCHIC UNITY

One of the least understood aspects of late-nincteenth-
century racism is the relationship between the doctrine of psychic
unity and the belief in inferior racial types. Psychic unity was the
belief, extremely common among monogenists, that the human mind
was everywhere essentially similar. In the formulation of Adolf
Bastian, psychic unity was freely invoked to explain similarities of
culture wherever they occurred. Since Bastian was the proponent of
an especially pronounced version of cultural idealism, the fact that
an idea was potentially common to all mankind was sufficient explana-
tion for its occurrence in one or more places. Some form of psychic
unity is also implied whenever there is an emphasis upon parallel
evolution, for if the different peoples of the world advanced through
similar sequences, it must be assumed that they all began with
essentially similar psychological potentials. But this assumption bears
no necessary relationship to the post-Boasian concept of racial equality.
Indeed, the nineteenth century’s ideas on psychic unity have little in
common with either the eighteenth or twenticth century’s under-
standing of the race-language-culture equation.

LEWIS HENRY MORGAN, RACIST

The nature of the confusion surrounding this issue is well
illustrated by the famous passage in Lewis Henry Morgan’s Ancient
Society, which describes the uniformity of human experience:

It may be remarked finally that the experience of mankind has
run in nearly uniform channels; that human necessities in similar
condition have been substantially the same; and that the opera-
tions of the mental principle have been uniform in virtue of the
specific identity of the brain of all the races of mankind
[MORGAN 1963:7].

On the basis of this and similar passages, Eleanor Leacock has sought
to exempt Morgan from the prevailing racism of his time. Writes
Leacock (1963:ix):

Morgan was clearly at odds with the view that inequalities in
technological development among different peoples were due to
differences in innate ability. Perhaps because of his familiarity
with and respect for American Indians, Morgan was beyond crude

137


===== PAGE 74 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

assumptions of white supremacy. White colonial policies of the
time were being buttressed with adjurations of racial inequality
and the superiority of northwestern Europeans. Morgan, like
‘Waitz before him, maintained the unity of the human race.

Yet Leacock herself is obliged to note on the very next page, “In the
light of Morgan’s views, it is surprising to find him referring occa-
sionally to the ‘inferior’ brain of various peoples” (ibid.:x). Neither
this, nor any of the other numerous passages in Morgan’s books that
assert the innate mental and physical variability of different human
groups, should cause surprise since Morgan was every bit as much a
racial determinist as Spencer. Morgan believed firmly that race and
culture were interdependent and that specific cultural traits including
kinship terminologies and habits of dress were carried in the “blood.”

There are some customs of such a strikingly personal character
that they may in a pre-eminent degree, be regarded as customs of
the blood. When prevalent over wide areas and persistently main-
tained from generation to generation, they seem to possess some
significance upon the question of the probable genetic connection
of the peoples by whom they are practised. There are three dis-
tinct customs or usages of this character, apparently transmitted
with the blood, which I have taken some pains to trace, and have
found them to be substantially universal in the Ganowanian fam-
ily. They may possess some value as corroborative evidence of the
unity of origin of these nations. These are, first, the custom of
saluting by kin; second, the usage of wearing the breech-cloth;
and third, the usage of sleeping at night in a state of nudity,
each person being wrapped in a scparate covering [MORGAN 1870:

274]-
Morgan, his respect for the virtues of barbarism notwithstanding,
did not consider the American Indian the equal of the European.

In his League of the Iroquois he indicates that the Indians lacked an
essential passion, namely the desire for economic gain:

This great passion of civilized man, in its use and abuse, his bless-
ing and his curse, never roused the Indian mind. It was doubtless
the great reason for his continuance in the hunter state, for the
desire of gain is one of the earliest manifestations of progressive
mind, and one of the most powerful passions of which the mind is
susceptible. It clears the forests, rears the city, builds the mer-
chantmen . . . in a word, it has civilized our race [1851:139].

Morgan’s ideas concerning the effects of race mixture on temperament
and behavior are the standard thoughts of the period, parallel in
all respects with Spencer’s views:

138

5. Spencerism

The Indian and European are at opposite poles in their physi-
ological conditions. In the former there is very little animal pas-
sion, while with the latter it is super-abundant. A pure-blooded
Indian has very little animal passion, but in the half-blood it is
sensibly augmented; and when the second generation is reached
with a cross giving three-fourths white blood, it becomes exces-
sive, and tends to indiscriminate licentiousness. If this be true in
fact, it is a potent adverse element leading to demoralization and
decay, which it will be extremely difficult to overmaster and
finally escape. In his native state, the Indian is below the passion
of love. It is entirely unknown among them, with the exception,
to a limited extent, of the Village Indians. This fact is suffi-
ciently proved by the universal prevalence of the custom of dis-
posing of the females in marriage without their knowledge or
participation in the arrangement [MORGAN 1870:207n].

Like a long line of Indianophiles stretching back to Bartolomé de las
Casas, Morgan’s life-long appreciation and defense of the American
Indian was coupled with a strong prejudice against Negroes (cf. HARRIS
1964b). In the 1850’s, as the historian Carl Resek (1960:63) tells us,
Morgan espoused the cause of abolition in the hope that unprotected
by slavery, the Negro race would disappear:

During the debate in Congress over the Compromise of 1850,
Morgan expressed the not uncommon sentiment of Negrophobia,
based partially on the belief that the Negro was a separate species.
He urged Seward to limit the expansion of slavery because “it is
time to fix some limits to the reproduction of this black race
among us. It is limited in the north by the traits of the whites.
The black population has no independent vitality among us. In
the south while the blacks are property, there can be no assign-
able limit to their reproduction. It is too thin a race intellectually
to be fit to propagate and I am perfectly satisfied from reflection
that the feeling towards this race is one of hostility throughout the
north. We have no respect for them whatever.”

What then is the meaning of the phrase the “specific identity of the
brain of all the races of mankind”’? Merely that in later years, as Resek
points out, Morgan rejected the notion of polygenesis and became a
firmly convinced monogenist. This position, however, was not, as
we have seen, incompatible with racial determinism. Like all mono-
genists, Morgan had to be something of an evolutionist even before
he began to feel the influence of Darwin and Spencer. As the races
evolve, they pass through similar biocultural stages. At any particular
stage, the innate mental condition of the descendants of any branch

139


===== PAGE 75 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of the human species tends to be essentially similar. They thus tend
to react to similar conditions in similar ways and to move in parallel
fashion from savagery to civilization. However, they certainly do not
move in tandem, all at the same time. Hence, at the present moment
in history, there are men who are bioculturally representative of all
phases of evolution; there are, in other words, “superior” and “inferior”
races.

EDWARD BURNETT TYLOR, RACIST

Precisely the same interpretation must be rendered of Ed-
ward Tylor’s position. In Primitive Culture (1958; I:7; orig. 1871)
Tylor seems to be taking an extremely advanced view when he proposes
to “eliminate considerations of hereditary varieties or races of man,
and to treat mankind as homogeneous in nature, though placed in
different grades of civilization. . . .” Yet in his Anthropology (18q9),
the first textbook in the field, Tylor displays little understanding of
the difference between racial and cultural capacities. Noting the “un-
likeness between the melancholy Russian peasant and the vivacious
Italian,” he insists that the difference “can hardly depend altogether
on climate and food and government.” Similarly, civilization can
hardly be explained by such extrinsic factors.

There seems to be in mankind inbred temperament and inbred
capacity of mind. History points the great lesson that some races
have marched on in civilization while others have stood still or
fallen back, and we should partly look for an explanation of this
in differences of intellectual and moral powers between such
tribes as the native Americans and Africans, and the Old World
nations who overmatch and subdue them [TYLOR 1899:74].

Although Tylor is certainly more restrained than many of his con-
temporaries, rarely invoking racial determinants, he appears in this to
be influenced by a sense of politeness as well as by scientific acumen.
Nonetheless, the chapter “Races of Mankind” concludes with an at-
tempt to explain why the white race is the best endowed for
leading a civilized existence. Assuming that man’s first appearance
was in the tropics, the more primitive forms of man were least in
need of civilized arts. Spreading to cooler climates, man then
evolved the specialties better suited to civilized life:

It may perhaps be reasonable to imagine as last formed the
white race of the temperate region, least able to bear extreme heat
or live without the appliances of culture, but gifted with the

powers of knowing and ruling which gave them sway over the
world [ibid.:113].

140

5. Spencerism

In this fashion, the greatest figures of late-nineteenth-century an-
thropology fell under the spell of racial determinism. Even when
the racial factor simply hovered over a discussion without actually
coming to roost, it crippled the attempt to apply scientific methods to
sociocultural phenomena. Aside from its own inherent errors, it gave
the theorists of this period a false sense of accomplishment with
respect to the nonracial aspects of their ideas about sociocultural pro-
cesses. When a sociocultural theory, such as Morgan’s, left huge
chunks of unexplained debris strewn about, one could always count on
the racial broom to sweep them out of sight. Despite their panoramic
grandeur, the theories of Spencer, Morgan, and Tylor lack the overall
coherence which one might suppose would have been insisted upon
by men so deeply convinced of the dominion of natural law. As we
shall see in the next chapter, Spencerism in practice meant eclecticism.
Despite their biological reductionism, and hence their materialism,
neither Spencer, Tylor, nor Morgan experienced the need to explore a
consistent cultural-materialist strategy. They were greatly to advance
our picture of the evolution of sociocultural phenomena in terms of
typical sequences; but their understanding of sociocultural causality
was blinded by the sands of racism.

141


===== PAGE 76 =====

Evolutionism:

D ol

S
553

It has been said of the period between 1860 and 18qo that in these
thirty years cultural anthropology had “grown from nothing to ma-
turity” (Tax 1955b:466). While agreeing with Sol Tax’s estimate of
the great formative influences of Tylor, Morgan, Spencer, and their
lesser contemporaries, we must resist the cliché that anthropology was
“nothing” before 1860. We have seen how evolutionism and racial
determinism flourished among Darwin’s predecessors and how the
Origin of Species arose from this general matrix. The burst of activity
in “cultural” anthropology after 1860 was not triggered by Darwin’s
book, but rather accompanied it, as a product of the same generative
influences. Tax himself draws attention to Prichard, Waitz, and a
number of amateur ethnologists reaching back to Lafitau whose work
provided the foundation for the period under discussion. But Tax, in
company with Lowie, Kroeber, and Kluckhohn, underestimates the
degree of continuity between the favorite anthropological fathers and
the earlier formulators of the principles of sociocultural evolution.
The “historical evolutionary school,” which according to Tax ‘“had
tun its course” in thirty years, was an integral part of a tradition

142

6. Evolutionism: Methods

that had its roots firmly and widely planted in the eighteenth century.
As we have seen, the continuity between the biocultural evolutionism
of the 1860’s and the belief in progress and perfectability of the
1760’s was unbroken. This continuity appears more pronounced if we
reject the self-constituted disciplinary boundaries which propound
the novelty of anthropological evolutionism in the 1860’s while ig-
noring the existence of Saint-Simon, Comte, and Hegel in the 1820s
and 1830’s. What the period commencing with 1860 produced was
simply a large number of better-documented and more specialized
versions of Turgot’s “universal history of mankind.”

That Darwin’s theories were not the trigger for the surge in evolu-
tionary formulations commencing shortly after the publication of
Origin is clear from the first two classic products of the period, both
published in 1861: Johann J. Bachofen’s Das Mutterrecht (Mother
Right) and Henry Maine’s Ancient Law. Concerned with the evolution
of the family, political organization, and law, neither of these treatises
suggests the nced for any acknowledgment of Darwin’s influence.
Bachofen’s Mother Right was first presented as a series of lectures
in Stuttgart in 1856, three years before Darwin’s book was published
(1AYs 1958:35), and was based almost entirely on Greek and Roman
sources, while Maine’s Ancient Law was a lawyer’s attempt to explain
the origins of different legal concepts in the tradition of Adam Fergu-
son and Montesquicu. It was also based on ancient Roman sources,
supplemented by a personal knowledge of India’s traditional com-
munities and legal systems. Both Maine and Bachofen prgduced
evidence to show that the modem European family was the résultant
of evolutionary modifications wrought on ancient kinship forms.
These were matriarchy and matrilineal descent in Bachofen’s theories,
and patriarchy and patrilineal descent in Maine’s theories. It should
be noted that Maine hedged on the question of the universality of
the patriarchal “stage,” regarding the transition from the Roman to
modern English family as a characteristic of “progressive” societies.
Bachofen, on the other hand, was convinced of the prior exis-
tence of a matrilineal stage everywhere on earth. But we shall return
to a comparison of the principal features of these and other evolu-
tionary sequences in the next chapter.

CONTINUITY IN ETHNOGRAPHY

There is also continuity between the 1860’s and the earlier
decades of the nineteenth century in the matter of ethnographic
sources. Turgot, Meiners, Klemm, Prichard, Waitz, Spencer, Morgan,

143


===== PAGE 77 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and Tylor represent so many points along a continuum of gradually
rising ethnographic standards. At the same time there occurred a steady
expansion in the number of different societies, knowledge of which
could be utilized in systematic comparisons. Although these materials
were for the most part contributed by poorly qualified travelers or
missionaries, there was some accumulation of data based on the work
of trained and skilled observers, among whom were illustrious figures
like Henry Schoolcraft, Alexander von Humboldt, Johann von Spix
and Karl von Martius, and Lewis and Clark.

It seems essential for a proper understanding of the rise of anthro-
pological theory not to posit at any point between 1750 and the present
a sharp break in the quality and quantity of ethnographic knowledge.
In subsequent chapters we shall examine the claim that the Boasians
and the British social anthropologists abruptly introduced radically
improved ethnographic standards. And we shall have occasion to re-
mark on the manifest shortcomings that still remain despite the
expansion of systematic fieldwork by anthropologically trained ethnog-
raphers. This is not to deny the great advance in quantity and quality of
cthnographic information available to the twentieth-century theore-
tician. Rather, it is to affirm the fact that such improvements accumu-
lated all during the nineteenth century and that the past and present
centuries belong on the same curve of rising standards. This point is
important because it may help to disabuse certain critics of social
science of the notion that the progressive accumulation and refine-
ment of data and theory are somechow an exclusive property of the
biological and physical sciences.

To estimate the quantity and quality of ethnographic materials
available at the beginning of the period 1860—qo, a brief analysis of
the sources in one of the era’s evolutionary monographs may prove
instructive. Edward Tylor’s Researches into the Early History of Man-
kind (1865) can be taken as representative of the higher scholarly
standards of these times. Concerned with the question of general
evolutionary directions and the origin of language, writing, naming,
tools, marriage, fire, and myths, Researches contains in embryonic
form most of the themes developed in Tylor's more mature writings.
One notes first of all extensive utilization of the ethnographic
compilations of Gustav Klemm (1843). References to smaller com-
pendia such as those of J. G. Wood (1874-80), W. Cooke Taylor
(1840), and R. G. Latham (1859) are also conspicuous. Next in
prominence are the sources that were used extensively by Tylor'’s
Enlightenment predecessors but which still yielded (then as well as
today) valuable and otherwise unobtainable information about exotic

144

Ragll

6. Evolutionism: Methods

peoples in early stages of contact: (1) the ancients, such as Herodo-
tus, Strabo, and Lucretius; (2) the Spanish Chroniclers, such as
Oviedo, Garcilaso de la Vega, and Sarmiento; (3) the early Jesuit
“relations” and missionary reports, such as those of Charlevoix,
Colden, Lafitau, and Dobrizhoffer; and (4) the narratives of great
explorers, such as those of Columbus, Cook, and many others
available in the publications of the Hakluyt Society. In addi-
tion to pre-nineteenth-century sources of this nature, Tylor used the
writings of many nineteenth-century travelers, missionaries, and scien-
tists. Thus for the ethnography of Oceania he had the United States
Government-commissioned reports of the explorations of Hale and
Wilkes. There was Mariner on Tonga; St. John on the Dyaks; T. H.
Williams on Fiji; G. Grey and W. Ellis on Polynesia; R. Taylor
and J. S. Polack on the Maori; and G. Grey, J. E. Eyre, and J. Back-
house on Australia. For his African ethnography Tylor drew on Adolf
Bastian, D. Livingstone, W. H. I. Bleek, Sir Richard F. Burton, J. S.
Moffat, Du Chaillu, E. W. Lane, J. I. Krapf, and A. Casalis. For Asia
there was Sir John Bowring on Siam; Mouat on the Andamanese;
and Sir James E. Tennent, F. Ward, and Logan on India. The richest
materials were those pertaining to the New World. For South Amer-
ica, Tylor drew on Darwin, Alexander von Humboldt, Spix and Mar-
tius, and Alfred Wallace. For Central America and Mexico, he had his
own travels to fall back on as published in his Anahuac (1861),
while for North America he used the rich firsthand accounts of Lewis
and Clark, H. R. Schoolcraft, and George Catlin. (Unaccountably
Morgan’s study of the Iroquois is not cited.) All of these sources
predate 1860.

THE IMPORTANCE OF ARCHAEOLOGY

The burst of anthropological theorizing after 1860 is not to
be understood only in relationship to the accumulation of ethno-
graphic knowledge. Perhaps even more important was the steady
increase in data derived from archaeological research. The first half of
the nineteenth century was a period of great archacological discover-
ies. These discoveries essentially confirmed the stages of history that
the eighteenth-century social philosophers had argued must have
existed on the basis of logic and their meager knowledge of con-
temporary primitive peoples. By 1860, the speculation that Europeans
must formerly have been savages had already been confirmed by unim-
peachable evidence brought out of the earth. Without keeping this
triumphant vindication in mind, we cannot appreciate the strength

145


===== PAGE 78 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of the conviction among the evolutionists of the period 1860—go
that contemporary primitives could provide valid information about
the ancient condition of humanity.

STONE, BRONZE, IRON

One of the most significant accomplishments of nineteenth-
century archaeology was the demonstration that the first Europeans
had lacked a knowledge of metallurgy. During the previous century,
the absence of metals among many contemporary primitive groups
was widely noted, and many scholars assumed that such a condition
must also have been generally characteristic of ancient times. Antoine
Goguet (1758), for example, had remarked that “the savages set before
us a striking picture of the ignorance of the ancient world, and the
practices of primitive times. They have no idea of metals and supply
the want of them by [stones and flints]” (quoted in HEIZER, 1962:
263). Many other eighteenth-century writers, basing themselves
mainly on ancient Greek and Roman sources, believed in the “three-
age system,” a stone-bronze-iron sequence of technology. It was not
until the beginning of the nineteenth century, however, that syste-
matic evidence for this view began to be produced. In 1806, extensive
government-sponsored excavations of Denmark’s shell middens and
dolmens were begun. These excavations, under the supervision of R.
Nyerup, brought to light stone implements that predated the earliest
cultures referred to in the Danish sagas. The collections from these
sites were placed in the Museum of Northern Antiquities in Copen-
hagen where C. J. Thomsen (1848; orig. 1836) used them to establish
the first archaeologically validated sequences of the Stone, Bronze,
and Iron ages (PENNIMAN 1965:55-56). The sequence was confirmed
in the 1850’s by stratigraphic techniques applied by Thomsen’s stu-
dent J. J. A. Worsaae, to Danish peat-moss sites. In the meantime,
under the influence of the Danish historian Vedel-Simonsen, the three-
age formulation had been taken up in Sweden by M. Bruzelius in 1816
and Sven Nilsson in 1838.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE NEOLITHIC
AND PALEOLITHIC

Another set of influential archaeological discoveries involved
neolithic lake sites. The Irish bogs were reported on first by W.

Wilde in 1840, followed by F. Keller’s studies of pile dwellings near
Zurich in the mid 1850’s. Further corroboration of the evolutionist

146

r’

&

6. Evolutionism: Methods

position came from the discovery of flint- implements recognized as
even older than the Danish stone age. Grappling with the problem
of the Mosaic chronology, John Fiere (1800) had already suggested
that certain buried implements dated from a time “even more re-
mote than the present world.” In France in the late 1820’s, Mme.
de Chistol, Marcel du Serres, and M. Tournal (1833) presented
evidence of the contemporaneity of man and extinct Pleistocene
fauna. This was followed in 1836 by Boucher de Perthes’ studies of
paleolithic tools and fauna at Abbeville. One of Boucher de Perthes’
principal antagonists, Dr. Rigollot, was converted to the new chronol-
ogy by his own discoveries at St. Acheul in 1855. By 1860, additional
work by Falconer, Prestwick, Lartet, and Lyell placed man’s earliest
beginnings well back into the Pleistocene. Nonetheless, the belief
that man’s antiquity did not exceed 6,000 years remained a respectable
opinion until the beginning of the Darwinian period. This belief
somewhat diluted the archaeological evidence of progressive evolution,
since it remained possible within the compressed chronology that the
earliest stone-age periods of Europe were merely degraded epilogues
to a higher “golden age” represented by the Egyptian and Babylonian
civilizations.

LYELL'S INTERPRETATION OF THE
PALEOLITHIC

The most decisive event in the defeat of this objection was
the publication of Charles Lyell's Antiquity of Man (1863), a book
whose contributions to the foundation of modern anthropological
theory cannot be overestimated. Lyell, confronting the issues that
Darwin had assiduously avoided, put together the available geological,
archaeological, linguistic, and ethnological evidence in proof of the
contemporaneity of artifacts and extinct animals, whose evolution
into modern types, on the hypothesis of transformism, would have
required tens of thousands of years. The men who made these arti-
facts, Lyell concluded, must have been drastically inferior in mental
constitution to modern man. Otherwise, so great was the time repre-
sented at the St. Acheul gravel pits and the Liege caves that we should
expect to find the earth full of the remains of all sorts of civilized
achievements, long antedating our own. If the carliest men had been
as intelligent as modern Englishmen, we should now be finding:

- . . lines of buried railways or electric telegraphs, from which the
best engineers of our day might gain invaluable hints; astronomi-
cal instruments and microscopes of more advanced construction

147


===== PAGE 79 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

than any known in Europe, and other indications of perfec-
tion in the arts and sciences, such as the nineteenth century has
not yet witnessed. . . . Vainly should we be straining our imagi-
nations to guess the possible uses and meaning of such relics,—
machines, perhaps, for navigating the air or exploring the depths
of the ocean, or for calculating arithmetical problems, beyond the
wants or even the conception of living mathematicians [LYELL 1863:

379]-

Thus, in Lyell’s new perspective on man’s place in geological time,
there was little room for the claim that the ancient civilizations in
Egypt and Mesopotamia marked a high point from which the
stone-age peoples and contemporary primitives had degenerated.
Compared to the Abbevillian hand axes and the extinct animal species
with which they were associated, the age of the Egyptian monuments
faded into insignificance:

Nevertheless, geologically speaking, and in reference to the
date of the first age of stone, these records of the valley of the
Nile may be called extremely modern. Wherever excavations have
been made into the Nile mud underlying the foundations of
Egyptian cities, as, for example, sixty feet below the peristyle
of the obelisk of Heliopolis, and generally in the alluvial plains of
the Nile, the bones met with belong to living species of quad-
rupeds, such as the camel, dromedary, dog, ox, and pig, without,
as yet, the association in any single instance of the tecth or bone
of a lost species [ibid.:383].

For an understanding of the continuity between the evolutionary
formulations of the second and first halves of the century, we must
note the fact that Lyell himself had visited the pits at St. Acheul in
1859. Witnessing the excavation of a flint tool, he returned at once
to express his opinion in favor of the antiquity of the Acheulian arti-
facts at the meeting of the British Association at Aberdeen (ibid.:104).

TYLOR'S DEPENDENCE ON
ARCHAEOLOGICAL DATA

Edward Tylor’s Researches into the Early History of Mankind
may once again serve to demonstrate the importance of pre-Darwinian
archaeological achievements for the theories of the period 1860—go.
It may be said without exaggeration that archaeological evidence is at
least as important as ethnographic evidence for Tylor's conclusions
concerning the overall uniformity of evolutionary change. The “three-
age” classification is employed throughout the book, as well as a

148

6. Evolutionism: Methods

modification that had recently been introduced whereby the “Stone
Age” was divided into “Ground” and “Unground” phases. In addition
to the ethnographic sources previously discussed, Tylor cites Lyell,
Christie, Lartet, Prestwick, Wilde, Wilson, and Goguet. The scope
and importance of archaeological evidence in Tylor’s evolutionism is
set forth in the following passage:

These combined characters of rudeness and the absence of grind-
ing give the remains of the Unground Stone Age an extremely
important bearing on the history of Civilization, from the way
in which they bring together evidence of great rudeness and great
antiquity. The antiquity of the Drift implements is, as has been
said, proved by direct geological evidence. The Cave implements,
even of the reindeer period, are proved by their fauna to be carlier,
as they are seen at a glance to be ruder, than those of the crom-
lech period and of the earliest lake-dwellings of Switzerland, both
belonging to the Ground Stone Age. To the student who views
Human Civilization as in the main an upward development, a
more fitting starting point could scarcely be offered than this wide
and well-marked progress from an carlier and lower, to a later and
higher, stage of the history of human art [1871:198].

Later, in his article on “Anthropology” in the ninth edition of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Tylor (1878) again acknowledged the debt
that the evolutionists owed to archaeological discoveries:

It has been especially the evidence of prehistoric archaeology
which, within the last few years, has given to the natural develop-
ment theory of civilisation a predominance hardly disputed on
anthropological grounds. . . . The finding of ancient stone im-
plements buried in the ground in almost every habitable district
of the world, including the seats of the great ancient civilisations,
such as Egypt, Assyria, India, China, Greece, etc., may be ad-
duced to show that the inhabitants of these regions had at some
time belonged to the stone age [TYLOR quoted in OPLER 1964a:132].

THE LIMITATIONS OF ARCHAEOLOGY

To a substantial degree, the contributions of Tylor and his
evolutionistic contemporaries were an attempt to flesh out the
archacologically revealed seriation of artifacts with the stages of social
and ideational growth, especially of kinship, political, and religious in-
stitutions. It was recognized that archaeology had relatively little to
contribute on its own in these matters. It was impossible from

archaeological evidence to decide whether the Ground Stone Age peo-

149


===== PAGE 80 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 6. Evolutionism: Methods

ples practiced monogamy, were patrilineal or matrilineal, or believed
in one god or many.

The intent of supplementing archaeological evidence by utilizing
ethnographic and historical data is quite explicit throughout the pe-
riod. Morgan (1877:8), for example, established his definition of
“ethnical periods” in terms of savagery, barbarism, and civilization,
only after duly noting the usefulness of the Danish archaeologists’
terms “Age of Stone, of Bronze and of Iron” for the “classification of
objects of ancient art.” Morgan’s testy adversary, John McLennan,
spelled out the limitations of archaeological materials in the following
terms:

The geological record, of course, exhibits races as rude as any now
living, some perhaps even more so, but then it goes no farther
than to inform us what food they ate, what weapons they used,
and what was the character of their ornaments. More than this
was not to be expected from that record, for it was not in its nature
to preserve any memorials of those aspects of human life in which
the philosopher is chiefly interested—of the family or tribal group-
ings, the domestic and political organisation [Mc LENNAN 1865:6].

THE COMPARATIVE METHOD

All theorists of the latter half of the nineteenth century pro-
posed to fill the gaps in the available knowledge of universal history
largely by means of a special and much-debated procedure known as
the “comparative method.” The basis for this method was the belief
that sociocultural systems observable in the present bear differential
degrees of resemblance to extinct cultures. The life of certain con-
temporary socicties closely resembles what life must have been like
during the paleolithic; other groups resemble typical neolithic culture;
and others resemble the earliest state-organized societies. Morgan’s
(1870:7) view of this prolongation of the past into the present is
characteristic:

. . the domestic institutions of the barbarous, and even of the
savage ancestors of mankind, are still exemplified in portions of
the human family with such completeness that, with the excep-
tion of the strictly primitive period, the several stages of this
progress are tolerably well preserved. They are seen in the organi-
zation of socicty upon the basis of sex, then upon the basis of kin,
and finally upon the basis of territory; through the successive
forms of marriage and of the family, with the systems of consan-
guinity thereby created; through house life and architecture;
and through progress in usages with respect to the ownership and
inheritance of property.

150

A similar viewpoint on the relevance of contemporary primitives to
the interpretation of prehistory formed the essential premise of A.
Lane-Fox Pitt-Rivers, founder of the Pitt-Rivers Museum at Oxford:

. . . the existing races, in their respective stages of progression,
may be taken as the bona fide representatives of the races of an-
tiquity. . . . They thus afford us living illustrations of the social
customs, the forms of government, laws, and warlike practices,
which belong to the ancient races from which they remotely
sprang, whose implements, resembling with but little difference,
their own, are now found low down in the soil . . . [PITT-RIVERS

1906:53].

To apply the comparative method, the varieties of contemporary
institutions are arranged in a sequence of increasing antiquity. This
is achieved through an essentially logical, deductive operation. The
implicit assumption is that the older forms are the simpler ones, but
in practice many different kinds of logical assumptions are involved, a
matter to which we turn in a later section.

THE ORIGIN OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

What justification existed for this extrapolation from con-
temporary primitives to ancient society? It has commonly been as-
sumed on Lowie’s (1937:19-29) authority that the main stimulus for
this practice came out of biology where zoological and botanical
knowledge of extant organisms was routinely applied to the interpre-
tation of the structure and function of extinct fossil forms. No doubt
there were several late-nincteenth-century anthropological applications
of this principle which explicitly referred to biological precedent. In
the 1860’s, however, it was the paleontology of Lyell, rather than of
Darwin, that was involved. Thus, the greatest of the British prehis-
torians, John Lubbock (1865), justified his attempt to “illustrate”
the life of prehistoric times in terms of an explicit analogy with
geological practices:

. . . the archacologist is free to follow the methods which have
been so successfully pursued in geology—the rude bone and stone
implements of bygone ages being to the one what the remains of
extinct animals are to the other. The analogy may be pursued
even further than this. Many mammalia which are extinct in
Europe have representatives still living in other countries. Our
fossil pachyderms, for instance, would be almost unintelligible
but for the species which still inhabit some parts of Asia and
Africa; the secondary marsupials are illustrated by their existing

151


===== PAGE 81 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

representatives in Australia and South America; and in the same
manner, if we wish clearly to understand the antiquities of Eu-
rope, we must compare them with the rude implements and
weapons still, or until lately, used by the savage races in other
parts of the world. In fact, the Van Diemaner and South Ameri-
can are to the antiquary what the opossum and the sloth are to
the geologist [LusBoCK 1865:416].

But Lubbock was here simply employing a stylish rationale for a socio-
cultural method that antedated both Darwin and Lyell. The roots
of the comparative method go back into the eighteenth century.
Indeed, the Cambridge historian ]. W. Burrow has attempted to iso-
late the origin of the practice among the “philosophic historians of the
Scottish Enlightenment.” Thus he points out that Adam Ferguson
(1767) believed that in the present conditions of the American In-
dian, “we behold, as in a mirror, the features of our own progenitors.”
Sir James Mackintosh (1799) referred specifically to the preservation
of barbarous phases of culture side by side with civilization: “We can
[now] examine almost every variety of character, manners, opinions
and feclings and prejudices of mankind into which they can be thrown
either by rudeness of barbarism or by the capricious corruption of
refinement” (quoted in BURROW 1966:11-12). There is no reason,
however, to confine the roots of the comparative method to the Scots.
The idea is actually an integral part of the Enlightenment’s notion
of “progress” and was shared in embryonic form at least by every
eighteenth-century social philosopher who believed that European
civilization represented an advance over an earlier and “ruder” condi-
tion. For how could one speak of such progress if there were not some
base line for comparison? Almost simultaneously with the introduc-
tion of the concept of the “state of nature,” “savages” viewed alter-
natively as miserable, innocent, or noble were used to “illustrate” the
condition out of which European socicty was presumed to have arisen.

It is true that zoologists were making use of the comparative
method as early as the eightcenth century. Indeed, as soon as the
extinct fossil forms of life came to the attention of geologists and biol-
ogists, the comparative method was applied in an attempt to under-
stand what kinds of organisms they had been and to assign them
a place in the Linnaean taxonomy. It is important to remember, how-
ever, that these early manifestations of the comparative method in
paleontology were not part of a theory of bio-evolution. In biology the
method was first applied to guide the assignment of fossil missing
links to positions in the “great chain of being.”

Another eighteenth-century manifestation of the comparative

152

6. Evolutionism: Methods

method is associated with the establishment of linguistic science.
When William Jones in 1786 first proposed that Greek, Latin, Gothic,
Celtic, and Sanskrit had a common origin, he was in effect asserting
that the comparison of contemporary languages could yield reliable
information concerning the nature of languages spoken by chronolog-
ically remote peoples. Jones’s suggestions were systematically pursued
by Friedrich von Schlegel (1808) and Franz Bopp (1816). In 1822
Jacob Grimm’s formulations of the regularities of vowel changes in the
Indo-European languages provided a fresh confirmation of the validity
of the comparative method applied to linguistic phenomena. By the
1860’s the triumphs of “philology” in outlining the steps in the evo-
lution of Indo-European phonology, grammar, and semantics served
along with paleontology and archaeology to remind anthropologists
of the validity of the comparative approach.

Although not named as such, we might also note here that the in-
troduction of the principle of uniformitarianism by Hutton and Lyell
into geology was actually another example of the same general
method: it was this principle which made it possible to connect va-
rieties of contemporary and ancient geomorphological phenomena in a
logical sequence based upon processes demonstrable for the present,
but only inferential for the past.

Finally we may note that it is merely another version of thf} com-
parative method which permits astronomers to inspect populations of
recent (close) and “fossil” (distant) stars and galaxies, and to arrange
them in probable evolutionary sequences, without ever hoping to be
able to observe any of the postulated transformations. It is Flear,
therefore, that the comparative method is closely related to the rise of
scientific theory in many different disciplines.

THE VALUE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Placing the origin of the comparative method in the Enlight-
enment prepares us to evaluate the evolutionists of 1860-go from a
more generous perspective than has hitherto been fashionable. We see
that when a great prehistorian like Lubbock made an attempt to
illustrate the life of the “paleolithic” and “neolithic” peoples (Lub-
bock’s terms) by reference to contemporary primitives, it was at the
end of a period of archaeological discoveries that had vindicated thle
use to which the comparative method had been put by the social phi-
losophers of the preceding century. This point is grudgingly conceded
by Lowie (1937:22) who notes that

153


===== PAGE 82 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

prehistory proved evolution by the rigorous techniques of geolog-
ical stratigraphy at a time when ethnographers were still groping
for proper methods of investigating living aborigines. No wonder
that ethnographers leaned heavily on the staff of archacology.

But for Lowie, as for all of the Boasians, the use of the comparative
method was the cardinal error of the evolutionist school. Accord-
ing to Lowie, the evolutionists as a class failed to see “the limited
range of cultural facts for which progress could be directly demon-
strated. . . . Prehistory,” he continued, “had nothing whatsoever to
offer on the growth of supernaturalism and social organization”
(ibid.:23). “A fatal fallacy of all this reasoning lay in its naive equa-
tion of modemn primitive groups with the primeval savage. .. ”

(ibid.:24).

The resemblance of modern savages to a primeval ape-man is
so important a tenet that we must explicitly expose the error. Tt
lies in failing to understand that even the simplest recent group
has a prolonged past, during which it has progressed very far in-
deed from the hypothetical stage [ibid.:25].

These abuses of the comparative method must be dissociated from
the general principle at issue. Some of them, as Lowie himself points
out, were avoided by the “greatest of the evolutionists.” Morgan, for
example, was perfectly well aware that none of the contemporary
groups of primitives could be equated with “primeval ape-man.” His
“Lower Status of Savagery” which “commenced with the infancy of
the human race” was a purely deductive condition not represented
by any contemporary primitive group: “No exemplification of tribes
by mankind in this condition remained to the historic period”
(Morgan 1877:10). As for an awareness of the particular historical ca-
reers of primitive cultures, all the great evolutionists conceded the
necessity of accounting for specialties of each group in terms of the
natural and cultural features of local environments.

‘What we must consider in Lowie’s criticism is not the abuse of the
comparative method, but the question of its general validity as a
means of understanding the evolution of culture. The issue to be con-
fronted is whether the cultures of contemporary primitive groups can
be used to orient our understanding of chronologically earlier socio-
cultural arrangements. Are there such things as surviving stone-age
cultures? The answer, as undeniable today as it was in 1860, is yes.
This does not mean, of course, that each and every marginal band-
organized society may be taken as equally representative of a particular
stage of sociocultural evolution. Throughout prehistory, as through-

154

6. Evolutionism: Methods

out the contemporary primitive world, many different varieties of cul-
ture flourished in adaptation to varieties of specific cultural and
ecological conditions. The late-nineteenth-century evolutionists, as we
shall see in a moment, tended to underestimate the amount of diver-
sity characteristic of both contemporary and paleolithic groups. Lu-
dicrous errors were committed, for example, on the assumption that
peoples who lacked metallurgy necessarily also lacked social stratifica-
tion or that there must have been a universal stage of matrilineality
preceding patrilineality. On the other hand, equally ludicrous errors
were committed by the Boasians in their attempt to discredit the com-
parative method. For example, many “historical particularists” argued
that sociocultural evolution had taken so many diverse paths that the
simplest sorts of technologies could be found in association with the
most “complex” forms of social organization. The Australian “section”
system was a favorite example of this alleged disparity between tech-
no-economic and social-organizational levels. Similarly, the Boasian
critics of the comparative method attempted to show that such insti-
tutions as slavery, private property, and state government were ca-
priciously associated with a great variety of additional sociocultural
features. Several of these examples of apparently quixotic and fortui-
tous associations will be examined at length in the chapters devoted
to Boas and his pupils. For the moment it must suffice to state that
there is no specific abuse of the comparative method which could
justify the denial of the relevance of our ethnographic knowledge of
contemporary pre-state societies to the task of unraveling the course
of sociocultural evolution. It is unquestionable that contemporary
primitives exhibit techno-environmental, techno-economic, social-or-
ganizational, and ideological adaptations which are both structurally
and chronologically distinctive of preliterate and pre-state societies. A
list of primitive features would include: egalitarian unilineal descent
groups, age grades, classificatory kinship terminologies, men’s cults,
low-density séttlements, erratic labor schedules, communal ownership
of strategic resources, absence of internal political sanctions, egalitarian
redistribution systems, and relative impermanence of settlements, to
mention only a few. These features can be given a causal nomothetic
explanation only to the extent that we assume similar institutional
complexes existed during the paleolithic and were and are everywhere
displaced by the evolution of state-organized societies.

In principle, that is, ignoring abuses which can arise from the overly
mechanical application of any good idea, there is no less justification
for the comparative method in anthropology than in biology. Indeed,
it could very well be argued that there is a much firmer basis for the

155


===== PAGE 83 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

extrapolation from contemporary primitives to paleolithic societies
than from contemporary bioforms to extinct species. This contention
rests on the fact that cultural evolution may be said to involve fewer
major types of adaptations at any single instant than is true of biology.
Such a judgment is rendered plausible because of the absence of any
process among cultural forms analogous to that of speciation among
bioforms. Since cultural innovations diffuse, even between radically
different sociocultural systems, rapid rates of evolution do not even-
tuate in a multiplicity of new types (see pp. 173ff.).

THE LIMITATIONS OF THE
COMPARATIVE METHOD

Of course, in practice, the comparative method can yield re-
sults which are only as good as the archaeology and the ethnography
from which its data derives. If the ethnography itself presents a false
picture of contemporary primitive life, it is scarcely worth transferring
to temporally remote cultures. In order for ethnography to be applied
to the interpretation of prehistory, systematic comparisons of many
different cultures of a similar basic techno-environmental and techno-
economic type are needed. From such a comparison, it is possible to
identify which clements in any given case are the result of contact
with more complex societies, which are a result of local environmen-
tal circumstances, and which are statistically associated with the type
itself. It is a serious error, for example, to suppose that contemporary
band-organized hunting and gathering societies are representative of
the great bulk of paleolithic hunting and gathering groups. Almost all
of the ethnographically classic cases of band-organized hunters and
gatherers are marginal or refugee peoples driven into, or confined to,
unfavorable environments by surrounding groups of more advanced
societies. Many evolutionary anomalies in social organization are trace-
able to contacts between low density band- or village-organized groups
and complex state societies resulting in special colonial or minority
status.

There is no denying that the late-nineteenth-century applications of
the comparative method were based on grossly inadequate ethnographic
data. But many of the evolutionists, especially Morgan, Tylor, and
Spencer, attempted to overcome these deficiencies by a strategy which
has numerous votaries among the statistical schools of modemn an-
thropology. Unable to vouch for the accuracy of any given instance,
each of these evolutionists turned to the amassment of large numbers

156

Dol

6. Evolutionism: Methods

of cases. As we shall see in Chapter 21, there is much to be said in
favor of the claim that ethnographic errors can be balanced out when
large samples are employed. Of course, in the nineteenth century the
basis of selection of cases tended to be rather crude, exposing the
evolutionists to the charge of selecting only the cases which confirmed
a particular hypothesis. Nonetheless, the practice of amassing large
numbers of cases must be considered in relation to the stereotyped
version of ethnographic irresponsibility that was imposed upon the
evolutionists during the Boasian critique of the comparative method.

TYLOR'S USE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Tylor’s (1958, I:9-10) account of this aspect of the compara-
tive method is especially noteworthy. He was asked by an historian to
explain how a “statement as to customs, myths, beliefs, etc., of a
savage tribe” could “be treated as evidence where it depends on the
testimony of some traveler or missionary, who may be a superficial ob-
server, more or less ignorant of the native language, a careless retailer of
unsifted talk, a man prejudiced or even willfully deceitful” (ibid.)?

This question is, indeed, one which every ethnographer ought to
keep clearly and constantly before his mind. Of course he is bound
to use his best judgment as to the trustworthiness of all authors
he quotes, and if possible to obtain several accounts to certify each
point in each locality. But it is over and above these measures of
precaution that the test of recurrence comes in. If two indepen-
dent visitors to different countries, say a medieval Mohammedan
in Tartary and a modern Englishman in Dahome, or a Jesuit
missionary in Brazil and a Wesleyan in the Fiji Islands, agree in
describing some analogous art or rite or myth among the people
they have visited, it becomes difficult or impossible to sct down
such correspondence to accident or wilful fraud. A story by a
bushranger in Australia may, perhaps, be objected to as a mistake
or an invention, but did a Methodist minister in Guinea conspire
with him to cheat the public by telling the same story there? The
possibility of intentional or unintentional mystification is often
barred by such a state of things as that a similar statement is
made in two remote lands, by two witnesses, of whom A lived a
century before B, and B appears never to have heard of A. How
distant are the countries, how wide apart the dates, how different
the creeds and characters of the observers, in the catalogue of
facts of civilization needs no farther showing to any one who will

157


===== PAGE 84 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

even glance at the footnotes of the present work. And the more
odd the statement, the less likely that several people in several
places should have made it wrongly. This being so, it seems rea-
sonable to judge that the statements are in the main truly given,
and that their close and regular coincidence is due to the crop-
ping up of similar facts in various districts of culture. Now the
most important facts of ethnography are vouched for in this way
[ibid.:g-10].

MORGAN’S STRATEGY

The same basic strategy may be found in the approach which
Lewis Henry Morgan developed in his comparative study of kinship
structures. Having discovered in 1858 that the Ojibwa in Wisconsin had
essentially the same kinship terminology as the Iroquois, Morgan at
once prepared a questionnaire to secure information from Indian
agents and missionaries all over the country. Encouraged by the re-
sponses, he himself went on expeditions between 1859 and 1862
through Kansas and Nebraska, up the Missouri, to Hudson’s Bay and
to the Rocky Mountains. In 1859, he discovered that the same ter-
minology occurred in India and obtained the support of the Smithso-
nian Institution to mail out hundreds of his questionnaires to United
States consular officials and representatives throughout the world.
Forty-eight completed schedules formed the factual basis for Systems
of Consanguinity and Affinity (1870).

THE ORIGIN OF THE STATISTICAL
COMPARATIVE METHOD

Perhaps the greatest anthropological paper of the nineteenth
century was Edward Tylor’s “On a Method of Investigating the Devel-
opment of Institutions, Applied to Laws of Marriage and Descent”
(1889). Using a sample of between 300 and 400 societies, Tylor placed
the comparative method on a statistical basis. He calculated percent-
ages of probabilities of association (“adhesions” is his word) between
postmarital residence, descent, teknonymy, and couvade and thereby
advanced toward an understanding of exogamy, endogamy, and the
origin of cross-cousin marriage and incest prohibitions. With this con-
tribution, Tylor may be considered to have founded the modern
statistical cross-cultural approach as represented in the work of George
P. Murdock and the Human Relations Area Files (see Chap. 21).
Characteristically, Tylor’s article ends with a plea for better cthno-
graphic data.

158

Datll

6. Evolutionism: Methods

|
|
|
L

SPENCER’'S STRATEGY

Herbert Spencer must also be credited with an ambitious at-
tempt to improve the ethnographic basis of the comparative method.
This took the form of a multivolume series of tables and citations
published in huge folios under the title Descriptive Sociology (1873-
1934). Each volume had two main parts. First the tables, consisting of
condensed statements arranged in a uniform manner and intending, in
Spencer’s words, to give a summary view of each society’s “morphol-
ogy, its physiology and (if a society having a known history) its devel-
opment.” Second, each volume contained the relevant extracts from
cited works that provided the basis for the tabular summaries. Spencer
projected a third part of Descriptive Sociology, in which the extracts
under one heading, such as Political, Ecclesiastical, or Ceremonial in-
stitutions, would be brought together; but this aspect of the work was
never completed. The entire project was conceived by Spencer to be a
necessary prelude to the writing of his Principles of Sociology (1876),
which was in turn conceived as the capstone to his lifework as em-
bodied in the various volumes of his “synthetic philosophy”. The plan
for Descriptive Sociology was laid down as early as 1859 in an article in
the Westminster Review, entitled “What Knowledge Is of Most
Worth?” In this article, Spencer urged that the biographical approach
to history be superseded by the collection of information bearing upon
“the natural history of society.” It is clear that in Spencer’s view the
amassment of sociocultural data was inseparable from the task of de-
scribing the stages of sociocultural evolution, or in other words, that the
comparative method was an integral part of social science. I shall quote
at length from this original conception since, as a guide to the collection
of ethnographic information, it foreshadows the instructions embodied
in the Royal Anthropological Institute’s Notes and Queries as well as
those in George P. Murdock’s list of cultural universals—the organizing
frame for the Cross Cultural Survey and Human Relations Area Files

(see p. 613).

The thing it really concerns us to know is, the natural history of
society. We want all facts which help us to understand how a na-
tion has grown and organized itself. Among these, let us of course
have an account of its government; with as little as may be of
gossip about the men who officered it, and as much as possible
about the structure, principles, methods, prejudices, corruptions,
etc., which it exhibited; and let this account include not only the
nature and actions of the central government, but also those of

159


===== PAGE 85 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

local governments, down to their minutest ramifications. Let us
of course also have a parallel description of the ecclesiastical gov-
ernment—its organization, its conduct, its power, its relations to
the state; and accompanying this, the ceremonial, creed, and reli-
gious ideas—not only those nominally believed, but those really
believed and acted upon. Let us at the same time be informed of
the control exercised by class over class, as displayed in social ob-
servances—in titles, salutations, and forms of address. Let us
know, too, what were all the other customs which regulated the
popular life out-of-doors and in-doors, including those concerning
the relations of the sexes, and the relations of parents to children.
The superstitions, also, from the more important myths down to
the charms in common use, should be indicated. Next should
come a delincation of the industrial system: showing to what ex-
tent the division of labor was carried; how tribes were regulated,
whether by caste, guilds, or otherwise; what was the connection
between employers and employed; what were the agencies for dis-
tributing commodities; what were the means of communication;
what was the circulating medium. Accompanying all of which
should be given an account of the industrial arts technically con-
sidered; stating the processes in use, and the quality of the prod-
ucts. Further, the intellectual condition of the nation in its
various grades should be depicted; not only with respect to the
kind and amount of education, but with respect to the progress
made in science, and the prevailing manner of thinking. The de-
gree of aesthetic culture, as displayed in architecture, sculpture,
painting, dress, music, poetry, and fiction, should be described.
Nor should there be omitted a sketch of the daily lives of the
people—their food, their homes, and their amusements. And,
lastly, to connect the whole, should be exhibited the morals,
theoretical and practical, of all classes, as indicated in their laws,
habits, proverbs, deeds. These facts, given with as much brevity
as consistent with clearness and accuracy, should be so grouped
and arranged that they may be comprehended in their ensemble,
and contemplated as mutually-dependent parts of one great
whole. . . the highest office which the historian can discharge is
that of so narrating the lives of nations as to furnish materials for
a Comparative Sociology, and for the subsequent determination
of the ultimate laws to which social phenomena conform [SPENCER
1859, quoted in SPENCER 1875:iv-vi].

In 1870 Spencer hired three assistants to begin the work of compil-
ing the materials for Descriptive Sociology. The first volume appeared
in 1873, and additional installments continued to be issued after
Spencer’s death, until 1934, under the provisions of his will. They are

160

T

6. Evolutionism: Methods

as follows: 1. English (1873); II. Ancient Mexicans, Central Ameri-
cans, Chibchans, Ancient Peruvians (1874); III. Types of Lowest
Races, Negritto, and Malayo-Polynesian Races (1874); IV. African
Races (1875); V. Asiatic Races (1876); VI. North and South American
Races (1878); VII. Hebrews and Phoenicians (1880); VIII. French
(1881); IX. Chinese (1910); X. Hellenic Greeks (1910); XI. Ancient
Egyptians (1925); XII. Hellenistic Greeks (1928); XIII. Mesopota-
r(ma (;929); XIV. African Races (1930); and XV. Ancient Romans
1934)-

Spencer’s intense concern with ethnographic data casts a curious
shadow over Lowic’s History of Ethnological Theory, from whose in-
dex Spencer’s name is absent. Evidently Spencer’s use of the term
“sociology” in his titles reassures many anthropologists that Spencer
can safely be ignored by a discipline that emphasizes primitive and
peasant sociocultural systems as opposed to modern Euro-American
societies. What then are we to make of the complaint by J. Rumney
(1934:22), Spencer’s scientific executor, that Principles of Sociology
was too much involved with primitive ethnography to qualify as
sociology?

Spencer stressed too much what is now called cultural anthro-
pology, which is only a division of general sociology, . . .
Spencer was far too interested in the origin of institutions, prim-
itive habits and the survival of ancient customs. . . .

THE ABUSE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Despite the great labor expended by the late-nineteenth-
century anthropologists on behalf of improving ethnographic compe-
te'nce, it cannot be denied that the evolutionists were perpetrators and
victims of massive ethnographic errors which, far from being canceled
out by appeal to a large number of cases, became that much more en-
trenched by reiteration. We shall have occasion to discuss some of the
worst of these in connection with the evolutionary schemes of Mor-
gan and McLennan. The errors of the ethnographically less well-in-
formed theoreticians are highly offensive to the modern reader. John
L}.\bbock, despite his fine grasp of the evidence for the European pre-
historic sequences, is the classic example. His Pre-Historic Times is
replete with tables, charts, and diagrams setting forth in minutest de-
tail the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the major European
archaeological sites and museum collections. Lubbock, himself, system-

161


===== PAGE 86 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

atically combed Europe for traces of prehistoric cultures, visiting a
half-dozen lake sites in Switzerland, shell mounds in Denmark and
Scotland, and the bone caves of the Dordogne. He claimed to have per-
sonally examined “almost every gravel pit and section from Amiens
down to the sea” (1865:vii). But when Lubbock turned in his final
chapter to the evidence from ethnography, he exhibited an atro-
cious indifference to the reliability of his sources; and Lowie justly up-
braids him for certain extravagances:

The Andamanese have “no sense of shame”; “many of their habits
are like those of beasts.” The Greenlanders have no religion, no
worship, no ceremonies. The Iroquois have no religion, no word
for God, Fuegians not the least spark of religion. “. . . there
can be no doubt that, as an almost universal rule, savages are
cruel” [LOWIE 1937:24].

But Lowie permits his indignation over these errors to carry over into
a critique of the principle of the comparative method. He blames the
“naive equation of modern primitive groups with the primeval savage”
for leading “serious writers” like Lubbock “into absurd underestimation
of recent tribes and uncritical acceptance of tourists’ tales” (ibid.). It
should be apparent that this line of disparagement of the comparative
method is a non sequitur. Lubbock’s low level of ethnographic under-
standing was not induced by the comparative method; rather his use of
the comparative method was rendered unsatisfactory by his meager
understanding of contemporary primitive societies. The origin of Lub-
bock’s mistakes rested in the thralldom of racial determinism which
lay over Lubbock and all his contemporaries. Since they believed that
primitive peoples represented biologically inferior grades of humanity,
or even different species, they were prone to accept reports exaggerat-
ing the difference between European and primitive bio-psychological
dispositions and capacities. This leads us to the next step in Lowie’s
critique of the comparative method—what he calls “the complete
abandonment of objective criteria”:

Sir John’s writings teem with subjective judgments, mnaively
passed on the basis of resemblance to or deviation from Furopean
standards. The Hottentots are “disgusting,” the Australians “mis-
erable” savages . . . he is himself constantly mortified, shocked,
horrified, by the savage scene [ibid.].

Once again it is obvious that the peculiarly obnoxious character of
Lubbock’s judgments results not from the comparative method but
from the prevailing conviction that Europeans are racially superior and
that their institutions are justified by that superiority.

162

ot

6. Evolutionism: Methods

THE RELATIVIST CRITIQUE

Lowie goes on to say that, in contrast to Lubbock’s ethnocen-
trism, “the modern scientific procedure is to refrain from all subjec-
tive judgments” (ibid.:25, Lowie’s italics). This certainly was the
self-image developed by the Boasians and others who insisted that
ethnography be founded upon complete moral and ethical relativism
But we shall examine evidence in subsequent chapters which indicates
that the relativists were unable to achieve the semblance of political
neutrality with respect to the destinies of primitive peoples. Modern
anthropologists can criticize Lubbock for his ethnocentric judgments
only at the risk of hypocrisy if the objection be that he had strong
convictions concerning the relative values of primitive and civilized in-
stitutions. During the period of reaction to the nineteenth-century
evolutionists, it was considered the worst of anthropological manners
to evaluate the relative merits of different cultural practices, especially
if primitive patterns were compared unfavorably to Euro-American
ones. But contributions to the political expression of particular value
positions consist of both action and inaction. Merely to refrain from
opinion is not therefore to avoid the expression of opinion. Thus, as we
shall see, the sclection of subjects about which one will not carry on
research, teach, or publish represents as much of a commitment as !
the reverse. This being the case, then cultural relativism, at its best,“
would represent a state of moral and ethical confusion characterized
by contradictory, weak, unconscious, or disguised value judgments. In
ethnography, it is not at all clear that a cryptic or confused moral and
ethical stance is preferable to an openly avowed one. According to
Lowie, while “an anthropologist as an individual cannot but respond
to alien manifestations in accordance with his national and individual
norms,” no carry-over of these reactions can be tolerated in his ethno-
graphic work: “. . . as a scientist, however, he merely registers
cannibalism or infanticide, understands, and if possible explains such
customs” (ibid.:25). The preposterous assumption here is that reliable
descriptions of cannibalism and infanticide cannot be achieved by
ethnographers who openly oppose these practices. But the two func-
tions are not at all necessarily incompatible. We must presume at
least that reliable descriptions have been submitted by ethnographers
who openly expressed their distaste for cannibalism. Moreover, in an
age where so much anthropological teaching and research is supported
by organizations with definite value commitments—such as the Na-
tional Institutes of Health, the Ford Foundation, and the United

163


===== PAGE 87 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

States Agency for International Development—it will become in-
creasingly difficult to convince anyone that descriptions of poverty,
exploitation, disease, and malnutrition are admissible only to the
extent that they lack “subjective pronouncements.” Thus to return
to Lubbock and his ethnocentric contemporaries, we condemn them
not because they expressed value judgments, but because their judg-
ments were based on false facts and theories. Their arrogance with re-
spect to contemporary primitives and preliterate societies is intolerable
first because they assumed that had they themselves been brought up
among London’s poor or among the Hottentots they would nonethe-
less have behaved like Victorian gentlemen; and second, because in
expressing shock over cannibalism, infanticide, and head-hunting, they
naively assumed that comparable practices had already been, or were
shortly about to be, extirpated from the repertories of their own civi-
lized communities.

SURVIVALS AND THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

Another aspect of the comparative method which became the
object of intense but unmerited criticism during the twentieth cen-
tury was the concept of “‘survivals.” Once again, we must guard against
an overemphasis of the precedent of biological models. The essence of
the concept of survivals is that phenomena originating under a set of
causal conditions of a former era perpetuate themselves into a period
during which the original conditions no longer exist.

The term itself was first employed by Tylor in Primitive Culture,
where he emphasized the value of survivals for the reconstruction of
history by means of the comparative method.

These are processes, customs, opinions, and so forth which have
been carried on by force of habit into a new state of society dif-
ferent from that in which they had their original home, and
they thus remain as proofs and examples of an older condition of
culture out of which a newer has been evolved [TYLOR 1958:16; orig.

1871].

The historian Margaret Hodgen (1936:89-go) has expended a whole
volume on the attempt to prove that Tylor’s concept of survival was
restricted to “irrational customs maintained by civilized peoples and
remarked for their non-conformity with the existing pattern of ad-
vanced culture.” Hodgen’s principal interest seems to have been to de-
grade the earlier attempts by Morgan, Maine, and McLennan to use

164

o

6. Evolutionism: Methods

survivals to reconstruct antecedent institutions among primitives. I
shall take it as requiring no extended justification that the idea of sur-
vivals was an integral part of the comparative method, and that in one
form or another it came into use more or less simultaneously in the
writings of the great evolutionists. Maine (1873:304; orig. 1861), for
example, was clearly dealing with survivals when he attempted to ex-
plain anomalous features of both Roman and Modern English juris-
prudence as remnants of earlier systems:

The old general conception is not obliterated, but it has ceased to
cover more than one or a few of the notions which it first in-
cluded. So too the old technical name remains, but it discharges
only one of the functions which it once performed.

Similarly, Morgan’s use of Hawaiian terminology in Systems of Con-
sanguinity and Affinity to prove the existence of a prior stage of group
marriage and his use of “relics,” “traces,” “outcrops,” and “remains”
to prove the existence of matrilineal descent among the Barbarian
forebears of the ancient Greeks and Romans constitute typical applica-
tions of the doctrine of survivals. Finally, we may note the similarity
between survivals and what McLennan called “symbols.” The latter,
said to reflect an earlier actuality, provided the main source of evidence
in Primitive Marriage (1865). It was through the widespread occur-
rence of symbolic nuptials involving mock battles, pretended flight,
and chase that McLennan arrived at his theory of marriage-by-capture
as a stage in the evolution of domestic institutions (see p. 193).

USEFUL AND USELESS SURVIVALS

Emphasis upon “survivals” or equivalent concepts early
in the 1860’s once again impresses upon us the gratuitous nature of
the attempt to regard biology as the source of evolutionary doctrines
in the social sciences. Lowie’s (1937:25) equation of “survivals” with
“rudimentary organs of social groups” or with “useless organs” (ibid.:
26) ill prepares us for an understanding of the historical significance
of this concept. It may be true, as Hodgen insists, that for Tylor
the bulk of survivals were relatively useless items. But it is clear that for
others who employed the concept or its equivalents, survivals might
very well have had a use, however impaired or transmuted. Indeed, the
first example of a survival given by Tylor is that of an old woman op-
erating a loom by throwing the shuttle from one hand to the other—
clearly not an entirely useless activity. Moreover, Maine certainly did
not hold that legal fiction was useless, nor did Morgan imply that kin-

165


===== PAGE 88 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ship terminologies that reflected past rather than present marriage
forms were not therefore useful for designating classes of relatives. The
fact is that in both biological and sociocultural survivals, there is a
spectrum of utility rather than a dichotomy of useful and useless.

At one extreme, consider the wing of a bat, the result of modifica-
tion of a primitive mammalian pentadactyl forelimb, which is emi-
nently functional in all of its aspects. The pentadactyl pattern,
however, cannot be explained by reference to the conditions of con-
temporary bat existence and hence is a “survival” in the previously
defined sense. At the other extreme there is the true vestigial organ,
like the human appendix, which lacks positive functions altogether.
Similarly, there are a small number of sociocultural “survivals” which
appear to be almost devoid of utility. The buttons on a man’s coat
sleeves or the bow on the band inside of a man’s hat are frequently
cited examples. Most sociocultural survivals, however, involve some
degree of continuing utility. Tylor's numerous cases of survivals in
sports, games, and popular sayings clearly fall into this latter category.

THE FUNCTIONALIST CRITIQUE OF
SURVIVALS

This point is essential in view of the twentieth-century British
functionalists’ attack on survivals, which was in turn, a part of the reac-
tion to evolutionary formulation in general. Examination of Bronislaw
Malinowski’s famous tirades against survivals reveals that the concept
he attacked was itself lifted bodily from the functional context in
which it had first been proposed. He employs a definition of survival
offered by Alexander Goldenweiser rather than Tylor whereby, “A sur-
vival is ‘a cultural feature which does not fit in with its cultural me-
dium. It persists rather than functions, or its function somehow does
not harmonize with the surrounding culture’” (MALINOWSKI 1944b:
28). With this definition to go on, it becomes child’s play to show that
survivals are nonexistent. Does a horse-drawn hansom cab in automo-
bile-age New York fail to “fit” in with its cultural medium? “Obviously
not. Such an antiquated means of locomotion is used for retrospective
sentiment . . . it moves where the fare is slightly intoxicated or else
romantically inclined” (ibid.:28-29). But the implication that Tylor or
Morgan would deny such an interpretation is wholly gratuitous. Ty-
lor’s works are filled with examples of items which in surviving to the
present have had their utility transformed to recreational or to aes-
thetic functions. When he explains the relationship of Victorian eve-
ning dress to older “practical coats in which a man rode and worked”

166

6. Evolutionism: Methods

(TYLOR 1899:15; orig. 1881), it is not to assert that a Victorian gentle-
man has no use for evening wear! When he shows that the widespread
custom of invoking supernatural assistance when a man sneezes (God
bless you!) derives from an earlier fear that the soul was in danger of
being expelled from the body, it is not to deny the importance of dis-
playing solicitude to a potential or actual victim of a cold (TyLor
1958, I:97ff.). When he notes that the bow and arrow of archery con-
tests and children’s games is “a mere sportive survival” of a “formerly
serious practice,” it is not to deny the pleasure that human beings
derive from sports and games (ibid.:73). Malinowski’s concept of sur-
vivals is thus as much filled with straw as his concept of economic man
(see p. 564). Tylor and Morgan were not interested in denying utility to
this trait and lack of utility to that one. They were concerned rather
with the task of reconstructing the general history of institutions.

THE IMPORTANCE OF HISTORY

Tylor and Morgan believed present-day institutions could not
be understood without reconstructing evolutionary antecedents. Sur-
vivals were “traces” which helped in the task of reconstruction, and
they were at the same time conspicuous warnings that a synchronic
method (which the British functionalists actually later adopted) could
never suffice to explain sociocultural differences and similarities. In
pointing to hansom cabs in New York, the evolutionists were demon-
strating that the present cannot be explained solely in terms of the
present. Given only Malinowski’s factors of nostalgia, inebriation, and
courtship, it would be impossible to predict the existence of hansoms,
present, past, or future. The context out of which Malinowski
wrenched the concept of survivals was that which insisted that the re-
construction of the earlier forms is essential for an understanding of
later ones. Tylor makes this context abundantly clear by citing Auguste

Comte’s strictures concerning the necessity for evolutionary perspec-
tive (see p. 62).

They who wish to understand their own lives ought to know the
stages through which their opinions and habits have become what
they are. Auguste Comte scarcely overstated the necessity of this
study of development when he declared at the beginning of his
“Positive Philosophy” that “no conception can be understood ex-
cept through its history,” and his phrase will bear extension to
culture at large. To expect to look modern life in the face and
comprehend it by mere inspection, is a philosophy whose weak-

167


===== PAGE 89 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ness can easily be tested. Imagine any one explaining the trivial
saying, “a little bird told me,” without knowing of the old belief
in the language of birds and beasts. . . . It is always unsafe to de-
tach a custom from its hold on past events, treating it as an
isolated fact to be simply disposed of by some plausible explana-
tion [TYLOR 1958:19—20].

In this broader context, it is clear that the question of the impor-
tance of diachronic data takes precedence over that of useful and
useless “survivals.” In a sense, every historical explanation is an explana-
tion which makes use of “survivals,” regardless of whether the survivals
are useful or useless.

STUPID CUSTOMS

It cannot be denied that Tylor derived a special delight in
ridiculing what he regarded to be silly and irrational customs which
had survived extensive formal and functional modification. Explaining
why he devoted so much of Primitive Culture to traits that are “worn
out, worthless, or even bad with downright harmful folly” (ibid.:156),
he rejoices that “in such inquiries we have continual reason to be
thankful to fools.” That is, “ethnographers, not without a certain grim
satisfaction, may at times find means to make stupid and evil supersti-
tions bear witness against themselves” by revealing their origins in bar-
baric and savage stages of culture (ibid.:156-57).

It is quite wonderful, even if we hardly go below the surface of
the subject, to sce how large a share stupidity and unpractical
conservatism and dogged superstition have had in preserving for
us traces of the history of our race, which practical utilitarianism
would have remorselessly swept away [ibid.:156].

Under the combined influence of cultural relativism, historical par-
ticularism, and synchronic functionalism, it has become bad form for
anthropologists to make public judgments concerning the relative
“stupidity” of various primitive and civilized customs. Once we take
care to emend Tylor’s maxim to embrace traits which Tylor ascribed
to “practical utilitarianism,” there is no reason why future generations
of anthropologists should deny themselves that “grim satisfaction”
with which the history of human folly has always repaid its serious
students. When Tylor’s “practical utilitarianism” gave birth to a war in
which practical machines enabled 30 million people to be killed, it
seems that many anthropologists suffered a loss of critical verve. In-
stead of declaring these machines and the social arrangements that

168

6. Evolutionism: Methods

dictated their use “stupid,” they went about adding witchcraft and
circumcision to the list of man’s great achievements (see p. 534). It
has yet to be demonstrated, however, that our understanding of cul-
tural evolution is enhanced by an attitude of equal respect for all of its
products.

FIELDWORK

Malinowski (1944b:30-31) blamed the doctrine of survivals
for one additional failing of the evolutionists:

The real harm done by this concept was to retard effective field-
work. Instead of searching for the present-day function of any cul-
tural fact, the observer was merely satisfied in reaching a rigid,
self-contained entity.

It is perfectly true that the evolutionists did not carry out ethnographic
research which could be likened to Malinowski’s own experience.
Moreover, neither Morgan, Tylor, nor Spencer initiated programs of
intensive fieldwork. Of these three, only Morgan achieved a firsthand
knowledge of the cultures of primitive groups. But even Morgan’s
work with the Iroquois would not be considered a bona fide field ex-
perience by modern standards, since it did not involve continuous or
prolonged contact with the daily routine of a given local community.
Tylor, while an avid traveler and keen observer, lacked research which
could even be compared with fieldwork in the modern sense, while
Spencer was not even a good traveler. It is questionable, however, that
the concept of survivals per se had anything to do with this aspect of
the evolutionists’ program. At the heart of the matter there lies a much
more general situation. Anthropology achieved its professional identity
under the guiding influence of eighteenth-century proposals for a sci-
ence of universal history. Morgan, Tylor, and Spencer were universal
historians who made use of the comparative method in order to
achieve a more detailed and, on the whole, more accurate rendering of
the sequence of cultural change which had led from the paleolithic
hunters to industrial civilization. They were convinced that evolution-
ary changes had been regular enough to permit the recovery of missing
historical data through comparison and the logical construction of in-
termediate and transitional types. Although they were aware of the in-
adequacy of much of the ethnographic literature, they expected that
the regularities of evolutionary change would be identified when a
sufficiently large number of cases were assembled. Two general con-
siderations inclined the evolutionists to this optimistic view of the re-

169


===== PAGE 90 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

constructive powers of the comparative method. As previously stressed,
in assessing their contributions to the rise of anthropological theory,
we must bear in mind that the basic principles of the comparative
method had already been vindicated by the findings of archaeology and
that a similar strategy had achieved great success in philology. In addi-
tion, it must also be remembered that all of the mid-nineteenth-cen-
tury sciences were dominated by a euphoria, arising from the
widespread belief that the mechanical model in physics was on the
verge of achieving a perfect description of the laws of matter and en-
ergy. Anthropologists were not the only scientists who grossly underes-
timated the complexity of the lawful relations governing the unfolding
of phenomena in their field of inquiry. And to that extent, there is a
certain amount of parallelism between the reactions in physics and
cultural anthropology to the discovery that Newtonian-type regularities
did not pertain on all levels of physical and sociocultural phenomena.
There is much to be said therefore on behalf of the view that the evo-
lutionists, in attending to the comparative method and to the data of
unreliable but abundant ethnographic reports, rather than to intensive
fieldwork with individual groups, were, for the times, following an es-
sentially correct strategy. Given the new evidential basis for the pre-
dicted stages of progress from a “state of nature” through savagery,
barbarism, and civilization, it was the strategically correct next step to
seck for greater precision in the definition of the relevant institutional
transformations without assuming that such refinements could be ob-
tained only by abandoning the rotion of universally valid stages. That
this assumption ultimately proved necessary was a theoretical advance
which could not have been achieved without the formulation and test-
ing of the nineteenth-century evolutionary schemes. Indeed, it is a
matter of historical record that the turn to intensive fieldwork did not
by itself automatically result in a more sophisticated application of
the comparative method. On the contrary, what happened was that the
comparative method was virtually abandoned. Instead of refining the
evolutionary sequences, the concentration on fieldwork even resulted
in the abandonment of all diachronic interests. Instead of perfecting
the science of universal history, the “cult” of fieldwork temporarily
effaced the heritage of Enlightenment scientism and gave rise to
frankly idiographic or humanistic varieties of anthropological descrip-
tions. Noting that Boas failed to produce a description of Kwakiutl
social organization adequate for modern applications of the compara-
tive method (see p. 314), one may reasonably doubt that much was
to be gained from similar performances by Morgan and Tylor. One or

170

ot

6. Evolutionism: Methods

two cases were not going to settle any of the issues of sequence in
which the evolutionists were interested; they were concerned not with
exceptions, but with general trends.

THE MYTH OF UNILINEAR
EVOLUTIONISM

This brings us to another of the important issues on which
the evolutionists have been systematically misrepresented. It is com-
monly believed that the evolutionary stages revealed by the compara-
tive method were regarded as fixed sequences, every step of which had
to be gone through by all cultures. This misunderstanding has been
consolidated by the label “unilinear evolutionism,” which Julian
Steward (1955:14) has assigned to the “classical evolutionary formu-
lation” which “dealt with particular cultures, placing them in stages of
a universal sequence” (cf. LOWIE 1937:19o). There is no support for
the contention, however, that the “classical evolutionary formulation”
denied that specific cultures could skip certain steps in a sequence or
evolve in a divergent fashion. It was Morgan’s (1877:8) view that “the
experience of mankind has run in nearly uniform channels; that hu-
man necessities in similar conditions have been substantially the same”
(italics added). These qualifiers deserve to be emphasized because it
is quite obvious that Morgan remained uncertain concerning just how
much uniformity there had been. He was aware that “differences in
the culture of the same period in the Eastern and Western hemisphere
undoubtedly existed . . . and he attributed these differences to “the
unequal endowments of the continents” (ibid.). On the one hand we
find him asserting:

So essentially identical are the arts, institutions and mode of life
in the same status upon all the continents, that the archaic form
of the principal domestic institutions of the Greeks and Romans
might even now be sought in the corresponding institutions of
the American aborigines . . . [ibid.].

But on the other hand he warns us that his “ethnical periods” cannot
be regarded as absolute in their application and that there are excep-
tions. What we must bear in mind is that to Morgan and his con-
temporaries the most interesting features of history were the
similarities rather than the differences. For it was upon the similarities
that a science of universal history depended. A modicum of sympathy
for the attempt to found such a science will suffice to justify Morgan’s
strategy. The first step in the development of any science must be the

171


===== PAGE 91 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

6. Evolutionism: Methods

assumption that the phenomena to be studied are related in an or-
derly fashion. It does less harm to begin with a picture of maximum
than with minimum order, for the exceptions will soon enough make
their claim to attention. Surely, neither a science of universal history
nor of anything else could begin with the exceptions! Morgan readily
acknowledged the existence of such exceptions, but in the context of
his task, he could scarcely be expected to make them his central
concern:

It is difficult, if not impossible, to find such tests of progress
to mark the commencement of these several periods as will be
found absolute in their application, and without exceptions
upon all the continents. Neither is it necessary, for the purpose in
hand, that exceptions should not exist. It will be sufficient if the
principal tribes of mankind can be classified, according to the de-
gree of their relative progress, into conditions which can be recog-
nized as distinct [ibid.].

A further discussion of Morgan’s position will be given below in
conjunction with the issue of parallel versus convergent evolution. But
if Morgan is exempt from the charge of unilinear evolutionism, it is
obvious that Tylor’s evolutionism must also be exempted. In his great
article on the statistical interpretation of marriage and locality rules,
Tylor (1889:269) argues for historical uniformities in terms that are
indistinguishable from Morgan’s:

The institutions of men are as distinctly stratified as the earth on
which he lives. They succeed each other in series substantially
uniform over the globe, independent of what seem the compar-
atively superficial differences of race and language, but shaped by
similar human nature acting through successively changed condi-
tions in savage, barbaric, and civilized life.

Yet, what is the meaning of the statistical version of the comparative
method, if not precisely that “substantially uniform” is not equivalent
to “unilinear”? In Primitive Culture, Tylor declares that few “would
dispute that the following races are arranged rightly in order of cul-
ture: Australian, Tahitian, Aztec, Chinese, Italian” (1958, 1:27). He
promptly follows this up, however, with the warning that “even those
students who hold most strongly that the general course of civilization,
as measured along the scale of races from savages to ourselves, is prog-
tess toward the benefit of mankind [must] admit many and manifold
exceptions. Industrial and intellectual culture by no means advances
uniformly in all of its branches . . .” (ibid.).

When we turn to Spencer, there is not the remotest resemblance

172

between his view of evolution and the unilinear stereotype. Indeed,
despite Spencer’s strong conviction concerning the lawfulness of socio-
cultural change, he was actually more “multilinear” than either Julian
Steward or Karl Wittfogel (see Chap. 23).

As with organic evolution, so with super-organic evolution.
Though, taking the entire assemblage of societies, evolution may
be held inevitable . . . yet it cannot be held inevitable in each
particular society, or even probable [sPENCER 1896, 1:96].

While the current degradation theory is untenable, the theory of
progression, in its ordinary form, seems to me untenable
also. . . . It is possible, and, I believe, probable, that retrogres-
sion has been as frequent as progression [ibid.:95].

. social progress is not linear but divergent and re-divergent.
Each differentiated product gives origin to a new set of differen-
tiated products. While spreading over the Earth mankind have
found environments of various characters, and in each case the
social life fallen into, partly determined by the social life previ-
ously led, has been partly determined by the influences of the new
environment; so that the multiplying groups have tended ever to
acquire differences, now major, and now minor: there have arisen
genera and species of societies [ibid., IT:331].

As Robert Carneiro (1967:43) concludes: “Thus Spencer was not
only not a unilinear evolutionist, he was not even a linear evolutionist
. .. he saw evolution as a process of successive branchings in which
increased heterogeneity goes hand in hand with increased complexity.”

THE MYTH OF THE DENIAL OF
DIFFUSION

Closely related to the misconception surrounding the evo-
lutionists’ commitment to unilinear models is the equally misunder-
stood issue of diffusion versus independent invention. Under the
influence of the historical particularists and the German and British
diffusionist schools, the myth has grown up that the nineteenth-
century evolutionists denied the importance of diffusion. The diffu-
sionists identified themselves with the point of view that man was
essentially “uninventive,” while the evolutionists were portrayed as
believing the direct opposite. The diffusionists not only set up the
dichotomy between “borrowing” and “invention,” but they dogmat-
ically denied that similar invention could account for worldwide sim-
ilarities. The historical particularists, on the other hand, followed a

173


===== PAGE 92 =====

_——'——__—_——T-'“
|

The Rise of Anthropological Theory M

middle course, rejecting both the “overinventiveness” of Adolf
Bastian and the “underinventiveness” of Wilhelm Schmidt and Fritz
Graebner (see Chap. 14). But they subscribed to, and helped to per-
petuate, the false dichotomy between independent invention and
diffusion.

This dichotomy is false in two senses. First, it does not accurately
reflect the position of the evolutionists, none of whom proposed, as a
matter of principle, that similarities had developed more frequently
from independent invention than from diffusion. And the dichotomy
is also logically and empirically false, because it rests on the unsup-
portable notion that independent invention and diffusion are funda-
mentally different processes.

Lowie’s entanglement in both of these fallacies impeded his ability
to interpret the respective contribution of the evolutionists and dif-
fusionists. He was perfectly aware, of course, that Tylor maintained
a lively interest in tracing diffused traits side by side with a deep con-
viction that there had been a general uniformity in evolutionary
stages. Indeed, Lowie’s highest accolades are reserved for Tylor’s
“serene willingness to weigh evidence” for and against diffusion in the
following cases: Pan-European paleolithic tools; the piston bellows of
Madagascar and Indonesia; North American and Old World pottery;
the Old and New World bow and arrow; the Australian, African, and
American theory that disease is caused by an intrusive stone or bone;
the game of parcheesi as played in Mexico and India; and various myths
found in both the Old and New Worlds. Tylor, according to Lowie
(1937:74), was the “very antithesis of a strict parallelist . . . he was
thoroughly convinced of the force of borrowing in human history and
expressed this faith both abstractly and with respect to special cases.”
And Lowie quotes Tylor's own words to the effect (1958, I:53):
“Civilization is a plant much more often propagated than developed.”
But Lowie (1937:60) was also of the opinion that “diffusion plays
havoc with any universal law of sequence.” How, then, could Tylor’s
evolutionism be combined with so large a dose of diffusion? One
gathers from Lowie’s stress on the association between evolutionism
and independent invention on the one hand and historicism and dif-
fusion on the other, that Tylor was simply confused. But the con-
fusion rests with Lowie, since it is evident that Tylor did not accept
the diffusionist dogma that “diffusion plays havoc with any universal
law of sequence.” Tylor evidently did not even feel that the fact of
diffusion obliged one in the slightest to alter his conception of evo-
lutionary sequences. Indeed, independent inventions were of interest
to Tylor for reasons that eluded Lowie.

174

To most of the evolutionists, independent inventions were of in-
terest not for demonstrating parallel evolution, but for demonstrating
psychic unity. From Tylor's point of view, the demonstration that
similar stages of culture had succeeded each other in substantially
uniform fashion did not require the separation of independently in-
vented traits from borrowed ones. Whether the uniformity of a par-
ticular stage had resulted from borrowing or independent invention
was unimportant for proving that there was a general movement to
history. The demonstration of evolutionary uniformity resided in the
worldwide, almost monotonous sameness of institutions which could
be arranged in a single chronological and structural sequence.

That Tylor regarded independent inventions as a strong argument
for psychic unity does not mean that he regarded diffusion as a strong
argument against psychic unity. It will be recalled that one of the main
points raised by the monogenists was the fact that Christianity was
apparently capable of being leamed by all human groups. Diffusion
may very well be regarded therefore as providing additional evidence of
the essential similarity of the human mind, although the evidence
from independent invention would seem to be somewhat stronger
and more direct. It was in precisely this frame of reference that Tylor
(1865:378-79) summed up his discussion of diffusion and indepen-
dent invention in his Researches into the Early History of Mankind:

In the first place, the facts collected secem to favour the view
that the wide differences in the civilization and mental state of
the various races of mankind are rather differences of development
than of origin, rather of degree than of kind . . . wherever the
occurrence of any art or knowledge in two places can be confi-
dently ascribed to independent invention, as, for instance, when
we find the dwellers in the ancient lake-habitations of Switzer-
land, and the Modern New Zealanders, adopting a like
construction in their curious fabrics of tied bundles of fibre, the
similar step thus made in different times and places tends to
prove the similarity of the minds that made it. Moreover, to take
a somewhat weaker line of argument, the uniformity with which
like stages in the development of art and science are found
among the most unlike races, may be adduced as evidence on the
same side, in spite of the constant difficulty in deciding whether
any particular development is due to independent invention, or
to transmission from some other people to those among whom it
is found. For if the similar thing has been produced in two
places by independent invention, then, as has just been said, it is
direct evidence of similarity of mind. And on the other hand, if it
was carried from the one place to the other, or from a third to

175


===== PAGE 93 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

both, by mere transmission from people to people, thgn tl?e
smallness of the change it has suffered in t;ar}splantmg is still
evidence of the like nature of the soil wherever it is found.

It is interesting to note the similarity between Tylor’g comments on
the compatability of diffusion and independent invention in terms of
psychic unity and the critique which was eventually advanced deny-
ing that independent invention and diffusion represented fundamen-
tally different evolutionary processes (see pp. 615—16).‘

Lowic’s (1937:77) insistence that diffusion explains resemblances
more satisfactorily than independent invention is totally unsubstanti-
able. Neither the one nor the other explains anything; both are mere
labels for a single process of change. The lawful conditions Aof this
process remain unstated in Lowie’s formulation as much as in Bas-
tian’s. What have we achieved when we tell ourselves that two
cultures are similar because they are or have been in contact? Since
all cultures are in contact directly or indirectly with all others, all cul-
tures should be the same. Since they are not, similarity is obviously
not a simple function of contact. Nor is it a matter of freq'uency or
intensity of contact measured in terms of distance or interaction, since
adjacent cultures in continuous contact frequently manifest sharp
cultural differences (e.g., Ituri pygmies and Bantu villagers; Southwest
Pueblos and Navajos; Vedda and Ceylonese). But we must postpone
further discussion of this issue to a later chapter (see p. 377).

PARALLEL AND CONVERGENT
CONTRIBUTIONS TO EVOLUTIONARY

UNIFORMITY

The unilinear-multilinear and the independent invention-dif-
fusion dichotomies should be seen in relationship to a third mislead-
ing distinction: that between parallel and convergent evo.h}tiou. In
parallel evolution, cultures evolve from and to similar conditions step
by step in tandem. In convergent evolution, cultures evolve toward a
similar condition through dissimilar steps. The Boasians made much
of this distinction because they were obliged to accept convergent
evolution as a common phenomenon. The reason for this is that every
case of diffusion is a case of convergence. Parallel evolution, however,
was regarded as extremely rare and exclusively identified with the al-
leged unilinear evolutionism of Tylor, Morgan, and Spepcer: The
demonstration of convergent evolution brought about by diffusion or

176

6. Evolutionism: Methods

by any other series of different steps was regarded by the Boasians as
constituting a disproof of the entire evolutionist position. As we shall
see (p. 258), both Boas and Lowie attacked the evolutionists through
repeated demonstrations that in the sociocultural realm “like effects”
could be produced by “unlike causes.” But, once again, we are dealing
with a distinction that was not essential to the evolutionists; their
main concern was with the general uniformity created by both con-
vergent and parallel processes and not with a step by step concatena-
tion of “identical” causes (cf. Lowie). As Tylor (1865:373) made
clear: “The state of things which is found is not indeed that one race
does or knows exactly what another race does or knows, but that sim-
ilar stages of development recur in different times and places.”

Indifference to the questions of independent invention versus
diffusion and to parallel as distinguished from convergent evolution is
also characteristic of Morgan’s approach. Morgan (1877:39) explicitly
includes diffusion as one of the mechanisms by which the substantial
uniformity of sociocultural evolution was made possible:

LEWIS HENRY MORGAN, DIFFUSIONIST

The most advanced portion of the human race were halted,
S0 to express it, at certain stages of progress, until some great in-
vention or discovery, such as the domestication of animals or the
smelting of iron ore, gave a new and powerful impulse forward.
While thus restrained, the ruder tribes, continually advancing,
approached in different degrees of nearness to the same status;
for wherever a continental connection existed, all the tribes must
have shared in some measure in each other'’s progress. All great
inventions and discoveries propagate themselves; but the inferior
tribes must have appreciated their value before they could ap-
propriate them. In the continental areas certain tribes would lead;
but the leadership would be apt to shift a number of times in the
course of an ethnical period [italics added].

In discussing the transition from the lower to middle status of bar-
barism, Morgan again makes explicit provision for borrowing without
acknowledging any serious challenge to his overall scheme:

Some of these inventions were borrowed, not unlikely, from tribes
in the Middle Status; for it was by this process constantly repeated
that the more advanced tribes lifted up those below them, as fast

as the latter were able to appreciate and to appropriate the means
of progress [ibid.:540].

177


===== PAGE 94 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

As Lowie (1937:59) himself points out, “Morgan was not unduly
disturbed by cultural loans, though he freely admits them.” And
Lowie (ibid.:60) was also perfectly aware that Morgan had explicitly
rejected the possibility that the major types of kinship system had
arisen independently and evolved in a parallel fashion. Indeed, Mor-
gan’s opinion of the Boasian stereotype of parallel evolution was that
it would require “miracles” to occur:

If it is assumed then that the Turanian and the Ganowanian
[terminologies] . . . were created independently in Asia and
America, would each by imperative necessity have passed through
the same experience, have developed the same sequence of cus-
toms and institutions, and, as a final result, have produced the
same identical system of relationship? The statement of the pro-
position seems to work its refutation on the grounds of its exces-
sive improbability. . . . If the two families commenced on
separate continents in a state of promiscuous intercourse, . . . it
would be little less than a miracle if both should develop the
same ultimate system of relationship. Upon the doctrine of
chances it is not supposable that each would pass through the
same experience, develop the same series of customs and institu-
tions and finally produce for themselves the same system of con-
sanguinity, which would be found, on comparison, to be identical
in radical characteristics as well as coincident in minute de-
tails . . . [MORGAN 1870:504—5].

As we have already seen, it was at this point that Morgan’s racism in-
truded and he was led to the absurd conclusion that Iroquois termi-
nology was “carried in the blood,” thereby proving that the American
Indians were descended from Asian progenitors. The irony of this as-
pect of Morgan’s denial of strict parallel evolution is that on this issue
Lowie later came to champion precisely the point of view which
Morgan had rejected, namely that in the presence of exogamous uni-
linear descent groups, Iroquois kinship terminology had been invented
over and over again! The respective positions of Morgan and Lowie on
the origin of unilinear descent groups constitute an equally spectac-
ular reversal of stereotypes. Morgan, as Lowie well knew, argued at great
length against the possibility of the independent invention of the
gens (matriclan). According to Morgan (1877:388-89), the establish-
ment of exogamic prescriptions along unilineal lines

. was too remarkable and too improbable . . . to be repeated
many different times, and in widely different areas. . . . Instead
of a natural and obvious conception, the gens was essentially
abstruse . . . a product of high intelligence for the times in

178

f

6. Evolutionism: Methods

which. it originated. . . . Its propagation is more easily explained
than its institution. These considerations tend to show the im-
probability of its repeated reproduction in disconnected areas.

Yet Lowie later came to argue that the clan had been independently
re-invented four times in North America alone (see P- 349)!

] It is clear that the classic image of the nineteenth-century evolution-
ist as a remorseless parallelist who insisted on identical evolutionary
stages for all cultures is nothing but a convenient substitute for an
embarrassing reality. In insisting upon the orderliness of sociocultural
evolution, neither Tylor nor Morgan asserted that the history of all
cultures consisted of an identical series of transformations. Divergent
paths of evolution were also recognized, but both Morgan and Tylor
believed that in the Jong run, parallelism and convergence acted to
insure a substantial degrec of global uniformity. On the other hand,
Lowie (1937:59), identifying himself with “historians of culture,”
protested that culture “is far too complex to be reduced to chron-
ological formulae; its development is mainly divergent, not parallel.”
But the opposite of “parallel” can be “mainly divergent” only when
“convergent” and “divergent” evolution are lumped together to form
an historically meaningless dichotomy over and against parallel evolu-
tion. The only historically applicable dichotomy is that which sep-
arates science from nonscience, namely one in which convergence and
parallelism act frequently enough to produce substantial uniformities.
:I‘heA evolutionists, in brief, simply denied that history had been
“mamly divergent”; the equation of that position with one which in-
sists that evolution had consisted mainly of parallel development is an
artifact of a highly biased understanding of the history of anthropo-
IQgica] theory. In ringing up the balance between the historical par-
ticularists and the evolutionists, we must reckon therefore with an
exaggeration by the historical particularists of the amount of disorder
in history, which is as least as much in error as the exaggerated order-
liness discerned by some but not all of the evolutionists. The errors of
the evolutionists were committed on behalf of pushing a science of
culture to (and beyond) its evidential limits; the errors of the his-
torical particularists—with which we deal in later chapters—were com-

mittgd out of a spirit of scientific nihilism, which denied that a science
of history was possible.

179


===== PAGE 95 =====

The Evolutionists:

Results 7

’—[: affirm the strategy of the comparative met}lod as practiced l?y
Morgan, Tylor, Spencer, and their contemporaries is not necessarily
to endorse any of the evolutionary schemes which they advanced_ for
consideration. The important thing is that these schemes contamled
hypotheses which even today can fruitfully orieutArcsearch f‘“d which
can be corrected in the light of new evidence, without being utterly
destroyed in the process. It so happens, however, that many of the
evolutionists’ sequences actually have endured the test of ?ddlt'lonfll
research and stand today as indestructible memorials to their faith in
the scientific method. But both the successes and the failures must be
considered if we are properly to evaluate either the evolutionists or
their twentieth-century critics.

MORGAN'S SCHEME

Since Lewis Henry Morgan’s developmental scheme is'the
most elaborate, embracing the widest spectrum of instftutlops in a
single frame, we may profitably employ it as a focus of discussion and

180

|

7. The Evolutionists: Results

of comparison with competitive theorics. Morgan envisioned human
history as consisting of three major “ethnical periods”—Savagery, Bar-
barism, and Civilization—of which the first two were divided into
subperiods denoted Lower, Middle, and Upper. These ethnical periods
and their subdivisions were defined by the following sequence of
technological innovations:

fruit and nut subsistence

MIDDLE SAVAGERY fish subsistence and fire

UPPER SAVAGERY bow and arrow

LOWER BARBARISM pottery

MIDDLE BARBARISM domestication of animals (Old
World), cultivation of maize,
irrigation, adobe and stone archi-
tecture (New World)

UPPER BARBARISM iron tools

CIVILIZATION phonetic alphabet and writing

LOWER SAVAGERY

In the domain of the family Morgan recognized five successive forms:
(1) The consanguine, based on group marriage within the same gen-
eration (marriage of “brothers and sisters”); (2) the punaluan, based
on a form of group marriage in which brothers were forbidden to
marry sisters; (3) the syndyasmian, or pairing, family, a transitional
form between group marriage and monogamy, in which husband or
wife could end the marriage at will as often as he or she wished; (4)
the patriarchical, a short-lived variety, mainly associated with the He-
brews and early Romans, in which supreme authority was vested in
the male head (polygyny was a secondary feature, present among
Hebrews, absent among Romans); and (5) the monogamian, based
on monogamy and female equality, and progressively resembling the
modern nuclear unit.

Morgan recognized the following sequence of kinship terminologies:
(1) Malayan; (2) Turanian-Ganowanian; and (3) Aryan-Semitic-
Uralian. In modern classifications these correspond  respectively to
the Hawaiian, Iroquois, and Eskimo types.

In the realm of sociopolitical organization, the sequence begins with
the first two stages of the family: a promiscuous horde, succeeded by
one organized into several intermarrying sets of male siblings and fe-
male siblings, corresponding to the punaluan phase of the family and
exemplified for Morgan in the so-called Australian marriage classes
(section and subsections in modern terms). The next phase is dom-
inated by the matrisib. Matrisibs combine to form phratries; phratries
combine to form tribes; tribes combine to form confederacies. All of

181


===== PAGE 96 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

these organizations, from the promiscuous horde to the confederacy,
were founded upon what Morgan called “personal relations,” i.e., upon
sex and kinship. All such arrangements were to be distinguished from
true political organization, which followed next, and which was based
upon the reckoning of rights and obligations in terms of territorial
identity and property relations. The true political units were the town-
ship, the county, and the state.

Morgan’s approach to these sequences involved him in a remarkable
attempt to coordinate and link the stages of each with all the rest. The
overall effect therefore is of a diachronic and synchronic system of un-
precedented structural and chronological scope. The overall movement
from systems based on sex and kinship to those based on territoriality
and property was connected by a series of negative and positive feed-
backs to family form, kinship terminology, and the technological cri-
teria of the ethnical periods.

To begin with the institutions of Lowest Savagery: Morgan’s ex-
planation for the Malayan terminology was that under group marriage
it would be impossible to discover which male on the first ascending
generation was one’s father, hence all potential fathers were called by
the same term. Similarly, since all women on the first ascending gen-
eration were either actual mother or potential “stepmothers,” they
were also designated by a single term. The connection with the tech-
nological criteria was more vague, being based on the assumption that
only a stunted form of mentality could sanction such brutish arrange-
ments as promiscuity and brothersister incest. This low form of sav-
agery was in turn reflected in, and reinforced by, the rudimentary
technological level characteristic of a period in which the use of fire
was unknown. With the introduction of the prohibition on brother-
sister marriage—rtesulting in Morgan’s “punaluan” form of group
marriage—the kinship terminology underwent its first major transfor-
mation. Since brothers and sisters were no longer actual, or potential,
mates, the children of brothers and sisters could no longer be “broth-
ers” and “sisters.” On the other hand, since brothers belonged to a
single marriage group and since sisters all belonged to another mar-
riage group, children of brothers continued to be “brother” and
“sister,” as did children of sisters. This then was the origin of the
cross-sex and parallel-sex uncle and cousin terms of Iroquois termi-
nology. At this point the whole organization of society is thus based
on “sexual” distinctions. At the same time, improvements in tech-
nology are brought about by an increased intellectual capacity, one of
the benefits of climinating brothersister incest. Indeed, Morgan

182

D aul

7. The Evolutionists: Results

(1877:434) described this process as “a good illustration of the op-
cration of the principles of natural selection.” Heightened intelligence
now prepares the way for the invention of the matrisib, a device that
consolidates the gain of the punaluan system and further widens the
scope of incest prohibitions to include all persons with common an-
cestry through females. The clan would be matrilineal at first because
W}'ICU it came into existence the family had not yet reached syndyas-
mian, or pairing, form. Since paternity was uncertain, descent could
not be traced through males. One’s mother, however, is never in
doubt; hence, descent was traced exclusively through females. Arising
in Savagery, the matriclan gradually became the central feature of
primitive social organization. It lasts all through Barbarism until the
beginning of political socicty and into the early stages of Civilization.
Its undoing is brought about by the same force that brings in the
monogamian family, patrilineality, and political society, namely the
growth of property. The latter, in turn, is a result of the gradual im-
provement in the “arts of subsistence.” The clan and the monogamian
family are opposed in principle. One stands for the merging of the
nuclear family in the clan collective, the other for independent family
units. Similarly, the organization on the basis of territory is opposed
to organization on the basis of kin. Large populations in dense aggre-
gates cannot be organized on a kin basis. Propertied classes put an
end to the democracy of clan life. But the inheritance of property
promotes the stability of the male within the family (he “wants”
heirs); thus in its last phases the descent rule of the clan shifts from
matrilineality to patrilineality. But this is a shortlived form because
the increase in property-mediated relations at the same time acts to
destroy the clan and to usher in the era of political society. Finally,
with the establishment of the monogamian family, the Iroquois ter-
n'fmology, last of the classificatory systems, gives way to the more
highly descriptive categories of the Aryan system.

WEAKNESSES OF MORGAN'S SCHEME

It should be pointed out at once that the interconnectedness
of the several sequences is far from perfect. The scheme outlined
above permits several major institutional transformations to occur
without corresponding modifications in related domains. Thus, for
Morgan, neither the syndyasmian family nor the patrisib have an effect
on the kinship terminology, yet it is now generally agreed that there is
an important correlation between patrilineality and Omaha systems

183


===== PAGE 97 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and between matrilineality and Crow systems.! According to Mor-
gan, Iroquois terminology was introduced before clans came on the
scene, and it continued unmodified during the long period of the
clan’s ascendancy. The most important lapses to which attention
should be drawn, however, are those involving Morgan’s evident fail-
ure to discover a systematic relationship between techno-economic and
social structural parameters. All of the prepolitical structural arrange-
ments of family, terminology, and clan relate to subsistence only
through the vague intermediation of a biocultural principle of natural
selection. That is, none of the specific differences and similarities of
primitive social structure are related to specific innovations in the
techno-environmental or techno-economic variables. It is only at the
point of transition from kinship-organized to politically organized so-
ciety that Morgan’s scheme achieves anything resembling full internal
coherence. This circumstance will be recalled when we turn to the
question of whether Morgan can be credited, as Marx and Engels
claimed, with an independent discovery of the materialist interpreta-
tion of history. For the moment let it suffice to say that it is doubtful
that such an interpretation can be sustained even with respect to
Morgan’s transition from social to political organization. One may be
certain, however, that it does not apply to the changes that precede
the emergence of the state, since, as we have just seen, the several
domains of the primitive sociocultural system are not closely inter-
determined.

In the light of almost a century of additional research and theory,
most of Morgan’s sequences must be discarded as either false or in-
adequate. Even his technological sequence contains drastic errors. To
begin with the “nuts and fruits” of Lower Savagery, it is now known
that man has been a hunter for a million years or more. “Fish sub-
sistence” is pre-eminently a matter of local adaptation and cannot be
assigned a definite chronological position with respect to hunting. The
introduction of the bow and arrow did not necessarily entail decisive
shifts in the “ratio of technological efficiency”: food calories output/
food calories input. Paleolithic groups which depended on spearing,
bola-throwing, surrounds, and simple gathering were probably already

1 Crow and Omaha terminologies tend to reflect a sociological emphasis upon
membership in unilineal descent groups. The classifying principle of lineality
overrides that of generation. Thus in Crow, a woman and all of her descendants
through females are referred to by a single term, while in Omaha, a man and
all of his descendants through males are referred to by a single term, regardless
of how many generations are involved. For example, in Crow, father’s sister, father’s
sister’s daughter and father’s sister’s daughter’s daughter, etc., are classed together.

184

7. The Evolutionists: Results

capable of reaching a population size which was determined largely by
the rate of reproduction of the natural biota rather than by a particular
hunting and gathering technology. One of Morgan’s worst ethno-
graphic errors was the assignment of the proto-state agricultural Hawai-
ians to Middle Savagery because they lacked the bow and arrow.
Pottery also turned out to be a poor choice as the diagnostic of the
transition between Savagery and Barbarism. By emphasizing pottery,
Morgan failed to give sufficient credit to the revolutionary significance
of the introduction of agriculture—control over the rate of reproduc-
tion of the natural biota—and its consequent new possibilities for hu-
man life. The use of the domestication of animals as the criterion of
Middle Barbarism was also ill-fated. It is simply contrary to archaeolog-
ical evidence to posit a significant time interval between the domestica-
tion of plants and the domestication of animals—both occur in the
earliest levels of the Near and Middle Eastern Neolithic. The emphasis
upon iron tools for Upper Barbarism was responsible for another of
Morgan’s great disasters: the assignment of the Aztec to the same
“ethnical period” as the Iroquois. In addition, Civilizations were at-
tained in both the Old and New Worlds long before the introduction
of iron. And the same may be said of Morgan’s last criterion—the
phonetic alphabet. The Incas managed an empire without using any
kind of writing system.

Despite these inadequacies, it cannot be said that Morgan’s tech-
nological series is today without rescarch significance. Certainly, its
historical contribution cannot be challenged, since it served to stimu-
late the search for better ways of identifying and conceptualizing the
innovations responsible for major increments in food production, pop-
ulation density, and population size. Morgan’s emphasis upon techno-
economic factors for demarcating major evolutionary trends remains
viable as a strategy. His “ethnical periods,” shorn of their biological
significance and equipped with nonpejorative labels, are probably ac-
cepted by the majority of contemporary American anthropologists as
a valid, if overgeneralized, taxonomy of cultural types. As Eleanor Lea-
cock (1963:1xi) has noted:

In spite of the disfavor into which Morgan’s work fell, his general
sequence of stages has been written into our understanding of pre-
history and interpretation of archaeological remains, as a glance at
any introductory anthropology text will indicate.

Thus Morgan’s Savagery is roughly equivalent to what are frequently
called hunting and gathering societies, while Barbarism is more or less
what most anthropologists have in mind when they discuss horticul-

185


===== PAGE 98 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theor The Evolutionists: Results
polog y 7-

tural, “tribal,” and pre- or proto-state societics. Finally, Civilization as
defined by a stratified, state-level organization is very much in current
use. Of course, it is another question, not faced by Leacock and other
Morganists, whether in this attenuated form, Morgan’s scheme was
notably more advanced than its cighteenth-century antecedents.

The least satisfactory of Morgan’s institutional sequences is that
which is concerned with the family and kinship terminology. Specula-
tions concerning a period of promiscuity have been deprived of all the
inferential bits of evidence to which Morgan was able to appeal. No
one today, despite numerous field studies of monkey and great ape
mating patterns would seriously venture to suggest what kind of mat-
ing preferences were characteristic of the transitional hominids. Mor-
gan’s reconstruction of a stage of promiscuity rested on what he took
to be evidence of forms of group marriage among the Hawaiians and
the Australian aborigines. This evidence was spurious, and all other
ethnographic cases in support of group marriage or the consanguine
family have been conclusively disproved. In its place, the universality
of pairing arrangements accompanied by incest prohibitions within the
nuclear family—cohabiting adult male and female and adult female’s
children—have been established. Morgan’s explanation for Hawaiian
terminology as an adaptation to the consanguine family is thus totally
devoid of evidential substance. The rout suffered by this explanation
was all the more humiliating because of Morgan’s assignment of the
highly stratified Hawaiians to the status of Middle Savagery, far below
the egalitarian Iroquois. The picture of monogamy as a condition
reached only after numberless generations of the struggle to perfect
the balance between the sexes is contradicted by the (serial) mono-
gamic bliss enjoyed by the majority of the members of every known
human society. Morgan’s explanation of Iroquois terminology was also
adversely affected by the rout of the consanguine family since the pro-
hibition on brother-sister marriage obviously long antedated the de-
velopment of the cross-parallel distinction. The repercussions extend
still further to take in the explanation of the matriclan, whose inven-
tion and spread were linked by Morgan to alleged biological advantages
of exogamy. Here, even if we grant the highly dubious hypothesis that
local exogamy conferred direct biological advantages, it still remains
difficult to see how clan exogamy, which affects parallel cousins but
not cross-cousins, would be much of an improvement over the earlier
nuclear family taboos.

The most bedeviled part of Morgan’s kinship sequences was his in-
sistence that the matriclan was chronologically prior to the patriclan.
Here Morgan was a participant in one of the most heated and uscless

186

discussions in the history of the social sciences. He and his supporters
were opposed by an equally numerous group, who argued for the re-
verse priority. Both groups were wrong, constituting one of those rare
cases of diametrically opposed positions about which it is impossible
to say that either contained a grain of truth. Descent rules, as they
have come to be understood, reflect residence patterns; and residence
patterns are primarily a matter of local techno-environmental and
techno-economic conditions. Groups with similar ratios of technolog-
ical efficiency and similar overall quanta of production may thus very
well exhibit contrasting descent rules. The occurrence of matrilineal
descent has no bearing on the status of women, since mother’s brother
rather than mother is generally the head of the descent group. Fur-
thermore, the idea that matrilineality is a result of confusion concern-
ing paternity is wholly confounded by the numerous cases of primitive
peoples who deny that the male is necessary for conception but who
regard themselves as descended from a line of males, and by the uni-
versal recognition of some degree of kinship with both maternal and
paternal relatives, regardless of the nature of the unilineal rule.

ENDURING ASPECTS OF MORGAN'S
SCHEME

Despite this profusion of errors, there remain several valuable
suggestions in Morgan’s approach to the evolution of the family, kin-
ship terminology, and kinship groups. As we shall see, Morgan’s basic
and original contention that kinship terminology was produced by
different forms of the family and of group organization has been vin-
dicated and constitutes to this day the basic premise of innumerable
books and articles. Furthermore, Morgan’s description of the egali-
tarian clan marks the beginning of the serious study of unilinear
descent groups.

A much more valuable contribution is to be found in Morgan’s
treatment of the emergence of stratified and state-organized societies.
T}}C pervasiveness of kinship statuses on the pre-state level; the with-
ering away of egalitarian unilinear groups and the rise of endogamous
castes, classes, and minorities; and the role of property in the develop-
ment of stratified groups are all foreshadowed in Morgan’s scheme.
Once again, however, there were numerous deficiencies brought about
by faulty data and by an overly mechanical pursuit of the contrast
Pﬂtween social and political principles. It is clear that kinship as an
ideology of identity is not incompatible with the formation of the
State. It is rather to be said that with the development of marked in-

187



===== PAGE 99 =====

Rl

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 7. The Evolutionists: Results

equalities of access to strategic resources, the ancient principles of
kinship (affinity through marriage and descent) are pressed into serv-
ing functions which hitherto were inimical to sociocultural survival.
In other words, stratified forms of kinship groupings take the place of
egalitarian ones. In a similar vein, it should be noted that the principle
of territoriality is also present on both state and pre-state levels, but its
functions are transfigured in the change from one to the other. Citizen-
ship in the modern nation state, for example, depends on a mixture
of territorial and kinship principles. It is true that children of New
Yorkers living in California are not entitled to special privileges when
they visit New York. Yet the child of a United States citizen is a
United States citizen wherever he is born. And of course kinship still
determines the basic pattern of the inheritance of property.

Much fruitful historical research was stimulated by Morgan’s sugges-
tion that unilinear descent groups had existed among the Greek and
Roman proto-states. While Morgan’s Greek and Roman evidence is
probably best regarded as indicating some form of nonunilinear group-
ing, the fact that scholars began to think of the predecessors of the
Greceks as being something like the Iroquois had an immensely salutary
effect upon culture-bound Euro-American historiography.

It will not be possible here to review all the schemes of universal
history produced during the period 1860-go. The kinds of errors upon
which they were based are well illustrated in Morgan’s case, and little
beyond an antiquarian curiousity would be served by providing their
details. A brief exposition of some additional sequences, however,
will be found useful as a preliminary to the next matter to be consid-
ered, namely the nature of the causal processes to which the evolu-
tionists attributed their developmental panoramas.

BACHOFEN'S SCHEME

One of the wildest schemes from the point of view of causal-
ity is that of J. J. Bachofen. Social life begins with a period of sexual
promiscuity identified by Bachofen as “hetairism.” This was the time
when the lawless materialist principle governed mankind. Only ma-
terial motherhood can be ascertained, and women are exposed to the
lust and sexual tyranny of men. The women now struggle to liberate
themselves. By virtue of their religiosity, the weaker sex is able to
subdue the stronger one, for Bachofen believed: “Religion is the only
efficient lever of all civilization. Each elevation and depression of hu-
man life has its origin in a movement which begins in this supreme
department” (BACHOFEN 1861:xiv, quoted in HOWARD 1904:42).

188

Mother-right or gynocracy now reigns. Female deities preside, the left
is favored over the right, the earth over the sky, moon over sun, the
youngest over the oldest. Women establish the family, oblige men to
marry, and progressively take on more Amazonian qualities. But the
reign of the gynocrats is founded on an inferior religious principle—
the material tie between mother and child symbolized in the Earth-
Mother deity. The men now seck to reverse the balance. At first they
merely seek to assert themselves by pretending they are mothers.
Hence, the origin of the couvade. Soon they rise to a new and higher
principle of religion, ushering in the third epoch, that of spirit. This
highest principle of life is based upon fatherhood as opposed to
motherhood.

It was the assertion of fatherhood which delivered the mind from
natural appearances, and when this was successfully achieved, hu-
man existence was raised above the laws of material life. The
principle of motherhood is common to all species of animal life,
but man goes beyond this tie in giving the pre-eminence to the
power of procreation, and thus becomes conscious of his higher
vocation. . . . In the paternal and spiritual principle he breaks
through the bonds of tellurism and looks upward to the higher
regions of the cosmos. Victorious fatherhood thus becomes as dis-
tinctly connected with the heavenly light as prolific motherhood
is with the teeming earth [BAcHOFEN 1861 :xxvii, quoted in HOWARD
1904:43]-
Morgan and Bachofen exerted a reciprocal influence on each other.
Bachofen’s ideas concerning the priority of matilineal descent and
gynocracy are incorporated in Ancient Society. Bachofen benefited
from the comparison of the classical matriclan with the Iroquois, and
he expressed his gratitude by dedicating a book of essays (Bachofen
1966; orig. 1880) to Morgan.

MAINE'S SCHEME

It was symptomatic of the whole motherright, father-right
controversy that in the very year that Bachofen’s Mother Right was
published, Sir Henry Maine’s Ancient Law also appeared, sctting forth
the proposal that in its original form, the family was patrilineal and
Patriarchical. Lowie (1937:51-52) has championed the view that
Maine’s evolutionary sequences, unlike those of Bachofen, Morgan,
and McLennan and Lubbock, were not intended to embrace a uni-
versally valid scheme, and that his words of homage “to continuous
Sequence, inflexible order, and eternal law in history” were nothing

189



===== PAGE 100 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

but a “sop to regnant fashion.” While it is true that Maine explicitly
rejected the idea “that human society went everywhere through the
same series of changes,” similar explicit denials have already been
demonstrated for the other so-called unilinear evolutionists. On this
issue J. W. Burrow’s (1966:164) analysis is to be preferred:

Because Maine was not a systematic thinker, and because he
never fully recognized the conflict between the historical and sci-
entific elements in his intellectual equipment, it would be pos-
sible, by selective quotation, to make out a convincing case for
either view of him—that he was a legal historian with perhaps too
great a fondness for cross-comparison and “brilliant” generaliza-
tion, or that he was a rigid evolutionary determinist. The only way
to give a picture of his work that approaches accuracy is to try to
give due weight to both aspects without pretending that they are
wholly compatible.

Part of the confusion arises from Maine’s original lack of interest in
what he regarded as the backward races of mankind. While he was
no less interested in the overall direction of history than was Morgan,
he resembled Hegel, Comte, and Condorcet in believing that a
knowledge of the history of the “progressive” nations would suffice to
discern the “laws of history.” Maine’s (1883:284) interest focused on
“the communities which were destined to civilization.” In Ancient
Law (1861:23) he says, “I confine myself in what follows to the pro-
gressive societies.” These societies consisted exclusively of “Aryan”
peoples, for “civilization is nothing more than a name for the old order
of the Aryan world, . . .” (MAINE 1887:231). At the time of his
original formulation of the patriarchal theory, Maine simply took it
for granted that there was no need to discuss the origin of institutions
in a framework larger than that of the Aryans; he could thus propound
a theory manifestly restricted to Europe and India and at the same
time make it sound as if he were referring to all of humanity. How
else explain the statement also found in Ancient Law: “The effect
of the evidence derived from comparative jurisprudence is to establish
the view of the primeval condition of the human race which is known
as the Patriarchal Theory” (ibid.: 118). Regardless of whether Maine
initially intended to restrict this patriarchal theory to the “Aryans,”
his contemporaries certainly reacted as if that was not the case. Mc-
Lennan (1865:115), for example, attacked Maine as one who “has
been unable to conceive how human beings could be grouped on any
principle more primitive than that of the patriarchal system. . ..”
Maine’s response to this was not to say that his work dealt only with
a restricted portion of mankind and that he was unable to conceive of

190

7. The Evolutionists: Results

matrilineality in the history of the “Aryan” peoples. Instead, he chose
to counterattack by casting doubt upon the matriarchal theory, sug-
gesting that the institutions which McLennan and Lubbock had at-
tributed to ancient man were cither falsely described or the result of
recent changes.

Sir John Lubbock and Mr. McLennan conceive themselves to
have shown that the first steps of mankind towards civilisation
were taken from a condition in which assemblages of men fol-
lowed practices which are not found to occur universally even in
animal nature. Here I have only to observe that many of the
phenomena of barbarism adverted to by these writers are found in
India. The usages appealed to are the usages of . . . wild tribes

. now for many years . . . under British observation, . . .
The evidence, therefore, [from India] . . . is very superior in-
deed to the slippery testimony concerning savages which is gath-
ered from travellers’ tales. . . . Much which I have personally
heard in India bears out the caution which I gave as to the reserve
with which all speculations on the antiquity of human usage
should be received. Practices represented as of immemorial antig-
uity, and universally characteristic of the infancy of mankind,
have been described to me as having been for the first time re-
sorted to in our own days through the mere pressure of external
circumstances or novel temptations [MAINE 1887:16-17].

It seems literally to have been the case that Maine was unable to
conceive how matriclans could constitute a viable form of social or-
ganization. Thus in a letter to Morgan, commenting on Ancient So-
ciety, Maine laments that he has been unable to find a copy of
Morgan’s The League of Iroquois and takes the opportunity to ask a
number of questions centering on his “difficulty in conceiving
[‘female’ gentes] as localized or combattant bodies” (MAINE, quoted
in STERN 1931:141—42). There is good reason to suspect, therefore, that
the sophisticated historical approach with which Lowie credits Maine
is more a result of ethnographic naiveté than of methodological rigor.

Maine’s most important contribution lies in his suggestion that kin-
ship had provided the basic principle of organization of primitive so-
ciety. The primeval groups are families such as Homer attributed to
the Cyclops in which a despotic father exercises absolute power over
his wives and children. These families aggregated through legal fic-
tions to form larger groups without surrendering their autonomy.
Hence, “the unit of an ancient society was the Family, of a modern
society the Individual” (1861:121). Thenceforth, “the movement of
the progressive socicties has been uniform” with respect “to the grad-

191



===== PAGE 101 =====

. oo

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

7. The Evolutionists: Results

ual dissolution of family dependency and the growth of individual
obligation in its place” (ibid.:163). This movement is examined by
Maine with respect to a number of related transitions expressed in
terms of useful dichotomies: Family-organized society is fixed-status
society; individualized society is free-contract society. The movement
is from status to contract. Family-organized society owns property in
common; individual-organized society embodies the growth of private
ownership. In the most primitive stage of law, all injuries may be
compensated by agreement of the families involved, and civil and
criminal law are confounded; later, certain injuries involve only in-
dividuals while others are crimes against the whole society.

CONVERGENCE TOWARD THE FOLK-
URBAN CONTINUUM

Maine’s emphasis on the progressive individualization of so-
ciety preceded Morgan’s treatment of the rise of the state in terms of
the contrast between relations through persons and relations through
territory; and there probably was some influence which flowed from
the former to the latter. But judging from the almost simultaneous
appearance of several similar formulations, the idea must have been
very much “in the air.” Thus in 1887, Ferdinand Ténnies published
his Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft, in which the transition from
feudal to capitalist society was described in terms of the following
kinds of contrasts: confident, intimate personal relations versus rela-
tions between strangers; moral, collective, cooperative, joint bonds
versus independent, depersonalized bonds; reciprocities, barter, and
exchange versus purchase and contract; and divine sanction versus
secular sanctions. In the next decade, essentially the same theme was
elaborated by Emile Durkheim under the rubrics “mechanical” ver-
sus “organic” solidarity (see p. 466).

During the Boasian period, when the terms “primitive” and “civi-
lized” were regarded as offensive to the principle of cultural relativism,
interest in the gemeinschaft-gesellschaft distinction waned among
anthropologists. Among sociologists influenced by Durkheim and Max
Weber, however, this dichotomy was kept alive, at least as far as
synchronic comparisons were concerned. In the 1940’s the idea finally
circled back into anthropology in the form of Robert Redfield’s
(1947) folk-urban dichotomy, the vaguely evolutionistic contrast be-
tween preliterate, homogencous, religious, familial, personalized prim-
itive and peasant communities and the literate, heterogeneous, secular,
individualized, depersonalized urban society. It is interesting to note

192

that Redfield, while acknowledging his debt to Maine, Tonnies, and
Durkheim, makes no reference to Morgan. Yet Morgan’s treatment of
the transition from the personal to impersonal, kinship to political
organization is not inferior to those which are acknowledged. Herbert
Spencer’s conception of the transition from the military to industrial
types of society, with the increase in heterogeneity that for Spencer
marked all evolutionary processes, probably also belongs in this same
set of proposals. Finally, it should be noted that none of the afore-
mentioned folk-urban theorists seem to have been aware of the fact
that Marx had anticipated their formulations as early as the 1848
Communist Manifesto (see p. 226).

MC LENNAN’S SCHEME

The scheme that most rivaled Morgan’s was that proposed by
the Edinburgh lawyer John McLennan. McLennan’s sequences, like
Morgan’s, began with a horde living, if not in strict promiscuity, at
least in a state of indifference concerning marriage rules. The mem-
bers of the horde, speculating on their origin, decided that they were
all descended from an animal ancestor. This was the origin of “to-
temism.”

The primal human population lived under harsh conditions and
were subjected to an intense struggle for existence both within and
between groups. In McLennan’s (1865:165) scheme, the foremost ef-

fect of this “struggle for food and security” was an alleged prevalence
of female infanticide:

As braves and hunters were required and valued, it would be the
interest of every horde to rear, when possible, its healthy male
children. It would be less its interest to rear females, as they
would be less capable of self-support, and of contributing, by their
exertions to the common good. In this lies the only explanation
which can be accepted of the origin of those systems of female
infanticide still existing, the discovery of which from time to time,
in out of the way places, so shocks our humanity.

The shortage of women within the group now led to the sharing of
one female among several males (the origin of polyandry). At the
same time an effort was made to compensate for the paucity of adult
women by capturing those who remained in neighboring hordes. This
Practice was, so to speak, habit-forming; it eventually was regarded as
a necessity that women be taken from other groups: “In time it came
to be considered improper, because it was unusual, for a man to marry
3 woman of his own group” (ibid.:289). This was the origin of “exog-

193



===== PAGE 102 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

amy,” a term first coined by McLennan, as was its opposite “endog-
amy.” Among the wife-sharing group of men, paternity could not be
determined. Hence, when descent first came to be reckoned, it was
necessarily in the female line.

In later versions, McLennan (1876:57ff.) shifted his ground and
postulated that female descent originated before wife-capture and
exogamy. He saw endogamous groups crystallizing around “primitive
mothers.” These broke up into separate “bands,” which maintained
their totem identity even while dispersed. Now began the period of
infanticide and wife-stealing. But the bands with the same totem re-
garded it as a sacred obligation to refrain from stealing each other’s
women. They were thus “obliged to obtain them by capture from
groups of a stock different from their own.” McLennan recognized that
there was something wrong with jumping immediately to exogamy
because marrying out became a habit. But his attempt to improve the
causal linkage added to the overburdened hypotheses. As the capture
of women became more and more prevalent, the concept of marriage
took on the meaning of cohabitation with a captured woman. This
happened because cohabitation with a woman of one’s own group
came to be regarded as something other than marriage, namely, as a sin,
equivalent to the theft and capture of one of the females who, while
of another local group, was descended from the same totem:

If, then, we conceive that . . . the name of “wife” came to be
synonymous with a subject and enslaved woman in the power of
her captor or captors, and the name of marriage to be applied to a
man’s relation to such a woman as possessor of her, the origin of
exogamy becomes apparent. Since a subject and enslaved wife
would, in the circumstances of the time, be attainable only by
capture, marriage would be possible only through capture, and the
prohibition which, as we have seen, would apply to capture, would
apply to marriage. Marriage with a woman of the same stock
would be a crime and a sin. It would be incest [ibid.:65].

Wife-capture now led to a transition from polyandry to polygyny, since
men who were successful in their raiding activity started to accumu-
late harems. At first the captured wives were shared with one’s broth-
ers. Later the only sharing tolerated was after death; hence the origin
of the levirate. The local bands now began to fill up with marriageable
female descendants of “foreign” women. This permitted exogamic
marriages to be arranged within the group by purchase and mock
capture. At the same time the end of polyandry meant that paternity
could be reckoned. Thus, with the growth of property, patrilineal de-
scent replaced matrilineal descent. This once again made all the women

194

7. The Evolutionists: Results

and men in the group members of the same descent line. Some groups
now proceeded to a patrilineal phase of exogamy—of marriage by
capture all over again—while others became endogamous. McLennan’s
scheme also briefly encompassed the origin of the state. Like Maine
and Morgan, he held that the continued growth of the importance of
private property brought about a reduction of kinship relations out-
side of the nuclear family. Hence, the rise of the state was accom-
panied by the decay of the tribe and other kinship groupings.

THE MORGAN-MC LENNAN
CONTROVERSY

Despite their agreement, reached independently, on the stage
of promiscuity and the priority of matrilineal over patrilineal descent,
McLennan and Morgan became embroiled in a bitter controversy.
McLennan sought to destroy Morgan's scheme by belittling the
significance of kin terminological systems. He denied their sociological
significance, much as Kroeber was to do years later, asserting that they
were mere modes of addressing persons that had no bearing on family
or descent. McLennan displayed remarkable “cool” for a man who had
never seen an Indian. Morgan responded with a long note in Ancient
Society dedicated to a critique of McLennan’s entire scheme. He
successfully exposed McLennan’s confusion concerning the nature of
the exogamous groupings which were supposed to have taken wives
from each other. Exogamy and endogamy, Morgan pointed out, could
very well exist side by side. The clan was exogamous, but the tribe as
a whole could be endogamous. Although Morgan sought to obliterate
the two terms, his critique helped to assure their survival.

One of the most interesting points made by Morgan was that Mc-
Lennan had erroneously construed matrilineal descent, a mode of
reckoning clan affiliation, as the entire realm of kinship. Morgan cor-
rectly insisted that his systems of consanguinity and affinity proved
the existence of bilateral reckoning of kinship regardless of the nature
of the descent rule employed.

The great heyday of evolutionary schemes was like that; many val-
uable suggestions mixed indiscriminately with an equally large num-
ber of worthless ones. The materials of criticism were easy to come
by; everyone could see logical and empirical flaws in his rival’s argu-
ments. The ingenious reformulations poured out in endless torrents. It
was an inefficient method; but the procedure was not hopeless. The
most absurd sequences were gradually eliminated as the issues subject
to continuous controversy came into sharper focus.

195



===== PAGE 103 =====

Ralll

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 7. The Evolutionists: Results

MATRIARCHY, POLYANDRY, TOTEMISM

Consider, for example, the advances made with respect to the
concept of matriarchy. Bachofen’s formulations of mother-right had
assumed that matrilineal descent was merely a concomitant of the
more fundamental fact of gynocracy. Thus, Bachofen and his fol-
lower J. Lippert (1884) accepted the myth of the Amazons as a literal
truth. But many writers who accepted a strengthened role for women
within the family under matrilineal descent rejected the idea of a po-
litical and military gynocracy. Tylor (188g), Charles Letourncau
(1888), and Ernst Grosse (1896) all made this point. It was also, of
course, implied in Morgan’s treatment of the Iroquois clan. L. Dargun
(1883), Carl Starcke (1889), and Edward Westermarck (1891) went
further and insisted that male domination of the family as well as of
political life was compatible with matrilineal descent. According to
Dargun, the distinction between power and kinship was an indispens-
able key to the evolution of the family. Thus, G. E. Howard
(1904:46), without assistance from the Boasians, could conclude:

In short, if among many peoples at some stage of progress re-
search has clearly demonstrated the existence of mother-right, it
has just as clearly shown that the notion of gynocracy, of a period
of female supremacy, is without historical foundation.

None of Bachofen’s critics, with the exception perhaps of Morgan,
understood that the locus of authority under matrilineal descent was
vested in mother’s brother rather than in father. This understanding
was not definitively achieved until Malinowski’s Trobriand studies. Yet,
it cannot be said that the evolutionists had made no headway as a
result of their armchair deliberations.

To take another example, McLennan’s fanciful notions concerning
polyandry had also receded almost to oblivion by the end of the cen-
tury. Both Spencer (1896, I) and Morgan (1877) adduced empirical
evidence indicating that polyandry was a rare form of marriage, asso-
ciated with highly localized conditions. Later, these objections were
elaborated by Starcke and Westermarck.

McLennan’s most cffective disciple was the Cambridge orientalist
W. Robertson Smith, who employed McLennan’s scheme to interpret
the sociological history of kinship and marriage among the Arabs and
Hebrews. With their strong patriarchal, monotheistic, and polygamist
traditions, no cultures would have seemed, on the face of things, less
propitious for a theory that emphasized matrilineality, polyandry, and
totemism. Yet Smith (1903, orig. 1885) managed to find circum-

196

stantial evidence to show that all of these unlikely institutions had
actually existed among the “Semites.” Regardless of the value of
Smith’s reconstruction of the primordial phases of Semitic history, his
description of the social structure of classical Islam benefited greatly
from McLennan’s sociological arguments and concepts. Smith’s great-
est achievements, however, lay in the realm of comparative religious
institutions (see p. 207). Thus, even McLennan’s explanation of
exogamy as a remnant of wife-capture had its positive aspects. Indeed,
Napoleon Chagnon’s (1966) recent study of the relationship between
exogamy, marriage, and warfare among the Indians of the Brazil-
Venezuela border promises to lend new dignity to McLennan’s more
lurid speculations.

THE ORIGIN OF INCEST TABOOS

Tt should be remembered that McLennan’s analysis of exogamy
and endogamy initiated the discussion of the origin of the universal
incest prohibitions within the nuclear family. This problem quite
legitimately continues to occupy the attention of modern anthropo-
logy, and no amount of doctrinal particularism will suffice to quiet our
urge to understand why these taboos are so powerful and ubiquitous.

Despite the support of McLennan’s theory of wife-capture by Rob-
ertson Smith, Lubbock, and Spencer, rival explanations of exogamic
taboos had won the field by the end of the century. Morgan’s approach
was more influential. It was premised on the alleged biologically de-
leterious results of close inbreeding. According to Morgan, the
brother-sister taboo arose from a realization that inbreeding was bio-
logically unsound. The exogamy of the clan arose shortly afterward and
represented a continuation of the same “reformatory movement.” Clan
exogamy and the brother-sister taboo then spread as a result of migra-
tion and natural selection. The trouble with this view is that clan
exogamy is correlated with preferential cross-cousin marriage, a rule
that promotes rather than hinders in-breeding within a small group.
Another difficulty with Morgan’s explanation is how to account for
the taboos separating father from daughter and mother from son.
Nonetheless, Morgan’s focus upon the biological consequences of in-
breeding remains a respectable minority position. It is not inconceiv-
able that the nuclear family taboos arose from a combination of
biological and cultural advantages consequent upon the introduction
of incest prohibitions within the nuclear family, while descent group
€xogamy arose from separate and primarily cultural advantages
(which in turn had biological consequences).

197

i
i


===== PAGE 104 =====

.l

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 7. The Evolutionists: Results

It was Tylor who pointed the way toward an understanding of these
additional cultural advantages. For Tylor (1889:267-68) exogamy is
the primitive mode of “alliance” and of “political self-preservation.”
“Among tribes of low culture there is but one means known of keep-
ing up permanent alliance, and that means is inter-marriage.” In this
form, Tylor's theory underlies, or is convergent with, the vast field of
kinship studies which stress marriage alliances between groups as the
key to primitive social structure. Thus, great weight has been placed
upon the alliance function of marriage by Lévi-Strauss and his follow-
ers (see pp. 499ff.). Unlike the latter, however, Tylor stressed the sur-
vival value of the exchange of women. The alternative has been be-
tween “marrying-out” or “being killed out”:

Exogamy . . . enabling a growing tribe to keep itself compact
by constant union between its spreading clans, enables it to over-
match any number of small, intermarrying groups, isolated and
helpless. Again and again in the world’s history, savage tribes
must have had plainly before their minds the simple practical al-
ternative between marrying-out and being killed out [ibid.:267].

Leslie White (1949a:316ff.) has made Tylor’s ideas the basis of his
own theory of incest prohibition by applying Tylor’s formula to the
family as a basic unit, independent of, and prior to, the clan. “A way
[exogamy] was found to unite families with one another, and social
evolution as a human affair was launched upon its career” (ibid.).

Another important line of inquiry bearing on the explanation of ex-
ogamy and the incest taboos started with the nuclear family as a pri-
mordial given and went on to stress the disruptive effect of endogamy.
This line was explored first by Carl N. Starcke (19o1; orig. 1889), who
contended that marriage between son and mother or brother and sister
would endanger the father’s authority. This suggestion figures in the
modern incest theories of Malinowski and Murdock. New and impor-
tant psychological dimensions to the problem were contributed by
Edward Westermarck (1891), foremost opponent of the Morgan-Mc-
Lennan-Tylor-Lubbock theory of original promiscuity. Westermarck fol-
lowed Darwin, Charles S. Wake, and Starcke in arguing that some
form of pairing must have been primordial in the human species since
it occurs among the primates and even among lower organisms. Accord-
ing to Westermarck, there is a universal dread of incest based upon an
instinctual human disgust for sexual relations with individuals who
have been reared together at close quarters. This instinctual repulsion
in turn was established within the species as a result of natural selec-
tion conferring adaptive advantages on outbreeding families.

198

Through natural selection an instinct must have been developed,
powerful enough, as a rule, to prevent injurious unions. This in-
stinct displays itself simply as an aversion on the part of individu-
als to union with others with whom they have lived, but as these
are for the most part blood-relations the result is the survival of
the fittest [WESTERMARCK 1894:546].

Westermarck’s espousal of natural selection greatly narrows the gap
between him and Morgan. Although Morgan does not refer to an in-
stinctual dread of incest, the advantages of the punaluan family are
“carried in the blood” like all of man’s other great innovations. For
both Westermarck and Morgan, the incest regulations in the clan
and community are outward extensions of the brothersister pro-
hibition. Westermarck’s suggestion that there is a biopsychological
component in the nuclear-family taboos cannot be dismissed. Some
form of imprinting may be involved or, as Arthur Wolf (1966) has
suggested, there may be something in the socialization process itself
which supports Westermarck’s view of the inability of persons reared
together to enjoy sexual communion.

THE EVOLUTION OF RELIGION

Morgan’s grand scheme of institutional evolution, so pro-
foundly optimistic with respect to the potency of the comparative
method, systematically avoided the reconstruction of the sequences
connected with the evolution of religion. Morgan’s reasons for not
treating magico-religious phenomena are highly instructive with re-
gard to the nature of his overall concept of sociocultural causality, to
which we turn in a moment. Religion, said Morgan, is just too irra-
tional to be understood by scientific means:

The growth of religious ideas is environed with such intrinsic dif-
ficulties that it may never receive a perfectly satisfactory exposition.
Religion deals so largely with the imaginative and emotional
nature, and consequently with such uncertain elements of knowl-
edge, that all primitive religions are grotesque and to some extent
unintelligible. This subject also falls without the plan of this work
excepting as it may prompt incidental suggestions [MORGAN 1877:5].

The attempt to describe evolutionary sequences for religion, far
from being avoided, was actually given priority by most of the other
evolutionists. There was ample precedent for this attempt in the En-
lightenment doctrine that man’s systems of belief were steadily mov-
ing toward higher forms of rationality which implicd agnosticism if not

199

|
i
i


===== PAGE 105 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

atheism as an end state. Comte’s theological, metaphysical, and scien-
tific stages of thought continued this tradition into the nineteenth
century. The theory that religious belief and institutions had under-
gone a natural evolution might be thought subversive with respect to
revealed religion. Yet many of the late-nineteenth-century theorists
not only clung to their childhood faiths but derived from them the
added satisfaction that came from being convinced that their beliefs
were demonstrably the highest form of religion. It was only among the
Marxists that the evolution of religion was once again taken unambigu-
ously to the end point postulated by D'Holbach, Helvetius, and
Diderot.

Bachofen’s scheme, it will be recalled, included not only the evolu-
tion of social organization, but also a parallel and functionally related
evolution of religious ideas. Indeed for Bachofen it was a series of re-
ligious reforms that set the direction of history. Turning to McLennan,
we may note that his treatment of religion was quite thin, despite the
fact that his use of the concept of totemism led to an extraordinary
outpouring of anthropological treatises. McLennan, it will be recalled,
regarded the invention of totemism as an essential part of the explana-
tion of the origin of exogamy. This is the aspect of McLennan’s
scheme that best exhibits the muddled views of sociocultural causality
with which he and the other evolutionists were content to operate.

After Bachofen, a sustained treatment of the evolution of religion
was first undertaken by a most unlikely member of the evolutionary
school, John Lubbock. Two thirds of The Origin of Civilization (1870)
is dedicated to a sketch of the stages of religious belief. Reaffirming his
carlier view that the most primitive savages lack anything which could
be called religion, Lubbock displays an infuriating certainty concerning
the doctrinal superiority of his own brand of superstition. It is impor-
tant to realize that men like Lubbock were under constant pressure to
disclaim any proclivity toward atheism. We understand therefore why
Lubbock insists that the savages lacked religion. Atheism and material-
ism are inferior conditions of belief; man only gradually acquires
higher spiritual concepts. If there is “one fact more certain than an-
other,” he proclaims, it is “the gradual diffusion of religious light, and
of nobler conceptions as to the nature of God” (1870:349). Lubbock
even went so far as to call the first stage of religion “Atheism”! His
scheme follows verbatim:

Atheism; understanding by this term not a denial of the exis-
tence of a Deity, but an absence of any definite ideas on the sub-
ject.

200

I o

7. The Evolutionists: Results

Fetichism; the stage in which man supposes he can force the
Deity to comply with his desires.

Nature-worship, or Totemism; in which natural objects, trees,
lakes, stones, animals, &c. are worshipped.

Shamanism; in which the superior deities are far more power-
ful than man, and of a different nature. Their place of abode also
is far away, and accessible only to Shamans.

Idolatry, or Anthropomorphism; in which the gods take still
more completely the nature of men, being, however, more power-
ful. They are still amenable to persuasion; they are a part of na-
ture, and not creators. They are represented by images or idols.

In the next stage the Deity is regarded as the author, not
merely a part, of nature. He becomes for the first time a really
supernatural being.

The last stage to which I will refer is that in which morality is
associated with religion [ibid.:119].

Lubbock had equally definite ideas about the evolution of social struc-
ture. He believed for example that the primitive stage of promiscuity
was followed by a period in which descent is first uniformly within
the tribe, then through the mother, then through the father, and
“lastly and lastly only,” through both (ibid.: 113). But the coordina-
tion of the religion sequence with the evolution of the family and
state is scarcely attempted. The casual nexus with which Lubbock
operates is a tangle of evolving ideas, pushing themselves on to perfec-
tion: “the human mind, in its onward progress, everywhere passes
through the same or very similar phases” (ibid.:192). Underlying the
whole process is the perfection of man’s physical nature. Advanced
ideas are “entirely beyond the mental range of the lower savages,
whose extreme mental inferiority we have much difficulty in realizing”
(ibid.:5). The only functional connection between religion and social
structure noted by Lubbock is that between the “increasing power of
chiefs and priests” and the stage of Idolatry “with its sacrifices, tem-

ples, and priests etc.” This analysis, however, he attributes to Solomon
(Wisd. of Sol. 14:17).

TYLOR AND THE EVOLUTION OF
RELIGION

Against Lubbock’s dreary performance, Tylor’s Primitive Cul-
ture (1871) stands out as a respectable contribution to anthropological
theory. This work at once demonstrates that the comparative method,
applied to dubious but abundant ethnographic material under the
guidance of a sufficiently critical intelligence, was capable of producing

201



===== PAGE 106 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

enduring results. The central theme in Primitive Culture is the evolu-
tion of the concept of Animism, Tylor's minimum definition of re-
ligion. Animism exists wherever there is a belief in souls, ghosts,
demons, devils, gods, or similar categories of phenomena. The root
of all these concepts is traced by Tylor to the belief in the human
soul. This belief, which is found in almost every culture, results from
the universal subjective experience of dreams and visions. In dreams
and visions one sees phantom people, doubles, who detach themselves
from their bodies and move about independently of material condi-
tions: one sees “a thin unsubstantial human image, in its nature a sort
of vapour, film or shadow” (1958 II:12; orig. 1871). The immense
utility of this concept lies in its power to account for another series of
universal experiences of the greatest significance to man: the difference
between life and death, health and sickness, wakefulness and sleep,
trance and ordinary consciousness. It is the evolution of this belief in
the human personal soul through vast extrapolations and embroideries
which forms the subject matter of Tylor’s great work:

.. . the conception of human soul once attained to by man,
served as a type or model on which he framed not only his ideas
of other souls of lower grade, but also his ideas of spiritual beings
in general, from the tiniest elf that sports in the long grass up to
the heavenly Creator and Ruler of the world, the Great Spirit
[ibid.:196)].

Tylor refrained from attempting to set forth a rigid sequence; many
different kinds of animistic beings come into existence at approxi-
mately the same stage, and they endure over long periods as survivals
among peasant and illiterate members of modern societies. In general,
however, there is a gradual movement toward monotheism and the re-
moval of the pantheon of high gods from direct human appeal.
“Lower animism” tends to be amoral; the soul is continued after death
in a condition which does not depend on its deeds during life. “Higher
animism” takes on the “retribution doctrine”—there are rewards and
punishments for the soul, depending on its lifetime performance.

THE LIMITATIONS OF TYLOR'S
APPROACH

Despite its vast erudition, its high standards of evidence, and
its lordly pace, Primitive Culture is a curiously one-sided book. If

Ancient Society suffers from a neglect of ideology, Primitive Culture
suffers even more from its neglect of social organization and economics.

202

7. The Evolutionists: Results

Once we have grown accustomed to the proposition that the doctrines
of contemporary Christianity had their origins in the lower animism of
savagery, there is little else of theoretical significance to be gained from
the piling of additional case upon case. Even as a treatment of religion,
Primitive Culture had its glaring limitations, since it is devoted almost
exclusively to the cognitive as distinct from the institutional compo-
nents of religion. As for the causal explanation of the evolution of ani-
mistic beliefs, the basic point of Primitive Culture seems to be that
the human mind has the ability to perfect itself by thinking more
clearly. The explanation by which Tylor connects ideology with social
structure corresponds exactly to Lubbock’s (and Solomon’s): Men
model their spirit pantheons after their own governments:

Among nation after nation it is still clear how, man being the type
of deity, human society and government became the model on
which divine society and government were shaped. As chiefs and
kings are among men, so are the great gods among the lesser
spirits. They differ from the souls and minor spiritual beings
which we have as vet chiefly considered, but the difference is
rather of rank than of nature. They are personal spirits, reigning
over personal spirits. Above the disembodied souls and manes, the
local genii of rocks and fountains and trees, the host of good and
evil demons, and the rest of the spiritual commonality, stand
these mightier deities, whose influence is less confined to local or
individual interests, and who, as it pleases them, can act directly
within their vast domain, or control and operate through the
lower beings of their kind, their servants, agents, or mediators

[ibid.:334].

The issue of why such correspondences should exist between political
structure and “projective systems” seems almost entirely to have es-
caped Tylor's comprehension. We find only the barest hint of the
possibility that religion might have functions more complex and subtle
than that of providing explanations for puzzling and distressing phe-
nomena. “In the course of history,” Tylor remarks in passing, “religion
has in various ways attached to itself matters small and great outside
its central scheme, such as prohibition of special meats, observance of
special days, regulation of marriage or kinship, division of society into
castes, ordinance of social law and civil government” (ibid.: 447).
From this juxtaposition of such very small and very great matters, we
derive some measure of Tylor’s preoccupation with narrow, rather
disembodied cognitive issues.

An emphasis on the relative parochialism of Primitive Culture seems
justified in relation to Tylor’s famous claim in his conclusion that “the

203



===== PAGE 107 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

science of culture is essentially a reformer’s science” (ibid.:539)
which will contribute to the “advancement of civilization.” Tt is in this
context painfully obvious that Tylor’s “science of culture” could not
be a “reformer’s science” as long as it propagated the view that social
change emanates from the “exposure of crude old culture” to the light
of intellect. It is true of course that Tylor’s interests did extend to
social organization and that his contribution to the study of kinship in
“On a Method of Investigating the Development of Institutions”
surpasses Morgan’s best sociological effort. Yet Tylor was unable to
bring the religion sequence and the analysis of social organization into
mutual conformity. In other words, he failed to achieve an under-
standing of sociocultural phenomena as a functional-causal system.
Hence his sought-after “laws of evolution” merely described the un-
folding of separate developmental sequences, each of which indepen-
dently derived its main motive power from the force of reason.

Tylor’s emphasis on the ideological content of religion stimulated a
distinguished but monotonously idealist series of cultural studies. Under
James Frazer, the preoccupation with the evolution of religious ideas
lapsed into a frankly literary endeavor. Under Andrew Lang, it denied
its natural science heritage and returned to mysticism.

FRAZER AND THE EVOLUTION OF
RELIGION

Sir James Frazer's writings have been assigned by Edmund
Leach (1966:562) to six categories: (1) translations and editions of
the classics; (2) writings about primitive concepts of the soul; (3)
writings about totemism; (4) writings about folklore in the Old
Testament; (5) passages of the Bible; and (6) The Golden Bough.
As Leach points out, Frazer was thus wholly occupied with “mental
anthropology,” while the “more sociological emphasis” lay quite
outside his range of interest (ibid.:564). According to Leach (ibid.:
561), Frazer explicitly thought of himself “as making a contribution
to literature rather than to science. . . .”

Frazer's application of the comparative method in The Golden
Bough, which by 1914 required an edition consisting of twelve vol-
umes, is the most grandiose ever undertaken by a single author. The
theoretical product of Frazer's monumental effort, however, is quite
feeble and certainly out of all proportion to the size of the undertak-
ing. Chiefly, it consists in a further confirmation of the Tylorian view
of modern religion as a natural growth from primitive antecedents. One
theme is concerned with the relationships between the sacrifices of di-

204

gl

7. The Evolutionists: Results

vine kings; the preservation of fertility; and by implication, the story of
the Crucifixion. Another deals with the prevalence of survivals. Perhaps
the most influential contribution is the distinction between religion
and magic, a subject that Tylor had neglected. Thus Frazer sees magic
as an early expression of science based on a false notion of the regularity
of cause and effect processes. Religion is a higher achievement, substi-
tuting uncertainty and prayerful conciliation for misguided notions of
causality. Science arises next, returning mankind to the principles of
cause and effect, but on a basis of true correlations. Frazer’s scheme,
however, remains wholly alien to a science of society. The whole proc-
ess of the alleged transition from magic through religion to science de-
pends on nothing but an inherent tendency of thought to perfect
itself: “In the last analysis magic, religion, and science are nothing but
theories of thought” (ibid.:826) . . . thoughts of thought, . . . ideas
about ideas.

With the publication of the 1922 abridgment of The Golden
Bough and the flood of public honors that accompanied it, Frazer
emerged as the anthropologist, whose books every educated man was
supposed to have read. I shall not join Edmund Leach in begrudging
Frazer his great success as an emissary to the educated masses. As litera-
ture, The Golden Bough does have its charms. The problem seems
rather to have been that too many anthropologists, including Leach
himself (see p. 544), never quite managed to throw off the habit of
regarding culture as nothing more than a pack of ideas swarming
around inside of people’s heads.

MORE MENTALISM

The mentalistic emphasis in Tylor’s treatment of religion was
also furthered by Robert R. Marett, Tylor’s successor at Oxford.
Marett (19og) attempted to correct for the overintellectualized ap-
proach of Tylor and Frazer by insisting (without benefit of fieldwork)
that primitives distinguished emotionally between supernatural and or-
dinary phenomena. Thus magic and religion should not be separated,
since their cognitive essence lies in a sense of mystery. “Supernatural-
ism,” Marett insisted, should embrace both magic and religion. Marett
also criticized Tylor’s concept of religion as failing to make provision
for the personification of inanimate objects that did not involve a soul
concept. To denote this kind of religious belief, Marett introduced the
term “animatism.” Like Frazer, Marett stands on the boundary be-
tween the scientist and man of letters. Indeed, Lowie (1937:111) calls
him “a philosophical humanist.”

205

|
|
}
[
i
;
]

|


===== PAGE 108 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

RETURN TO MYSTICISM: ANDREW LANG

The culmination of the line of Tylor’s philosophical hu-
manist students lies with Andrew Lang. Unfortunately Lang and
Lang’s relationship to Tylor have been misinterpreted to the present
generation of anthropologists through an error in Lowie’s account (cf.
WALLACE 1966:7; PENNIMAN 1965:140). According to Lowie (1937:82)
“Tylor’s Primitive Culture . . . denied high gods to the simpler peo-
ples,” and “on the subject Tylor was challenged by Andrew Lang.”
Tylor, however, never denied high gods to simpler peoples, and Lang
never held that Tylor had made such a denial. Tylor’s view is quite
clear:

Thus, then, it appears that the theology of the lower races al-
ready reaches its climax in conceptions of a highest of the gods,
and that these conceptions in the savage and barbaric world are no
copies stamped from one common type, but outlines widely varying
among mankind. The degeneration-theory, in some instances no
doubt with justice, may claim such beliefs as mutilated and per-
verted remnants of higher religions. Yet for the most part, the
development-theory is competent to account for them without seek-
ing their origin in grades of culture higher than those in which they
are found existing. Looked upon as products of natural religion,
such doctrines of divine supremacy seem in no way to transcend the
powers of the low-cultured mind to reason out, nor the low-cul-
tured imagination to deck with mythic fancy. There have existed
in times past, and do still exist, savage or barbaric peoples who
hold such views of a highest god as they may have attained to of
themselves, without the aid of more cultured nations. Among
these races, Animism has its distinct and consistent outcome, and
Polytheism its distinct and consistent completion, in the doctrine
of a Supreme Deity [TYLOR 1958, II:422].

It is true that Tylor was vigorously attacked by Lang, but Lang’s
stated motivation is not mentioned by Lowie. What Lang came to
resent, after an initial period of enthusiasm for the genre of naturalistic
evolutionary studies of religious thought, was first, the premise that
animism has been based on an essentially false set of ideas. In his
The Making of Religion (1898), Lang criticized Tylor for supposing
that primitive man did not actually possess many of the powers
which he attributed to souls and that all such manifestations of
souls among contemporary Englishmen were necessarily “survivals.”

206

I

7. The Evolutionists: Results

We hold that very probably there exist human faculties of un-
known scope; that these conceivably were more powerful and
prevalent among our very remote ancestors who founded religion;
that they may still exist in savage as in civilized races, and that
they may have conformed, if they did not originate, the doctrine
of separable souls. If they do exist, the circumstance is important,
in view of the fact that modern ideas rest on a denial of their
existence [ibid.:66-67].

Second, Lang insisted that Tylor's animism could not explain the
high gods in whom the simpler peoples believed. Tylor had under-
estimated the extent to which these high gods exercised a moral in-
fluence over primitive peoples. “The moral, heart-reading, friendly,
creative being of low savage faith, whence was he evolved?” inquires
Lang. His answer: “It is as easy, almost, for me to believe that they
‘were not left without a witness,” as to believe that this God of theirs
was evolved out of the maleficent ghost of a dirty mischievous med-
icineman” (ibid.:185). In other words, Lang toyed with a return to
the degeneration theory and to the doctrine that monotheism was the
gift of God to man.

STRUCTURAL APPROACHES TO
RELIGION

The analysis of religion as part of a larger social system was
initiated by evolutionists outside of Tylor’s orbit. Two figures require
our attention, W. Robertson Smith and Herbert Spencer.

Smith was a disciple of McLennan’s, who found McLennan’s de-
velopmental sequences applicable to the history of the Semitic peo-
ples. His Religion of the Semites (1889) stands out among all
of the contemporary evolutionist treatments of religion because of
its focus on what is essentially a single cultural tradition and by its
extraordinarily detailed treatment of certain relationships between
social organization, ritual, and belief. Smith cannot be said to have
systematically explored the entire range of structural relationships be-
tween social organization and religion, nor did he manage always to
rise above the kind of projective or imitative view that was current
among the Tylorians. Yet the relatively restricted ethnographic com-
pass within which he confined himself guaranteed a result that
was closer to modern structural-functionalist standards than anything
produced up to that time. His treatment of the social functions of
feasting, ritual communion, and sacrifice with its emphasis upon the
maintenance of a sense of social solidarity constitutes an important if

207



===== PAGE 109 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

imperfectly acknowledged influence on British social anthropology.
Smith’s (1956:21) cardinal hypothesis was that religious and politi-
cal institutions are “parts of one whole of social custom.” Myth and
doctrine—the essence of religion for Frazer—were thus something of
an epiphenomenon. Not that Smith relished ideological details less
keenly than Frazer, but he regarded the institutional matrix as the
source of religious ideas.

When we study the political structures of early society, we do not
begin by asking what is recorded of the first legislators, or what
theory man advanced as to the reason of their institutions; we try
to understand what the institutions were, and how they shaped
men’s lives. In like manner, in the study of Semitic religion, we
must not begin by asking what was told about the gods, but what
the working religious institutions were, and how they shaped the
lives of the worshippers [ibid.].

SPENCER'S SCHEME

It is quite likely that Smith here reflected the influence of
Spencer. For of all the evolutionists, it was Spencer who approached
most closely to the understanding of sociocultural phenomena in
terms of evolving systems, each of whose parts contributed to each
other and to the continuity and change of the whole. Unfortunately,
the value and historical effectiveness of Spencer’s synthesizing genius
was not matched by his ability to handle ethnographic data. He seems
to have lacked the critical flair which came so easily to Tylor. The
result is an embarrassing mixture of a highly sophisticated method-
ology based on abundant but inappropriate or fanciful examples that
give rise to improbable or overly mechanical evolutionary sequences.
In his Principles of Sociology Spencer undertook to sketch develop-
mental sequences for all the major branches of culture. His guiding
principle was the “law of evolution”; namely, that in all spheres of
the universe, there is

an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of motion;
during which the matter passes from an indefinite incoherent
homogeneity to a definite coherent heterogeneity; and during
which the retained motion undergoes a parallel transformation
[1912:367; orig. 1864].

Thus, in the evolution of the family, the “incoherent homogeneity” of
promiscuity yields the progressively greater “definiteness” of matrilin-
eal and then patrilineal descent; marriage moves to higher levels of

208

el

7. The Evolutionists: Results

order through polyandry, polygamy, and monogamy; the social system
as a whole moves from the military type to the industrial type in-
volving increasing degrees of individuation and the multiplication of
specialized parts.

It is to the domain of religion, however, that I must now limit my
remarks. Here we find Spencer dealing first of all with a sequence of
beliefs which are markedly parallel to Tylor’s. Indeed, both Tylor
and Spencer virtually accused each other of plagiarism in deciding
who had been the first to trace the concept of a monotheistic god
back to the ghosts and dreams of primitive men (cf. HAYS 1958:80).
Spencer’s sequence is typically more rigid and mechanical than Ty-
lor’s. In compensation, however, Spencer addresses himself to more
stimulating and historically important questions. He proceeds to his
analysis only after observing that “there can be no true conception
of a structure without a true conception of its function” (SPENCER
1896, 11:671). The functions of various stages of religions are then
viewed in relationship to political control, social cohesion, military
activities, and ecclesiastical bureaucracies. His conclusions have a
distinctly modern ring to them in their emphasis upon “cohesion”
and “social continuity”:

Thus, looking at it generally, we may say that ecclesiasticism
stands for the principle of social continuity. Above all other
agencies it is that which conduced to cohesion; not only between
the coexisting parts of a nation, but also between its present gen-
eration and its past generations. In both ways it helps to main-
tain the individuality of the society. Or, changing somewhat the
point of view, we may say that ccclesiasticism, embodying in its
primitive form the rule of the dead over the living and sanctifying
in its more advanced forms the authority of the past over the
present, has for its function to preserve in force the organized
product of earlier experiences versus the modifying effects of more
recent expericnces. Evidently this organized product of past ex-
periences is not without credentials. The life of the society has,
up to the time being, been maintained under it; and hence a
perennial reason for resistance to deviation [ibid.:773].

Again:

As furnishing a principle of cohesion by maintaining a com-
mon propitiation of a deceased ruler’s spirit, and by implication
checking the tendencies to internal warfare, priesthoods have
furthered social growth and development. They have simultane-
ously done this in sundry other ways: by fostering that spirit of
conservatism which maintains continuity in social arrangements;

209



===== PAGE 110 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

by forming a supplementary regulative system which cooperates
with the political one; by insisting on obedience, primarily to gods
and secondarily to kings, by countenancing the coercion under
which has been cultivated the power of application; and by
strengthening the habit of self-restraint [ibid.:817].

EVOLUTIONISM, A SCIENTIFIC
ADVANCE

Enough has now been said to demonstrate the powerful for-
ward motion generated during the period 1860—qo as far as the main
task of the comparative method was concerned. It cannot be denied
that a better knowledge of the most general directions of sociocultural
evolution was achieved. Nor can it be denied that in the very pro-
cess of reproducing the possible lines of development, false hypotheses
came to enjoy an orthodoxy which diminished the luster of the
equally numerous correct and productive ones. In balance, however,
this period must be reckoned as one of the great epochs in the en-
largement of Western man’s comprehension of his place in nature.
Under the impact of relativism, we are much too prone to emphasize
the snobbery of the Victorian anthropologists and their irritating
conviction that all men would ultimately aspire to live and look like
middle-class Englishmen. We must not forget that there is an as-
pect to the evolutionism of the period which stands opposed to the
ethnocentric naiveté of men like Lubbock and McLennan. In their
culture, evolutionism was a daring admission that the sacred institu-
tions of family, church, property, and state had an ancestry, as Lang
put it, of maleficent ghosts and dirty mischievous medicinemen.
Admittedly it was a source of comfort to know that nature had
equipped modern Euro-America with the best institutions which
“the survival of the fittest” could provide. But this rationalization of
contemporary mores, institutions, and beliefs involved tumning away
from the much more convincing and satisfying rationales of divine
revelation and divine commandments. The enduring significance of
the late-nineteenth-century use of the comparative method was that
it completed the demonstration, begun in the previous century, that
Western man’s institutions from Christianity to motherhood had a
natural and not a divine origin. This achievement may not impress a
generation whose theologians, driven to despair by the crimes of
man, hint that “God is dead.” But educated opinion in the Victorian
era found it hard to believe that conjugal fidelity, filial respect, and
love of God were nothing more than human artifices, slowly evolved

210

7. The Evolutionists: Results

by trial and error, and destined to be replaced by as yet unknown
but equally mundane arrangements. What the evolutionists faced
were learned men, like the Archbishop of Dublin, Richard Whately:

‘We have no reason to believe that any community ever did, or
ever can emerge, unassisted by external helps, from a state of utter
barbarism unto anything that can be called civilisation. Man has
not emerged from the savage state; the progress of any community
in civilisation by its own internal means, must always have begun
from a condition rcmoved from that of complete barbarism, out
of which it does not appear that men ever did or can raise them-
selves [WHATELY quoted in L.UuBBOCK 1870:326].

In this context, when Lubbock insists that primeval man was an
atheist (thereby protecting himself from being called the same), we
must not conclude that his main interest lay in maligning the Tas-
manians and Fuegians in order to praise Englishmen. It rather
seems to have been his intent to emphasize the “utter barbarism” of
the earliest men in order to confound Whately and other “degener-
ationists” who refused to surrender the comforting illusion that it
was God who had made Englishmen monogamists and monotheists.

If T seem to lay insufficient stress on the absurdly false sequences
for which Morgan, Spencer, Lubbock, McLennan, and even Robert-
son Smith were responsible, it is not because the distortions of history
in the name of science are ever to be taken lightly. Rather, it seems
that in condemning the method responsible for these aberrations,
many contemporary anthropologists have lost their own sense of his-
torical perspective.

THE ABSENCE OF CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

While the historical errors and sequential flim-flammery of
the evolutionists have been the subject of abundant critical appraisal,
there is another aspect of their work which has gone virtually without
serious discussion. The aspect in question is the nature of the causal
process which the evolutionists substituted for the “hand of God”—
the processes which had brought about that degree of parallelism
and convergence without which the comparative method could not
have been utilized. It should be apparent that without exception,
none of the evolutionists were cultural materialists. By thus saying at
once what they were not, we shall spare ourselves the confusion
which results if we attempt to say precisely what they were in posi-

211

i
|

——— e e


===== PAGE 111 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tive terms. Thus Opler (1964a:123) attempts to refute White’s
(1949b:364) assertion that Tylor expressed “the materialist interpre-
tation of culture.” Stocking (1965¢c:136), on the other hand, attempts
to prove that Opler’s label “philosophical idealist” is equally inap-
propriate. The truth is that Tylor was a philosophical and cultural
eclectic. He had no consistent theory of cultural causation. On the
one hand, like all of his contemporaries, he belicved that the direction
of history was governed by a process of natural selection in which the
survival of the fittest men and institutions was assured: “institutions
which can best hold their own in the world gradually supersede the
less fit ones, their incessant conflict determines the general re-
sultant course of culture” (TyLOR 1958, 1:69). On the other hand,
again, like all of his contemporaries, Tylor also fervently embraced
the culturalidealist heritage of the Enlightenment. While Tylor
emphasized the importance of material culture in the evolutionary
process, the ultimate pre-eminence of mind in shaping the direction
of material progress remains unquestioned. Our previous discussion
of the independent nature of Tylor's religion sequence should have
made this sufficiently clear. Opler’s remarks on the subject may none-
theless be cited to remove any lingering doubt:

Of man’s “brain-organization” and his ability to use symbols he
[Tylor] says: “Man’s power of using a word, or even a gesture, as
the symbol of a thought and the means of conversing about it, is
one of the points where we most plainly see him parting company
with all lower species, and starting on his career of conquest
through higher intellectual regions”. . . . In another place he
[Tylor] declares: “Man’s power of accommodating himself to the
world he lives in, and even of controlling it, is largely due to his
faculty of gaining new knowledge”. . . . “History,” he [Tylor]
tells us, “is an agent powerful and becoming more powerful, in
shaping men’s minds, and through their minds their actions in
the world . . . .” The key to man’s achievements, as Tylor saw
it, lay in his “power of coordinating the impression of his senses,
which enables him to understand the world he lives in, and by
understanding to use, resist, and even in a measure rule
it” ... [oPLER 1964a:138-39].

It is interesting to note that while Opler himself argues at length
(in order to refute White) that Tylor was a Social Darwinist, he
nonetheless flatly concludes, “The central place of the evolution of
the mind in Tylor's theory stamps him as a philosophical idealist
and invalidates any attempt to select passages to prove him a ma-
terialist” (ibid.:143). But to be a Social Darwinist, as we have seen,

212

7. The Evolutionists: Results

is to be a racial determinist, a biological reductionist. Indeed, Opler
even quotes at length from Tylor’s racist statements. But how could a
philosophical idealist propose that mind is determined by the material
conditions of the struggle for existence? After all, what was the fuss
about, if Darwin’s theory was not viewed as the very essence (so to
speak) of the incarnation of materialism? Thus if Tylor is to be
called a “philosophical idealist,” it can only be with the proviso
that he was more confused than philosophical.

MORGAN NOT A CULTURAL
MATERIALIST

Exactly the same observation is required in the case of
Morgan. The precedent for regarding Morgan as a materialist was, of
course, set by Marx and Engels; and in the next chapter, we shall
inquire into the reasons for this unfortunate error. In the meantime
attention should be drawn to the extraordinary exchange between
Opler, Harding, and Leacock (in opLER 1964b), in which one side
demonstrates conclusively that Morgan was a materialist, while the
other demonstrates equally well that Morgan was not a materialist.
On the materialist side, Harding quotes the following chapter and
verse from Morgan’s Ancient Society (1877:9):

It is probable that the successive arts of subsistence which arose
at long intervals will ultimately, from the great influence they must
have exercised upon the condition of mankind, afford the most
satisfactory bases for these divisions [the “ecthical periods” and
subdivisions of Savagery, Barbarism, and Civilization].

On the same side, Leacock’s favorite passages are as follows:

The most advanced portion of the human race were halted, so
to express it, at certain stages of progress, until some great inven-
tion or discovery, such as the domestication of animals or the
smelting of iron ore, gave a new and powerful impulse forward
... [MORGAN 1963:39].

. improvement in subsistence, which followed the cultiva-
tion of maize and plants among the American aborigines, must
have favored the general advancement of the family. It led to lo-
calization, to the use of additional arts, to an improved house
architecture, and to a more intelligent life. . . . The great ad-
vancement of socicty indicated by the transition from savagery

213



===== PAGE 112 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

into the Lower Status of barbarism, would carry with it a corres-
ponding improvement in the condition of the family . . .
[ibid.:469].

Cities . . . imply the existence of a stable and developed ficld
agriculture, the possession of domestic animals in flocks and
herds, of merchandise in masses and of property in houses and
lands. The city brought with it new demands in the art of govern-
ment by creating a changed condition of society [ibid.:264].

Convincing as this might seem, Opler has citations to prove that
Ancient Society was actually a study of cultural evolution from the
point of view of the mental and moral development of certain funda-
mental “germ” ideas. Opler’s favorite chapter and verse appears to be
the following:

Out of a few germs of thought, conceived in the early ages, have
been evolved all the principal institutions of mankind. Beginning
their growth in the period of savagery, fermenting through the
period of barbarism, they have continued their advancement
through the period of civilization. The evolution of these germs of
thought has been guided by a natural logic which formed an es-
sential attribute of the brain itself. So unerringly has this principle
performed its functions in all conditions of experience and in all
periods of time, that its results are uniform, coherent and trace-
able in their courses. These results alone will in time yield con-
vincing proofs of the unity of origin of mankind. The mental
history of the human race, which is revealed in institutions, in-
ventions and discoveries, is presumptively the history of a single
species, perpetuated through individuals, and developed through
experience. Among the original germs of thought, which have ex-
ercised the most powerful influence upon the human mind, and
upon human destiny, are these which relate to government, to
the family, to language, to religion, and to property. They had a
definite beginning far back in savagery, and a logical progress, but
can have no final consummation, because they are still progressing,
and must ever continue to progress [MORGAN 1877:59-60].

Opler again weakens his own case by drawing attention to Morgan’s
“Cultural Darwinism” (ibid.:112). But the “materialists” on the other
side fail to exploit this lapse since that kind of materialism with its
racist taint, is as embarrassing to their image of Morgan as is the
notion of philosophical idealism. For Opler, howevet, the implica-
tion of biological reductionism is not quite as devastating as in
the case of Tylor, since his point is to prove not that Morgan was a
“philosophical idealist” but that he was a “dualist”: materialist for
material culture and idealist for everything else. Thus the point

214

.

7. The Evolutionists: Results

here under consideration—the confused eclecticism of the evolu-
tionist—is actually conceded by Opler.

SPENCER NOT A CULTURAL
MATERIALIST

The best case for philosophical materialism (not cultural
materialism) is furnished by Herbert Spencer. As the staunchest
and most consistent of the biological reductionists, Spencer’s material-
ism seems unquestionable. Moreover as Carneiro (1967:xxxv) has
pointed out, for Spencer the universe was composed exclusively of
matter and energy, and the entire course of evolution was at bottom
a physical process. Furthermore, in cultural matters, Spencer fre-
quently stressed the importance of subsistence, energy systems, war-
fare, and impersonal social forces. According to Carneiro (ibid.:xxvi):
“He denied that recognition of ‘advantages or disadvantages of this or
that arrangement furnished motives for establishing or maintaining’
a form of government, and argued instead that ‘conditions and not
intentions determine.” Correspondingly, he saw the values and at-
titudes of a society, not as shaping, but as reflecting the society:
‘.. . for every society, and for each stage in its evolution, there is
an appropriate mode of feeling and thinking . . . [which] is a function
of the social structure. . . . Fortunately we need not concern our-
selves with the philosophical significance of the fact that, despite all
this, Spencer himself frequently denied that he was a materialist. The
question is, whether he was a cultural materialist, that is, whether he
systematically elaborated a theory which accounted for cultural differ-
ences and similarities in terms of techno-cconomic and techno-en-
vironmental conditions. Although Spencer came closer than Morgan
to such a viewpoint, he failed ultimately to achieve it because at each
approach, the principle of biological reductionism interceded, pro-
viding a direct feedback between social structure and ideology and
the stage reached in the progress of man’s biological and psychologi-
cal nature. Thus, while Spencer held that each successive stage in the
sequence of the family or in the ideology of ghosts is a result of a
materialist process of selection, the selective factors do not necessarily
or preponderantly act through the techno-economic, techno-environ-
mental parameters. To take one example, we may note how in
explaining the functional relationship between ecclesiastical and politi-
cal hierarchies, Spencer so readily lapses into the familiar cultural-

idealist frame, lured by the seductive gossamers of the state of
“human nature”:

215



===== PAGE 113 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Examination discloses a relation between ecclesiastical and po-
litical governments in respect of degree. Where there is but little
of the one there is but little of the other; and in societies which
have developed a highly coercive secular rule there habitually ex-
ists a highly coercive religious rule.

It has been shown that growing from a common root, and
having their structurcs slightly differentiated in early societies, the
political and ecclesiastical organizations long continue to be dis-
tinguished very imperfectly.

This intimate relationship between the two forms of regulation,
alike in their instrumentalities and in their extents, has a moral
origin. Extreme submissiveness of nature fosters an extreme de-
velopment of both the political and religious controls. Contrari-
wise the growth of the agencies effecting such controls, is kept in
check by the sentiment of independence; which while it resists
the despotism of living rulers is unfavourable to extreme self-
abasement in propitiation of deities [sPENCER 1896, IT:671].

The confusion among evolutionists on the question of philosophi-
cal idealism versus philosophical materialism has been discussed
at length by the historian George Stocking. From the fact that this
muddle existed and from the manifest emphasis which the evolu-
tionists place upon the task of reconstructing the stages of history,
Stocking reaches the conclusion that the philosophical categories, ideal-
ism and materialism, do not provide the proper frame for a discus-
sion of nincteenth-century anthropology. Anthropologists who seek
to understand the history of their discipline are warned by Stocking
that “the present day polemical point obfuscates historical under-
standing” (1965c:142). To this we must at once reply, on the con-
trary, present-day polemical point alone makes historical understand-
ing possible. The fact that none of the classical evolutionists proposed
a cultural-materialist explanation of sociocultural evolution was indeed
of no significance to Morgan, Tylor, or Spencer. In retrospect,
however, there is no fact of greater significance for the present-day
anthropologist who secks a knowledge of the foundations of con-
temporary theory.

216

T

Dialectical

Materialism

U5
5053

As Darwin discovered the law of evolution in organic nature so
Marx discovered the law of evolution in human history. . . .”
Thus spoke Friedrich Engels (quoted in MEHRING 1935:555) at the
grave of his lifetime friend and collaborator. Needless to say, few
non-Marxist social scientists have subscribed to Engels’s estimate. On
the other hand, the attempt on the part of a minority of Western
social scientists to diminish Karl Marx’s stature in relation to his
contemporaries—to Comte, Spencer, or J. S. Mill—has met with little
success. One may reasonably object to regarding Marx as the historical
equal of Darwin. Marx’s theories are surrounded by a polemic which in
Darwin’s case no longer exists. But the continuation of this polemic
itself testifies to the power of Marx’s ideas as compared with those of
other nineteenth-century social scientists.

This polemic has produced a vast critical literature, especially in eco-
nomics, political science, and sociology. It also has produced a sus-
tained critique of even greater magnitude, in which the author’s point
cannot be understood except as an implicit rejection of Marxist princi-
ples. Frequently enough, the reaffirmation of non-Marxist positions

217



===== PAGE 114 =====

T

The Rise of Anthropological Theory | 8. Dialectical Materialism

takes the form of rote or unconscious acceptance of principles which
have been elaborated in response to the Marxist challenge. These vis-
ceral “critiques” of Marxism have their counterpart in the degraded
Marxist catechisms and “Manuals” directed against “bourgeois” social
science. To the bourgeois and Marxist ideologues, a new generation
says, a plague on both your houses.

MARX'S INFLUENCE

Many have argued that Marx was wrong; few have argued
that his ideas can or should be ignored. Pitirim Sorokin’s (1928:522)
contention that one Georg Wilhelm von Raumer anticipated Marx’s
“economic conception of history” has succeeded neither in detracting
attention from Marx nor in rescuing von Raumer from obscurity.
Sorokin is one of the few who have claimed that Marx and Engels
were so far from being “Darwins or Galileos” that “There is no reason
even for regarding their scientific contribution as something above the
average” (ibid.:545). But the lifework of the most esteemed figures
of non-Marxist twentieth-century sociology weighs against this pique.
Almost the entire galaxy of great figures in early twentieth-century
sociology were, as the non-Marxist sociologist T. B. Bottomore (1965:
11ff.) maintains, “discussants of Marx.” One simply cannot under-
stand Max Weber, Emile Durkheim, Georges Sorel, Vilfredo Pareto,
or George Simmel without taking into consideration the fact that
they come after Marx. The same is true of Thorstein Veblen, Wer-
ner Sombart, Karl Mannheim, Lester Ward, and Alfred Keller.

Even to understand Sorokin, one must consider first and foremost
his hatred of Bolshevism. It is historically indisputable that no nine-
teenth-century figure has exerted an influence upon non-Marxist
twentieth-century sociology which in any significant respect approaches
that of Marx and Engels. Nor can it be denied that this prominence
is deserved regardless of political issues. It is one thing to compare
Marx with Max Weber, his greatest twentieth-century critic, but quite
another to compare Marx with his floundering contemporaries. The
historically informed non-Marxist who is aware of Marx’s errors of
fact and theory is also aware of the blunders and inanities of Comte,
J. S. Mill, and Spencer. In the final analysis, Engels’s graveside claim
boils down to this: either Marx (with Engels’s help) was the Darwin
of the social sciences, or nobody was. To quote from another promi-
nent avowedly non-Marxist sociologist, C. Wright Mills (1962:35),
Karl Marx “was the social and political thinker of the nineteenth
century.” It remains to be shown, however, that this eminence adds

218

up to a scientific contribution analogous to that which is generally
attributed to Darwin. Most non-Marxist social scientists scem to
believe that their Darwin has yet to be born.

DID MARX DISCOVER THE LAW OF
CULTURAL EVOLUTION?

In my opinion, Engels was correct when he attributed to
Marx the “discovery of the law of evolution in human history.” Yet
it is possible to hold this view and to deny that Marx’s fole in the
development of social science was like that of Darwin in the de-
velopment of biology. Marx formulated a scientific prinmplg at least
as powerful as Darwin’s natural selection—a general principle that
showed how a science of human history might be constructed. Yet
Marx glimpsed this principle only after a long journey through the
thicket of Hegelian philosophy and in the midst of a political career
predicated on an imminent proletarian revolution. Both of these cir-
cumstances had a corrosive effect on Marx’s ability to found a true
science of history. In order to apply Marx’s “law of history,” the non-
Marxist social scientist must strip away the Hegelian and political
accretions, the one with its ponderous double-talk, the other with
its unrequited debt to nineteenth-century communism. What remains
will scarcely satisfy the doctrinaire Marxist, for it is no longer mainly
a theory of proletarian revolution in Euro-American capitalist society.
Stripped of the burden of the dialectic and of the necessity for pro-
viding not only a theory but also the ideology of revolution, Marx’s
sociology will strike the faithful as singularly uninteresting. But even
a deHegelianized, de-proletarianized Marx subsumes several of the
major trends in contemporary anthropological theory and challenges
the remainder.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE UNITY OF
THEORY AND PRACTICE

To rescue Marx’s “law of history” for non-Marxist applica-
tions, we must break the grip which political activism holds on the
scientific aspects of his contribution. It was Marx himself, of course,
who insisted that social science and political action were inseparable.
This scientifically unacceptable proposition was first enunciated by
Marx in his critique of the philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach: “The
philosophers have interpreted the world in various ways: the point
however is to change it” (1941:82). In this view, only a theory of

219

!
]
J
i
]
]



===== PAGE 115 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

history which enables men to make history is worth the effort. Thus,
the only effective answer to the challenge presented by alternative
interpretations is to prove them wrong by helping to bring about the
predictions of onc’s own theory.

There is a superficial resemblance between the test of “changing
the world” and the fulfillment of prediction in conformity with the
rules of the scientific method. Thus, engineers do prove that their
interpretations of the laws of aerodynamics and hydraulics are correct
when the airplanes they design and help to build fly, or when the
dams they design and help to build hold back the river. But the so-
called unity of theory and practice cannot be applied in most of the
nonlaboratory sciences. No one insists that geologists must justify their
respective models of the ice ages by producing new advances of the
continental glaciers. Nor do we expect that alternative explanations of
meteorological phenomena require made-to-order hurricanes, torna-
does, and thunderstorms.

In the historical sciences, the doctrine of the unity of theory and
practice is rendered superfluous by the possibility of subjecting one’s
predictions to the test not of future, but of past events. That is, there
is no reason why the social sciences cannot accept retrodiction as the
test of theory. Thus, the retrodiction of irrigation agriculture in the
highland meso-American formative period, does not require an ar-
chaeologist to establish the truth by digging irrigation ditches. It suf-
fices that the archacologist find the evidence that the ditches once
existed. Similarly, if one suspects a correlation between patrilineal
descent and Omaha kinship terminology, the evidence from extinct
cases is as acceptable as that from present or future cases, while the

question of helping to build an Omaha terminology is obviously ir-
relevant.

THE THREAT OF POLITICS

The Marxist stress on the unity of theory and practice con-
tains an implicit threat to the most fundamental rule of the scientific
method, namely, the obligation to report data honestly. Marx himself
took pains to elevate scientific responsibility over class interests.

Thus, according to Karl Wittfogel (1953:355), Marx demanded that
scholars:

be oriented toward the interests of mankind as a whole and seek
the truth in accordance with the immanent needs of science, no
matter how this affccted the fate of any particular class, capital-
ists, landowners, or workers. Marx praised Ricardo for taking this

220

Rl

8. Dialectical Materialism

attitude, which he called “not only scientifically honest but also
scientifically required.” For the same reason, he condemned as
“mean” a person who subordinated scientific objectivity to ex-
traneous purposes: “. . . a man who tries to accommodate sci-
ence to a standpoint which is not derived from its [the science’s]
own interests, however erroneous, but from outside, alien, and ex-
traneous interests, [such a man] I call ‘mean’ (gemein).”

But Wittfogel goes on to accuse Marx of “violating his own scientific
principles” (ibid.:359) in his persistent refusal to acknowledge that
in the Oriental state it was the bureaucracy that constituted the rul-
ing class (see page 671). Regardless of Marx’s intentions, it is clear
that a science which is explicitly bound to a political program is
dangerously exposed to the possibility that the values of that program
will gain the ascendancy over the values of science. It is a matter of
historical record that Lenin and Stalin were fully prepared to corrupt
scientific standards in order to prove by practice what their theories
predicted. As Wittfogel (ibid.:355) has stated.

Starting from Lenin’s thesis that all socialist literature must be
party literature, which must “merge with the movement of the
really most progressive and consistently revolutionary class,” they
scorn objectivity and exalt in its stead the “partisanship” (parti-
inost) of science.

The admission that a particular proletarian movement lacks the
conditions for the growth of class consciousness necessarily weakens
that movement’s revolutionary potential. If the point is to change the
world, rather than to interpret it, the Marxist sociologist ought not to
hesitate to falsify data in order to make it more nseful. When the
ethics of social science are derived primarily from the class struggle,
information, as in any war, is an important weapon. Thus the Marxist
sociologist would seem to enjoy a mandate to change data in order to
make it more useful in changing the world, subject only to the usual
limitations imposed upon wartime propaganda: on the one hand,
repeated falsification diminishes credibility and runs the risk of self-
defeat; on the other, acceptance of one’s own propaganda may
eventually destroy the objective basis of action. Under Stalin, the con-
sistent errors in the interpretation of the class structure of the United
States by Communist observers no doubt reflected in part this
aspect of the unity of theory and practice. The failure among Marxist
theoreticians to expose Morgan’s principal blunders likewise reflects
the tendency of politicized social science to harden into dogma. Witt-
fogel (1957:360ff.) has shown how the ideologues of the Soviet

221

i



===== PAGE 116 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Communist Party even succeeded in repressing Marx's concept of
an oriental mode of production in an attempt to prepare the way for
the spread of Communism to China.

Of course, Marxists are not the only ones whose facts and theories
are vulnerable to political currents. Many non-Marxists consciously
or unconsciously accept the view that political goals must take prece-
dence over scientific ones and consciously or unconsciously suppress
or distort findings which support the Marxist interpretation of history.
As I have previously had occasion to stress, ethical and political neu-
trality in the realm of social-science research is a limiting condition
which cannot be approached by a posture of indifference. Neither
the researcher who preaches the partisanship of science, nor he who
professes complete political apathy, is to be trusted. Naturally, we
demand that the scientific ethic—fidelity to data—must be the
foundation of all research. But we must also demand that scientific
research be oriented by explicit hypotheses, whose political and
moral consequences in both an active and passive sense are under-
stood and rendered explicit by the researcher.

MARX AS AN EVOLUTIONIST

In explaining Marx’s theories from the perspective of the
development of anthropology, it is appropriate first of all to empha-
size the many parallels that link Marx, along with Darwin, Morgan,
Spencer, and Tylor, to a common heritage of eighteenth-century doc-
trines. Marx’s belief in the generally progressive nature of history is
distinctive only in the strength of its apocalyptic emphasis. Poverty
and exploitation in all its forms are destined by the workings of nat-
ural law to be eliminated as a result of the proletarian revolution.
The strong utopian ingredient in Marx’s vision of progress is illus-
trated in the distinctive motto of ultimate communism: “from each
according to his abilities, to each according to his needs.” However,
the ultimate stages of Spencer’s industrial society do not lack for
similar manifestations of spontaneous altruism. As Marxism pre-
dicted the end of exploitation in the communist millennium, Spencer-
ism predicted a future society in which the desires of each individual
would be in adaptive equilibrium with the desires of all others and
with the means of satisfying them (cf. HIMMELFARB 1959:347).

Marx shared with Darwin and Spencer that curious nineteenth-
century faith in the ability of violence and struggle to bring about
unlimited social improvement. The publication of Darwin’s Origin of
Species at once found Marx and Engels clucking happily over

222

Dalle

8. Dialectical Materialism

what they took to be the natural-history analogue to their own ma-
terialist interpretation of nature. Marx declared, upon first reading
the Origin of Species, that it provided “a basis in natural science for
the class struggle in history”; recommending it to Lasalle, he wrote,
“Despite all deficiencies, not only is a death-blow dealt here for the first
time to teleology in the natural sciences, but their rational meaning is
empirically examined” (MARX, quoted in HIMMELFARB 1959:347).
‘Within a month of the publication of Darwin’s book, Engels wrote to
Marx (December 12, 1859): “Darwin, whom I am first now reading,
is splendid” (quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:85).

THE CONVERGENCE OF MARX AND
SPENCER

Although Marx and Engels thought it highly amusing that
Darwin had been able to understand the animal kingdom by an
analogy with the animallike behavior of British capitalist society,
and although they detested Malthus, they were not beyond having
their own principle of the survival of the fittest. Indeed, both Spen-
cer and Marx warned against the deleterious effect of diminished
competition. The only difference was that for Spencer, the danger
lay in the possibility that individuals would somehow manage to
avoid natural selection because of misguided altruism; while in Marx’s
version of progress-through-struggle, the danger lay in the failure of
one class to perceive another as its enemy. Spencer’s fetishistic ven-
eration of competition as expressed in the phrase “survival of the
fittest,” has its counterpart in Marx’s Hegelian infatuation with
“contradictions.” The class struggle is simply an expression of irrecon-
cilable competition between proletarians and bourgeoisie for control
of the means of production.

Even in regard to the relationship with Malthus, there is much
that unites the Spencerians and Marxists. This commonality is ob-
scured by the fact that Darwin gratefully attributed his main inspira-
tion to Malthus’s theory of population. Marx, on the other hand, had
nothing but contempt for Malthus and called him “the mountebank
parson . . . a bought advocate” and “a shameless sycophant of the
ruling classes” (quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:66-67). What Marx objected
to in Malthus was the assumption that the “struggle-forlife” charac-
teristic of capitalism was equally prevalent in all forms of society.
Instead of sceing the struggle for survival in nature as the justification
for a similar struggle in society, Marx regarded the similarity between
the animal and human condition as an indictment of capitalism:

223

l
!
f



===== PAGE 117 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

“nothing discredits modern bourgeois development so much as the
fact that it has not succeceded in getting beyond the economic
forms of the animal world . . .” (ibid.:go). But the main thrust of
Spencerism is precisely that man must overcome the animal pro-
pensity to destructive competition. This change in human nature
will take place in Spencer's scheme only if industrial society is
permitted to evolve unhampered by state interference. As we have
already seen, Spencerism rose to ideological pre-eminence not be-
cause it confirmed but because it denied Malthus’s dire predictions.
Marx, of course, regarded the Spencerian advocacy of progress through
struggle as a mere bourgeois maneuver calculated to appease the
conscience of the capitalist exploiters. Thus the concrete brutality of
the present was to be justified by an illusory future. But Marx’s
scheme also had its brutal interlude. To overcome Malthus’s predic-
tions, it too urged the continuation of an animal-like struggle out of
which alone would come a future better life (see p. 468).

MARX'S EVOLUTIONARY SCHEME

Like all the other mid-nineteenth-century cultural evolu-
tionists, Marx and Engels had their scheme of world historical stages.
By means of these stages, the degree of progress toward communist
perfection could be measured. Distinctively, their periodization of
universal history was based on the forms of property associated
with various modes of production. Several different versions were
offered, each of which contained baffling ambiguities, which to this
day are the bane of Marxist exegesists.

In Marx and Engels's “The German Ideology” (196s; orig. ms.
1846), the first stage was described as based on “tribal ownership” and
was associated with the “undeveloped stage of production at which a
people lives by hunting and fishing, by the rearing of beasts or, in the
highest stage, agriculture.” (ibid.:122). The main feature of social
structure at this stage is the family and its extensions. With increase
in population, families develop distinctions between commoners and
chieftains and slavery begins to develop. The second stage is based
upon “ancient communal and state ownership” (ibid.:123) and is
accompanied by the formation of cities through voluntary tribal
merger and conquest. Land and slaves are at first held in common,
but private ownership of immovable property soon begins to assert
itself. With the growth of private property in land, the tribal collec-
tive decays. The development of the ancient city-state, of which
Roman society was the ultimate expression, marks the culmination

224

?‘

8. Dialectical Materialism

of these trends. The third stage is based on “feudal or estate prop-
erty” (ibid.:125). Feudal lords collectively own the land which is
worked not by slaves but by serfs. During this same period, there is
an analogous organization in the towns, whereby guilds of master
craftsmen and merchants control the work of apprentices and jour-
neymen.

In this scheme, the relationship between the ancient city-state
and feudalism is difficult to decipher. There appears to be no neces-
sary relationship between one and the other. Indeed, Eric Hobs-
bawm (1965:28) argues that feudalism appears to be an dlternative
evolutionary path out of “primitive communalism” under conditions
of low regional population density and no large cities. Yet it is
clear that Marx and Engels treat only that feudalism which followed
on the collapse of the Roman Empire—the feudalism which “is pre-
pared by the Roman conquests and the spread of agriculture con-
nected with these.” There is no doubt, however, that the next stage,
capitalism, arises only on the basis of feudalism, with the emergence
of the burgher classes dedicated to trade and manufacture.

In the brief historical sections of their 1848 Communist Manifesto,
Marx and Engels described an evolutionary sequence of class society,
consisting of the slave society of antiquity, feudalism, and capitalism.
No treatment is accorded the prehistoric, classless socicties. Once
again, the question of a necessary connection between slave society
and feudalism is left in doubt.

MARX NOT A UNILINEAR EVOLUTIONIST

Up until 1941, the definitive listing of the evolutionary stages
of class society was regarded as those given in Marx’s “Preface” to
The Critique of Political Economy (19o4; orig. 1859), namely, the
“Asiatic, ancient, feudal, and modern bourgeoisie.” However, in 1939-
41 a manuscript written by Marx in preparation for The Critique of
Political Economy was published under the title Grundrisse der
Kritik der politischen (Okonomie (Outlines of a Critique of Political
Economy). This work, composed in 1857-58, contained a section,
entitled “Formen,” dealing with precapitalist economic formations
which has now become the most important source of information
concerning Marx’s evolutionary periodization.

In the “Formen,” the transition from the stage of tribal economic
types is definitely presented as following a number of different
Toutes, apparently dictated by local conditions, the nature of which
Temains disappointingly obscure. Specifically identified are the orien-

225



===== PAGE 118 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tal, with a Slavonic-Rumanian variant, the ancient, and the Ger-
manic. Marx makes it clear that all of these forms of property and
production may progress into feudalism, although with different prob-
abilities. Thus the stereotyped interpretation of Marx as a unilinear
evolutionist is as defective as the common stercotype of unilinear
evolution applied by the Boasians to the anthropological evolutionists.

MARX ANTICIPATES MAINE

Marx’s interest in the precapitalist economic forms is totally
marginal to his consideration of the feudalism-capitalism transition,
which in turn is marginal to his major concern, the analysis of capi-
talist society. The step from tribal communities to the oriental, an-
cient, and Germanic levels receives cursory if not sloppy treatment.
Apparently, the guiding thread in Marx’s periodization is the progres-
sive and gradual emergence of alienated men conditioned to sell
their only possession—their labor, which they cease to regard as a
part of themselves. Thus, the ancient slave societies are more “pro-
gressive” than the Asiatic type, because they allow for considerable
private holdings in land and slaves and a complex individualized
monetary economy (MARX 1065:83).

In the Asiatic type, communalism “survives longest and most stub-
bornly” (ibid.).

This is due to the fundamental principle on which it is based,
that is, that the individual does not become independent of the
community; that the circle of production is [a] self-sustaining
unity of agriculture and craft manufacture, etc. [ibid.].

In the ancient slave societies, however, the city rather than the land
is the basis of the lingering communalism:

The community is here also the first precondition, but unlike our
first case, it is not here the substance of which the individuals are
mere accidents or of which they form mere spontancously natural
parts. The basis here is not the land, but the city as already cre-
ated seat (center) of the rural population (landowners). The
cultivated area appears as the territory of the city; not, as in the
other case, the village as a mere appendage to the land
[ibid.:71].

In describing the influence of communalism in the ancient states,
Marx anticipated major points in the analyses of Maine and Morgan,
by giving emphasis to emerging tribal and kinship relations: “The

226

B sl

8. Dialectical Materialism

tribes of the ancient states were constituted in one of two ways,
cither by kinship or by locdlity. Kinship tribes historically precede
locality tribes and are almost everywhere displaced by them” (ibid.:
76). The new manuscripts of 1857-58 therefore lend support to
Engels’s (1954a:132; orig. 1884) claim that he and Marx had set
forth Henry Maine’s ideas about the transition from “status to con-
tract” as far back as 1848.

H. S. Maine, the English jurist, believed that he had made a co-
lossal discovery when he said that our entire progress in compar-
ison with previous epochs consists in our having evolved from
status to contract, from an inherited state of affairs to one volun-
tarily contracted—a statement which in so far as it is correct, was
contained long ago in the Communist Manifesto.

Actually, of course, Ferguson and Millar were responsible for a still
earlier formulation of the same trend of thought.

MARX'S IGNORANCE OF PRIMITIVES

Despite occasional insights, Marx’s treatment of prefeudal
society is highly schematic, superficial, and disorganized. The an-
cient type includes varieties which evolved over thousands of years
from tiny city-states to the Roman Empire. Asiatic society includes
independent village communities and gigantic Oriental despotisms:
societies as diverse as those of peasant Russia, Mexico, Peru, “the
ancient Celts and some tribes of India” (Marx 1965:70; orig. 1857~
58). As for the stage of primitive communalism, it is obvious
that Marx’s knowledge of ethnography had still not advanced much
beyond that of Turgot or Rousseau. As in “The German Ideology,”
pastoral, agricultural, and hunting modes of existence are indiscrim-
inately associated with “tribal community, the natural common
body” (ibid.:68). Hobsbawm, who attempts to defend Marx and
Engels’s understanding of Greco-Roman history and of India (al-
though Henry Maine clearly surpassed them in both areas) frankly
admits the poverty of their knowledge of primitive societies:

At the time the Formen (1857-8) were written, Marx’s and
Engels’ knowledge of primitive society was . . . not based on
any serious knowledge of tribal societies, for modern anthropology
was in its infancy . . . [HOBSBAWM 1965:25].

The ignorance of Marx and Engels with respect to nine-tenths of
human history does not appear quite as natural to the anthropologist
as to the Marxist philosopher. Granted that anthropology was in its

227

i



===== PAGE 119 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

infancy when Marx wrote The Critique of Political Economy (1859),
it does not follow that the failure to use ethnographic data was pri-
marily a reflection of that circumstance. Rather we must consider
the fact that almost all of the sources employed by Tylor in his
Researches into the Early History of Mankind were already available.
Instead of the infancy of anthropology, one suspects the dead hand
of Hegel, with the latter's contempt for knowledge of the “unpro-
gressive” parts of mankind. When Marx and Engels declared in the
very first line of the Communist Manifesto, “The history of all
hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles,” the im-
mense residual category, “prehistory,” during which there are no
classes, is banished from view, not simply because it deals with
classless societies, but because such societies were conventionally re-
garded as uninteresting and unilluminating.

No prejudice is more calculated to arouse bitter feelings among
anthropologists than that of the Furopean historian who feels he has
nothing to learn from the history of savages, because savages cannot
“contribute to history.” This bitterness arises not only from the senti-
ment that primitives are human too, but from a practical conviction
that ethnographic data are indispensable for a science of culture. In
this context it might seem that the profound neglect of Marx by
anthropology is merely the reciprocal of Marx’s neglect of primitives.
It would at least seem the better part of charity to attribute the an-
thropologist’s ignorance of Marx, in contrast to his knowledge of
such third-order luminaries as Gustav Klemm and Adolf Bastian,
to this quid pro quo. But other circumstances intervene and compel
us toward different conclusions.

MARX AND ANTHROPOLOGY

There is no doubt that a consensus exists among con-
temporary anthropologists that Marx and Engels are irrelevant to the
history of anthropological theory. Robert Lowie did not even
permit these names to appear in his index; while T. K. Penniman
(1965:52-53) allots Marx a few disjointed lines, and A. I. Hallowell
(1960) mentions Comte and Buckle but not Marx. According to Al-
fred Meyer (1954:22), cultural anthropology “developed entirely
independently from Marxism.” This neglect, if true, was surely un-
deserved. There are additional aspects of Marx and Engels’s ap-
proach to cultural evolution which demand that their work be
placed in the mainstream of the history of anthropological theory.
First, despite Marx and Engels’s initial neglect of ethnographic data,

228

B ool

8. Dialectical Materialism

their formulation of the principles of cultural evolution was intended
as a contribution to the explanation of cultural differences and simi-
larities with respect to all cultural types. It is in this regard that their
contribution was strictly analogous to Darwin’s principle of “natural
selection”—as an explanatory principle, applicable not just to one
phylum or genus, but to the evolution of all life forms. Second, toward
the end of his life, Marx seized upon the opportunity furnished by the
publication of Morgan’s Ancient Society to redress his neglect of the
primitive world. His notes furnished the inspiration for Engels's The
Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, an event which,
as we shall see, destroys Meyer’s claims about the lack of relationship
between Marxism and the development of cultural anthropology. But
first we must attend to the nature of these theories themselves.

MARX S PRINCIPLE OF CULTURAL
SELECTION

In the “Preface” to The Critique of Political Economy
(not included in the original 1859 edition), Marx summed up his
strategy for achieving an explanation of cultural evolution, in what is
undoubtedly the closest equivalent in the social sciences to Darwin’s
pnncnple of natural sclection:

In the social production “luch men carry on they enter into
definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their
will; these relations of production correspond to a definite stage of
development of their material powers of production. The sum total
of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure
of society—the real foundation, on which rise legal and political
superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness. The mode of production in material life determines
the general character of the social, political and spiritual processes
of life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their
existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines
their consciousness [1904:11~12].

Beyond this point, Marx’s exposition, while no less lucid, refers not
to social life in general, but rather to class society. Thus, we learn
that the “material forces of produchon .. . come in conflict with the
existing relations of production,” and that thence commences “the
period of social revolution” when “the entire immense superstruc-
ture is more or less rapidly transformed.” Here the Hegelian and
revolutionary activist ingredients in Marx would come forward to
overwhelm the more general strategy.

229



===== PAGE 120 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE HEGELIAN MONKEY

If we grant the relevance of Marx’s analysis of the “inner
contradictions” of nineteenth-century capitalism, there remains con-
siderable doubt concerning the relevance of the same analysis with
respect to the modified capitalism of the modern industrially advanced
Euro-American nations. In some cases at least—as in the mixed econo-
mies of the Scandinavian democracies—capitalism’s “internal contra-
dictions” seem to have been solved by multiple compromises, by
the dreaded “revisionism,” rather than by the “negation of the nega-
tion.” The dialectic, however, grows less useful as its principles of anal-
ysis are applied to situations increasingly remote from the social system
which inspired its founders. Marx’s attempt to identify the inner
Hegelian logic of the breakdown of the Greco-Roman world into
feudalism was singularly unsuccessful. His treatment of the Asiatic
type was even less rewarding. If the great oriental despotisms of
Egypt and Babylonia contained the seeds of their own destruction,
they remained dormant for remarkably long epochs. When we get
to the domain of pre-state societies, however, the dialectic is clearly
just so much excess baggage. Morgan, of course, pictured progress
from Savagery to Civilization as a smooth unfolding of germ ideas
under the tutelage of natural selection. As we shall see, when Engels
attempted to assimilate Morgan’s scheme to a materialist view of
world history, his vague dialectical excursions become wholly super-
fluous and inconsequential. It seems impossible not to conclude, there-
fore, that if dialectical materialism is a useful guide to sociocultural
analysis, it is as a special case of a more general materialist strategy.
As a local mode of analysis, which arose at the juncture of romanticism
and industrialism, it is ill suited for the general history of mankind.
It is a romanticized, mysticized, partisan materialism, appropriate to
men who wish to foment a revolution based on mid-nineteenth-cen-
tury European class structure and ideology. It is Marx’s more general
materialist formulation that deserves our closest scrutiny.

MARX AND ENGELS: CULTURAL
MATERIALISTS

Despite the Hegelian monkey on their back, Marx and En-
gels must be credited with an important “breakthrough.” There

were many predecessors and contemporaries who were convinced that
natural law governed the rcalm of sociocultural phenomena. But

230

8. Dialectical Materialism

Marx and Engels were the first to show how the problem of con-
sciousness and the subjective experience of the importance of ideas
for behavior could be reconciled with causation on the physicalist
model. If there had been an orderliness in human history, it cannot,
as the Enlightenment philosophers supposed, have originated from
the orderliness of men’s thoughts. Men do not think their way into
matrilineality, the couvade, or Iroquois cousin terminology. In the
abstract, can a good reason be found why anyone should bother to
think such apparently improbable thoughts? And if one man had
thought of them, whence arose the compulsion and the power to
convince others of their propriety? For surely it could not be that
these improbable ideas construed as mere spontancous products of
fancy occur simultaneously to dozens of people at a time. Obviously,
therefore, thoughts must be subject to constraints; that is, they have
causes and are made more or less probable in individuals and groups
of individuals by prior conditions.

It is tempting to suppose that these prior conditions are prior
thoughts, and that, as in the Enlightenment model, one idea leads
to another. The development of mathematics and the physical sci-
ences might be described fairly successfully in this manner, but the
same track takes us nowhere if we seek to explain matrilineality or
the couvade. There is no purely logical progression which unites these
practices with prior or subsequent practices. Indeed, as we have seen,
one of the main sources of error of late-nineteenth-century attempts
to reconstruct world history was the assumption that logic alone
would suffice to unravel the relationship between matrilineality and
patrilineality, exogamy and endogamy, and all the other aspects of
cultural evolution.

We are led inexorably to conclude that thoughts about institutions
are constrained by the institutions under which men do their thinking.
Now there arises the question, whence come the institutions?
Marx attempted to answer this question by giving separate consider-
ation to different varieties of institutions. He split the nonideological
aspects of sociocultural life into two parts: the economic structure
(“the real foundation”) and the “legal and political superstructure.”
He came to distinguish, therefore, three major sociocultural seg-
ments: (1) the economic base; (2) the legal-political arrangements,
which in modemn terms correspond to social structure, or social organi-
zation; and (3) “social consciousness” or ideology. Marx and Engels
then boldly proclaimed that it was in the economic base that the
explanation for both parts of the superstructure—social organization
and ideology—were to be found.

231

|
|
i



===== PAGE 121 =====

T

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 8. Dialectical Materialism

Why was it not the other way round? Why not the dominance of
social organization over economics? The answer here is contained in
the phrase which associates “relations of production” with “a definite
stage of development” of man’s “material powers of production.” It
is the stage of development of the material powers of production
which renders the “relations of production” independent of man’s
will. For no group of men can will into existence whenever and
wherever they choose, the apparatus of production—coup de poing,
plows, or Bessemer converters—except in a definite order of progres-
sion. That order of progression corresponds precisely to what the
combined efforts of archaeologists and ethnographers have revealed
it to be. The unbroken chain of technological innovations which
connects digital computers with Oldowan choppers does not admit
of deviations or leaps (although the rate of change might conceivably
vary rather widely). Stone tools had to come before metal tools;
spears Niad to come before bows and arrows; hunting and gathering
had to precede pastoralism and agriculture; the digging stick had to
precede the plow; the flint strike-a-light had to be invented before
the safety match; oars and sails had to precede the steamboat; and
handicrafts had to precede industrial manufacture. Indeed, none of
the major opponents of cultural materialism has ever seriously ques-
tioned these facts.

The Boasians, for example, frequently pointed out that technology
is cumulative and that objective measures of progress are possible in
this realm. Thus, the only point at issue (aside from details con-
cerning the order of emergence of certain innovations) is whether
“the mode of production in material life determines the general
character of the social, political and spiritual” aspects of sociocultural
life. This, it will be seen at once, is an eminently empirical issue, not
to be answered by logic alone.

THE MEANINGC OF ‘‘MODE OF
PRODUCTION’’

Unfortunately, the formulation of the empirical tests of the
cultural-materialist strategy has been impaired by ambiguities inherent
in Marx and Engels’s definition of “base.” A large literature has
accumulated concerning whether or not Marx and Engels intended to
give the technological factors cqual weight with the “relations” or
organization of production (cf. BOBER 1927). One of the prin-
cipal sources of this confusion resides in the fact that Marx and En-
gels did not relate the transformation of feudalism into capitalism

232

to changes in the technology of production. Instead, the transition to
capitalism is supposed to occur as a result of the organization of the
craft and merchant guilds. Capitalism was in existence for two hun-
dred years before innovations in the technology of production be-
come important in Marx’s analysis. Here we may venture to express
our disinterest in the attempt to find out precisely what Marx and
Engels intended by the phrase “mode of production.” It is as evi-
dent as it is understandable that an operationalized metataxonomy of
sociocultural entities was not achieved by Marx and Engels any more
than it has been achieved by the entire combined effort of twentieth-
century social science. For most social scientists, the boundary be-
tween economics and technology remains as hazy today as it was a
hundred years ago. The same may be said with respect to another
evident fault in Marx’s threefold sectioning of sociocultural systems,
namely, the failure to consider the modifying effect of environment
upon the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of a “definite
stage of production.” Moving toward the other end of the economic
sector, we may also note the continued vagueness of the line which
separates the organization of work from the organization of law and
order and social interaction. Indeed, there is no more widely mis-
understood term than “work” itself. Since all behavior produces
some environmental effect, what portion is not “production”? Fi-
nally, we may take brief notice of the failure of social science to
ground its categories in definite etic operations, with the result that
mentalistic, subjective, and idealist—i.e., “emic”’—entities contami-
nate even the most devotedly materialist analyses (see Chap. 20).
We may take it as axiomatic that precise demarcation of the sectors
of sociocultural systems is not possible without the prior establishment
of an etic data language.

THE GREAT UP-ENDING

Despite the shadowy fringes on the concept “mode of pro-
duction,” there never has been any confusion concerning the general
nature of the factors to which Marx pointed as the key to the under-
standing of sociocultural causality. It was not merely Hegel whom
Marx “found standing on his head,” but the entire body of Enlighten-
ment social philosophy. Before Marx, the analysis of “mind” was re-
garded as the only conceivable understanding to which man, the “ra-
tional animal,” could aspire. It is a pity that Marx’s dialectical fixation
has deprived so many social scientists of the enjoyment of that great
up-ending of “heaven and earth.”

233


===== PAGE 122 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

In direct contrast to German philosophy, which descends from
heaven to earth, here we ascend from earth to heaven. That is to
say, we do not set out from what men say, imagine, or conceive,
nor from what has been said, thought, imagined, or conceived of
men, in order to arrive at men in the flesh. We begin with real,
active men, and from their real life-process show the development
of the ideological reflexes and echoes of this life-process . . .
[MARX and ENGELS in BOTTOMORE 1956:75].

Let us take note at this juncture of a second enduring theme in
Marx and Engels’s materialist program, the distinction between what
men “say, imagine and conceive” about themselves and their social
life and the actual or “real” nature of that life—their “real life-
processes.” To be sure, this theme is not specific to cultural ma-
terialism; it has already been encountered in the works of Ferguson
and Millar (see p. 51); and it will recur in the discussions of
Durkheim, British social anthropology, Freudian psychological an-
thropology, and French structuralism. All of these approaches are
predicated upon the assumption that the actual participants in social
life are incapable of an objective description of their own behavior
or of a scientifically valid explanation of that behavior. All of these
approaches thus share in common a commitment to clearing away
the errors of autoanalysis, the fagade of ideology, the rationalized
appearances of things, in order to penetrate into the deeper levels
of both thought and action. In several instances, however, as in
the culture and personality and French schools, the penetration
beneath the surface aims at a deeper understanding of what the
actor thinks or feels, rather than at an explanation of the socio-
cultural factors which constrain and direct his thoughts and feel-
ings. In other instances, most notably in Durkheim and the British
social anthropologists, the focus more closely resembles that of
cultural materialism. The announced goal at least is to explain social
facts in terms of social facts, rather than ideas in terms of other ideas.
But the structural-functionalists, as we shall see, do not even pretend
to be able to explain sociocultural differences and similarities. Their
insistence upon rendering psychological facts in a “structural” idiom
is thus itself a most remarkable sociocultural phenomenon, calling
for an extensive application of the principle that manifest content
and autoanalysis are not to be trusted. In contrast, the relationship
of the priority of observer-orientation over actor-orientation is an
integral part of the cultural-materialist program. The hypothesis that
causal explanations reside in the material conditions of life énjoins
an attitude of extreme skepticism toward the relevance of the manifest

234

e

8. Dialectical Materialism

meanings of all verbal events. This is beautifully expressed in Marx’s
critique of Feuerbach: “Social life is essentially practical. All mys-
teries which mislead theory to mysticism find their rational solution
in human practice and in the comprehension of this practice” (MARx

1941:82).

DIACHRONIC CAUSAL FUNCTIONALISM

Although many readers will regard it as self-evident, we
should also note that Marx and Engels depended upon a “func-
tionalist” model of sociocultural life. This in itself was not re-
markable, since Comte, Spencer, and Morgan were also functionalists,
long before the German diffusionists and the Boasians gave Bronislaw
Malinowski the pretext for supposing that there was some novelty
attached to the idea that the parts of culture are interrelated. More-
over, Marx and Engels shared with Comte, Spencer, and Morgan a
functionalism which was fully compatible, indeed was deliberately
subordinate to an interest in change, in contrast to the twentieth-
century functionalists who were capable only of synchronic analysis.
But there is one respect in which the functionalism of Marx and
Engels merits special comment. As a causal, as well as diachronic
and synchronic model, the economic-structural-ideological concate-
nation provides the basis for stipulating the more or less durable and
influential parts of the system. This provides, in theory at least, some
prospect of being able to discern degrees of functional effectiveness or
“fit,” as between an innovation and an older element in the system.
The measurement of degrees of functional effectiveness is essential to
diachronic functionalism, if one intends eventually to account for the
fact that the path of evolution is littered with extinct forms whose
parts were once eminently functional. It is thus the cause-effect
relationship between base and superstructure which provides “the
strain toward consistency,” a feature which gets introduced into non-
causal functional models as a mysterious “essence” or “propensity”
of social systems.

Thus, the Marxian functionalist model escapes the ultimate vapidity

of the modern synchronic functionalist schools, by explicitly denying’

that all the features of a sociocultural system contribute equally to
its maintenance. Indeed, as a result of the dialectic aspects of Marx's
scheme, dysfunctional ingredients are not only accommodated, but
assigned a central role as system-changing variables. Such variables
are functional in a diachronic sense, since they are responsible for the
emergence of a new adaptive system out of the old.

235

NN



===== PAGE 123 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

It cannot be denied that the Hegelian heritage has its merits at
this juncture, since it is wholly concerned with the problem of how
conflict leads to “higher” unity. We shall in a later chapter have
occasion to observe the antics of the synchronic functionalists as they
attempt to interpret hate, witchcraft, and violence as functional, sys-
tem-maintaining variables. On the other hand, it is not necessary to
concede to the dialectic a monopoly on functional models capable of
handling conflict. The decisive advantage of the Marxian model is
that it is diachronic and evolutionary, not that it is dialectic. Any
diachronic model is capable of accommodating the fact that strains
may accumulate until consistency on the old basis is no longer fea-
sible, and there is a violent collapse in the whole system. But there is
another kind of accumulation of dysfunctional strains which defeats
the Hegelian dialectic: evolution through the slow accumulation of
minor changes wrought by minor adjustments to minor stresses.
What is needed is a causal-functional model which can explain all
varieties of evolutionary processes.

WERE MARX AND ENGELS RACISTS?

The Marxian strategy was remarkably free of the endemic
racism of the nincteenth century. Marx explicitly conceived it as his
historical mission to link Hegelianism with eighteenth-century ma-
terialism. As materialists, Marx and Engels considered themselves the
heirs of D'Holbach and Helvetius, whom they traced to Locke through
the French philosopher Etienne Bonnot de Condillac. In The Holy.
Family (1845), they wrote:

[Condillac] expounded Locke’s ideas and proved that not only the
soul, but the senses too, not only the art of creating ideas, but
also the art of sensuous perception are matters of experience and
habit. The whole development of man therefore depends on edu-
cation and environment [quoted in SELsamM and MARTEL 1963:

58-59]-
It is clear that Marx and Engels’s political program was predicated on
the same radical emphasis upon experience that had served as the
ideology of the French Revolution. They belicved in the “omnipo-
tence of education” and regarded socialism and communism as vir-
tually synonymous with radical environmentalism:

There is no need of any great penetration to see from the teaching
of materialism on the original goodness and equal intellectual
endowment of man, the omnipotence of experience, habit, and

236

8. Dialectical Materialism

education, and the influence of environment on man, the great
significance of industry, the justification of enjoyment, etc., how
necessarily materialism is connected with communism and social-

ism [ibid.:60].

This does not mean that Marx and Engels achieved a modern
understanding of the relationship between heredity and encultura-
tion. Their environmentalism, like that of Monboddo, Condorcet,
Samuel Stanhopce Smith, and Lamarck, provided for a rapid, direct
feedback between race and culture. The inheritance of acquired
characteristics was for them the main vehicle of bio-evolutionary
change. For example, Engels’s explanation of the “transition from
ape to man” invoked a process of increasing manual dexterity
passed on by heredity from one generation to the next:

.. . But the decisive step was taken: the hand became free and
could henccforth attain ever greater dexterity and skill, and the
greater flexibility thus acquired was inherited and increased from
generation to generation.

Thus the hand is not only the organ of labour, it is also the
product of labour. Only by labour, by adaptation to ever new
operations, by inheritance of the resulting special development of
muscles, ligaments, and, over longer periods of time, bones as
well, and by the ever renewed employment of these inherited im-
provements in new, more and more complicated operations, has
the human hand attained the high degree of perfection that has
enabled it to conjure into being the pictures of Raphael, the statues
of Thorwaldsen, the music of Paganini [1954b:230; orig. 1876;
quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:107].

It was this strong Lamarckian theme which laid the foundation for
the twenticth-century disaster of Soviet genetics. Under Lysenko, it
became a Stalinist dogma that the direct feedback between cytoplasm
and environment, rather than the indirect feedback mediated by
Mendelian genetic processes, was responsible for bio-evolutionary nov-
elty. The magnitude of this error cannot be overemphasized. But
the attempt on the part of certain biologists to compound the dis-
repute of Lysenko by linking Lamarckianism to racism is an equally
grave disservice to science (to social science). Thus, H. J. Muller
gave as one of his reasons for resigning from the U.S.S.R. Academy
of Science the fact that

. . the inheritance of acquired characters must lead inevitably,
and indeed by the admission of some of its adherents, to the same
dangerous Fascistic conclusions as that of the Nazis; that the

237

i
}
|



===== PAGE 124 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

economically less advanced peoples and classes of the world have
become actually inferior in their heredity. The Nazis would have
the allegedly lower genetic status, a cause, while the Lysenkoists
would have it an effect of the lower opportunity of the less fortu-
nate groups for mental and physical development [quoted in ZIRKLE

1959:109].
Zitkle goes on to indict both Engels and Marx with racist propensities,
as evidenced by their obvious lack of sensitivity to the feelings of
Negroes and Jews. Engels, extolling the importance of “the principle
of the origin of all thought content from experience” (ie., Locke’s
principle), attempts to show how the same principle can be applied
to the social group as a whole:

By recognizing the inheritance of acquired characters . . . in-
dividual experience can be replaced to a certain extent by the
results of the experiences of a number of its ancestors. If, for
instance, among us the mathematical axioms seem self-evident to
every eight-year-old child, and in no need of proof from experience,
this is solely the result of “accumulated inheritance.” It would be
difficult to teach them by a proof to a bushman or Australian

negro [1954b:353].
Zitkle goes on to insist that Marx “also esteemed the different races
very differently” and that “toward some of them, he was openly
contemptuous.” He then quotes Marx’s letter of July 30, 1862,

addressed to Engels, on the subject of Ferdinand Lassalle’s failure
to provide him with a loan:

The Jewish nigger Lassalle, who fortunately left at the end of the
week, has, again fortunately, lost 5000 Thaler in a bad specula-
tion. . . . Now it is completely clear to me that, as his head shape
and hair growth prove, he is descended from the Negroes who
joined Moses on the journey out of Egypt (if not, his mother or
grandmother on his father’s side crossed with a nigger). Now this
combination of Judaism and Teutonism with a negroid ground
substance must produce a wonderful product. The obtrusiveness of
the fellow is indecd mnegroid. . . . One of the great discoveries
of our nigger—which he shared with me as a “most trusted
friend”—is that the Pelagians stemmed from the Semites . . .
[quoted in ZIRKLE 1959:111].

Despite this display of bad taste, directed as much against his own
ancestry as against Lassalle’s, Marx simply will not fit the mold of the
racial determinist. Nor docs the history of the principle of acquired
characteristics admit of a close association with racism. Both Samuel

238

B ol

8. Dialectical Materialism

Stanhope Smith and Herbert Spencer believed in the inheritance of
acquired characteristics. For the one, this meant that physical and
psychological racial differences were as evanescent as sicknesses; for
the other, it meant that no fundamental social change could occur
until human nature slowly evolved to a higher plane.

The crucial question concerning race at mid-century was not whether
there were biological differences, nor whether these were subject to
environmental modification, but rather how long it would take to
change them. The answer of Marx and Engels was contrary to the
prevailing view: they predicted great changes in their own lifetime.

Although Marx believed that there were individual differences in
intellectual and physical aptitudes, he clearly saw these as subordinate
to the effects of societal, class, and individual learning experiences:
“In principle a porter differs less from a philosopher than a mastiff
from a greyhound. It is the division of labor which has set a gulf be-
tween them” (MARXx 1963:120; orig. 1847). Marx declared in
his critique of Proudhon, “all history is nothing but a continuous
transformation of human nature” (ibid.:147). Now while this was a
position to which the Spencerians also wholeheartedly subscribed, there
was a fundamental difference. Marx was a revolutionary who devoted
his life to the assumption that radical political changes, involving the
up-ending of the social order on a global scale, could be accomplished
within one or two generations. The Spencerians, on the other hand,
while equally devoted to their own brand of “progress,” warned
that human nature could be changed only at a rate commensurate
with the workings of natural selection. The differential consequences
of the biological feedback in Marx’s and Spencer’s theories are well
understood in the political implications of the vernacular contrast
between “revolution” and “evolution” (a distinction which, in an-
other sense, is technically incorrect, since revolution is a form of
evolution). Thus while Marx shared with Spencer the prevailing and
erroneous notion of a Lamarckian feedback between behavior and
heredity, his conclusions concerning the human potentiality for rapid
change correspond to the modern post-Boasian understanding of the
relative strengths of enculturation and racial variables.

The same must be said of Engels, who explicitly associated his
view about the mathematical capacities of various races with Spencer’s
belief that the sense of mathematical proof is acquired and trans-
mitted through heredity: “Spencer is right in as much as what thus
appears to us to be the self-evidence of these axioms is inherited”
(ENGELS 1954b:340). The implications of these views, however, are al-
most totally at variance with their usual significance among nineteenth-

239



===== PAGE 125 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

century Spencerians. For Engels, the hereditary Euclidean incapacities
of bushmen were evanescent effects brought on by the same sort of
deprivations which kept Monboddo’s chimpanzees from learned dis-
course with the philosophes. Thus Engels, in Origin of the Family,
Private Property and the State, shared with Gobineau and the entire
corps of mid-century anthropologists, including Tylor, Morgan and
Spencer, the belief that the Germans were “a highly gifted Aryan
tribe” (1954a:254). But he went out of his way to give a sociocultural,
rather than a racist, explanation for this stereotype. “What was the
mysterious charm with which the Germans infused new vitality into
dying Europe? Was it the innate power of the German race, as our
jingo historians would have it?” (ibid.).

By no means . . . their personal efficiency and bravery, their love
of liberty, and their democratic instinct, which regarded all public
affairs as its own affairs, in short, all these qualities which the
Romans had lost and which were alone capable of forming new
states and of raising new nationalities out of the muck of the
Roman world—what were they but the characteristic features of
barbarians in the upper stage, fruits of their gentile constitution
[i.e., their clan organization] [ibid.:254~55]?

THE STRATEGY OF CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

It should be obvious to all scholars who are genuinely con-
cerned with the scientific study of human history, that despite their
Hegelian and revolutionary political environments, Marx and Engels
had succeeded in going further than any of their contemporaries
toward the formulation of a “law” of cultural evolution. The major
ingredients in this “law” in retrospect may be seen as: (1) the
trisection of sociocultural systems into techno-economic base, social
organization, and ideology; (2) the explanation of ideology and
social organization as adaptive responses to techno-economic condi-
tions; (3) the formulation of a functionalist model providing for
interactive effects between all parts of the system; (4) the provision
for analysis of both system-maintaining and system-destroying var-
iables; and, (5) the pre-eminence of culture over race.

The greatest caution is required if we are to comprehend the sense
in which it is legitimate to ascribe to this unprecedented ensemble
of proposals a status equivalent to Darwin’s discovery of the “law of
evolution.” It must be established with uncompromising clarity that
Darwin’s so-called “law of evolution” was not a “law” but a strategy:
a master research design for explaining the course of bio-evolu-

240

8. Dialectical Materialism

tion. This strategy was introduced by Darwin in the guise of what he
called “the principle of natural selection.” The latter purports to
explain dll biotransformation; yet in actuality, it explains none. Its
value resides exclusively in the general directions it imparts to the
researcher, who seeks an understanding in nomothetic terms of the
trajectory of phylogenetic modifications. It does not matter whether
the researcher is interested in amphibia or mammals, worms or fish,
the strategy is the same: the explanation of biological transforma-
tions is to be found in the adaptative advantages (measured in
terms of reproductive success), which particular innovations confer
upon the organism and its lineage. The statement of this strategy
per se yields no specific information concerning the quantitative
or qualitative nature of the advantages in question. We are not told
whether it is resistance to stress, avoidance of predators, improvement
in thermal efficiency, invasion of new ecological zones, better care
of young, etc. Each application of the principle of natural selection
results in a separate theory, the confirmation or rejection of which
is dependent upon logical and empirical operations whose specific
terms and instruments cannot be deduced from the general statement.

The admissible sense in which one may propose Marx as the dis-
coverer of a “law of cultural evolution” is that which separates the
specific application of the cultural-materialist program on behalf of
explaining capitalism from the general strategy set forth in the “Pref-
ace” to The Critique of Political Economy. This strategy states
that the explanation for cultural differences and similarities is to be
found in the techno-economic processes responsible for the production
of the material requirements of biosocial survival. It states that the
techno-economic parameters of sociocultural systems exert selective
pressures in favor of certain types of organizational structures and
upon the survival and spread of definite types of ideological complexes.

It states that in principle, all of the major problems of sociocultural -

differences and similarities can be solved by identifying the precise
nature of these selective parameters; yet as a general principle, it does
not commit itself to the explanation of any specific sociocultural
type or any specific set of institutions. It is possible, in other words,
to accept Marx’s research strategy without accepting any of his analy-
ses of the specific phenomena of capitalist and feudal societies. This is
not to suggest that Marx’s analysis of nineteenth-century capitalism,
the F.rcnch Revolution, or of feudalism can be demeaned or ignored,
but simply that in anthropological perspective, a strategy purportedly
applicable to the study of three thousand sociocultural systems is an

event of far greater significance than the application of that strategy
to one or two of them.

241

|


===== PAGE 126 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE MYTH OF THE MONADIC
EXPLANATION

Before discussing the application of Marx and Engels’s pro-
posal to ethnographic data, we must take note of what is probably the
most frequently misunderstood and misrepresented aspect of the
cultural-materialist strategy. It is repeated ad nauseam by persons
unfamiliar with the research and data-processing requirements of cul-
tural hypotheses, that sociocultural phenomena are “too complex to be
explained by any one factor.” We hear over and over again the refrain
that economic explanations of phenomena are “single-factor explana-
tions” and that economic explanations are therefore invariably “simplis-
tic explanations.” For example, the historical particularist Melville
Herskovits (1953:118) lauded Franz Boas for his lack of economic,
geographical, and racial determinism, with the following “simplistic”
reference: “He was obviously no Marxist—we have seen how vigor-
ously he rejected any simplistic explanation of social phenomena,
whose complexity none realized better than he.” One does not know
to which “Marxists” Herskovits was referring, but there are at least
two who are not easily associated with simplemindedness, namely,
Marx and Engels. One more typical instance of the simplistic single-
factor myth can be seen in the following passage from the historian
Frederick Teggart (1941:233):

This theory, then, . . . is unacceptable as an explanation of how
man has come to be as he is, for . . . it is based upon a limited
view of the facts, and represents a projection of a single factor upon
the complexity of human experience.

The purely customary status of this argument is exposed as soon as
one actually begins to work on a specific problem from a cultural-
materialist point of view.

Consider for example what is involved in a cultural-materialist expla-
nation of the difference between race relations in Brazil and the United
States. The prevailing idealist explanations stress Portuguese national
character and Catholicism versus Anglo-Saxon racism and Protes-
tantism. The materialist explanation starts with the ecological potential
of colonial Brazil as compared with colonial North America, differ-
ences reflected in sugarcane plantations, as opposed to tobacco and
cotton plantations. Next the differences in migratory patterns must
be observed: large numbers of homesteaders and yeomen from over-
populated England, landowners and adventurers from underpopulated

242

'

8. Dialectical Materialism

Portugal. There is a more nearly balanced sex ratio among the English
colonists; a markedly unbalanced one among the Portuguese. It is
noted that miscegenation with African slaves occurs in both cases but
with different treatment of the mulatto offspring. The Brazilians,
lacking homesteaders (“poor whites”), assign the mixed types to
cattle herding, local nonexport agriculture, and other services and
productive tasks essential to the support of the sugar plantations; the
Americans fill the analogous roles with the marginal whites, with
the consequence that the mulatto in the South is either kept in
slavery or expelled northward; in Brazil, the mulatto and freed
slave colonize the interior; moreover, the demographic balance be-
tween the races works for the Negro and mulatto in Brazil, and
against them in the United States: 3 to 1 versus 1 to 3 in 1820. Sugar-
cane, the basis of slavery in Brazil, experienced a long decline in the
world market; cotton, the basis of the nineteenth-century slave system
in the United States, was the world’s most lucrative export crop when
the northern industrial interests challenged the political hegemony of
the southern slavocracy. The United States slaves were declared free
(and only in the enemy slave states!) during the height of the most
ferocious war in history. This was done in order to encourage up-
risings in the South and to gain conscripts for the Union Army.
Brazil's slaves were freed by an Imperial decree at a moment when
the entire slave economy was in its senility and when there were
millions of ex-slaves and racially mixed persons scattered throughout
the interior. In the United States, the freed slaves faced an implacable
Whitc majority, with whom they had to compete for land and jobs
(in a nascent industrial economy). The United States whites invoked a
tule of descent whereby mixed types were jammed into the Negro
category, while Brazil had already evolved a system for establishing ra-
cial identity which did not depend on a descent rule. Hence, the
United States acquired the conflict-ridden two-caste system in contrast
to the continuous color spectrum of Brazilian multiracialism (cf.
HARRIS 1964b).

This sketch, of course, fails to mention many additional variables
which would also have to be considered were we actually to attempt
a fullscale analysis. It should be obvious, however, that there is
n'othing simplistic about the economic, demographic, ecological, poli-
tical, military, and cognitive data which would be necessary to con-
ﬁm? the hypotheses generated by the assumption that the pattern
O_f Inter-racial conflict in the United States is rooted in material con-

_ditions, rather than in Anglo-Saxon national character.

Sy

243

|


===== PAGE 127 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

MARX AND ENGELS WARN AGAINST
OVERSIMPLIFICATION

Some may object that Marx and Engels had no such compli-
cated skein of interrelated phenomena in mind when they sought
to reduce history to the question of the ownership of the means of
production. But such an objection could only be sustained by ig-
norance of Marx’s analyses of specific events, such as the French
Revolution, or the American Civil War. It was no less an economic
determinist than Engels who pointed out that there was a danger in
forgetting the difference between the main principle of a strategy and
its actual application to concrete cases. In a letter to Joseph Bloch,
written in 18go, Engels said:

Marx and [ are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that younger
writers sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due
to it. We had to emphasize this main principle in opposition to
our adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the time,
the place or the opportunity to allow the other elements involved
in the interaction to come into their rights. But when it was a
case of presenting a section of history, that is, of a practical ap-
plication, the thing was different and there no error was possible.
Unfortunately, however, it happens only too often that people
think they have fully understood a theory and can apply it without
more ado from the moment they have mastered its main principles,
and those even not always correctly. And I cannot exempt many
of the more recent “Marxists” from this reproach, for the most
wonderful rubbish has been produced from this quarter too,
[ENGELS in sELsaM and MARTEL 1963:205-6].

Far from propounding “simplistic” explanations in terms of a single
factor, Marx and Engels repeatedly emphasized the need for con-
sidering the interaction between base and superstructure in account-
ing for any particular historical situation. They made it perfectly clear
that the determinism which they saw extending from base to super-
structure was not an absolute one-to-one effect. Engels used the term
“ultimately” to qualify the selective influence of the mode of pro-
duction on ideology, much as we would today seek to qualify any
deterministic statement in probabilistic terms, given a sufficient num-
ber of cases and in the long run:

According to the materialist conception of history the determining
element in history is ultimately the production and reproduction
in real life. More than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted.

244

el

8. Dialectical Materialism

If therefore somebody twists this into the statement that the
economic element is the only determining one, he transforms it
into a meaningless, abstract and absurd phrase. The economic
situation is the basis, but the various elements of the superstruc-
ture—political forms of the class struggle and its consequences,
constitutions established by the victorious class after a successful
battle, etc.—forms of law—and then even the reflexes of all these
actual struggles in the brains of the combatants: political, legal,
philosophical theories, religious ideas and their further develop-
ment into systems of dogma—also exercise their influence upon
the course of the historical struggles and in many cases prepon-
derate in determining their form [ibid.:204].

DID ANTHROPOLOGY DEVELOP
INDEPENDENTLY OF MARXISM?

In assessing the historical significance of Marx’ and Engels’s
materialist proposals, it will not suffice merely to enumerate and ex-
plicate the merits of the strategy against some absolute set of stan-
dards, such as logical coherence, ability to generate causal hypotheses,
compatibility with scientific canons of intersubjectivity, verifiability,
and operationalism. The merit of a strategy such as Darwin’s principle
of natural sclection resides not merely in its record of more or less
successful applications to specific problems, but rather in its promise
a_nd its performance relative to the promises and performances of
tival strategies. In like manner, we must compare the cultural-material-
ist strategy with its nearest rivals. Such a comparison, while taking
note of the peculiar liabilities of the dialectical version of cultural
materialism, cannot fail to recognize the predicament in which Hegel,
Comte, Bastian, Bachofen, and the other idealists were wallowing.
Sp§n§erism alone appeared a worthy alternative to the cultural-ma-
terialist strategy. But it is unnecessary for the purpose on hand to
pursue the comparison of Spencerism and Marxism. I shall leave it
to t_hle reader to trade the reductionism of the one against the dia-
leCt'lmsm of the other, the tautology of the “survival of the fittest”
against the ambiguities of the “mode of production.” It should require
no further discussion, however, to establish the point that the
strategy which Marx and Engels proposed was one which the emer-
gent science of culture could ill afford to judge inferior or to discard
without first putting to the test of ethnography and the comparative
method. Yet we have seen how Lowie could omit the very name of
Ma'rx from the History of Ethnological Theory, while Alfred Meyer
claims that cultural anthropology developed “entirely independent

245

i


===== PAGE 128 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of Marxism.” Was it possible that the European focus of Marx and
Engels's writing offended or bored the late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century anthropologists by its failure to discuss primitive
cultures? Was that the reason why anthropology could develop so
gloriously free of Marxist problems? We might almost suppose the
truth lay in this direction were it not for one awkward fact. This fact
is called Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.

MORGAN,S EFFECT ON MARX AND
ENGELS

Marx and Engels read omnivorously over a vast field. Their
attention was drawn to Morgan’s Ancient Society shortly after its
publication, and Marx at once recognized the need of revising his
own description of prehistoric evolution in the light of Morgan’s
superior knowledge of primitive institutions. While making an ex-
tensive abstract of Morgan’s work, Marx expressed the intention of
relating Morgan’s discoveries to the materialist interpretation of his-
tory. He did not live to complete this task, but Engels, working
from Marx’s notes, brought it to completion in 1884.

Ancient Society was a work of supreme importance to Marx and
Engels because it opened their eyes to the complexity of primitive
cultures and to the inadequacies of their own dabbling in this area.
Morgan, with his firsthand experience of American Indian tribes,
was obviously better qualified than any of his FEuropean rivals. Indeed,
Engels (1954a:47) appears, like many other library scholars, to have
been somewhat overawed by anthropological fieldwork, apparently
believing that Morgan “had spent the greater part of his life among
the Iroquois.” Engels’s opening sentence declares: “Morgan was the
first person with expert knowledge to attempt to introduce a definite
order into the prehistory of man.” Well over half of Engels’s
book consists of a summary paraphrase of Ancient Society. Such
new materials as occur are based on Engels’s own well-credentialed
knowledge of Greco-Roman and Furopean history. The important
point here is that as far as primitive culture is concerned, Marx and
Fngels bought Morgan lock, stock, and barrel. Morgan’s scheme, its
tri-part periodization, its evolution from sexual communism to monog:
amy, from gens to state, from matrilineality to patrilineality, became
the standard source of ethnological enlightenment for Marxists and
communists throughout the world—a state of affairs which lasted
well into the second quarter of the present century (cf. ToLsTOY

1952).
246

8. Dialectical Materialism

Morgan’s effect on Engels was perhaps greater than Marx had in-
tended. It appeared much later, to Stalinist theoreticians at least,
that Enygcls had compromised Marxism by the attempt to reconci]tz
Morgan’s prehistoric scheme with the principle that the mode of pro-
guchon_determincs history. For in his “Preface,” Engels declared glat

alccordl_ng to the materialistic conception, the determining factor in
history is the production and reproduction of immediate life,” a two-
fold process consisting of the “production of the means (;f subsis-
tence, o“f food, clothing and shelter and the tools requisite therefore”
and of thQ p‘roduction of human beings themselves, the propagation
of the species” (1954a:8). The reason for this startling innovation is
to be f}ound( in the previously discussed nonconformities between
Mor.gan s main techno-economic sequence and the evolution of the
family al.]d gens. Thus Engels was able to provide a cultural-materialist
explanation of the origin of the nuclear family, incest taboos, and clan
exogamy, only by subscribing to Morgan’s Darwinian hypotiwsis con-
cerning the deleterious effects of inbreeding. On this point Engel
quoted directly from Ancient Society: e

In this cver widening exclusion of blood relatives from marriage,
natural selection also continues to have its effect. In Mor, 1;’;
words, marriage between non-consanguineous gentes "tendcgé to
create a more vigorous stock physically and mentally. When two
advancing tribes are blended into one people . . . the new skull

and brain would widen and lengthen to th ili
e of ot g g o the sum of the capabili-

Even more indicative of Engels’s difficulty in providing a consistent
cultural-materialist version of prehistory is his adoption of Morgan
and_ Bachofen’s explanation of the origfn of monogamy. In a pass%wc
]Vjvhlch proves _th;%t even the world’s number two Marist could ha:c
ourgeois prejudices about sex, Ingels decides that primitive sexual

communism came to an end b i
ecause in effect the women enjoyed i
Iess than the men: menioyed i

Bachofen is again absolutely right when he contends throughout
that theﬂtmnsilion from what he terms “hetacrism” or “Sumpf-
zeugung” to monogamy was brought about essentially by the
women. tTh.c more the old traditional sexual relations lost their
naive, pmmtm_t jungle character, as a result of the development
0£ the economic cun(.htiuns of life, that is, with the undermining
;7_ thc] old Cnmmums.m and the growing density of the popula-
t101:1, tltt morcv degrading and oppressive must they have appcarcd
o the women; the more fervently must they have longed for the
right to chastity, to temporary or permnne;ﬂ marriage with onc

247



===== PAGE 129 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

man only, as a deliverance. This advance could not have originated
from the men, if only for the reason that they have never—not
even to the present day—dreamed of renouncing the pleasures of
actual group marriage. Only after the transition to pairing mar-
riage had been effected by the women could the men introduce
strict monogamy—for the women only, of course [ibid.:87-88].

THE EFFECT OF MARX AND ENGELS
ON THE INTERPRETATION OF MORGAN

But Marx and Engels were determined to find in Morgan
independent corroboration of the materialist interpretation of his-
tory. Engels described Morgan as the man who

rediscovered in America, in his own way, the materialist concep-
tion of history that had been discovered by Marx forty years ago,
and in his comparison of barbarism and civilization was led by
this conception to the same conclusions, in the main points, as
Marx had arrived at [ibid.:7].

The substantial obstacles to such a conclusion have been discussed in
the previous chapter. By omitting all reference to “germ thoughts”
and by skillful editing, Engels succeeded in bringing forth a suitably
materialistic Morgan. But it is Engels and not Morgan who presents
the first clear-cut periodization of prehistory, based on the mode of
production:

Savagery—the period in which the appropriation of natural prod-
ucts, ready for use, predominated; the things produced by man
were, in the main, instruments that facilitated this appropriation.
Barbarism—the period in which knowledge of cattle brecding and
land cultivation was acquired, in which methods of increasing
the productivity of nature through human activity were learnt.
Civilization—the period in which knowledge of the further work-
ing-up of natural products, of industry proper, and of art was
acquired [ibid.:46].

The moral of this part of our story is not that Engels at Marxs insti-
gation distorted Morgan’s view of history. That is probably true, but
it is insignificant. Moreover, the modifications which Engels intro-
duced were on the whole quite sound and imparted to Morgan’s
scheme a logical coherence that it lacked in the original. The signifi-
cant thing is that the cultural-materialist strategy had now, much for
the worse rather than for the better, become wedded to an interpreta- |
tion of primitive culture which was a by-product of a definitely non-

248

8. Dialectical Materialism

__materialist research-strategy. For anthropologists, the viability of that
strategy now became identified with the future of Morgan’s scheme.
With Morgan’s scheme incorporated into Communist doctrine, the
struggling science of anthropology crossed the threshold of the
twentieth century with a clear mandate for its own survival and
well-being: expose Morgan’s scheme and destroy the method on
which it was based. The anthropological attack against Morgan was
to have these consequences: (1) the abandonment of the compara-
tive method; (2) the rejection of the attempt to view history from
a nomothetic standpoint; (3) postponement of actual tests of the
cultural-materialist strategy during a forty-year interlude. Meyers
would have been closer to the truth had he stated that cultural
anthropology developed entirely in reaction to, instead of indepen-
dently of, Marxism.

249



===== PAGE 130 =====

Historical Particu-

larism: Boas

9

. a

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

Q98
0

During the first half of the twentieth century, anthropology in the
United States was characterized by a programmatic avoidance of
theoretical syntheses. The basic research strategy for this period was
formulated by Franz Boas, one of the most influential figures in the
history of the social sciences. Boas was guided by a distinctive sense
of inductive purity, which he transmitted to a generation of followers.
It was a creed, however, which paradoxically denied its own existence.
His students would admit only that Boas had trained them to pursue
their varied interests mindful of the data, free of prejudice, and dis-
trustful of all schemes. They explicitly denied that Boas was the
center of a “school.” His mission had been to rid anthropology of i‘ts
amateurs and armchair specialists by making ethnographic research in
the field the central experience and minimum attribute of profes-
sional status. With the passage of time, however, a definite central
theme suggested in the label historical particularism has come to
be associated with the Boasian period.

The perspective which we enjoy in these matters in no way dimin-
ishes the importance of Boas' contribution to the development of

250

anthropology or of anthropological theory. It is true that the strategy
of historical particularism required an almost total suspension of the
normal dialectic between fact and theory. The causal processes, the
trends, the long-range parallels were buried by an avalanche of nega-
tive cases. It is also true that the attempt to harden the fiber of
ethnographic inquiry- with higher standards of proof met with only
limited success, and we shall have to take into account the notable
instances in which Boas and his students abused the facts as others
before and after have done. But the standards he proposed remain
a permanent legacy.

Those who aver that Boas retarded the progress of anthropology as
a science make improper allowance for the cultural forces that lay
behind the historical particularist reform. There were culturally de-
termined ideological limits within which anthropological theory was
largely constrained. Transgressors left no heritage within anthropology
of which we are today aware. Boas and his first generation of students
were obliged to build professional, university-based anthropology
practically from the ground up. They were remarkably successful de-
spite the many obstacles to be overcome. The culturally prescribed
limits were not so narrow and well-defined that options did not
exist. We have merely to consider the fate of anthropology within
the Soviet Union, Germany, and Italy during the same period to
realize that if historical particularism was essentially negative and
theoretically sterile, it nonetheless avoided the worst pitfalls of its
times.

The list of famous and influential anthropologists who were trained
by Boas testifies to his central importance in the establishment of the
discipline: Alfred Krocber, Robert Lowie, Fay-Cooper Cole, Edward
Sapir, Melville Herskovits, Alexander Goldenweiser, Alexander Lesser,
Paul Radin, Clark Wissler, Leslie Spier, J. Alden Mason, E. Adamson
Hoebel, Ruth Benedict, Margaret Mead, Ruth Bunzel, Jules Henry,
M. F. Ashley Montagu, Frank Speck. These students in turn set
forth the main lines of development of anthropological research and
instruction at crucial installations throughout the country. For ex-
ample, Kroeber and Lowic at Berkeley; Cole and Sapir at Chicago;
and Herskovits at Northwestern. Boas himself maintained a patri-
arch’s control over anthropology at Columbia from 18¢6 to his death
in 1941. In addition, he was at the center of critical formative events,
such as the modemizing of the American Anthropologist in 1898,
the founding of the American Anthropological Association in 1goo, the
revitalization of the American Ethnological Society in the same year,
and the founding of the American Folk-Lore Society in 1888.

251


===== PAGE 131 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Boas’ accomplishments as a teacher, administrator, researcher,
founder and president of societies, editor, lecturer, and traveler are
exhausting to behold. To anyone who has ever worried about pub-
lishing or perishing, the fact that all of this activity was accompanied
by the publication of a torrent of books and articles is well-nigh
terrifying. In addition to half a dozen books, Boas published over 700
articles (LESSER 1968:26). Boas™ stature increases with each passing
year, as we find in his work the measure of our own shortcomings.
Yet in order to achieve an understanding of twentieth-century an-
thropology, we must set aside the image of Boas as father, hero, and
“guru” and tum our attention to the task of locating his contribution
to theory within the patterns of an age. That is, we must rise above
personalities and adopt a cultural perspective. In so doing, we render
homage through objective criticism even more than through eulogies,
which impair our understanding of Boas and of ourselves as well.

BOAS’

Margaret Mead (1959b:31) has said, “Characteristically, there
are no methods named after Boas, just as there is no Boas
school. . . .” During an exchange with the South African critic A. W.
Hoérnle (1933), Kroeber (1935:540) also expressed his belief that “there
is no ‘Boas school’ and never has been.” Many of Boas’ students seem
to have shared this view of themselves; and in some ways this belief
in itself constituted the central feature of the Boasian position. Ac-
cording to Kroeber, partisan and propagandistic programs in the social
sciences were a sign of immaturity. There were no schools in physics,
he argued, only physicists doing their job with every available scienti-
fic technique. With Boas, anthropology had come of age; under his
influence there was no “singling out of any one method—psycho-
logic, sociologic, diffusionist, functional, or Kulturkreis—as constituting
a king’s highway superior to others” (ibid.). For Margaret Mead,
Boas was “the man who made anthropology into a science” (1959b:

5).
’ The image of Boas which had the greatest appeal to his students
was that of a professional scientist who had raised anthropological
research methods and standards of proof to a level with which even a
physicist would fecl comfortable. In this regard, the special nature of
Boas’ doctorate has been emphasized repeatedly by his students. His
principal thesis was submitted at the University of Kiel in 1881, and it
was concerned with the color of sea water. Previously he had studied

IMAGE

252

el

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

physics and geography at Heidelberg and Bonn, and he was also
well trained in mathematics. For Kroeber, this background provides
the key to the understanding of Boas’ role:

From physics Boas brought into anthropology a sense of defi-
niteness of problem, of exact rigor of method, and of highly
critical objectivity. These qualities have remained with him un-
impaired, and his imparting them to anthropology remains his
fundamental and unshakable contribution to our discipline
[KROEBER 1935:540].

For Goldenweiser, Boas was anthropology’s “culture-hero.” Like
the heroes of primitive myths who give the essentials of life to man, it
was Boas who bestowed the gift of science upon anthropology:

Indian mythologies tell of culture-heroes, supernatural animals or
birds who bestow culture upon man, teach him the arts and crafts,
introduce songs and ceremonies. To anthropology in this country
Franz Boas, the “Man,” came as such a culture-hero. Brought up
in the atmosphere and methods of the natural sciences and
steeped in the scholarly ideals of pre-war Germany, he bestowed
upon American anthropology that clarification of issues and stiff-
ening of scientific fiber which it stood so sorely in need of
[GOLDENWEISER 1941:153].

According to Ruth Benedict (1943:61), “Boas found anthropology a
collection of wild guesses and a happy hunting ground for the ro-
mantic lover of primitive things; he left it a discipline in which theo-
ries could be tested” (quoted in WHITE 1963:67). Lowie, as we shall
see in greater detail later on, identified Boas with physicist-philosopher
Ernst Mach and associated both of them with the development of

“higher standards of proof” and the perfection of the scientific
method.

THE STANDARDS OF BOAS’
CONTEMPORARIES

There is considerable truth in this portrait. Boas was a veri-
table fortress of scientific sobriety in comparison with most of his
contemporaries. Although his cautious approach to generalization ap-
pears in retrospect overdone and self-defeating, there was nothing
illusory about the shoddy standards of his contemporaries. Lacking
a firm foundation in the universities, anthropological subjects were

253


===== PAGE 132 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

still an easy prey for imaginative amateurs. Consider, for example,
this 1893 description of chimpanzee behavior from the pages of the
American Anthropologist:

The cleared spaces . . . are used by the chimpanzees to build
immense bonfires of dried wood. . . . When the pile is com-
pleted one of the chimpanzees begins to blow at the pile as if
blowing the fire. He is immediately joined by others, and, even-
tually by the whole company, and the blowing is kept up until
their tongues hang from their mouths, when they sit around on
their haunches with their elbows on their knees and holding up
their hands to the imaginary blaze. In wet weather they fre-
quently sit in this way for hours together [BUTTEROFER 1893:337].

It must be kept in mind that many of Boas’ contemporaries were
temperamentally unsuited to scientific discipline. It was an age in
which the license to generalize on the basis of fragmentary evidence
was claimed by second- and third-rate people. Lester Ward, one of the
founders of American sociology, is a case in point. Reviewing a book
on the origin of life, he could let himself go in the following manner,
seemingly without qualms:

The book is purely theoretical, and no facts whatever are adduced.
This is not a criticism of the book. In fact it is one of the beauties
of it. Anyone who reads the book can see that the author’s head is
full of facts and that all he was trying to do was to reason from a
store of facts to certain conclusions. Those who speak disrespect-
fully of this method are often unable to make any use of their

facts, however many they possess [WARD 1904:151].

Since cultural theory in the United States was dominated by a
mixture of Spencer’s and Morgan’s evolutionism, it was to be ex-
pected that the prevalent debauchery of method frequently involved
sins committed in the name of evolutionary reconstruction. William
McGeg, for example, first president of the American Anthropological
Association, was often guilty of naive stage-scheming replete with
jingoistic Spencerian celebrations of America’s evolutionary success:

Just as patriarchy gives way to hierarchy, and hierarchy to absolute
monarchy, so limited monarchy is giving way to democracy or
republicanism; already the foremost nation of the earth is a repub-
lic, and all other civilized nations are either republican or under-
going changes in the direction of republicanism. So according to
the experience of the ages, the best nation is a republican one, and
the best citizen is the individual adapted to life under republican
conditions [nmc GEE 1894:353].

254

?—

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

McGee was an inexhaustible mine of every error of substance and
theory that it was possible to commit on the basis of the most vul-
gar prejudices masquerading as scientific expertise. In seeking to
understand Boas’ renaissancelike involvement with all four fields of
anthropology, we must bear in mind that people of McGee’s ilk
had opinions about everything, most of them so blatantly wrong as to
create a virtual vacuum once they were challenged and assigned to
their proper oblivion. McGee’s thoughts on the connection between
race and language are sobering in the extreme. Here he seeks to explain
“the ascendancy of the simple, tangible, and definite tongue and
writing of the Anglo-Saxon”:

Possibly the Anglo-Saxon blood is more potent than that of other
races; but it is to be remembered that the Anglo-Saxon language
is the simplest, the most perfectly and simply symbolic that the
world has ever scen; and that by means of it the Anglo-Saxon
saves his vitality for conquest instead of wasting it under the

Juggernaut of a cumbrous mechanism for conveyance of thought
[Mc GEE 1895a:281].

McGee's confusion of race, language, and culture was representative
of learned opinion both within anthropology and in Western society
in general. The debasement of contemporary primitive peoples to the
level of Anthropoidea was, as we have seen, an important expres-
sion of Euro-American imperialism. McGee’s version is especially
anoxious: “The savage stands strikingly close to sub-human species
in every aspect of mentality as well as in bodily habits and bodily
structure” (McGEE 19o1:13). John W. Powell, the founder of
the American Bureau of Ethnology (in 1879), was another influential
!Jut distressingly undisciplined dabbler in anthropological evolution-
ism. Like many of his contemporaries, Powell could dash off a
presidential address on the history of mankind with a comprehensive
finality that even Turgot and Condorcet could not have surpassed. In
one colossal synthesis, he arranged the stages of evolution into four
grades: savagery, barbarism, monarchy, and democracy. Then to each
of t_hcse grades he assigned specific social institutions, such as the
family to savagery, the gentes to barbarism, and so forth. In music,
the stages were rhythm, melody, harmony, symphony; in aesthetics:
danlce, sacrifice, ceremony, histrionic art; in technblogy: hunting,
agriculture, artisanry, machinery (powELL 1899).

One of the most influential anthropologists among Boas’ con-
temporaries was Daniel G. Brinton. In his presidential address before
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Brin-

255



===== PAGE 133 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ton (1896:12) reaffirmed the standard Spencerian position: “The
black, the brown and the red races differ anatomically so much from
the white, especially in their splanchnic organs, that even with
equal cerebral capacity, they could never rival its results by equal
efforts.”

Brinton is especially important for an understanding of Boas’
(1896b) famous critique of the comparative method. It was Brinton
more than Morgan or Tylor who was closest to mind when Boas
pointed out that insufficient caution was being exercised in the re-
construction of universal parallel sequences. For Brinton had spoken
of “the nigh absolute uniformity of man’s thoughts and actions,
his aims and methods, when in the same degree of development,
no matter where he is or in what epoch” (BrINTON 1896:12).

It is interesting to note that Leslie White (1963:43) has misrepre-
sented Boas’ reaction to Brinton by associating Brinton’s use of the
comparative method with that of Morgan and Tylor. Brinton, how-
ever, was prepared to go far beyond Morgan and Tylor in regarding
“the modes of thought and feeling” of contemporary nations of
“low culture” as representative of extinct tribes at “about the same
stage of culture.” Indeed, in his presidential address to the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, Brinton attacked Mor-
gan and Tylor for placing too great an emphasis upon diffusion as
the explanation of transcultural similarities. Instead of identifying the
target of Brinton’s remarks as Morgan and Tylor, White has Brinton
criticizing some vaguely defined group of “comparative mytholo-
gists and folk-lorists of the old school” who had not “caught up with
the development of ethnologic science” (WHITE 1963:43). Although
Brinton did not refer to Morgan and Tylor by name, it is quite clear
that they are the intended targets:

The anthropologist of today who, like a late-distinguished scholar
among ourselves, would claim that because the rather complex
social system of the Iroquois had a close parallel among the
Munda tribes of the Punjab, therefore, the ancestors of each
must have come from a common culture center; or, who, like an
eminent living English ethnologist, sees a proof of Asiatic rela-
tions in American culture because the Aztec game of patolli is
like the East Indian game of parchesi,—such an anthropologist, I
say, may have contributed ably to his science in the past, but he
does not know where it stands today [BrINTON 1896:9].

That is, Morgan and Tylor were accused of being overly conservative
with respect to parallelisms, and Boas, in responding to Brinton, was
implicitly defending Morgan and Tylor against an application of the

256

I sl

\ 9. Historical Particularism: Boas

comparative method which they, too, would have found unacceptable.
Since this obviously would not be compatible with the picture of
Boas as an archreactionary, White fails to mention who it is that
Brinton considers to be out of date.

In contrast with many of his American colleagues at the turn of
the century, Boas casts an heroic shadow. His natural gifts, superior
education, and European cosmopolitan advantages make people such
as McGee, Brinton, and even Powell look like hayseeds and bumpkins.
But it is misleading to picture him as the high god-creator of scientific
anthropology. There were many before him who urged and achieved
field research as the basis for ethnology. The scientific description of
American Indian cultures was certainly already well advanced
when Boas arrived at the scene. As far back as the 1830’s, Henry
Schoolcraft, one of the founders of the American Ethnological
Society, had begun the task of sympathetically recording the mental
realities of Indian groups based on extensive firsthand exposure. (His
wife was of Ojibwa descent.) Morgan’s contact with the Iroquois and
his subsequent westward journeys obviously removed him from his
armchair for respectably prolonged periods. Both W. H. Holmes and
Otis T. Mason acquired an excellent firsthand knowledge of aboriginal
technology, and Alice Fletcher and James Mooney were pioneer
ethnographers of high competence (cf. HELM 1966). What was unique
in Boas’ case was not the emphasis on field research and collection of
facts, but his insistence that these activities were more critical, more
prestigious, and more scientific than theory-making on any scale,
grand or small.

Unprecedented also was the precise quality of Boas’ devotion to
the collection of facts. There is a strong puritan element in his out-
look. For him, science was very much a sacred enterprise. Those who
tushed to conclusions without proper attention to facts were in effect
desecrating a temple. His eulogy of physiologist Rudolf Virchow,
another product of nineteenth-century German empiricism, may be
taken as representative of his own outlook:

The sound progress of science requires of us to be clear at every
moment, what elements in the system of science are hypothetical
and what are the limits of that knowledge which is obtained by
exact observation . . . many an impetuous student has felt his
[Virchow’s] quict and cautious criticism as an obstacle to prog-
tess. On this account he has suffered many hostile attacks—until
generally the progress of research showed that the cautious master
was right in rejecting the far-reaching conclusion based on im-
perfect evidence. There are but few students who possess that cold

257



===== PAGE 134 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

enthusiasm for truth that enables them to be always clearly con-
scious of the sharp line between attractive theory and the observa-
tion that has been secured by hard and earnest work [BoAs 1902:443,
quoted in KLUCKHOHN and PRUFER 1959:23].

CRITIQUE OF THE COMPARATIVE
METHOD

‘What then was Boas’ reaction to the widespread conviction
concerning the uniformity, even “monotony,” of evolutionary
change? The fundamental issue to which he addressed himself in
“The Limitations of the Comparative Method” was the problem of
separating instances of convergent from instances of parallel evolution.
He did not doubt that there were many remarkable resemblances of
culture traits that could not be explained by diffusion. But the fact
that such phenomena as shamanism, the concept of a future life, the
use of the bow, geometric designs, masks, and many other items are
widely distributed does not establish the uniformity of history. Con-
clusions concerning whether evolutionary uniformities, that is, paral-
lel evolutionary sequences, have occurred or not must be held in
abeyance until data of a certain sort are collected. The data in
question are the facts of the historical sequences by which in par-
ticular local areas the observed phenomena have come into existence:

The fact that many fundamental features of culture are universal,
or at least occur in many isolated places, interpreted by the as-
sumption that the same features must always have developed
from the same causes, leads to the conclusion that there is one
grand system according to which mankind has developed every-
where; that all the occurring variations are no more than minor
details in this grand uniform evolution. It is clear that this theory
has for its logical basis the assumption that the same phenomena
are always due to the same causes [Boas 1948:275; orig. 1896b].

This assumption, however, argues Boas, is patently false in a large
number of concrete instances. Clans, for example, seem to have arisen
among the Navaho by the fusion of separate groups, but among
the Northwest tribes, they resulted from village fission. Geometric
designs did not necessarily result, as Hjalmar Stolpe (1891) and
Alfred Haddon (1895) had proposed, from gradual conventionaliza-
tion of realistic representations, but rather from any of “four different
lines of development and from an infinite number of starting points.”
Again, masks are sometimes used as disguises, so that harmful spirits
will not recognize the wearer; elsewhere they are wormn to frighten off

258

7‘

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

people and spirits, and in still other contexts, they are worn to
commemorate a deceased relative. It seems unlikely, therefore, that
the same causal sequence can have accounted everywhere for the
development of these phenomena.

Therefore we must also consider all the ingenious attempts at
constructions of a grand system of the evolution of socicty as of
very doubtful value, unless at the same time proof is given that
the same phenomena must always have had the same origin. Un-
til this is done, the presumption is always in favor of a variety of
courses which historical growth may have taken [Boas 1948:275].

In emphasizing the variety of history, Boas had obviously taken a
position against evolutionary schemes which embraced all of mankind
in a single developmental formula. But a contempt for the vogue of
logically fabricated worldwide parallelisms was fully merited in the
context of the age. This does not mean that Boas had consciously
set himself the task of championing the proposition that there were
no regularities in history, but rather that he felt that the amount of
regularity had been grossly overestimated. Appalled by the free-
floating speculation, which his contemporaries had assumed to be
their professional prerogative, Boas struggled to improve the balance.
In the long run, there was a need for both the particularist and
generalist approaches. But priority for the moment must be given
to the study of specific sequences in delimited areas.

The comparative method and the historical method, if I may use
these terms, have been struggling for supremacy for a long time,
but we may hope that each will soon find its appropriate place
and function. . . . The comparative method, notwithstanding all
that has been said and written in its praise, has been remarkably
barren of definite results, and I believe it will not become fruitful
until we renounce the vain endeavor to construct a uniform sys-
tematic history of the evolution of culture, and until we begin to
make our comparisons on the broader and sounder basis which T
ventured to outline. Up to this time we have too much reveled in
more or less ingenious vagaries. The solid work is still all before
us [ibid.:280].

WAS BOAS AN ANTIEVOLUTIONIST?

It was to be expected that the abuse of scholarly standards
would be found among those whose ignorance and incompetence
were buoyed up by the prevailing ideological dogma, which happened
to be Spencerian evolutionism. When altemnative schemes came to

259



===== PAGE 135 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the fore, equally ambitious in scope and vapid in content but having
nothing to do with evolutionism, Boas reacted with comparable vigor.

Boas' early interest in mythology and folklore was based upon
the conviction that these materials would be useful in the attempt to
distinguish independently invented from diffused items. Thus, his
study of the diffusion of the North American raven myth provided
the occasion for a critique of facile assumptions about parallel evolu-
tion. Yet Boas made it clear that he was not about to take up the
cause of dogmatic “antievolutionism.” His paramount interest was
the achievement of high standards of scholarship:

If we want to make progress on the desired line, we must insist
upon critical methods, based not on generalities but on each in-
dividual case. In many cases, the final decision will be in favor of in-
dependent origin; in others in favor of dissemination [ibid.:435;
orig. 18g6a].

Boas tried to steer this middle course throughout his career. When
he reviewed Leo Frobenius, one of the forerunners of the German
diffusionist school, he commented: “By following the methods pre-
sented in this book, anything and everything can be proved. It is
fiction, not science” (Boas 18ggb:755). To Fritz Graebner, chief
architect of the German diffusionist methodology, he was more re-
spectful, but no less critical. Independent invention, parallel evolu-
tion, and convergence are all upheld as commonplace facts of
culture. Although Boas agreed with Graebner that diffusion is more
common than independent invention, this was no license for assign-
ing diffusionary explanations in the absence of practical geographical
connections. Premature generalization is once again the worst error:

1 rather repeat once more the warning that I have given again
and again for twenty years: rather to be overcautious in admitting
transmission as the cause of analogies in cases of the sporadic oc-
currence of similar phenomena, than to operate with the concept
of lost links of a chain of cultural intercourse [1948:303; orig. 1911].

METHODOLOGICAL PURITANISM

Boas seldom permitted himself the luxury of assuming that
he himself had been able to meet his own standards. It was if the orgy
of evolutionary and diffusionist speculation had nauseated him so
that he could never again feel at ease in the presence of a gencraliza-
tion. This facet of Boas’ outlook deserves the emphasis which Kroeber,
Lowie, Sapir, Bunzel, and many others have insisted on giving it,
despite the compilation by Leslic White (1963:41ff.) of a number of

260

o. Historical Particularism: Boas

instances in which Boas himself reached speculative conclusions.
There is no doubt that Boas’ attempts to reconstruct the history of
various American Indian groups are frequently based on thin evidence.
Some of these speculative conclusions must be reckoned with in as-
sessing Boas” influence upon the development of theory, and we
shall consider them later on. But it seems to me that White over-
emphasizes these lapses. After all, as White and many other critics
have pointed out, the chief objection to Boas’ approach is that it
led to a vast collection of primary materials—texts and descriptions
in which practically no attempt was made to orient the reader with
respect to even short-range and tentative generalizations. According to
Helen Codere (1959:61), Boas published more than 10,000 pages on
the Northwest Coast alone; and, as White has taken pains to point
out, most of this went “without commentary, without the bare in-
formation that would be needed to render it intelligible to the
reader” (WHITE 1963:55). In this ocean of facts, the speculations to
which White objects are mere outcroppings, whose disappearance
Boas would probably have accepted with perfect equanimity.

In comparison with his contemporaries, Boas was faithful to his
inductive principles. That he did not inaugurate the reign of
absolute truth goes without saying. But he surpassed most anthro-
pologists before or since in his concern to present to others the evi-
dence from which ethnographic statements could be constructed.
Let us admit that Boas’ empiricism involved standards which even
he could not maintain. Certainly his students were destined to fall
even shorter of the mark and, in some instances, to restore a de-
bauchery of method comparable to that of Brinton, Powell, and
McGee. Let us also admit, for reasons which I shall make plain in a
moment, that Boas’ basic philosophy of science involved errors which
are in the long run inimical to the progress of social science. There
still results no basis for the assertion that Boas retarded the develop-
ment of anthropology by fifty years (cf. raY 1955:140). Given the
condition of anthropology at the end of the nincteenth century, the
one great reformatory movement that was necessary (but not suffi-
cient) to the further progress of the science of culture was precisely
that which Boas initiated.

REJECTION OF PHYSICALISM

Recognition of Boas’ salutary effect in clearing out the ama-
teurs and charlatans, with their snake-oil evolutionary formula, in no
way obliges us to overlook the negative influences that emanated

261



===== PAGE 136 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 9. Historical Particularism: Boas

from other facets of his approach. From the outset, Boas was in-
volved in a philosophical paradox from which he never escaped, but
which in the history of anthropology is of far greater significance
than his methodological puritanism. The nub of this dilemma was
that Boas believed that the patient accumulation of historical data
would lead automatically to the improvement of anthropological the-
ory. Although by his own admission he was temperamentally much
more in sympathy with the collection of historical facts, he suc-
ceeded in convincing himself and his students that generalizing
interests could not possibly suffer from a program of historical re-
construction. He never conceded that a choice must be made between
history and science; rather he conceived of science as having historical
and generalizing components, formally disallowing any invidious
comparison between them. Regardless of his attempt to maintain
an interest in the problem of formulating lawful principles, it is
obvious from the research strategy he followed throughout his career
that he was perfectly content to continue his particularist studies in
complete independence of their nomothetic payoff. It is thus his-
torically more correct to reverse the emphasis that his students give
to his background in physics. Far from applying a physicalistic model
to the study of sociocultural phenomena, Boas reacted against such a
model and was much more concerned with showing how it needed
to be supplemented in the special circumstances of the so-called
Geisteswissenschaften or human sciences.

The published evidence for this reaction dates back to 1887. Having
returned from a field trip among the Eskimo, which he undertook as
a geographer, Boas sought to define the special qualities of geography
as a discipline. “If we would maintain [geography’s] independence,” he
argued, “we must prove that there exists another object for science
besides the deduction (sic) of laws from phenomena” (1948:641;
orig. 1887a). This other aim, argues Boas, is that which characterizes
the difference between the descriptive or historical and physicalist
methods. In the descriptive sciences, the single fact, the single
phenomenon, is sufficiently compelling in itself.

“The object of the historian is . . . the study of the facts . . . [he]
dwells admiringly on the character of his heroes. He takes the most
lively interest in the persons and nations he treats of, but is un-
willing to consider them as subject to stringent laws” (ibid.:642).
Although the physicalists do not deny the importance of every
phenomenon, “they do not consider it worthy of study for its own
sake.” The descriptive scientist, on the other hand,

262

holds to the phenomenon which is the object of his study, may it
occupy a high or a low rank in the system of physical sciences,
and lovingly tries to penctrate into its secrets until every feature
is plain and clear. This occupation with the object of his affection
affords him a delight not inferior to that which the physicist en-
joys in his systematical arrangement of the world [ibid.:645].

REJECTION OF MATERIALISM

It has now been established that this attempt to define the
difference between an historical and a physicalist approach to knowl-
edge expressed a fundamental shift in Boas’ Weltanschauung and was
part of the process which led him away from physics to anthropology.
This shift took place during the decade 1878-88, or from his twentieth
to his thirticth year. During this period Boas gradually gave up the
philosophical premises associated with the mechanistic syntheses of
mid-century physics, chemistry, and biology. Under the influence of
a widespread neo-Kantian idealist movement, Boas turned away from
the materialism with which he had approached his earlier study of
physics. The trajectory of his intellectual growth moved him steadily
along the path from physics to geography to ethnography. Thanks to
George Stocking’s research on Boas’ correspondence, we may now
learn about this transition in Boas’ own words, addressed to his
American uncle, Abraham Jacobi, on April 10, 1882:

The objectives of my studies shifted quite a bit during my uni-
versity years. While in the beginning my intention was to regard
mathematics and physics as the final goal, T was led through the
study of the natural sciences to other questions which prompted
me also to take up geography, and this subject captured my in-
terest to such an extent that I finally chose it as my major study.
However, the direction of my work and study was strongly influ-
enced by my training in natural sciences, especially physics. In
the course of time I became convinced that my previous ma-
terialistic Weltanschauung—for a physicist a very understandable
one—was untenable, and I gained thus a new standpoint which
revealed to me the importance of studying the interaction be-
tween the organic and the inorganic, above all between the life of
a people and their physical environment [quoted in STOCKING

1965a:55].
From this awakening, Boas goes on to say, came the definition of
what he wished to do for the rest of his life:

Thus arose my plan to regard as my life’s task the [following] in-
vestigation: How far may we consider the phenomena of organic

263


===== PAGE 137 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

life, and especially those of the psychic life, from a mechanistic
point of view, and what conclusions can be drawn from such a con-
sideration [ihid.]?

GEOGRAPHICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
INTERESTS COMBINED

Upon the threshold of his voyage to Baffin Island to study
the Eskimo, Boas confided that the discipline to which he intended to
devote himself was not geography, but rather “psychophysics.” Dur-
ing the year of his military service (1882-83), he published six
programmatic articles on this subject. But in order to receive sponsor-
ship for his Baffin Island expedition, he felt it was necessary to re-
strict his research to physical and human geography. He therefore
busied himself with the orthodox geographical proposal of “studying
the dependence of the migration of present-day Eskimo on the con-
figuration and physical conditions of the land” (ibid.:57). In the
following year, just before his departure for Baffin Island, he repeated
his interest in “physiological and psychological mechanisms” and
lamented his inability to go at once to the heart of his life plan:

From the pure scientific standpoint, I would begin the matter
with psychophysics, and T have today the exact outline of a book
on the subject which (I hope!) T may write sometime later. . . .
But from the practical viewpoint I must willy-nilly begin with
geography, since that is the science that I have thoroughly
learned [ibid.:55].

Boas did his best to work out a compromise between the geographical
and the psychophysical. This compromise was embodied in the pro-
posal to study “the dependence of the knowledge of the land area of
wandering of the peoples on the configuration of the land,” that is,
in modern idiom, the relationship between a people’s understanding
of their habitat’s geography and their patterns of movement across
the land.

I am going now primarily to collect material that will give me
points of view for more gencral studies. The general study will be
about the knowledge peoples have of the local geography, which
will be followed by a psychological study about the causes for the
limitation of the sprcading of peoples. From here I wish to gain
the starting point for the general questions which psychophysics
will give me possibly more rapidly and just as surely. Of course on
my trip I must pursue many other goals, make geographical maps,

264

.

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

found botanical and zoological collections, make ethnographical
and anthropological investigations, etc., but I shall keep my chief
aim always in mind [ibid.].

It should be noted that Boas actually did devote a portion of his
work among the Eskimo to the comparison of the Eskimo’s knowl-
edge of the area with cartographic realities. The latter, being un-
known, involved him in thousands of miles of mapping expeditions.
To obtain an understanding of the Eskimo’s point of view, he
solicited numerous drawings, which are of continuing interest.

REJECTION OF GEOGRAPHICAL
DETERMINISM

During the year 1882-83, Boas made the acquaintance of
Adolf Bastian and Rudolf Virchow, upon whom his hopes for an
appointment at the University of Berlin were pinned (HERSKOVITS
1957:114). Both of them, Bastian with his belief in universal germ
thoughts and Virchow with his strong physiological interests, were
concerned with regularities and processes. Earlier, at the University
of Kiel, it had been the geographer Theobald Fischer with whom
Boas had worked most intimately. (It is even possible that when Boas
went from Bonn to Kiel, it was to accompany Fischer, who was
making the same move [KLUCKHOHN and PRUFER 1959:9].) Fischer,
in turn, was a disciple of the geographer Karl Ritter, who was explicitly
devoted to the task of formulating the laws of migrations and cultural
evolution. In a letter from Fischer to Boas, we learn that Boas has
been reading Buckle, the archexponent of geographical determinism,
and that, with some cautions, this was all to the good: “That you
occupy yourself with Buckle is very desirable, but you must not be
taken completely into his tow; he has been called, not unjustly, an
‘ultra-Ritterian’ 7 (ibid.:57). Although Fischer was somewhat less
committed than Ritter to a geographical-determinist position, there
can be no doubt that Boas planned his trip to Baffin Island in con-
formity with a strong presumption in favor of the primacy of
geographical factors in the life of the Eskimo. In an earlier letter to
his uncle, explaining his plans for the expedition, Boas described
himself as having

in mind a geographical investigation which, though it does not fit
into my program of study, should give me materials for a thesis
when I try for the post of University lecturer. That is, I am making

265


===== PAGE 138 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

studies of the Eskimo and their knowledge of the land they in-
habit, as well as of the entire region, in the hope of demonstrating
a certain rclationship between the number of people in a tribe,
the distribution of food, and the . . . [quoted in HERSKOVITS
1957:113. Complete sentence could not be deciphered].

The principal publication resulting from Boas’ expedition to Baffin
Island was The Central Eskimo {1888), a lucid account of life in
the arctic which stressed the interrelationship between geographical
and cultural factors. Henceforth, however, Boas never again gave
prominence to a culture’s geographic milien. As Kroeber (1935:543)
observed, the Eskimo study was “the only one in which the geographic
setting is given other than perfunctory or minimal consideration.”
It is thus clear that in shifting over from geography to ethnography,
Boas was moving away from a belief in geographical determinism.
The Eskimo experience appears to have been critical in this conver-
sion. According to Gladys Reichard (quoted in HERskovITS 1957:

115):

His life with the Eskimo made him change radically his predis-
position to assign geographic influence as primary to the develop-
ment of culture which he went with after Ratzel’s influence. In
other words, he was taught to realize the significance of culture
by the Eskimo, and the environment seemed to him to be at least
secondary. He concluded that they did things in spite of rather
than because of the environment. . . .

George Stocking (1965a:64) has recently attempted to refute the
notion that Boas’ first field trip was such a “conversion experience.”
This may be true as far as the overall drift of Boas toward mentalism
and neo-Kantianism is concerned, but Boas himself seemed to believe
that the Eskimo trip was decisive for his rejection of geographical de-
terminism.

If in later writings I did not stress geographical conditions the
reason must be sought in an exaggerated belicf in the importance
of geographical determinants with which I started on my expedi-
tion in 1883-84 and the thorough disillusionment in regard to
their significance as creative elements in cultural life. I shall al-
ways continue to consider them as relevant in limiting and
modifying existing cultures, but it so happened that in my later
field work this question has never come to the fore as particularly
enlightening [0oAs 1948:306; orig. 1935].

Despite this reaction, Boas’ initial publications on the Eskimo (Boas
1884-85) were couched in the idiom of geographical determinism.
According to Stocking, this proves the tendency of Boas’ epigoni to

266

. ool

g. Historical Particularism: Boas

exaggerate the importance of the Eskimo experience “as the un-
conscious archetype of their own ritual initiations into the culture of
anthropology” (1965a:58). Ruth Benedict, Melville Herskovits, and
Gladys Reichard were obviously wrong about what the conversion was
all about, but something quite drastic certainly did happen on that
trip. To overlook it or minimize it leads to a wholly false view of
the main thrust of the Boasian program. It would take nothing short
of a conversion experience for Boas to have regarded “geographical”
issues as relatively unimportant in his Northwest Coast studies. As
for the delayed effect in terms of publication, it is probably related
to the fact that he was looking for a job back in Berlin as a geographer.

THE INFLUENCE OF THE NEO-KANTIAN
MOVEMENT

It is impossible to understand the the significance of Boas’
progress through the stages of physics, geography, and psychophysics
to ethnology without some reference, however brief, to the main
philosophical currents in nineteenth-century Germany. In an age
characterized by great advances in the laboratory sciences, the gran-
diose speculative metaphysics propounded by Hegel and his followers
fell into disrepute. As an alternative to materialism, a return was
made to the teachings of Kant. The philosophy of Kant was
congenial to the times precisely because it embodied a compromise be-
tween idealism and materialism. The essence of external “things-in-
themselves” was neither mind nor matter, but simply unknowable.
To the extent that knowledge is at all possible, it must depend on
sense impressions. These, however, are constrained by the funda-
mental a priori categories of mind, such as a moral sense and concepts
of space and time. Knowledge is thus an interactive product in
which mind and reality collaborate. It is possible to construe this
formula two ways: first, as a justification for a strong empiricist
approach through sense data; or, second, as the justification for em-
phasizing the contribution that the observing mind makes to the per-
ception of the data. Initially the neo-Kantian movement stressed the
former; by the end of the century, however, it was the influence of
mind that was being stressed, and in effect, the same path that had
led from Kant to Hegel had to be trod once again. The various
stages of Boas’ progress toward anthropology mirror this trend of
Kantian styles. Fechner’s psychophysics, which Boas at one point saw
as his lifework, was itself nothing more than an attempt to provide a
laboratory basis for Kant's ideas. As Wolfgang Metzger (1965:111)

267


===== PAGE 139 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

notes, “Fechner’s original aim was to prove scientifically some as-
sumption about the relations between body and soul that he had
derived from [Kant’s] philosophy.”

Boas’ involvement with the neo-Kantian movement dates at least
from his last four semesters at Kiel when he studied philosophy under
Benno Erdmann, a leading contemporary authority on Kant. Another
prominent neo-Kantian was Rudolf Lehman, with whom Boas cor-
responded on the eve of his arctic expedition. And amazing as it
may seem, during his first field trip to the arctic, Boas spent long
evenings, with the temperature outside at minus forty degrees cen-
tigrade, reading a copy of Kant “so that I shall not be completely
uneducated when I return” (sTockiNe 1965a:58).

WILHELM DILTHEY

For a number of circumstantial reasons it seems appropriate
to ook for the specific influence of the neo-Kantian philosopher Wil-
helm Dilthey. Boas’ 1888 defense of geography bears a striking re-
semblance to Dilthey’s treatment of the distinction between the
Naturwissenschaften (natural sciences) and Geisteswissenschaften
(human sciences), first published in 1883. It is especially instructive to
compare Boas’ description of the historian’s approach to a phenom-
enon—he “lovingly tries to penetrate . . . into its secrets” (see above,
p- 263)—with Dilthey’s own version of the same:

The secret of the individual draws us, for its own sake, into ever
new and more profound attempts to understand it, and it is in
such understanding that the individual and mankind in general
and its creations are revealed to us [DILTHEY 1959:21; orig. 1883).

Although Boas makes no specific mention of Dilthey until 1907
(cf. sTOCKING 19652:64), he could not possibly have escaped Dilthey’s
influence.

Within the German area, including Switzerland, no school of psy-
chology has ever been so generally accepted, so highly estimated
and so predominant among educated people in general and
particularly among the members of the university staffs as the
“geisteswissenschaftliche Psychologie” of Wilhelm Dilthey. This
public opinion has been so effective that even at present it is
hard for the representatives of scientific psychology to carry
through those measures as are necessary to keep up with the inter-
national development [w. METZGER 1965:112].

268

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

For Dilthey, the crucial difference between the human and the
natural sciences resided in the special attributes of mind as distinct
from other phenomena: “we do not know the inner nature of physical
things and processes and have to read causal order into them by
hypothesis, whereas in the world of mind we know directly what we
are dealing with” (HODGES 1952:230). This emphasis upon knowing
irgm within—foreshadowed as far back as Vico—constitutes one of
the central themes of the Boasian program. It is unlikely that Boas
would have articulated the reasons for this—emphasis in conformity
with Dilthey’s technical elaboration, but it is clear from the trajectory
of his career and from the kind of research he carried out and inspired
others to carry out, that a similar stress on the “inner life” was a
fundamental element in his approach to culture.

There is much in Dilthey that is also preparatory to the more
general intention among post-Boasian cognitive specialists in the
United States to “get inside of other peoples’ heads” (see Chap. 20).

‘Wherever there is cognitive activity, wherever values are appreci-
ated or ends pursued, wherever in the midst of the processes of
nature a free agent appears, there is matter for the Geisteswissen-
schaften. . . . It is true . . . that they also deal with many
physical facts; but they deal with them only in so far as they are
related to an inner life, having value for a subject or conditioning
the execution of his purpose [HODGES 1952:228-29].

Like the Boasians, but very unlike the modern “ethnosemanticists,”
Dilthey combined this stress on “emics” with an equally important
emphasis upon history. That is, the path to the understanding of
the inner life lies through the study of an individual’s history. It was
partly as a result of this belief that Dilthey came to oppose the
development of experimental psychology, in favor of “lived experi-
ence” and “understanding.” According to Metzger (1965:111), Dil-
they’s effect upon the development of psychology in Germany was
disastrous:

Dilthey’s combat against experimentation in psychology origi-
nated in another inheritance of German romanticism that lasted
through the whole nineteenth century and in some disciplines,
e.g.,, in education, has not yet been abandoned in our time. The
pivotal idea of this doctrine of historicism is the assumption that
you know all about a person or a fact, or even of an art, if you
know its history. (E. g., German high school teachers are pre-
pared for their educational duties by lectures and examinations
in history of education.)

269

e —


===== PAGE 140 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE INFLUENCE OF RICKERT AND
WINDELBAND

Lowie (1956b:1006) has been one of the few anthropologists
to draw attention to the “Southwest German” school of philosophy—
to Heinrich Rickert and Wilhelm Windelband, who were neo-Kant-
ians based at Baden and who formulated the difference between
human and natural sciences in terms of the concepts of “idiographic”
and “nomothetic” studies. Lowie correctly associates this point of view
with Boas' 1887 discussion of geography, but he fails to mention
Dilthey, with whom the Baden group was closely involved, but who
differed from them in certain historically important respects. In its
original presentation by Windelband in 1894, the nomothetic/idio-
graphic distinction sharply divided the sciences into generalizing and
particularizing disciplines. The study of history could not and should
not be made to yield generalizations. Although Windelband and
Rickert eventually retreated from this position, it was in its original
extreme form that this dichotomization influenced Boas’ students.
Lowie points to eight references to Windelband’s follower, Rickert,
in Kroeber’s collected essays. Most of these are subsequent to Sapir’s
urgings in his critique of Kroeber's “Superorganic” that all anthro-
pologists and social scientists interested in method ought to read
Rickert, to whom he expressed his own great debt. Lowie emphasiz=d
the fact that “The reader of Windelband or Rickert might certainly
conclude that the historical disciplines not only failed to demonstrate
laws, but most emphatically did not wish to find any” (ibid.: 1007).
Dilthey on the one hand and Windelband and Rickert on the other
carried out a long controversy in which the sharpness of the separa-
tion between the particularizing and generalizing sciences was one of
the main issues. In his rejoinders to Windelband, Dilthey insisted
that both idiographic and nomothetic interests were legitimate within
the human sciences. There is a matter of method, however; the nat-
ural sciences systematize their data by moving toward the abstract,
seeking the kind of relation that can be put into an equation. “The
human studies systematize by sceing the particular fact more and
more fully in its context among other facts structurally related to it”
(nopGEs 1952:230). The human studies do indeed take an interest
in the individual

for his own sake, just as he is, apart from all thought of his relation
to laws and determining conditions, and without any attempt to
explain him at all. The human studies, thercfore, contain an ele-

270

g. Historical Particularism: Boas

ment of pure description, a “loving understanding (Verstindnis)
of the personal, a reliving of the inexhaustible totalities,” which
is seen at its simplest in biography [ibid.:231].

However, this does not mean that lawful generalizations cannot be
sought in the sphere of human sciences. The line of division between
the two spheres is not rigid, and provision must be made for inquiries
which have a footing in both realms (ibid.:169). In Dilthey’s view,
human studies actually have three objectives: the description of his-
torical facts, the discovery of laws and regularities, and the formula-
tion of standards of value (ibid.:169-70).

THE ATTACK AGAINST MATERIALISM
AND SCIENTISM

The controversy between Dilthey and Windelband was only
a small eddy in a huge Euro-American ideological whirlpool. It seems
likely that the motive power of this vortex derived from the menace
of materialism.

The first indication of the awakening of the mind from the ex-
tremely negative attitude of the materialists may be seen in the re-
turn to the teaching of Kant; the activity of the subject in the
claboration of science, which had been for long ignored, and had
been thrust into the background by the triumphs so easily achieved
by the mechanical method, asserts its right once more and inaugu-
rates the fruitful work of salutary criticism [ALIOTTA 1914:13].

It scarcely seems necessary to elaborate on the connection between
philosophical materialism and the rise of radical political movements,
especially Marxism. Toward the end of the last century, the social
structures of Europe and America had become vulnerable to commu-
nist and socialist subversion. As the political struggle for the control
?f the bourgeois state intensified, learning and lore were swept up
into the battle. Conscious as well as unconscious attempts were made
on a wide front covering all intellectual media to annihilate the sub-
versive doctrines. In the rapidly expanding and highly competitive
subcommunity of professional intelligentsia, prestige and emolument
closely adhered to the contribution which one made to the rout of
the materialists. Science itself became the object of suspicion. Con-
trary to all the experience of the past four hundred years, science was
declared incompetent to judge or modify religious doctrine. This
peculiar belief, unique to Western civilization, saved theology from
any repetition of the severe mauling it had received at the hands of

271



===== PAGE 141 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the Darwinists. The floodgates of science were lifted. Out poured
countless varieties of idealist, vitalist, pragmatist, and historicist fads
and philosophies. Looking at this advancing tide from the vantage
point of a rationalist, the philosopher Morris Raphael Cohen pro-
phetically grasped its ultimate significance for the twentieth century
in an essay entitled, “The Insurgence against Reason.”

There can be little doubt that this distrust of reasoning and intel-
lect has its roots deep in the temper of our age. The art, literature,
and politics of Europe and of our own country show an ever-grow-
ing contempt for ideas and form. The popular philosophies of
the day, those which emanate from James, Bergson, Croce,
Nietzsche, Freud, Chamberlain, Spengler and others, are cer-
tainly at one with the recent novel, drama, music, painting, and
sculpture in attaching greater value to novel impressions and
vehement expression than to coherency and order. The romantic
or “Dionysiac” contempt for prudence and deliberative (so-called
bourgeois) morality is simply a more intense, if not more crude,
expression of the reaction against scientific or rigorous intellectual
procedure, a reaction which makes our modern illuminati like
Bergson and Croce dismiss physical science as devoid of any
genuine knowledge, or as at best a merely practical device for
manipulating dead things [1925:113].

Darwinism of course was one of the chief objects of this onslaught.
Everywhere voices were raised arguing for the return of life to mys-
tery. Among the intelligentsia there were many who accepted the
facts of evolutionary transformation, but all kinds of reasons were
brought forth to cast doubt on the adequacy of natural selection to
explain the evolutionary panorama. Under the skirts of Darwin’s
qualified detractors, mystics and metaphysicians flourished. The tide
against Spencer was no less powerful, not against his racism, but
rather for his having dared to encapsulate history in the materialist
principle of the survival of the fittest. Actually, one aspect of the
emphasis upon the idiographic was the escalation of the rhetoric of
nationalism. Neco-Hegelian racist visions of national souls working
their way toward ineffable glories were expressed in the writings of
men like Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Oswald Spengler, Ernst
Troeltsch, Othmar Spann, and other harbingers of fascism.

IDIOGRAPHIC IDEALISM

Boas” turn toward psychophysics; his questioning of the
materialism which had seemed congenial at the outset of his univer-
sity studies; his defense of geography in the idiom of the Geistes-

272

9 Historical Particularism: Boas

wissenschaften; and his ultimate vision of anthropology must all
be seen in relationship to this huge cultural tide. It is clear that al-
though Boas was borne along, he remained far behind the advancing
crest. In others, the idiographic option was seized upon to deprive
science virtually of all claim to knowledge in human affairs. The
English philosopher-historian R. G. Collingwood (1922:445), him-
self one of the more extreme products of this trend, could note:

The chief feature of European philosophy in the last generation
has been that movement of reaction from nineteenth-century
positivism which has tended to degrade science into a false form
of knowledge and to find the true form in history.

Commenting specifically on the contest between history and science,
M. R. Cohen remarked:

The fact that literary historians are generally more interested in
the concrete picture of the events they portray, while scientific
physicists are generally more interested in the laws which physical
phenomena illustrate, has given rise in recent times to the view
that history is nearer to reality, which is always individual, and
that rational or scientific physics is a more or less useful fiction

[1925:121].

Emboldened by the “spirit of the times,” historians such as Croce
could scarcely conceal their contempt for people who were unable
to grasp the essence of history on their own but required the feeble
crutches of science to do so:

Do you wish to understand the true history of a Ligurian or
Sicilian neolithic man? First of all, try if it be possible to make
yourself mentally into a Ligurian or Sicilian neolithic man; and if
it be not possible, or you do not care to do this, content yourself
with describing and classifying and arranging in a series the skulls,
the utensils, and the inscriptions belonging to those neolithic peo-
ples. Do you wish to understand the history of a blade of grass?
First and foremost, try to make yourself into a blade of grass, and
if you do not succeed, content yourself with analysing the parts
and even with disposing them in a kind of imaginative history

[1923:233].

MODERATENESS OF BOAS POSITION

Boas was influenced in a lifelong fashion by the rise of neo-
Kantianism, but it must be stressed, contrary to the impression
one gains from reading White’s scathing manifesto, that he escaped
from its worst consequences. It means something in this context that

273



===== PAGE 142 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Boas continued to insist that the laws governing cultural phenomena
would eventually be discovered. Indeed, on the very heels of his paper
defending the particularist viewpoint in geography, there came an-
other paper, concerned with defining the aims of ethnology. We are
not privileged to dismiss the statements which he makes therein,
affirming that the most important aim of ethnology is the discovery
of scientific laws.

The frequent occurrence of similar phenomena in cultural areas
that have no historical contact suggests that important results may
be derived from their study, for it shows that the human mind
develops everywhere according to the same laws.

The discovery of these is the greatest aim of our science. To
attain it many methods of inquiry and the assistance of many
other sciences will be needed. Up to this time the number of in-
vestigations is small, but the foundations have been laid by the
labors of men like Tylor, Bastian, Morgan and Bachofen
[BoOAS, 1948:637; orig. 1888].

Instead of a frivolous alternation between the nomothetic and
idiographic options, we may now follow Boas’ gradual retreat from
the position which he took in 1887-88 on the relationship be-
tween the collection of facts and the formulation of regularities.
‘We may confidently assign full and typical sobriety to Boas’ insistence
in the midst of his critique of the comparative method that “the
histories of the cultures of diverse tribes . . . [are] not the ultimate aim
of our science” (1948:278-70; orig. 1896b).

We must credit the fact that in its origins, the historical particular-
ist movement was conceived as the handmaiden of a nomothetic
approach to history. Specific cultures were to be studied in their partic-
ular historical context. This was to be done not because the search for
uniformities in history is futile, but because the only way in which
the amount and nature of such uniformity can be appraised is through
a program of inductive historical research. In other words, it was not
Boas’ intention, as he himself repeated on a number of occasions, to
abandon the search for lawful regularities in history. Rather than re-
place the comparative method, it was his hope that historical par-
ticularism would supplement it and facilitate the discovery of the
sought-after laws, which remained the ultimate objective of anthro-
pological inquiry.

When we have cleared up the history of a single culture and un-
derstand the effects of environment and the psychological condi-
tions that are reflected in it we have made a step forward, as we

274

L

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

can then investigate in how far the same causes or other causes
were at work in the development of other cultures. Thus by com-
paring histories of growth general laws may be found. This
method is much safer than the comparative method, as it is usu-
ally practiced, because instead of a hypothesis on the mode of

development, actual history forms the basis of our deductions
[ibid.:279].

The historical method was thus to be harnessed to the service of
the comparative method. By so doing, anthropological theory would
be purged of its puerile amateurism, and a new and sounder basis for
generalization would be established. Both perspectives were neces-
sary, nor were the methodological reforms restricted to the compara-
tive outlook. Simplistic historicism, which assumed a connection
between geographically remote cultural phenomena, without evidence
of how the influence actually could have been transmitted, was
equally to be condemned. If the parallel evolutionists came in for a
worse drubbing than the diffusionists, it was, as I have already sug-
gested, simply because the evolutionists held the field.

WILL THE REAL HISTORIAN PLEASE
STAND UP?

Boas and one of his most famous students, Alfred Kroeber, be-
came involved in a curious controversy concerning which was the more
historicist-minded. As we shall see at greater length in a subsequent
chapter, Kroeber was exposed to trends and reared in a milieu which
moved him far closer to the idiographic extreme. The resulting con-
trast between himself and Boas appeared to him so striking that he
reached conclusions concerning Boas which seem incredible, unless
placed in the context developed in this chapter. As we have already
seen, Kroeber believed that it was Boas’ training in physics which was
the most fateful aspect of his formative years. How did he reconcile
this belief with the main features of Boas’ program? Simply by never
doubting that Boas meant what he said about the relationship be-
tween history and science. But from Kroeber's standpoint this pre-
occupation with science was a symptom, if not a cause, of Boas’
failure to pursue a genuinely idiographic approach. Indeed, incredible
as it may seem, Kroeber went so far as to accuse his mentor of ne-
glecting real history! According to Kroeber, the association of Boas
with a position of historical particularism was nothing but an error

which arose from Boas’ attempt to refute the grandiose schemes of his
predecessors:

275



===== PAGE 143 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

“When he came on the scene, he found anthropology taken up
with schematic interpretations—Morgan’s will serve as a typical
example; and he unhesitatingly proceeded to show that these
schemes secmed valid only as long as the fact was ignored that
they were built up of subjectively selected pieces of evidence torn
out of their historical context, that is, their actual context in the
world of nature. In his insistence that this context may not be
"Violated, Boas may have secmed, possibly even to himself, to be
following historical method. But it was merely historical method
applied as a critical safeguard; the problems with which he con-
cerned himself were not historical except in minor cases, but con-
cerned with process as such [1935:542].

As an example of Boas’ interest in process as opposed to history,
Kroeber mentions his former teacher’s researches into primitive art.
What questions does Boas put to the phenomena of art? Supposedly,
like a physicist with analogous problems, he considered a gamut of
processes: conventionalization, influence of technique, symbolism,
secondary interpretation, virtuosity, and “cursive slovening.” Nowhere,
complains Kroeber, does Boas deal with an art style except as it may
serve as a point of departure for some problem concerned with the
processes of conventionalization, symbolism, etc. He shows no con-
cem for the styles themselves, for “their essential quality.” “The cause
is a lack of interest in factual description for its own sake, in other
words, in phenomena” (ibid.:543). Kroeber goes on to make the
flat accusation that Boas was not an historian. Although he ob-
serves all the methodological safeguards associated with an historical
orientation—the need for context, stress on uniqueness in all phenom-
ena, caution with respect to “generalizations savoring of the universal”
—he still does not “do” history. “In brief, one may define the Boas posi-
tion as basically that of the physical scientist” (ibid.:554). A similar
judgment was rendered by another of Boas’ famous pupils, Paul
Radin (1933:17).

The only products of Boas’ work which were significantly his-
torical in Kroeber’s opinion were his monograph on the Eskimo and
a presidential address to the New York Academy of Science entitled,
“The History of the American Race” (Boas 1948:324-30; orig. 1911).
The Eskimo monograph was historical in spirit, even though it was
almost exclusively synchronic, because of its manifest coherence and
lucidity! Kroeber’s hankering after the essence of history was baffling.
Boas found the whole outburst unintelligible. “If Dr. Kroeber calls
my first piece of ethnological work, “The Central Eskimo,” historical,
I fail to understand him.” Why, wonders Boas, has Kroeber failed to

276

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

mention the years devoted to trying to unravel the historical develop-
ment of social organization, secret societies, the spread of art forms
and of folktales on the northwest coast of America?

Is it that painstaking work of this kind docs not seem to Dr.
Kroeber worth while, but that it requires the flight of an un-
bridled imagination to have his approval? I cannot understand in
any other way his praisc of a public lecture which I gave as Presi-
dent of the New York Academy of Scicnces on “The History of
the American Racc,” guarding my statement, however, at the
very beginning by saying that I should give my fancy freer rein
than I ordinarily permit myself [ibid.:307].

Boas used this occasion to refer back across forty-nine years of his
career to the paper on “The Study of Geography,” thereby confirming
the crucial importance of his rejection of the physicalist model.
Kroeber, who had been influenced by Windelband and Rickert, simply
did not understand Boas’ brand of neo-Kantianism:

In 1887 I tried to dcfine my position in regard to these subjects,
giving expression to my consciousness of the diversity of their
fundamental viewpoints. I aligned myself clearly with those who
are motivated by the affective appeal of a phenomenon that im-
presses us as a unit, although its elements may be irreducible to a
common cause. In other words the problem that attracted me pri-
marily was the intelligent understanding of a complex phenome-
non. When from geography my interest was directed to cthnology,
the same interest prevailed [ibid.:305].

FIRST PHASE OF BOAS’ REJECTION OF
CULTURAL LAWS

White has seized upon the similarity between Boas’ initial
statement of research strategy and the position set forth in the last
phases of his career as evidence of an unchanging outlook with respect
to the question of rcgularities in history. He says, regarding the
earliest and latest of Boas’ statements on laws in history, “it is the
same Boas down to the last detail” (warre 1963:64). This leads to a
view of Boas which suggests a measure of what might almost be
called duplicity, or at the very least, an unusual and totally out of
character frivolity. For, as we have already scen, and as White points
out, at the very moment that Boas adopted the particularist option,
he also affirmed the discovery of laws as the most important aim of
ethnology. There is every reason to supposc that on this subject Boas
meant what he said in 1888, and that between then and his latest

277



===== PAGE 144 =====

m o

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

writings, a definite development in outlook can be traced. It was in
many respects a disastrous kind of development, but it vouches for
the integrity and continuity of Boas’ belief that particularist studies
would lead to the “discovery” of laws.

By accepting Boas’ statements that the ultimate objective of his
reform of the comparative method was generalization, we shall be
able perhaps to state more clearly than White precisely what was
wrong with the Boasian research strategy. The great strategic lessons
which the Boasian period affords must inevitably elude our compre-
hension, if we believe that from the outset this movement had no
interests other than those which Windelband came to identify as
idiographic. Boas, as distinguished from his students, was above all an
empiricist. Like Dilthey, and in contrast to the later Neo-Kantians
who were to influence Kroeber, Sapir, Radin, and Benedict, a priori
insights and conclusions were anathema to him. Nothing would be
further from his temperament than to dogmatize an intuited absence
of historical regularities. What we find instead is a mounting convic-
tion, based upon the accumulation of ethnographic evidence collected
by himself and by other anthropologists, that the search for regular-
ities will end in failure. In his earliest phase as exemplified in “The
Limitations of the Comparative Method,” universal unilinear se-
quences are denied but not to the extent of rejecting more limited
forms of parallel sequences. The search for the laws governing these
uniformities is urged as an important, if not the most important, aim.

SECOND PHASE

By about 1910, Boas had given up the possibility that sig-
nificant developmental uniformities involving whole congeries of insti-
tutions would be found. He continued, however, to stress the
probability that the occurrence of similar institutions throughout the
world reflected something inherent in the human mind. But it was
now his opinion that the expression of this common denominator
did not require a uniform cultural matrix. Indeed, he now stressed
that convergences under the influence of mental laws could occur in
almost any kind of cultural context:

I do not mean to imply that no general laws of development
exist. On the contrary, the analogies that do occur in regions far
apart show that the human mind tends to reach the same results,
not under similar, but under varying circumstances [1948:341; orig.

1910].
278

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

The empirical basis for this shift in emphasis is summarized in Boas’
The Mind of Primitive Man (1911). In this book, the absence of
uniform developmental sequences is for the first time clearly and
explicitly related to an absence of a determinative order between the
various parts of culture and between culture and the natural environ-
ment. He points for example to the various forms of the family
and insists that they cannot be correlated with other institutional
features.

Some very primitive tribes, like the Eskimo and the Indian tribes
of the Northwest plateaus of North America, count relationships
bilaterally . . . other tribes with highly developed culture recog-
nize the maternal line alone, while still others, whose economic
and industrial life is of a simpler type, recognize the paternal line
[BoAs 1938c:182-83; orig. 1911].

Inventions, social order, intellectual and social life all may develop in-
dependently: “There are people, like the Australians, whose material
culture is quite poor, but who have a highly complex social organiza-
tion” (ibid.:197). Similarly, the influence of environment is quite
unpredictable. Proof of the spontaneous creative influence of the
mind is to be found in the great diversity of culture among such
pairs of adjacent peoples as the Eskimo and Chuckchee, the Hotten-
tot and Bushman, and the Negrito and Malay (ibid.:191). The
exploitation of food resources is itself subject to the whim of culture.
“Even among the Eskimo, who have so marvelously well succeeded in
adapting themselves to their geographical environment, customs like
the taboo on the promiscuous use of caribou and seal prevent the
fullest use of the opportunities offered by the country” (ibid.:191-92).
This appeal to sundry ethnographic examples of alleged lack of cor-
relation between the different parts of culture, and hence of the
lack of parallel evolution, was accompanied by one of Boas’ rare
confrontations with economic determinism. Naturally, he saw little
merit in such a position: )

There is no reason to call all other phases of culture a superstruc-
ture on an economic basis, for economic conditions always act on
a preexisting culture and are themselves dependent upon other
aspects of culture. It is no more justifiable to say that social struc-
ture is determined by economic forms than to claim the reverse,
f(_)r a preexisting social structure will influence economic condi-
tions and vice versa, and no people has ever been observed that
has no social structure and that is not subject to economic condi-
tions. The claim that economic stresses preceded every other

279


===== PAGE 145 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

manifestation of cultural life and exerted their influences on a
group without any cultural traits cannot be maintained. Cultural
life is always economically conditioned and economics are always
culturally conditioned [ibid.:193].

We cannot stop here to comment on Boas’ conclusions except to say
that they are unwarranted in fact and theory, but in subsequent chap-
ters we shall examine the relevant ethnographic data. For the moment,
let us proceed at once to the final phase of the development of Boas’
thought on the question of evolutionary laws.

THIRB PHASE

It was toward the end of his career that Boas rcached a
position that was fully compatible with Windelband’s sharp separa-
tion of nomothetic and idiographic studies. This development dates
from the appearance in Boas™ theoretical writings of a new and stri-
dent theme in which it is stated that the scarch for lawful evolutionary
regularities is a chimera; that the aims of anthropology should not
include the discovery of laws; and that no amount of additional re-
search could possibly alter the futility of the nomothetic option in
the phenomena of culture. In this connection, Boas™ dismissal of the
possible relevance of the comparison between cultural development in
the old and new worlds is especially diagnostic. At the very moment
when improved techniques had brought archacology to the verge of
its greatest discoveries, Boas declared: “Although in this case paral-
lelism seems to exist on the two continents, it would be futile to
try to follow out the order in detail” (BoAs 1948:287; orig. 1920a).
There is a double irony in this unfortunate opinion. Not only were
future excavations to prove him wrong, but they were to do
so with stratigraphic techniques which he himself helped to introduce
(see Chap. 23). It was at some point during the decade of the 1920’s
that Boas finally abandoned the heritage of the nineteenth-century
search for developmental uniformities. By 1930 he had taken the
radical step of suggesting that anthropology had become entirely
too wrapped up in the attempt to reconstruct particular historical
sequences. Since it was now apparent that the structure of the human
mind accounted for whatever regularities were manifest in cultural
phenomena, anthropology could no longer remain aloof from the
study of the relationship between the individual psyche and the forms
of culture:

280

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

It should be clearly understood that historical analysis does not
help us in the solution of these questions. . . . An error of
modern anthropology, as I sce it, lies in the overemphasis on his-
torical reconstruction, the importance of which should not be
minimized, as against a penetrating study of the individual under
the stress of the culture in which he lives [ibid.:26g; orig. 1930].

It was in this fashion that Boas sired in his maturity a totally unex-
pected offspring: the field of personality and culture. A more de-
tailed look at this not unmixed blessing must await a separate chapter.
Let it simply be noted here that Boas’ declining interest in historical
reconstruction was accompanied by an increased concern with psy-
chological factors. It was during the twenties that Boas’ most famous
female students reccived their training and were sent out with his
encouragement to probe the neglected relationship between the indi-
vidual and culture. It is not necessary at this point to weigh the
respective contributions of Boas and his students to this new sub-
stantive and theoretical focus. What is essential for the moment is
that Boas was prepared to assume full responsibility for the switch in
emphasis. The new direction was emphatically defined again in 1932:

The problems of the relation of the individual to his culture, to
the society in which he lives have received too little attention.
The standardized anthropological data that inform us of custom-
ary behavior, give no clue to the reaction of the individual to his
culture, nor to an understanding of his influence upon it. Still,
here lie the sources of a true interpretation of human behavior.
It seems a vain effort to search for sociological laws disregarding
what should be called social psychology, namely, the reaction of
the individual to culture. They can be no more than empty
formulas that can be imbued with life only by taking account of
individual behavior in cultural settings [ibid.:258-59; orig. 1932].

Under these circumstances the continued insistence that anthropology
was an historical science assumed a significance it lacked at the outset.
Anthropology must be an historical science, not because the history
of particular cultures is the only way to formulate the lawful ingredi-
ents in cultural phenomena, but rather because there is no viable
alternative to the study of individual phenomena. If this is so, it
follows that the study of the individual human personality is the
highest fulfillment of the particularizing trend. Simultancously with
this turn toward psychology, Boas’ resistance to a nomothetic ap-
proach to history lapsed into dogma. Not only were historical laws

281


===== PAGE 146 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

undiscovered, but they would for all time remain undiscoverable.
His final pronouncement on the subject is contained in an addendum
to his reply to Kroeber’s accusation that he was no historian:

In my opinion a system of social anthropology and “laws” of cul-
tural development as rigid as those of physics are supposed to be
are unattainable in the present stage of our knowledge, and more
important than this: on account of the uniqueness of cultural phe-
nomena and their complexity nothing will ever be found that
deserves the name of a law excepting those psychological, biolog-
ically determined characteristics which are common to all cultures
and appear in a multitude of forms according to the particular cul-
ture in which they manifest themselves [ibid.:311; orig. 1936].

STACKING THE CARDS AGAINST THE
NOMOTHETIC MODE

It is difficult to understand what Boas intended to convey
by means of the phrase, “as rigid as [the laws] of physics are sup-
posed to be.” On the one hand this phrase would seem to indicate
that Boas was aware of the changes which the concept of scientific
law had undergone as a result of relativity theory and quantum me-
chanics. But if this were the case, why should anthropology continue
to be burdened by Newtonian concepts that physics had abandoned?
If probabilities had replaced mechanistic certainties, why should
anthropologists demand that their laws admit no exceptions? Ac-
tually, as we have seen, it never was the intention of those who spoke
of the laws of history in the nineteenth century to obtain anything
other than a description of the most probable sequences. But through-
out the Boasian period, a unique double standard seemed to prevail
against anthropology’s nomothetic aspirations. As one ponders the
way in which Boas and his students used one or two negative in-
stances to deny hypotheses confirmed by hundreds of other instances,
one inevitably becomes impressed by the amount of effort lavished in
proving that chaos was the salient feature of the sociocultural realm.

BOAS’

Boas™ students have attempted to combat the impression that
he was committed to this self-defeating objective. Boas himself in
1920 replied to the accusation that was being made abroad con-
ceming the futility of trying to disprove everything while proving
nothing:

GENERALIZATIONS

282

hall

g. Historical Particularism: Boas

It may seem to the distant observer that American students are
engaged in a mass of detailed investigations without much bear-
ing upon the solution of the ultimate problems of a philosophic
history of human civilization. I think this interpretation of the
American attitude would be unjust because the ultimate ques-
tions are as near to our hearts as they are to those of other
scholars, only we do not hope to be able to solve an intricate his-
torical problem by a formula [1948:283-84; orig. 1920a).

As Boas developed his arguments on behalf of historical and
psychological particularism, he not infrequently drew upon a small
stock of illustrative generalizations. For example, he repeatedly men-
tions the alleged tendency of an enlargement of food production to
give rise to increased population, greater leisure time, and a more
elaborate division of labor. (I say “alleged,” because it is doubtful
that increased productivity in the formative phases of the urban
revolution was translated into a decrease in per capita man-hour
input [cf. HARRIS 1959a].) In offering this generalization, Boas usually
tried to make the point that it would require a great deal of qualifica-
tion in any concrete case. He made similar use of such additional
generalizations as the tendency for activities that begin unconsciously
later to become “the subject of reasoning”; and the tendency of
metallurgy to follow after the invention of pottery, agriculture, and
stone-based industries (BoAs 1948:287-88; orig. 1920a). These gen-
eralizations are treated only as examples, that is, Boas never discussed
them for their own sake. Yet it is on the basis of such snippets of
theory that Lesser (1968) has attempted to prove that Boas “did not
deny the possibility of regularities or ‘laws’ in cultural phenomena.”

It should be noted that neither Boas nor his students were the
originators of these theories—all of them, it will be recalled, were
clearly set forth by Turgot in 1750. Nor did Boas and his students
orient their fieldwork in relation to them, or make sustained compara-
tive field or library studies specifically intended to test their validity
(cf. wAx 1956:65). Boas not infrequently offered his examples of
generalizations in a context that revealed that he held them in con-
tempt. He repeatedly characterized such statements as “necessarily
vague and, we might almost say, so self-evident that they are of
little help to a real understanding” (Boas 1948:258; orig. 1932).

BOAS AS A DETERMINIST

Boas systematically rejected almost every conceivable form of
cultural determinism. Of geographical explanations, he wrote: “It is

283


===== PAGE 147 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

fruitless to try to explain culture in geographical terms” (1948:266;
orig. 1930). Of economic factors: “We do not sec how art styles,
the form of ritual or the special forms of religious belief could possibly
be derived from economic forces” (ibid.:256, orig. 1932; italics
added). Of the relationship between religion and art: “We might
think that religion and art are closely associated, but comparative
study merely shows that art forms may be used to express religious
ideas; a result that is of no particular value” (ibid.:266; orig. 1930).
Of social organization and industrial activitics: “There is no significant
law that would cover all phases of their relations. We have simple
industries and complex organization, or diverse industries and simple
organization” (ibid). His judgment of the relationship between
kinship forms and demographic-economic factors is of special sig-
nificance in view of the strong theoretical interests that have always
centered on these problems: “there is no evidence that density of
population, stability of location, or economic status is necessarily
connected with a particular system of relationship and of behavior
connected with it” (Boas 1938a:680). The overwhelmingly negative
thrust of Boas’ empiricism is mitigated only to the extent that
he never intended to deny that all of the aforementioned factors
were devoid of determinative influence. The point was rather that
all these factors were determinative in unpredictable degrees and in

pattern unique to each ethnographic instance. In theory, therefore,
he Boasian program strongly identified itself with an eclectic outlook
in which “complete descriptions” were to be carried out by “all

vailable techniques,” and explanations were to be provided by em-
jbracing a wide variety of theoretical assumptions. Unfortunately, this
lis the philosophical position with which probably the vast majority
|of practicing Western anthropologists would most like to associate
i themselves.

ECLECTICISM

Fclecticism is certainly the path of least resistance through
the frequently strident polemics of the system-mongerers. Most an-
thropologists simply want to be left in peace to pursue the study of
their “people.” If one keeps technological, economic, social, political,
and ideational factors “in mind,” why should one have to get em-
broiled in the brouhaha of theoretical disputation?

Because of the strong logical affinity between an eclectic and in-
ductive approach, many Boasians have reacted with bewilderment and
impatience to the critical evaluation of Boas’ influence. The frequent
assertion that Boas “founded no school” went along with the belief

284

Daull

9. Historical Particularism: Boas

that the only thing Boas insisted on was higher standards of proof; as
long as it was responsible to the data, any theoretical and substantive
interest was conccivably compatible with the attempt to preserve the
vanishing fragments of primitive languages and cultures.

Eclecticism, however, abounds with hidden dangers. In practice,
it is often little more than a euphemism for confusion, the muddled
acccptance of contradictory theories, the bankruptcy of creative
thought, and the cloak of mediocrity. It bestows upon its practi-
tioners a false sense of security and an unearned reputation for scien-
tific acumen. Science consists of more than responsibility to the
data; the data must be made responsible to theory. Neither one
without the other suffices. It is impossible to be faithful to the facts
and at the same time indifferent to theory.

The history of the Boasian period suggests that the problem of
causality in culture can never be solved through a well-rounded eclectic
approach. It seems likely that in practice eclecticism will always end
by amplifying one’s initial impression of randomness and unpre-
dictability. The very idea of a scientific statement demands that some
balance be struck among the relevant variables, that they be assigned
different weights and values, and that they be segregated into depen-
F{ent and independent relationships. To say that everything is equally
important in every situation is to propose in effect that all situations
should be the same.

One deceptively simple solution is to argue that in certain cases
one set of factors, e.g., religious beliefs, are the independent variable,
while in other cases, another set of factors, e.g., economic organization,
takes its place. But this strategy, closely identified with Max Weber
?nd popular among sociologists as well as Boasian anthropologists, is
incompatible with historical determinism. Unless one can specify the
conditions under which now religion, now art, or then again subsis-
tence comes to the fore, the principles involved will be valid for only
one case at a time, much as if mass and gravitational force were
related in one way on the earth but in a different way on the moon.

A generalization which applies to only one case is a contradiction in
terms. ’

DELIBERATE AVERSION TO
SYSTEMATIZATION

But even if we grant that an eclectic approach is admissable
as. a provisional substitute for a coherent body of theory, we should
still have to confront the fact that, in practice, Boas never approached
a problem by giving full consideration to the entire range of environ-

285


===== PAGE 148 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

mental, technological, economic, social, aesthetic, and ideological
factors. With the exception of his study of the Eskimo, he rarely
considered environmental influences. His flat rejection of the relevance
of economics to art styles has already been cited. Although by no
means adequate for assessing the extent of his neglect of economic
factors, we may accept his own fiat against relating economics to
specific forms of social organization as a temporary estimate. It is
thus very difficult to avoid the conclusion that the proof of historical
disorder was of greater significance in Boas’ mature Weltanschauung
than was the formulation of orderly principles. Even Lowie, Boas’
greatest and most faithful student, was obliged to admit it as “para-
doxical” that Boas never integrated his thousands of pages of de-
scription of the Kwakiutl into a single work and that he had a
“puritanical” resistance to provisional synthesis. “It is this deliberate
aversion to systematization that is the despair of many readers and
precipitates misunderstanding” (LOWIE 1937:151-52). In the words
of Margaret Mead: “No probe must go too far lest it lead to premature
generalization—a development which he feared like the plague and
against which he continually warned us” (1959b:29).

Boas’ achievement of a view of culture in which lawful processes
were so vapid as to be unworthy of formulation is associated with
egregious epistemological, methodological, and factual errors. In the
long run, of course, it will be the errors of fact and of interpretation of
fact that will weigh most heavily in the judgment of future genera-
tions. We shall turn to these in a moment. But it would be a repeti-
tion of Boas’ capital mistake to suppose that these errors were
unrelated to fundamental philosophical misapprehensions.

BASIC PHILOSOPHICAL ERRORS

From the very earliest period, the Boasian program suffered
the embarrassment of a virtue which was at the same time its chief
vice. It was inductive to the point of self-destruction. The proposal
to substitute concrete historical data for speculative deductions about
history needs no defense. On the other hand, to deprive science of
speculation altogether is to deprive it of its very life blood. Yet in
essence, this is what the Boasian program sought to accomplish. In
view of the fragmentary nature of the ecthnographic recerd and in
view of the urgency of obtaining data from fast-disappearing tribal
groups, all theory was deemed speculative. The need of the moment
was fieldwork. As one of Boas’ students has put it, “the only corrective
was to allow conclusions to follow from the data without the intro-

286

[

Dol

o. Historical Particularism: Boas

duction of preconceived philosophical positions” (M. smITH 1959:49).
This “natural history” approach, to which most of Boas' students
would probably subscribe, is further elaborated as follows:

Boas’ emphasis on systematic fieldwork led to the collection of
whatever data became available. If one found an informant to be
particularly well versed in a subject, one concentrated on that
subject, getting everything possible from him and following
through with other informants, obscrvations, and the like, even
though the immediate usefulness of the material might not be
apparent. . . . This exhaustive collection of data which seems at
the time to have little or no connection with any specific problem
is peculiarly a feature of the natural history approach. . . . There
is a fascination in following the details of a subject just for its
intrinsic interest. . . . Masscs of data may therefore be worked
over with no clear knowledge of what is to be gained at the end

[ibid.:54].

In the history of philosophy there is a perfect parallel to Boas' con-
cept of science in the work of Francis Bacon. Reacting to a surfeit of
metaphysical final causes and other scholastic theoretical crutches,
Bacon insisted on the primacy of induction. Like Boas, he felt that
the greatest need of the day was the collection of a corpus of reliable
facts: Heretofore, wrote Bacon, “no search has been made to collect
a store of observation sufficient either in number, kind, or in certainty
to inform the understanding, or in any way adequate.”

The method usually followed by philosophers should be inverted.
Instead of coming down from axioms to particular conclusions, as
in syllogistic deducation, the scientist should go instead from par-
ticular experiments and observations up to axioms—induction, in
other words, should replace deduction [ciLsoN and LANGAN 1963:

37-38].

Science in this view is distinguished by its systematic collection of
facts carefully checked for accuracy. “The essence of his [Boas’]
method was . . . to gather facts, and ever more facts . . . and permit
them to speak for themselves. . . .”(rADIN 1939, quoted in WHITE
1947b:406). If enough facts are collected, the corpus of scientific in-
formation will eventually be ripe for the “discovery” of the laws of
nature. It is evident, however, both from the history of science in
general and from the experience of the social sciences, that a strict
adherence to Baconian induction, even if it were culturologically fea-
sible, would not lead to the discovery of regularities. The trouble is
that a random sampling of any field of observation will prove beyond

287



===== PAGE 149 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the shadow of doubt that nature is chaotic. One has merely to observe
birds flying, smoke rising, clouds drifting, feathers floating, and stones
plummeting to realize that Galileo’s formulation of the laws of
motion could not possibly have resulted from the mere collection of
facts. If one set out to note all the facts about a single grain of sand,
all of the computers in the world could not store the information
which could eventually be collected on that subject. Cultural phe-
nomena, with their dependence upon complex levels of logico-
empirical abstraction, could undoubtedly provide facts in correspond-
ingly higher degrees of infinity. “Complete descriptions” of anything
are impossible. The normal mode of scientific procedure is, therefore,
something quite different from what Bacon supposed. For an authori-
tative opinion in this matter, one can scarcely improve on Einstein

(1936):

There is no inductive method which could lead to the funda-
mental concepts of physics. Failure to understand this fact con-
stituted the basic philosophic error of so many investigators of
the nineteenth century. . . . We now realize with special clarity,
how much in error are those theorists who believe that theory
comes inductively from experience . . . [quoted in WHITE 1947b:
406].

Facts are limitless, but the resources of science, even in the best
endowed branches, are meager by comparison. There are limited
quantities of research manpower, funds, and facilities. Moreover, the
devotion of research effort to the collection of one set of facts means
the neglect of other sets of facts. Under modern laboratory condi-
tions, where funding takes place in relation to competitive proposals,
there is less opportunity to confuse mere induction with science.
The great instruments of observation, the optical and radio tele-
scopes, the high-energy particle generators, and the rocket-borne te-
lemetry packages operate on the strictist of schedules with each
moment of fact collecting justified by thousands of man-hours of
previous thought and experiment. Even in conventional laboratories,
precious research time is never abandoned to an aimless rushing
about from one experiment to another. As Einstein is also reputed to
have said, “You've got to itch to scratch.” To be sure, the richer the
facility, the greater the leeway for relatively unstructured approaches.
Thus in the field of cancer research, hundreds of thousands of sub-
stances are being tested for their possible curative effects without
disturbing the course of more theoretically oriented rescarch. But in
the social sciences, especially in ethnology at the turn of the century,

288

o. Historical Particularism: Boas

only an infinitesimal portion of the social effluent could be diverted.
Every expedition, every minor field trip, every conversation with an
informant was the equivalent of hundreds of hours of time with the
Brookhaven cyclotron or the 200-inch Palomar telescope. In all fields,
not only are some facts collected, but others are not collected. And
the commission and omission stand as a unit within the research
strategy, regardless of whether the research is oriented by a formal
conscious hypothesis.

289



===== PAGE 150 =====

The

Boasian Milieu 10

S
Sl

Regardless of the Baconian urge with which Boas has been invested;
that is, despite his image as the patient collector of facts on all
aspects of culture, neither Boas nor his students conducted their re-
search completely free of hypotheses. These hypotheses were never
overtly formulated. Indeed, they resemble nothing so much as what
in recent ethnosemantic theory is called a “cognitive map.” They
were part of the general mode of Jooking at the phenomena of culture
which middle-class Euro-American academics at the turn of the cen-
tury had acquired through common or parallel enculturation expe-
riences. Only by reference to this milieu can an anthropologically
informed understanding be reached of Boas’ “aversion to systema-
tization” and of the negative thrust of the entire Boasian program
with respect to the formulation of historical regularities.

Anthropologists of all theoretical schools have been strangely lax
in applying their own methods of studying cultural phenomena
to the study of themselves. One might suppose that anthropologists
would not often stand in need of special reminders concerning the
capacity of cultural influences to shape the main substance of an in-

290

10. The Boasian Milieu

dividual’s cognitive world. Yet it is remarkable how slight has been
the attention paid to the relationship between the Boasian program
and the sociocultural milieu in which Boas and his students lived.
Although this task obviously cannot be attempted in anything less
than a major work, we may here at least try to achieve a better defini-
tion of the problem than is currently available.

BOAS NOT A REACTIONARY
ANTIEVOLUTIONIST

Largely under the influence of Leslie White, critics of the
Boasian program have equated its main tenets with “antievolution-
ism.” For White (1949a:110), as we have seen, Boas was the chief
representative of the “reactionary and regressive antievolutionist”
tendency in the United States. Boas’ attack on the comparative
method is seen by White as the turning point in American anthro-
pology from evolutionism to antievolutionism (WHTE 1959a:108).
In White’s analysis of the sociocultural factors responsible for this
reaction, a misleading equivalence is established between the forces
opposed to Spencer’s theories and those opposed to Marx. In White’s
interpretation, the antievolutionary reaction in the United States was
simply an extension of the struggle that had been waged between
Darwinism and the “enemies of evolutionism.” Although largely un-
successful in the biological sciences (with such notable exceptions as
the Scopes trial), the antievolutionist counterattack is said to have
won the field in the social sciences:

The forces of institutionalized Christianity, especially within the
Roman Catholic Church, were arrayed against evolutionism. The
use of evolutionist theory in general and Morgan’s theories in
particular by Karl Marx and the radical socialist labor movement
evoked powerful opposition from the capitalist system. Thus,
antievolutionism becamc a creed for certain sectors of society

- a philosophy in support of the church, private property, the
family, and the capitalist state [ibid.:109)].

White’s analysis is encumbered by an unnecessary and confusing
thetoric. It is very difficult to equate Boas with “reactionary and
regressive” currents. Of course, White was careful to distinguish Boas
the man from Boas the symbol of an intellectual movement, but
there is an inevitable association of one with the other. Anyone at all
familiar with Boas’ carcer knows that he was a prodigious champion of
causes which in the logic of political liberalism are generally ac-

291


===== PAGE 151 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

knowledged as being anything but “reactionary and regressive.” Boas’
lifelong struggle against the notion of a direct feedback between ra-
cial and cultural factors is regressive only to the extent that it repre-
sents a return to the radical doctrines of the French Revolution. If
there is any one theme capable of eliciting an enthusiastic consensus
among contemporary American anthropologists, it is that the racist
premises of Spencerism blocked the further development of the social
sciences. Moreover, Boas had a distinguished record of public protest
against racist bigotry. During the First World War he courageously
maintained a pacifist position despite the virulent nationalism that
had sickened campus life. During the rise of the Nazi race mania,
Boas led the struggle against biological reductionism. In 1931, on the
occasion of the award of an honorary doctorate at the University of
Kiel, he felt it his responsibility to deliver an address on the subject
of race and culture. His papers were circulated by the German under-
ground, and his books were conspicuous in the Nazi bonfires. When
Boas suffered a fatal heart attack on December 21, 1943, during a
luncheon at the Men’s Faculty Club at Columbia University, his last
words concerned the need for eternal vigilance against racism.

EVOLUTIONISM VERSUS
ANTIEVOLUTIONISM

But there is another and more serious defect in White’s
explanation of the Boasian position. It arises from White’s attempt to
discuss the functional significance of the Boasian program in terms
of a worthless dichotomy: evolutionism versus antievolutionism. As
we have seen, if we accept the meaning of evolution to be the trans-
formation of forms, there never has been serious resistance to such an
idea in the social sciences. White himself has defined evolution as
“a temporal sequence of forms” (see Chap. 22), and to this meaning
of evolution, no Boasian could possibly object. Mere transformism,
of course, was not the essence of the evolutionism of the Spencerians
nor of the doctrinaire Marxists. There were three additional ingredi-
ents in the Spencerian version of evolution, and it was to these that
the Boasians objected. One was biological reductionism, the other
was the tendency to regard parallel evolution as dominant over
cither convergent or divergent evolution, and the third was a snob-
bish definition of progress. There was another ingredient in Spencerian
evolutionism with which the Boasians were by and large in com-
plete agreement. This was the conviction, shared by Spencer and
Darwin, that biological as well as sociocultural evolution was explicable

292

10. The Boasian Milieu

in terms of purely “natural” processes. White’s equating of Boas’
antievolutionism with the antievolutionism of supernatural explana-
tions of life and mind has been justly criticized by Lowie:

Thus White’s gloomy picture of most contemporary anthro-
pologists plunged into Cimmerian darkness, unrelieved by a sin-
gle lambent ray of evolution, is preposterous. He ought to realize
that Thurnwald, Radcliffe-Brown, Radin, Lesser, Malinowski are
professed evolutionists, and that even I have spoken kindly
enough of neo-evolutionism.

The questions which worry White, viz., “why Boas and his dis-
ciples have been anti-evolutionists” and what may be “the source
and basis of the anti-evolutionist philosophy of the Boas group,”
automatically disappear. In order to infuse sense into such queries
they must be re-formulated: Why have Boas and his students
attacked not evolution, but Morgan’s and other writers” evolution-
ary schemes [1948a:227]?

White has failed to address himself constructively to this query. The
Boasians have done so at length, and we already know their answer:
the “schemes” were based on shoddy standards of proof. Like White,
I reject this explanation. It fails to explain why the normal interplay
between theory and research was so drastically restricted; why in the
words of Kluckhohn (1939:333), it got to be that “to suggest that
something is ‘theoretical’ is to suggest that it is slightly indecent.” To
be sure, White is not the originator of the misleading equation be-
tween the essence of the Boasian position and a clumsy use of the
phrase “antievolution.” In his rejoinder to Lowie, White quite
properly stressed that some of the Boasians themselves had led the
way to misunderstanding by crude expressions of hostility to “evo-
lution.” The most splendid example of this debauchery in the ranks
of the higher empiricists is that of Berthold Laufer. I quote in extenso,
because it represents the nadir of the negativism and antiscientism
which was associated with historical particularism.

The theory of cultural evolution, to my mind the most inane,
sterile, and pernicious theory ever conceived in the history of
science (a cheap toy for the amusement of big children), is duly
disparaged. . . . Culture cannot be forced into the straitjacket
of any thcory whatever it may be, nor can it be reduced to chemi-
cal or mathematical formulae. Nature has no laws, so culture
has none. It is as vast and as free as the ocean, throwing its waves
and currents in all directions. . . . All that the practical in-
vestigator can hope for, at least for the present, is to study each
cultural phenomenon as exactly as possible in its geographical

293



===== PAGE 152 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

distribution, its historical development and its relation or associa-
tion with other kindred ideas. The more theories will be smashed,
the more new facts will be established, the better for the progress
of our science [LAUFER 1918:90].

White (1947b:402ff.) has shown that Ruth Benedict, Ruth Bunzel,
Edward Sapir, Paul Radin, and Alexander Goldenweiser all must
share the onus of setting up the false dichotomy between Boas™ pro-
gram and “evolution.” But it is clear from the context in which
“antievolutionary” statements occur that there is very little White has
ever said about evolution per se to which the majority of Boasians
would want to raise any objections.

White summarizes evolutionary doctrine in his “Energy and the
Evolution of Culture,” laying down propositions which Boasians
may find trite and futile, but which do not arouse the Bryanesque
ardor imputed to them when evolution is propounded. Boasians
do not deny that man requires food, controls his environment
with the aid of tools, improves his control by invention and dis-
covery, and alters social structure as a result of technological
evolution [LOWIE 1946:416].

DARWIN NOT ATTACKED BY BOASIANS

Nonetheless, we must not fail to take into account the ap-
parent similarity of the “anticvolutionary” lapses with the continuing
struggle within biology and philosophy between the Darwinists and
the special creationists, vitalists, and other varieties of antimaterialists.
As was seen earlier, these forces did indeed stage a strong comeback
toward the end of the nineteenth century. The vogue of historical
particularism corresponded in time with the influence of Henri Berg-
son in France and William James in the United States, both of whom
were concerned to salvage as much as possible of the badly damaged
theist position. In Germany, the influence of Windelband and
Rickert was reaching its peak. At the same time, despite his many
staunch defenders, such as Ernst Haeckel (the hero of Lowie’s youth),
A. Weissman, F. A. Lange, and E. Krause, there was strong political
pressure against the dissemination of Darwin’s views: “the theory
became entangled with the theories of the Social Democrats and
soon assumed a materialistic aspect which the state considcred to be
so anti-social as to deprecate its teaching in the schools” (FOTHERGILL
1952:121). Within biology, the attack was carried on by the vitalist
Hans Driesch (1go8) in Germany and by St. George Mivart (1871)
in England. In Germany, the historian E. Radl (1930:388) could
triumphantly declare in 1910, “Darwinism . . . is dead.”

294

I

10. The Boasian Milieu

This complete domination of contemporary thought by the Dar-
winian point of view did not last long. After the eighties one
realm after another was lost to it, until finally it reigned supreme
only in the field of biology [ibid.:372].

Radl’s sketch of the return to theism and orthodoxy leaves no room
for doubting that the Boasian movement was part of a widespread
cultural phenomenon:

Interest in religion revives. Scientific attacks on the literal ac-
curacy of the bible are out of date . . . we speak again of the
necessity for religion. . . . There came a reaction, too, against
the evolutionary view of history. Some workers still believe that
science should formulate the empirical laws that govern past
events. But the attempts initiated by Buckle and Taine to write
history around these laws has long been abandoned [ibid.:373].

Like White, Radl equates cultural antievolutionism with anti-Dar-
winism. But this was an error common to all those who sought to
bolster up their own investment in the religious counterattack with
references to the opposition that the theory of natural selection was
encountering within biology. Radl of course was ridiculously optimis-
tic about the demise of Darwinism within biology. At the very
moment of its alleged death, Darwinism, united with the rediscovered
Mendelian principles, was on the verge of its greatest victories. The
entire field of experimental and paleontological biology was about to
fall under its sway. By the twenties, it was vitalism and entelechism
which were dead, while the new Synthetic Theory was in full com-
mand. This victory proves the essential continuity of evolutionary
theory within the discipline of biology. At the height of the reaction,
even under men like Hans Driesch, Thomas Hunt Morgan, and
Jacques Loeb, all mentioned by Lowie as influential in his own
outlook, there was never any question that the doctrine of descent
with modification was about to be abandoned. The great issue of the
day was whether natural selection was adequate for an explanation of
the phenomena of adaptation. As Lowie says, just as these critics of
Darwinism did not reject evolution per se, “neither did anthro-
po}ogists reject all cultural evolution” (LowIE 1956b:1006). But even
Fhls is a drawing of false battle lines. Boas did not reject evolutionism
In any degree whatsoever. What he rejected was (1) biological re-
ductionism, (2) cultural parallelism, and (3) universal standards of
progress. At no point did Boas and his students, most of whom were
athgists or agnostics, embrace a theistic interpretation of either bio-
logical or cultural evolution. As a matter of fact, the Boasian model of
endlessly divergent cultural transformations is closer to the Darwinian

295


===== PAGE 153 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

model of the “tree of life,” than is White’s highly abstract notion of
a universal cultural sequence. (We will have more to say about this in
Chap. 22.) But at no point either, did the Boasians make the slight-
est headway toward formulating the general principles—the equiva-
lent of the theory of natural selection—which would account for
micro- and macro-evolutionary transformations.

Now in regard to the attack upon parallelism and racism, it is of
paramount importance to express without rhetoric the fact that the
Boasians rejected all coherent (ie., noneclectic) explanations of socio-
cultural differences which made any appeal to any deterministic prin-
ciple whatsoever, with rather marked indifference to whether they
were inspired by materialist, idealist, or theist doctrines. This means
that if we seek to understand the sociology of knowledge of the Boas-
ian period, we must concentrate on the functional contribution of
the rejection of all formulable determinisms.

THE PROBLEM OF SPENCERISM

But there is a minor dilemma that stands in the way. If
cultural forces are presumed to be decisive in the unfolding of the
Boasian epoch, how is it that Spencerism, so eminently suited to the
ideological nceds of competitive industrial and international capitalism,
was able to be driven out of anthropology by the Boasians? This is
the question White is unable to confront because of his inability to rec-
oncile the alleged “reactionary” and regressive antievolutionism with
Boas’ “progressive” antiracism.

It should not be concluded that Spencerism had to be abandoned
because it embraced a determinist view of history. On the contrary,
Spencerism was a perfect expression of all individualistic, spontaneous,
competitive, and unpredictable impulses. If it was chaos that was
needed, the doctrine of the survival of the fittest was beautifully
adapted to the wildest surges in Laufer's ocean. The interaction of
the sociocultural and biological models of evolution all during the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in no way produced a decisive
adherence to determinist principles. Spencer was a materialist and a
determinist. But others could read in the triumph of biological
evolutionism a new vindication of the limitless nature of human
destiny. Indeed, this was one of the options taken by an influential
sector of learned opinion both in Europe and the United States.

That very theory of evolution which had at first sight appeared to
prove the mechanical method afresh, and to give it a new weapon
wherewith to subdue the rebel world of life, helped rather to de-

296

10. The Boasian Milieu

preciate its value and to shake its foundations. Regarded in the
light of evolution, was the world what the mechanical theory had
held it to be, an eternal persistence of unchangeable substances,
an cternal repetition of necessary movements subject to unchange-
able laws; or was it rather a perennial becoming, an incessant
renewal of forms which cannot be foreseen, and which cannot
therefore be subject to the rigid necessity of determinism? Is not
variability, that is to say, the possibility of the new, presupposed
in all evolution? Can the new be confined within the limits of
any mathematical formula? How can mechanics, the science of
eternal types, mirror the transient life of the real? It is not to the
motionless ideas of reason that we must turn if we would sound
the depths of being and grasp it in the productive moment of its
generation, but rather to the free creations of imagination and
energy [ALIOTTA 1914:xxi].

In the same vein, the wildly exciting effect that evolutionism had
upon Nietzsche, with his uncontrollable “blond beast,” is also de-
serving of note. It is clear, therefore, that the struggle against Social
Darwinism by the Boasians is not to be taken for granted. If other
aspects of the Boasian program are rooted in cultural forces, one
cannot deny a similar derivation of the element of antiracism.

THE CULTURAL SOURCE OF THE
ATTACK ON SPENCERISM

The attack on racist theories coincided in the United States
with a period of strong democratic countercurrents. Boas was a
member of an immigrant minority, who as an individual was ob-
viously unprepared to concede the superiority of the dominant white
Anglo-Saxon Protestant intellectual and business elites. Nonetheless,
he was no superman; without supporting currents powerfully im-
pelled by the conditions of his adopted social milieu, racism might
very well have survived and triumphed in American, as it did in
German and Italian, anthropology. But the antiracist countercurrents
in the United States were nourished by the vast influx of Poles,
Russians, and Ttalians, whose Catholicism or Judaism was not easily
worked up into a master-race complex. These immigrant groups par-
ticipated in the political and ideological struggle to break the pattern
of unrestricted competition, which marks the beginnings of United
States welfare capitalism. They provided the pressure for antitrust,
pro-labor, and progressive income tax legislation prior to the outbreak
of the First World War—the war “to Make the World Safe for

297



===== PAGE 154 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Democracy.” In other words, the functional basis for the Boasian attack
upon Spencerism had nothing whatsoever to do with the dark reaction-
ary forces summoned up by White. The inappropriateness of the reac-
tionary and regressive label is underscored as soon as we remind
ourselves, although this scarcely seems necessary, that Spencerism may
be dead in anthropology, but it is still a very conspicuous element in
the ideological armamentarium of the American right, the Birchers,
Dixiecrats, and right-wing Republicans. Richard Hofstadter's (1944)
theory that Social Darwinism has passed out of existence in American
life can be sustained only if we regard a belief in the essentials of the
doctrine as synonymous with an awareness of who Herbert Spencer
was.

In many ways the Boasian program corresponds rather closely with
the fundamental ideological outlook associated with left-of-center
political liberalism. The belief in multiracial democracy, relativity of
custom, maximum freedom for the individual, the importance of ma-
terial comfort, but the ultimately greater strength of the rational
mind, and hence, the ultimate openness of society and history—all
these themes are faithfully mirrored in the work of Boas and his
pupils. In fact, there is only one point at which the Boasian program
can be said to enter into serious conflict with the ideological manifesta-
tions of democratized liberalism: the culture concept. This concept,
so vital to the destruction of racism, is potentially, if not inherently,
deterministic and antidemocratic in its own right.

THE PARADOX OF
DETERMINISM

CULTURAL

If the enculturation experience determines for life how the
individual is to conduct the entire pattern of his affairs, from sex to
art, what then becomes of the vaunted freedom of the individual? To
push to the furthest wall at once, if culture determines how we
behave, then what difference is there between a democratic and
totalitarian regime other than the illusion to which the actors in the
democratic milieu have been enculturated that they are “freer” to
choose their individual and collective destinies? It is no accident that
Leslie White, the most outspoken critic of the Boasian program, has
driven the concept of culture almost to this very extreme. It is not
widely shared, although there are many anthropologists, including
myself, who would agree that the association of freedom with political
democracy is much more of an illusion than the average well-en-
culturated ideologue is willing to grant.

298

B _

10.

The Boasian Milieu

Among the Boasians, with one conspicuous exception, namely
Alfred Kroeber, the relationship between culture and freedom has
been treated in a diametrically opposite fashion. In essence, the
Boasian program has pressed forward to a vision of the absolute
maximum amount of individual freedom compatible with the con-
tinued serviceability of the culture concept. In other words, arguments
against historical determinism have stopped just short of destroying
cultural determinism.

There are two main routes to this position: (1) by emphasizing
the creative role of the individual in cultural change, and (2) by
stressing the variability and nonconformity of individuals with respect
to culture patterns. The transport of the cultural-determinist position
along these paths had a definite chronology. Boas set 1910 as the
date which divided the period in which he stressed historical recon-
struction from that in which he tumed to “the interaction between
individual and society” (Boas 1948:311; orig. 1936). As I have already
indicated, it was this concern which led to the development of culture
and personality studies during the twenties.

Earlier there was the famous exchange between Sapir and Kroeber
(to which we shall turn again in Chap. 12) when Sapir (1917:443)
remarked: “I fail to see how we can deny a determining, and in some
cases even extraordinarily determining, cultural influence to a large
number of outstanding personalities.” The culmination of this em-
phasis on the individual was embodied in the work of Paul Radin,
one of Boas’ students who shared with Kroeber the belief that Boas
didn’t really “do history.” Radin’s prescription for fulfilling the
tole of historian, however, was diametrically opposed to Krocber's. To
do history properly, one must study individuals. Radin’s Crashing
Thunder: The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian (1926) repre-
sented the ultimate narrowing down of history to a single individual.
(Actually, as The Nature of Cultural Things [HARRIS: 1964a] dem-
onstrates, there are micro-focused options that even Radin over-
looked.) Later, Radin explained his approach as follows:

'I_'hc [historical] task, let me insist, is always the same: a descrip-
tion of a specific period. . . . This can be done only by an in-
tensive and continuous study of a particular tribe, a thorough
knowledge of the language and an adequate body of texts and this
can be accomplished only if we realize, once and for all, that we
are dealing with specific, not generalized, men and women, and
with specific, not generalized events. But the recognition of
specific men and women should bring with it the realization that
there are all types of individuals and that it is not, for instance, a

299


===== PAGE 155 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Crow Indian who has made such and such a statement, uttered
such and such a prayer, but a particular Crow Indian. It is this
particularity that is the essence of all history [RApIN 1 933:184-85].

The most perfect congruence between the culture concept and
that of individual freedom has been achieved by David Bidney. Al
though not a Boasian, Bidney’s position is entirely at the mercy of the
factual critique that the Boasians employed to demonstrate the open-
ness of history. “Ultimately,” insists Bidney (1963:34), “human cul-
ture is the product of man’s potentiality for freedom of creativity
and freedom of choice.” But it was not necessary for the Boasians to
have moved as far as Bidney toward the reductio ad absurdum of
cultural indeterminism. The important thing is that the Boasians re-
mained well within the culturally tolerable limits of the ideology of
freedom. Even Kroeber, as we shall see, professed and delighted in
the unpredictability of cultural evolution. The crucial issue, however,
is the probability of parallel and convergent development, informed
by an understanding of the causal processes of cultural evolution.

The facts happen to be very much against the kind of situation that
Bidney imagines to be the hallmark of humanity. The Boasian treat-
ment of the facts was heavily weighted in favor of making it possible for
ideologues to convince a wider public that the doctrines of political
liberalism rest on a firm scientific foundation. I hasten to add, how-
ever, that in removing that foundation, post-Boasians have no inten-
tion of depriving anyone of his illusion of freedom. Rather it is our
intention to help clear the way for an objective measurement of the
degree of historical freedom that cultures and individuals possess.
Any other formulation of the problem constitutes a philosophical
disputation unworthy of modern anthropology.

300

The Ethnographic
Basis of

Particularism

11

Becausc of the heavy emphasis that the Boasians placed on achieving
higher standards of evidence in ethnography, they have exposed
t!lcmsclvcs to captious and vindictive criticism, based on a re-evalua-
tion of old, or the presentation of new, ethnographic data. Leslie
White, the chief architect of the attack on Boas, has generated a
considerable amount of resentment within the anthropological fra-
ternity by his sometimes petty innuendos concerning the competence
of Boas as a fieldworker. White claims Boas was excessively puritanical
and prudish and that the amount of time he actually spent in the
field has been inflated. White has also demanded to know why Boas,
who was being honored by his students “as the world’s éreatest
anthropologist,” could not have formulated the concept of ambi-
lateral descent, which has subsequently turned out to be the key to
t!le understanding of Kwakiutl social organization. “The facts lay
tight before his eyes,” says White (1963:67). Needless to say, one
does not criticize Newton for failing to be Einstein. )

Furthermore, it is unjust to impugn Boas’ performance as a field-
worker in view of the absence of objective standards for measuring

301



===== PAGE 156 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the performance of anthropologists in the field. It is of course a
commonplace within the fraternity that certain anthropologists will
acquire a reputation for being “good” or “bad” fieldworkers and that
this judgment will be maintained independently of the evaluation of
the substantive and theoretical product that issues from their field or
library research. But this kind of thing rarely rises above the level of
gossip. It seems unquestionable that Boas functioned quite well in
terms of rapport, acceptance, and opportunities for participation and
observation; his data-recording techniques were superb; and if one
can judge from George Hunt and Henry Tate, whom Boas trained as
assistants, no anthropologist has ever had better informants (cf.
ROHNER 1966). The defective portions of Boas’ ethnography have little
to do with Boas’ capacities as a fieldworker but are entirely a product
of the theoretical prospectus of the Boasian program. It therefore
remains an essential task, to which White has made important contri-
butions, that the errors involved be publicized and their deleterious
consequences upon cultural theory be traced. We must do this not in
order to diminish Boas™ stature, but rather in order to carry forward
the perfection of the discipline to which he dedicated his life.

THE KWAKIUTL

As formulated by Boas, presented to his students, dissem-
inated within anthropology, and diffused beyond to adjacent disci-
plines, Boas’ Northwest Coast cthnography was the main factual
armory for the assault on cultural materialism and historical de-
terminism. For those who were interested in proving that the paral-
lelists had grossly exaggerated the amount of order in cultural phe-
nomena, the Northwest Coast Indian tribes were an inexhaustible
source of appatent chaos. The Kwakiut]l of Vancouver Island, who
were the focus of Boas' field interests over a period of almost forty-
five years, inhabited an area of great ecological complexity, distin-
guished by its rain forests, its migratory fish, and its large maritime
mammalian species. The Kwakiutl, like the rest of the Northwest Coast
peoples, exploited this environment through numerous hunting, fish-
ing, and gathering techniques, but they practiced no agriculture. This
mode of existence exposed them to the fluctuations in the size and
location of the fish and animal populations, which could be abun-
dant or scarce in conformity with a complex series of environmental
circumstances. At the time of Boas’ first visit in 1886, however, the
Kwakiut! had already been in contact with Europeans for over nincty
years. From 1849 on, they had been engaged in intensive trade with

302

hall

'

11.

The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

the Hudson’s Bay Company, and the groups with whom Boas worked
had in fact drastically modified their way of life in order to take up
residence adjacent to the trading post at Fort Rupert. Toward the
end of the nineteenth century, the Kwakiutl and the rest of the
Northwest Coast groups were the object of visits by a steady stream
of tourists, and their direct or indirect involvement with the events
responsible for the development of the Pacific Northwest was steadily
intensified all during the years of Boas’ research.

The abuse of Kwakiutl ethnography centers on two major issues.
At an early point in his study of their social organization in relation-
ship to that of the surrounding tribes, Boas came to believe that the
Kwakiutl were undergoing a matrilineal to patrilineal change in de-
scent, contrary to that which the generalists of the nineteenth century
had claimed to be the normal sequence. In addition, Boas became
fascinated by the occurrence of destructive give-away feasts, or pot-
latches, which he insisted were beyond explanation involving eco-
nomic causality. Both of these issues are related, since in sum, they
involved a misunderstanding of the basic Kwakiutl residence and
descent groups, the numaym, and the relationship between that

group and the techno-environmental conditions under which the
Kwakiutl lived during pre-contact times.

KWAKIUTL DESCENT

Boas (1897) presented his view of Kwakiutl social structure
under the title, The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the
Kwak_iutl Indians. Tt was based upon his belief that the Kwakiutl had
kinship groups, originally identified as gens or clans but later simply
termed numaym, in which membership and privileges were dependent
upon a variety of matrilineal descent.

Here the woman brings as a dower her father’s position and privi-
leges to her husband, who however is not allowed to use them
himself, but acquires them for the use of his son. As the woman’s
father on his part has acquired his privileges in the same manner
through his mother, a purely female law of descent is secured,
although only through the medium of the husband [1897:334-35].

Tl?is description was the reverse of Boas’ earlier opinion that “The
child does not belong by birth to the gens of his father or
mother, but may be made a member of any gens to which his father,
mother, grandparents, or great-grandparents belonged” (18g1a:609).
I.n conformity with his announced interest in historical reconstruc-
tion, Boas speculated concerning the nature of the earlier phases of

303



===== PAGE 157 =====

B o

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

Kwakiutl social organization. Initially, he seemed to have been
convinced that the Kwakiutl had at one time been matrilineal and
that they were in transition to the expected patrilineal stage: “The
marriage ceremonies of the Kwakiutl seem to show that originally
matriarchate prevailed also among them” (quoted in WHITE 1963:52).
Within a few years, however, Boas fell victim to the demon of dis-
order. In 1895 he reversed his thinking, defied the prevailing evolu-
tionary scheme, and argued that the transition that had taken
place was in the opposite direction, and that the “organization must
have been at one time a purely paternal one” (1897:334-35); hence,
the transition had gone from patriliny to matriliny.

His reasoning follows a most tendentious path, which of course is
all the more painful with benefit of hindsight. The evidence con-
sisted mainly of the absence of the kinds of survival that should
have been found had the former stage been matrilineal. Thus, there
was “No trace left of an inheritance from the wives’ brothers,”
matrilocality was absent, and there were no legends or myths which
traced the origins of the groups to matrilineal ancestors. There were,
however, some legends that mentioned patrilineal ancestors. As for
the latter:

It is true that these traditions are probably not very old and have
been modified with the changing social life of the pecople; but
from what we know of the development of myths we should ex-
pect to find in them traces at least of the old maternal institu-
tions; but the fact that they are invariably and always are
explained by geneaologies seems to my mind conclusive proof
that the paternal organization of the tribe preceded the present
one [ibid.:335].

With the development of the concept of nonunilinear descent
through the work of Goodenough (1956) and Davenport (1959), it
has become obvious that Boas was trying to force the Kwakiutl
numaym into one of two categories, both of which were inappropri-
ate. The salient feature of the numaym is precisely the fact that
there is no rigid adherence to one or the other unilineal principle,
but that individuals may make use of ambiguous and flexible principles
in aligning themselves and their offspring with various residential and
descent groupings.

Actually, by 1920 Boas had once again changed his emphasis and
had recognized that something was wrong. Regarding the system of
matrilineal descent through a man’s daughter’s husband’s daughter,
he now said, “I believe this does not quite correspond to the actual

304

conditions.” His analysis, however, secems to have remained in a
state of provisional formulation, since it contained contradictory
statements. On the one hand, and in conformity with the ultimate
solution reached by other analysts, he noted that “The transmission
from individual to individual through marriage is most arbitrary.” On
the other hand, he also maintained that “the numayms are based on
descent with a preference for the paternal line” (1948b:362; orig. 1920).
Despite his evident inability to offer anything like a coherent picture
of the observed system, Boas continued to insist upon the validity of
the now more than ever tenuous reconstruction: “I do not see any
reason for a change of my opinion in regard to the relative antiquity of
the transfer of names and privileges through the male or female
line” (ibid.: 366). It should be noted that in context there are a
number of provisos which indicate the speculative quality of this
conclusion. But the extreme interest in Boas” handling of the numaym
stems from the fashion in which he and his students seized upon this
case to destroy the supposed universal tendency for patrilineality to
follow matrilineality and at the same time to discredit the entire
historical determinist position.

On the basis of this one drastically deficient case, there gradually
diffused out of Schermerhorn Hall at Columbia, through lecture,
word of mouth, article, and text, the unquestioned dogma that Boas
had proved that it was just as likely that patrilineality succeeded
matrilineality as the reverse. When the case was cited in the general
textbook that Boas had edited, Gladys Reichard (1938:425) referred
to it as “more convincing” than the other possible instance among
the Trobrianders (also highly dubious, however) because “the details
of its cause are more positive.” Boas’ speculations concerning a
patrilineal to matrilineal development among the Kwakiutl actually
gave rise to an attempt to show that this sequence was the normal
one. Thus, John Swanton (1gos) tried to demonstrate that it was
precisely the matrilineally organized tribes, such as the Haida of
the Northwest, the Zuni and Hopi among the Pueblos, and the Creck
and Natchez of the Southeast, who were the culturally most advanced
peoples, while the groups that were organized on a patrilineal and a
bilateral basis were deemed to be more primitive. Lowie (1920:150-
55), Kroeber (1923:355-58), and Goldenweiser (1914:436) all fell
for this curiously involuted parallelism. As Murdock (1949:189) has
shown: “This inverted evolutionistic scheme of a bilateral-patrilineal-
matrilineal succession in the forms of social organization became an
established dogma in American anthropology.” Tt is clear, therefore,
that neither Boas nor his students approached the facts of Kwakiutl

305



===== PAGE 158 =====

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

social organization free of rather sweeping hypotheses. The pity of it is
that their hypotheses were not clearly phrased and that even had
they been correct, they would still not have been suitable substitutes
for the determinist systems to whose overthrow they were dedicated.
For what after all was the explanation of the alleged patrilineal-to-
matrilineal shift among the Kwakiutl? Nothing but the proximity of
the more northerly tribes who were matrilineal. That is, the func-
tional interpretation of Kwakiutl social structure was left to the mercy
of the postulated diffusionary influence.

A MODERN INTERPRETATION OF THE
NUMAYM

It was only long after Boas™ death that there began to emerge
the lineaments of a functional explanation of the numaym which at
once eclipses and renders superfluous attempts to derive its non-
unilinear character from speculative diffusionary impulses. Thomas
Hazard (1960) has suggested how the bilateral claims of descent were
probably utilized by individuals to associate themselves with chieftains
who were best able to provide safety and sustenance. During the
sharp population decline brought about by the stresses of the contact
period, the ability of a local group to exploit its hereditary fishing
and hunting resources depended upon the ability to recruit ade-
quate personnel through all descent lines. Boas’ genealogies actually
showed the complete scrambling of descent lines as all sorts of
claims were pressed and all sorts of exceptions to the allegedly pre-
ferred arrangements took place, but he did not attempt a functional
analysis of these phenomena. The real force of Hazard’s interpreta-
tion is that it links the nonunilinear nature of the numaym to the
Northwest Coast technology, economy, and habitat and, in so doing,
at once provides an insight into the situation on Vancouver Island,
which, however tentatively offered, opens vistas of fruitful inquiry.

THE POTLATCH

In order to appreciate the advance that this represents over
the Boasian position, we must take up that second and by far more
influential focus of Boas’ ficldwork, the Kwakiutl potlatch. As has
already been suggested, if one wished to demonstrate the lawlessness
of culture, the Northwest Coast was one of the best places to do it.
At the time of Boas' first visit, and probably for several decades
prior to that date, the Kwakiutl were practicing a form of feasting

306

that scems to defy any sort of techno-environmental or techno-eco-
nomic explanation. Here was a whole people caught up in an exchange
system that conferred greatest prestige on the individual who gave
away the greatest amount of the most valuable goods. Since previous
analyses of economic behavior had stressed the importance of hus-
banding the products of labor and of rationally apportioning work
effort in relation to needs and consumption patterns, the Kwakiutl
material was in effect the death-knell of homo economicus, conceived
either in the capitalist or socialist image. Moreover, it was not merely
that goods were given away, but that on occasion, so overwhelming
was this passion for self-glorification, that blankets were ripped to
shreds, valuable fish oil set on fire, whole villages burned, and “slaves”
thrown into the sea to drown. Boas’ account of the potlatch has
probably been the single most influential ethnographic description
ever published. It set in motion a series of concentric effects which
have yet to lose their strength, centering first among anthropologists,
but steadily advancing into adjacent domains and out to a vast edu-
cated public.

The continuing pertinence of the potlatch data derives from the
fact that Boas” Kwakiutl material was picked up by his student Ruth
Benedict and woven into Patterns of Culture, probably the most
widely read anthropological book of all time. The purport of this
book, to which we shall return in a later chapter, was to draw psy-
chological portraits of three different cultures representing three
different portions of the spectrum of cultural patterning. In this
endeavor, the Zuni were Apollonian, the Dobuans were paranoid,
and the Kwakiutl were Dionysians touched with megalomania.

The object of all Kwakiutl enterprises was to show oneself su-
perior to one’s rivals. This will to superiority they exhibited in the
most uninhibited fashion. It found expression in uncensored self-
glorification and ridicule of all comers. Judged by the standards
of other cultures the speeches of their chicfs . . . are unabashed
megalomania [BENEDICT 1959:16g; orig. 1934).

Looking at the potlatch as seen through the eyes of its participants,
especially of its chiefly contestants, the facts that stood out for Boas
and his students were the boasting of greatness, the announced in-
tentions of shaming one’s rivals, and the compulsion which a man
who had been shamed felt to retaliate against his rival by holding
an even more lavish give-away. Under Benedict’s skillful literary
handling, the facts of potlatch took on the appearance of an ultimate
mania, without rhyme or reason except the inflated egos of the chiefs

307


===== PAGE 159 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and their reckless desire to hold on to or to augment their hereditary
claims to prestige. Everything in Kwakiutl life was affected by this
strange custom.

The whole economic system of the Northwest Coast was bent to
the service of this obsession. There were two means by which a
chief could achieve the victory he sought. One was by shaming his
rival by presenting him with more property than he could return
with the required interest. The other was by destroying property.
In both cases the offering called for return, though in the first
case the giver's wealth was augmented, and in the second he
stripped himself of goods. The consequences of the two methods
seem to us at the opposite poles. To the Kwakiutl they were
merely complementary means of subduing a rival, and the highest
glory of life was the act of complete destruction [ibid.:172].

During the past fifteen years a drastic reinterpretation of the pot-
latch has been put forward by a number of Northwest Coast special-
ists. This new synthesis has been achieved by combining historical and
ecological interests and by linking the peculiarities of Kwakiutl ethnog-
raphy to more general types of phenomena.

THE POTLATCH IN HISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVE

Helen Codere’s Fighting with Property (1950) was the first
attempt to see the potlatch in relationship to the Euro-American
development of the modern Northwest. It is readily established
through Boas’ and Hunt's family histories and through the records of
the trading post and Indian agents, that aboriginal patterns of pot-
latch bore only a faint resemblance to those observed toward the end
of the century. The Kwakiut], like all other tribal peoples in the path
of the Furo-American expansion, were the victims of excruciating
ecological and sociocultural pressures, beginning from the moment of
the appearance of the first Europeans in the region. These pressures
led dramatically and inevitably to the extinction of their aboriginal
patterns and to the virtual extinction of the Kwakiutl as a viable
breeding population. Even before the explorer Vancouver contacted
them in 1792, they were already trading in muskets obtained from
the neighboring Nootka and had begun to experience the first effects
of European diseases. During the early part of the nineteenth cen-
tury, a slow increase in trade was accompanied by a drastic decrease
in population, brought about by epidemics of smallpox and respiratory
diseases to which, like all Amerindians, they lacked immunity. Be-

308

D

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

tween 1836 and 1853 their population fell from 23,000 to about 7,000.
In 1849 the establishment of the Hudson Bay trading post at Fort Ru-
pert further intensified both the trade with Europeans and the effect
of disease. Then in 1858, 25,000 to 30,000 Euro-American males set
out for the British Columbia goldfields, making nearby Victoria their
jumping-off place. Kwakiutl women in large numbers began to serve
these men as prostitutes, and venereal diseases now accelerated the
trend toward depopulation. By the eighties, the great Northwest
canning industry was in full production with 6,000 boats on the Fraser
River alone, and many Kwakiutl responded to the demand for factory
workers. At about the same time, lumbering, which during the decade
1870-80 had already produced 350 million board feet, also sought
to attract the Kwakiutl. By the time of Boas™ first visit, the whole
Kwakiutl population had sunk below 2,000!

With the establishment of the Hudson Bay Company trading
post, Codere shows how the potlatch involved a preponderance of
European trade goods, especially blankets, and hence, how it re-
flected the new, prodigiously expansive industrial and commercial
economy. Another consequence of the Euro-American presence was
the prohibition of warfare, and Codere attempts to draw a con-
nection between the cessation of warfare and the development of the
flamboyant patterns of hostile potlatching in the late period. Accord-
ing to Codere, when the Indians could no longer wage war, they
fought with property, which had become available on an unprece-
dented scale.

Inasmuch as Codere’s book was written as a doctoral thesis under
Ruth Benedict’s supervision, one scarcely expects it to contain a
sustained criticism of the Boasian position. The historical perspective
did, however, prepare the way for more penetrating appraisals.

Codere’s theory that competitive potlatch substituted for war-
fare does not by itself involve anything other than a kind of “force of
tmt_iition" explanation for the strange phenomena observed by Boas.
This may ultimately prove to be a viable perspective, although there
are two reasons for withholding judgment. First, the same theory has
been used to explain the migratory development of labor patterns to
the Rand mines in South Africa but with a noteworthy absence of
success (cf. marris 1959b). Second, Codere (1956) herself later
Went on to show that there was a more “amiable” and “playful” side
to Kwakiutl life, especially among ordinary people as dist(inguishcd
from the chiefs, in which the furious competitiveness associated with
th.e great contests of the late nineteenth-century was nowhere in
evidence.

As T have said, Codere’s modification of the Benedict-Boas ver-

309



===== PAGE 160 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

sion of the potlatch was not intended to lead the way toward a major
break with the traditional view. Indeed, in pointing to the amiable
side of the Kwakiutl, Codere represented herself as merely elaborating
on the caution that Boas had belatedly advised concerning the one-
sidedness of Benedict’s portrait:

The amiable qualities that appear in intimate family life are easily
overlooked. These are not by any means absent. In contrast to the
jealousy with which prerogatives are guarded, everyone within the
family circle belittles his position. Husband and wife address each
other as “You whose slave I am,” or “You whose dog I am”
[BoAS 1938a:685].

REVOLT OF THE NORTHWEST
SPECIALISTS

By the middle of the fifties a ground swell of dissatisfaction
with Boas’ Kwakiut] material had set in among other Northwest Coast
specialists. The above quote figured prominently in the rear-guard
battle that was waged to protect Boas” image. Verne Ray (1955:140)
set off a lively exchange in the American Anthropologist by demand-
ing to know why Melville Herskovits” biography of Boas had not
mentioned the fact that the master had failed to “speak out in cor-
rection of the errors of his students, such as Benedict [with] the result
that the ethnographic picture for the Northwest Coast as visualized,
taught, and accepted by many anthropologists is that which in fact
applies only to the nobility of the southern Kwakiutl.” Rushing to
defend Boas, Lowie (1956a:162) pointed out that it was Boas him-
self who had indicated the need for mentioning the Kwakiutl’s more
homely virtues. In his rejoinder, Ray (1956) stressed the omission by
Boas of any direct reference to Benedict and of the small amount of
space that Boas had devoted to this crucial point.

It is hard for me to see how this can be considered an adequate
answer to, and correction for, the misinterpretations in a book
(Benedict 1934) which has sold 600,000 copies. . . . Ruth Ben-
edict’s book had appeared four years carlier. But Boas does not
mention her or her “Dionysian” formulation in his article and
does not list the book in his bibliographical footnotes. I should
add that I do not consider that it was mandatory that Boas correct
Benedict, but I wish that he had [ray 1956:167-68].

Ray, in criticizing Herskovits, had elicited sharp rebuttals from both
Lowie and Kroeber, thereby entangling himself all at once with three
of the most influential living anthropologists (not to mention the

310

-

31. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

spirits of Boas and Benedict). This alone seems to provide a clue as
to why Ray failed to mention the fact that Boas was indeed under a
special obligation to correct whatever Lowie, Kroeber, and Herskovits
conceded was wrong in Patterns of Culture: Boas had signed his
name to the book’s Introduction (about which, more later).

The reformulation of Kwakiutl ethnography by Codere and others
(cf. DRUCKER 1939:955) failed to cut through the skein of particular-
ism with which Boas had surrounded his description. The Kwakiutl
material remained cut off from the world of theory. Nonetheless, the
Fort Rupert potlatch could now be seen as a definite product of the
contact situation, thereby defeating at once all attempts to prove by
means of Boas’ data that its explanation was governed by causative
factors too complex for nomothetic formulation. The population
decline, introduction of wage labor, sudden abundance of goods, re-
pression of warfare, and the earlier pattern of communal feasting
taken together indicate that a highly determinate set of factors
were at work upon the Kwakiutl. If one objects that the adaptation
achieved was rather unique, there remains the obviously predictable
fact that their adjustment was not viable, and therefore scarcely the
kind of diachronic trajectory with which one would want to con-
struct the laws of history.

THE MYTH OF THE NORTHWEST EDEN

Actually, there is a good chance that we shall eventually be
able to make further sense out of the run-away aspects of the
Kwakiut] system by taking into consideration the contrasting com-
parative material characteristic of other contact phenomena. In this
regard, the fact that the Kwakiutl resource base was not menaced by
Fhe whites and that an attempt was made to lure the Kwakiutl
Into wage labor and cash trade under free market conditions in a
booming economy, without the usual coercive subterfuges, may
provide the missing ingredient.

. In the meantime, a promising beginning has been made toward
Interpreting the pre-contact potlatch in conformity with nomothetic
ecological principles. Andrew Vayda (1961c) and Wayne Suttles
(1960) are responsible for formulating the issues upon which the
description and explanation of the aboriginal patterns now seem to
depend. From Boas’ descriptions, from the accounts of Indian agents,
and from superficial acquaintance with the ecology of the Northwest
littoral, a deep-seated conviction had developed that the bountiful-
ness of nature in this area was so great that vast surpluses of food
Wwere guaranteed to the human population on the basis of a minimum

311



===== PAGE 161 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

productive effort. Codere pictured the Kwakiutl as having a “fantas-
tic” surplus economy (1950:63) and bases her entire thesis on its
unquestioned veracity. In the reformulations of Suttles and Vayda,
however, this view is discredited. The salmon and the other river-
spawning and offshore migratory fish, upon which the main sub-
sistence load depended, did not present themselves for harvest in the
abundance and with the regularity claimed for them. On the basis
of impressionistic accounts of single runs, when salmon “in a solid
black mass in aggregate motion” choked a stream from bank to bank,
it is possible to exaggerate the long-range harvest potential of de-
limited portions of the region. Annual variability, both of a general
as well as of more localized scope, has been demonstrated not only
for fish but for supplemental land products as well. These considera-
tions have been elaborated by Piddocke (1965) specifically for the
Kwakiutl. There is evidence that under aboriginal conditions the
Kwakiutl were probably the frequent victims of serious food shortages
caused by variations in weather and climate, by shifting patterns of
migrations, and by uncontrollable variations in the rate of reproduc-
tion of the flora and fauna upon which they depended.

But what then are we to make of the abundance that obviously
did exist during the period of maximum potlatch? That the
remnant Kwakiutl groups toward the close of the nineteenth century
were indeed producing what has been called a “superfluous” surplus—
food or the means for obtaining food in quantities far beyond ability
to consume over a longrange period—is not to be doubted. But
one of the theoretical requirements for such a condition is a stable or
declining population. With their rapid decrease in numbers, the Kwa-
kiutl certainly could afford to burn their fish oil, destroy their blankets,
or ruin their houses. They were a society celebrating its own funeral.
And the funeral rites could be all the more lavish because simultaneous
with the drop in population there came a vast improvement in
the technological repertory for exploiting their environment—guns,
iron for harpoons, hooks, and possibly most important, the modern
European carpentry kit with which they were able to perfect the
construction of their canoes.

THE POTLATCH AND THE NUMAYM

Thus, as soon as we put the Kwakiutl back into nature and
proceed on the assumption that their way of life represents an adap-
tive response to a given techno-economic equation, a whole new
panorama of ethnographic comparisons opens before us. To explain

312

the potlatch, we are no longer dependent on the Digger Indian myth
with which Benedict lulled her readers into innocence: “In the be-
ginning God gave ecach people its cup to drink from.” For now we
see that the bilateral character of the numaym as presented in Haz-
ard’s analysis is precisely the kind of arrangement that one would
expect if the aboriginal potlatch had functioned not to maintain an
incomprehensibly self-destructive nobility in the state of bloated ego-
satisfaction, but rather a precariously balanced human population in
maximum fitness with respect to a bountiful but unpredictable en-
vironment. Following Vayda and Suttles, we begin to sce the potlatch
as a functional response to the problem of minimizing the effects of
seasonal and long-term fluctuations in the productivity of the local
groups. This was accomplished by the relatively frequent collection
of a numaym’s economic surplus under the auspices of its chief and
by its redistribution again under the auspices of the chief to temporar-
ily disadvantaged numaym who inhabited different portions of the
tribal area. Like the explanation offered by Codere and the Boasians,
this new ecological approach emphasizes the importance of the pres-
tige which the numaym potlatch leaders derive from giving gifts of
food and other valuables to members of neighboring groups. But
whereas this prestige has nothing but a completely inexplicable and
unqualified penchant for self-glorification at its base in Benedict’s
account, we now sce that the entire prestige system was probably in
definite and controlled articulation with aboriginal techno-environ-
mental and techno-economic conditions vital to the maintenance of
individual and collective life. In other words, we sce a system, expli-
cable in scientific terms, where previously there was nothing but
the unintelligible ravings of megalomaniacs. Under aboriginal condi-
tions, the Kwakiutl potlatch must have been one of the varieties of
redistributive systems by which incipiently stratified social systems
maintained their productivity levels and maximized their social co-
hesion. This concept, introduced first by the economist Karl Polanyi,
ushered in a new era in Polynesian ethnography, when Marshall Sah-
lins (1958) showed how it could account for variations in social strati-
fication among Pacific Island groups. The same concept has helped to
identify the causal factors responsible for many of the remarkable
parallelisms between the evolutionary trajectories of Old and New
World civilizations.

It seems highly probable that within the next generation many of
the features of primitive cultures that appeared as intractable enigmas
to the Boasians will yicld their secrets to comparative cultural ecology.
This is not to say that we are on the verge of returning to a scheme of

313


===== PAGE 162 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

universal parallel evolution, but rather that we have within our grasp
the ability to formulate the general principles by which both parallel
and divergent sequences occur.

BoAS’ ETHNOGRAPHIC STRATEGY

In this context it is relevant to return once again to the
cardinal inadequacy of the Boasian program—its unadmitted, but
nonetheless present, and unfortunately false or inadequate, hypotheses.
Under the Boasian program, ethnography was dedicated to the syste-
matic collection of the wrong facts, that is, to the facts about which it
could have been declared at the outset that they were precisely those
least likely to contribute to an understanding of sociocultural systems.
It is for this reason, and not for vindictiveness, that we are obliged to
pay full heed to the analysis that White and others have rendered of the
nature of the materials with which Boas filled his 5,000 pages of
Kwakiutl publications. By far the overwhelming bulk of this labor
was concerned with folk tales, mythology, religion, art, ceremony, and
mechanical aspects of technology and technique (so-called material
culture). Large amounts of space are devoted to food about
which we can no longer accept Victor Bamouw’s (1949:252) dry
optimism:

When Franz Boas published page after page of blueberry-pie
recipes in Kwakiutl, the old man probably knew what he was
after; but when his students did the same kind of thing, they
often lacked the driving central purpose which animated Boas
[1949, quoted in MEAD 1959b:32].

Codere, who has made greater use of Boas' materials than anyone
else, has tried to save the day with the conclusion that “Boas’ Kwakiutl
materials are ready to work with; an important part of his legacy is
that the understanding of the Kwakiutl is already far advanced”
(1959:73). If this statement refers at all to nomothetic understand-
ing, it is valid only to the extent that we are able to use the Kwakiutl
material in spite of having to labor under the dead weight of an
enormous amount of relative trivia. Granted that one can never tell
from which direction the angel of light will descend, we share the
obligation of making ourselves responsible for strategic guesses. Boas
consistently guessed wrong. How clse shall we explain Codere’s own
admission that the 5,000 pages of Kwakiutl ethnography are an inade-
quate basis for a general treatment of the culture? “It is not possible
to present a synthesized account of Kwakiutl culture based upon

314

11. The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

Boas’ works” (ibid.:66). For reasons previously stated, I cannot agree
with Murdock, when in a choleric outburst over not being able to use
the Kwakiutl for his World Ethnographic sample, he denounced
the “extravagantly overrated” Boas and insisted that “He was not even
a good ficldworker” (MURDOCK 1949:xiv). But Murdock’s pique is well
justified if “Despite Boas’ ‘five-foot shelf of monographs on the
Kwakiutl, this tribe falls into the quartile of those whose social struc-
ture and related practices are least adequately described among the
250 covered in this study” (ibid.). Boas may have been a good
fieldworker, but he was good about the wrong things.

EMIC AND ETIC ECONOMICS

The evaluation of Boas’ ethnographic product and the reason
why it was doomed from the outset not to yield insights into the
nomothetic principles which govern human history can best be
stated by making use of the distinction between emic and etic re-
search strategies. When Ray first gave public utterance to “the cocktail
room discussions” of dissatisfaction with Boas’ ethnographic mono-
graphs, he cited among other inadequacies the lack of economic data.
Lowie, with his usual on-the-spot aptitude for citing chapter and
verse, flatly denied this accusation:

Nor were economic phenomena “neglected” by him. In the ear-
lier monograph on the Eskimo he describes their economic life
with associated techniques, gives an account of land utilization,
and discusses trading (Boas 1888:419-561). Conceivably he might
have gathered much more of relevant information on the North-
west Coast, but if property, inheritance, and potlatches are eco-
nomic phenomena, they were not neglected [LOWIE 1956a:161].

Similarly, although admitting that Boas was largely concerned with
“symbolic” aspects of culture (mythology, language, and art in that
order) Codere (1959:61) insists that he did not slight other types of
description and analysis. She forthwith begins to total up the number
of Boas’ publications in which “non-symbolic” interests are indulged.
But both Boas’ supporters and his detractors have by and large
missed the essential point here. As we shall see in the case of Lowie’s
own ethnographic interest in things economic, the decision to study
“economics” is not at all what is needed if one is to begin to hope
that his data may contribute to the formulation of lawful principles.
This is because there are emic cconomics and etic cconomics. In

315



===== PAGE 163 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the former instance, one studies the potlatch as it appears to the pot-
latchers; in the latter instance, one studies potlatch as it appears
within the frame of cross-culturally valid analytical and quantitative
categories, such as calories, man-hour in-put, redistribution, stratifi-
cation with respect to access to resources, and so forth.

EMICS AND THE BOASIAN PROGRAM

In the strategically most decisive sense, the significance of
Boas’ turn to ethnography from physics and of his selection of the
historical method as opposed to the method of science was that
thereafter the definitive test of a good ethnography was whether or
not it faithfully mirrored the world of the natives as the natives saw it.
I am not aware of any sustained exception to this viewpoint anywhere
in Boas’ ethnographic product. Certainly we shall find no exception
throughout all of the thousands of pages of texts collected by himself
or his two trained informants, Hunt and Tate. The essence of such
texts is precisely their unswerving fidelity to what the native said or
thought.

To view Boas” fundamental ethnographic strategy in terms of the
emic-etic option permits us to see at once the unbroken development
that links his initial period of historical reconstruction with the ap-
parently anomalous concern for culture and personality to which it
ultimately gave birth. When White accuses Boas of psychological
reductionism, and when Boas himself refers to the importance of
psychological principles, there is at bottom the issue that divides
emics from etics, not that which divides psychology from culture. It
is not as a psychologist that Boas turns to his descriptions of potlatch
protocol and raven myth elements; it is rather as an ethnographer
with an overwhelming bias in favor of emic interpretations. It is as an
emicist that he clings to the remnants of Bastian’s elementary ideas,
gives to his general book the title The Mind of Primitive Man,
and repeatedly insists that two culture clements are not the same if
they mean different things to the people who possess them. Margaret
Mead’s comments on her apprenticeship under Boas seem to confirm
this point:

To get the depth of understanding he required meant submerg-
ing his thinking in that of another. It meant learning to think in
another’s terms and to view the world through another’s eyes.
The most intimate knowledge of an informant’s thought proc-
esses was mandatory and could only be obtained by intensive work
over a long period. Important concepts and strange viewpoints
had to be checked with other material and with a number of in-

316

T

11.

The Ethnographic Basis of Particularism

formants; supplementary information had to be obtained else-
where. But Boas conceived of his main task as the adoption of an
informant’s mode of thought while retaining full use of his own
critical faculties [1959b:58].

Mead associates Boas™ interest in the single informant and his indiffer-
ence or even hostility to statistical treatments of cultural phenomena
(despite his skillful use of statistics in physical anthropology) with
this same penchant for the natives’ point of view. Further confirma-
tion of the saliency of this option in the outlook of Boas and his
students may be found in Frederica de Laguna’s (1960:792) insis-
tence that the rejection of mechanical or biological analogies as a
means of interpreting the world of culture is the most distinctive
feature of American cultural anthropology:

While cultures themselves and their inherent values have become
recognized in one sense as phenomena of the natural order, they
are not to be understood through mechanical or biological anal-
ogies or through an analysis which the scientist can make from
outside by confidently appealing to alleged sociological or psy-
chological laws. Rather, this inner world is to be entered with hu-
mility, the passport a readiness to listen while the native himself
speaks.

For at last we have come full circle, and the savages who first
gave us anthropology itself are those through whose eyes and
hearts we are to discover not simply the worlds and minds of
primitive men, but, in so doing, what it is to be human.

And Boas himself, in one of his last works, forcefully advocated the
necessity for interpreting the native’s behavior in terms of the na-
tive’s categories:

In natural sciences we are accustomed to demand a classifica-
tion of phenomena expressed in a concise and unambiguous
terminology. The same term should have the same meaning
everywhere. We should like to see the same in anthropology. As
long as we do not overstep the limits of one culture we are able to
classify its features in a clear and definite terminology. We know
what we mean by the terms family, state, government, etc. As
soon as we overstep the limits of one culture we do not know in
how far these may correspond to equivalent concepts. If we
choose to apply our classification to alien cultures we may com-
bine forms that do not belong together. The very rigidity of
definition may lead to a misunderstanding of the essential prob-
lems involved. . . . If it is our serious purpose to understand the
thoughts of a people the whole analysis of experience must be
based on their concepts, not ours [1943:314].

317



===== PAGE 164 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

As Codere (1959:72) remarks, “Boas’ Kwakiutl work is the product of
a consistent, monumental, and unfinished plan motivated by the
desire to understand a people.” He saw that “desire as understanding
the ‘mental life’ of a people as reflected in their culture.”
I take strong exception when Codere goes on to state that “no
new anthropological aim” has come along to replace Boas’ aim of
understanding the mental life of a culture. There has always been
the option of secking to understand a culture in its emic and etic b
manifestations in terms of the lawful processes governing the genera- rO e er
tion of similarities and differences in human history. Such an option
can only be fulfilled by systematic separation of emics and etics and

by the study of both under the guidance of operationalized concepts
and overt hypotheses. The error of trying to study culture “without

theoretical bias” is laid to rest when we realize that neither Boas nor
his students admitted the validity of the logic-empirical procedures

that are essential to the study of history, if such a study is to yield
nomothetic results. &%

Tw first of Boas’ students to receive a doctorate at Columbia Uni-
versity was Alfred Lewis Kroeber. By the time Kroeber came under
Boas’ influence, he had already earned a Master of Arts degree in
English and was teaching as a lecturer in that subject. He later ex-
plained the difference between himself and Boas in terms of this
background:

My education included some contacts with experimental science
which T found highly stimulating, but consisted primarily of
generalized activity in the linguistic-literary-historical field, re-
maining rather undifferentiated until I settled upon anthropology
as definitive profession [KROEBER 1935:566].

Heightened sensitivity to aesthetic patterns, concern with nuances of
style, and a reliance upon intuitive judgments heavily outweighed
Krocber's aspirations toward social science. He never seriously be-
lieved that anthropology could become anything other than one of
the humanities. But the vast scope of his scholarly erudition, his
| Olympian geniality, and omnivorous intellect were universally ad-

318 319



===== PAGE 165 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

mired among anthropologists and by important segments of the
larger academic community. After his “guru’s” death, Kroeber became
the undisputed “grand old man” of the profession, an image richly
reflected by undiminished scholarly activity to the last moments of
his eighty-fifth year. I shall leave to his biographers the task of balanc-
ing theoretical critique against the erudition and charm of his scholar-
ship. For the present, what seems most relevant is that Kroeber
began his career with certain neo-Kantian assumptions concerning
history, which were never thrown off and which preserved him in all
fundamentals as an historical particularist throughout his life.

VULNERABILITY TO IDEOLOGICAL
CURRENTS

Kroeber was fond of saying that he had not really become
interested in theoretical issues until he had reached middle age, and
he advised others to follow suit. Like Boas, he urged that theory
should result from fieldwork conducted as far as possible without
theoretical preconceptions. Turning to his earliest anthropological
publications, however, one finds an already well-formed theoretical
prospectus modeled after Boas’ views. Following publications con-
cerned with the folklore of the Smith Sound Eskimo and of the
Cheyenne, Kroeber submitted his doctoral thesis, Decorative Sym-
bolism of the Arapaho (1go1), in which he attempted to show that
both decorative and symbolic art forms could occur simultaneously,
thus easily defeating Alfred C. Haddon’s (1895) notions of a uniform
progression of art styles. But neither his brief field exposure prior to
1901 nor his equally brief acquaintance with the literature of the
social sciences up to that point furnished a sound basis for his more
general conclusion: “. . . all search for origin in anthropology can
lead to nothing but false results” (XKROEBER 19o1:332). This was a
large conclusion to reach at age twenty-five at the end of a dissertation
whose twenty-cight pages are mainly devoted to the art forms of one
badly mauled American Indian society. But as Julian Steward has
remarked, “The thesis . . . on Arapaho art . .. clearly set forth
Kroeber’s basic and life-long point of view” (1961:1043).

The conditions of Kroeber’s first employment as an anthropologist
illustrate the effective nature of the linkage between the nco-Kantian
perspective and the larger milieu in which the Boasian movement un-
folded. Starting in 1go1, Kroeber began a lifelong involvement with
the Department of Anthropology at Berkeley, which, like Boas at
Columbia, he was obliged to build practically from scratch. During

320

Do

12. Kroeber

the first five years of Kroeber's employment his salary came directly
from Mrs. Phoebe Hearst, William Randolph Hearst’s mother (sTEw-
ARD 1961:1044-45). Under these circumstances, it is difficult to ima-
gine how someone from the left end of the intellectual spectrum
could personally have achieved a strong institutional base, much less
how he could have advanced a whole new branch of learning against
its many competitors. The main difficulty that Boas’ students con-
fronted may have been a lack of comparative perspective. The milieu
in which they operated had so successfully prevented the growth of
university-based radical opinion, that in attacking the foundations of
nineteenth-century historical determinism, they were exposed only
to fundamentally sympathetic critics. Among themselves, the Boasians
created an illusion of dialectic exchange, as when Kroeber imagined
himself and Boas at opposite sides of the history-science dichotomy,
or when Kroeber and Sapir clashed over the need for a concept of the
superorganic. But in reality, only a very small part of the spectrum of
social-science tradition had achieved academic representation. It can-
not be said too often that the progress of intellectual life requires
confrontation between the widest possible variety of theories and
hypotheses. The penalty of provincialism is always the same: errors
are piled on errors, because everyone is tolerant of similar faults.

THE ATTACK AGAINST MORGAN

Laboring under this handicap, Kroeber attempted to en-
large upon the element of randomness that he had exposed in the
study of Arapaho art. At approximately the same time that Boas and
John Swanton were attacking Lewis Henry Morgan’s notions con-
cerning the priority of matrilineal descent, Krocber turned his at-
tention to Morgan’s treatment of descriptive and classificatory kinship
terminologies. Kroeber's attack on Morgan, unlike Lowie’s, as we
shall sec in the next chapter, did not arise out of a careful study of
Morgan’s contribution. It is even possible that Kroeber’s knowledge of
Morgan was acquired secondhand, or at least he never seems to have
taken Morgan seriously, as Lowie was ultimately obliged to do. Kroeber's
approach to Morgan was not characterized by the genial toleration he
so readily manifested during his maturity on behalf of less qualified
contributions, e.g. “leaving room for David Bidney to have God and
prayer in his interpretation of culture” (KROEBER 1952:115). By at-
tflcking Morgan in a famous article, “Classificatory Systems of Rela-
tionship” (19og), Kroeber misled a generation of anthropologists into
contempt for Morgan’s most enduring contribution. But it was Kroe-

321



===== PAGE 166 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 12. Kroeber

—_—

ber’s view of the relationship between kinship terminology and social
structure that subsequently proved to be incorrect and impoverished.

Morgan, it will be recalled, believed that classificatory terminologies
were associated with the evolutionary emergence of unilinear descent
groups, that they reflected the great sway of kinship institutions
during most of human history, and that they were replaced by de-
scriptive terminologies during the transition from kinship to state-
organized societies. Krocber's attack followed the strategy that had
proved successful in his thesis. It was the same strategy that Boas
himself was about to sum up in The Mind of Primitive Man, namely,
an attempt to demonstrate that the allegedly sequential elements
can actually be found existing together in the same society at the
same time. Thus, Kroeber argued that the kinship terminologies of
all cultures, primitive or civilized, consisted of a mixture of classifica-
tory and descriptive tendencies. There was no general rule by which
one or the other form could be correlated with social structure. One
has only to consider the classificatory nature of such English terms as
“uncle” and “cousin” to realize that Morgan must have been carried
away by his schemes to have supposed that such practices were con-
fined to cultures on the clan level of organization. But Kroeber was
not content to restrict his attack to just this one point; his interest
lay in the “toppling” of Morgan’s whole developmental scheme. As
he explained much later when he wrote a preface for the publication
of his collected essays:

As an anthropologist in the face of Morgan, I could not well stop
there; both because his primary segregation into classificatory and
descriptive types did not hold water, and because it was easy to
show that internal conceptual logic, such as of reciprocity, anal-
ogy, and consistency, was sufficiently frequent and strong to pre-
vent sets of kinship terms being construed as mere reflections or
indices of marriage or other social institutions. Therewith the
whole of Morgan’s speculative schema of origin and development
of society seemed to me impaired or toppled. I continue to think
so until today [1952:172].

Kroeber eventually regretted his dogmatic refusal to accept the prin-
ciple that kin terminologies reflect social institutions. When the
English anthropologist W. H. R. Rivers challenged Kroeber’s stand,
Kroeber says about himself that he became “intransigent in rebuttal”
and that it was this which had led him to declare: “Terms of rela-
tionship reflect psychology, not sociology” (KROEBER 1952:181; orig.
190g). It would have been better to say, he admitted in 1952, “that as

322

part of language, kin term systems reflect unconscious logic and
conceptual patterning as well as social institutions” (KROEBER 1g52:
172).

Kroeber had previously proposed several substantial modifications
of the obiter dictum in question (1917b; 1917¢; 1934). Nonetheless,
he continued to reject any remnant of a causal relationship between
social organization and terminology. By 1919, he was willing to
admit that “institutions and terminologies unquestionably parallel or
reflect each other at least to the degree that a marked discrepancy of
plan is rare,” but in obedience to his basic philosophy of history,
and by means of fancy footwork, he continued to hedge on the
question of cause:

Institutions probably shape terminologies causally, but in the
main by influencing or permitting a logical scheme. In a sense,
this logical scheme underlies both institution and terminology, so
that the correlation between them, although actual, can be con-
ceived of as indirect [1952:189; orig. 1919b].

This position, with its emphasis on a “logical scheme” underlying
both terminology and social structure, led Kroeber in the direction
of an increasing concern with cultural “patterns” as the units of
cultural description. In the post-Boasian period, the search for the
underlying scheme or plan has been taken up by the “new ethnog-
raphy” in the guise of ethnosemantic analysis. The debt of this
movement to Kroeber's attack on Morgan will be duly noted in
subsequent chapters.

MORGAN VINDICATED

The irony in all this is that Kroeber’s original attack on the
distinction between classificatory and descriptive systems was based
on a false rendering of Morgan’s meaning. Morgan was aware of the
“lumping” characteristics of such terms as “cousin” and “uncle.” For
Morgan, descriptive terminologies are those in which terms applied
to lineal kinsmen are never applied to collaterals. This distinction
does serve to separate most primitive kinship terminologies from the
systems employed by most literate state societies. It does have evolu-
tionary significance, and it is basic to an understanding of the differ-
ential functions of kinship in stratified as opposed to egalitarian
social structures.

_As White (1959b) indicates, a long list of prominent anthropolo-
gists, including Goldenweiser, Tozzer, Stern, Penniman, Gillin,

323



===== PAGE 167 =====

?‘ B

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 12. Kroeber

Hoebel, Murdock, and Lowie, accepted Kroeber’s denial of the evolu-
tionary significance of the classificatory-descriptive dichotomy. Fortu-
nately, few anthropologists, even among the Boasians, agreed with
Kroeber’s “intransigent” insistence that kin-terminological systems
and social structure exhibited no orderly relationship. British social
anthropologists not only ignored Kroeber in this respect but even
managed to preserve Morgan’s original sense of the classificatory-
descriptive distinction. Thus, A. R. Radcliffe-Brown preceded White
by many years in suggesting that the reason for the confusion of
Kroeber and other American anthropologists concerning Morgan's
meaning was that Morgan had ceased to be consulted in the original.
“What Morgan meant by this term is quite clear from his writings
... but his definition is often ignored, perhaps because people no
longer bother to read him” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN, quoted in WHITE
1959b:385). Morgan’s approach to kinship terms and kinship groups
has been vindicated by scholars who remain as hostile to Morgan’s evo-
lutionary schema as Kroeber was back in 19og and again in 1952. With
the publication of George Peter Murdock’s Social Structure, Morgan’s
contribution to kinship analysis was re-established as a permanent
foundation of contemporary anthropology.

The scientific significance of kinship systems was first appreciated
by Morgan in what is perhaps the most original and brilliant
single achievement in the history of anthropology. That many
of Morgan’s particular interpretations are no longer acceptable
docs not diminish the luster of his work [MURDOCK 1949:91].

MISPLACED EUPHORIA

Murdock’s study owes to Morgan precisely what Kroeber
sought to topple, namely, the proposal to search for causal cross-cultural
correlations between kin-terminologies, social groupings, and mar-
riage patterns. It is surprising, therefore, to read in the preface to the
very volume just quoted that “. . . Krocber kept American anthro-
pology alive through an ineffectual generation by his originality, his
concern with vital issues, and his analytic insight” (MURDOCK 1949:xv)!
On the basis of Kroeber’s halting concessions to causality, which 1
have already cited, Murdock strains to achieve a sense of common
purpose, declaring, further along in the same book, that he “finds
himself in substantial agreement with practically all Kroeber's theo-
retical statements, save for a few obiter dicta.” Apparently, Kroeber
was not willing to pay the price of Murdock’s praise. In 1952, without
the slightest acknowledgment of Murdock’s attempt to develop a

324

scientific approach to social structure on the basis first proposed in
Morgan’s Systems (1870), Kroeber once again denied that such an
approach was feasible:

Morgan and Rivers had singled out particular terminological fea-
tures as caused by specific usages. This difference between them
and myself I continue to hold to as fundamental in the under-
standing of cultural manifestations. The causality that is involved
in culture has normally accumulated so long and so intricately
that on the whole very little of it can be specifically unraveled
with authenticity. Boas was big enough to realize this. But the
pioneers like Morgan, the men trained in laboratories like Rivers,
the ruck of social scientists hoping somehow to imitate physics,
kept and keep trying; and yet they achieve either only bits or
constructs that are mainly unreal. It is the pattern rather than
precise causation that is the meaningful result by and large
achievable in the study of culture—as the history of linguistics
should long ago have sufficed to teach us [KROEBER 1952:173].

It is not known if Kroeber specifically intended to include Murdock
among the “ruck,” but there is no doubt that Murdock was prac-
ticing social science on the physicalist model or as close as he could
get to it when he wrote Social Structure (see Chap. 21).

I dwell on this point because Kroeber inspired his colleagues to
feel that their irreconcilable theoretical positions were just on the edge
of euphoric harmony. The most remarkable instance occurred between
him and Leslie White on the issue of the “superorganic,” a case to
which we shall shortly return. Doctrinaire Marxists have emerged
from discussions with Kroeber convinced that if they could only

have gone on for a few more minutes, all the differences between
them would have evaporated.

KROEBER'S CREDO

Kroeber must have derived a special delight from these en-
counters, for there was nothing in his writings that justified the wide-
spread confusion surrounding his views on the great issues in social
science. The onus for this confusion certainly does not rest with
Krocber, in view of the forthright credo he delivered in his thirty-
ninth year under the title “The Eighteen Professions” (1915). This
article seems to have suffered an undeserved oblivion. I shall quote or
par?phrasc all eighteen “professions,” since they amount to the best
available summary of Kroeber’s version of historical particularism.

325

————— e e e e e et


===== PAGE 168 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

[1] The aim of history is to know the relations of social facts to the
whole of civilization . . . . Relation is actual connection, not cause.

[2] The material studied by history is not man, but his works, i.e., the
results of his deeds.

[3] Civilization, though carried by men and existing thrpugh icm,
is an entity in itself, and of another order from life. . . . History is not
concerned with the agencies producing civilization, but with civilization as
such. The causes are the business of the psychologist.

[4] A certain mental constitution must be assumed by the historian,
but may not be used by him as a resolution of social phenomena.

[5] True instincts lie at the bottom and origin of social phenomena,
but cannot be considered or dealt with by history.

[6] The personal or individual has no historical value, save as illustra-

tion.

[7] Geography, or physical environment, is material made use of by

civilization, not a factor shaping or explaining civilization.

[8] The absolute equality and identity of all human races must be

assumed by the historian.

[9] Heredity cannot be allowed as a significant factor in history.

10] Heredity by acquirement is a monstrosity. .

[11] Selection and other factors of organic evolution cannot be admitted

as affecting civilization.

12] The so-called savage is no transition between the animal and the

scientifically educated man. . . . All men are totally civilized. . . . There

is no higher and no lower in civilization for the historian.

13] There are no social species or standard cultural types or stages. . ..

A stage in civilization is merely a preconception made plausible by arbitrarily

sclected facts.

14] There is no ethnic mind, but only civilization. .

[15] There are no laws in history similar to the laws of physico-

chemical science. All asserted civilizational laws are at most tendencies. . . .

History does not deny them and may have to recognize them, but their

formulation is not its end.

16] History deals with conditions sine qua non, not with causes. The

relations between civilizational phenomena are relations of sequence, not

of effect.

17] The causality of history is teleological . ... this does not suggest

theology to those who are frce from theology. )
[18] In fine, the determinations and methods of biological, psychological,

or natural science do not exist for history.

THE SUPERORGANIC

In all essentials save one, Kroeber's “professions” faithfully
mirror Boas” influence. The exception is found in number six, Tht’:
personal or individual has no historical value, save as illustration.

326

B

12. Kroeber

Whereas Boas™ idiography led him increasingly in the direction of
interactive problems of personality and culture, Kroeber took the
culture concept in the opposite direction and argued for the complete
subordination of the individual to his cultural milieu. It was this
de-emphasis of the individual, elaborated at greater length in “The
Superorganic” (1917a) two years later, which convinced everybody
that Kroeber had departed from the Boasian fold. His “culturological”
remarks aroused great uneasiness among the Boasians, possibly be-
cause of the resemblance to exhortations of soap-box historical de-
terminists against the “great man” theory of history.

In “The Superorganic,” Kroeber made extensive appeal to the
“principle of the simultaneity of invention” to show that history
was determined by cultural patterns, not by individuals. There were
those who saw in the simultaneous rediscovery of Mendel’s principles
by DeVries, Correns, and Tschermak a “meaningless play of capri-
cious fortuitousness.” But to Kroeber, this kind of event revealed

. a great and inspiring inevitability which rises as far above
the accidents of personality as the march of the heavens tran-
scends the wavering contacts of random footprints on clods of
carth. Wipe out the perception of DeVries, Correns, and Tscher-
mak, and it is yet certain that before another year had rolled
around, the principles of Mendeclian heredity would have been
proclaimed to an according world, and by six rather than three
discerning minds [KROEBER 1917a:199].

Kroeber went on to claim that the subordination of the individual
to the culture pattern held true in all cultures, that everywhere the

individual (to return to Hegel) was the mere agent of culturological
forces:

Ericsson or Galvani eight thousand years ago would have polished
or bored the first stone; and in turn the hand and mind whose
operation set in inception the neolithic age of human culture,
would, if held in its infancy in unchanging catalepsy from that
time until today, now be devising wireless telephones and nitro-
gen extractors [ibid.:201].

THE CONTROVERSY WITH SAPIR

A reply to this heresy was issued at once by Edward Sapir,
who in addition to setting the pattern of anthropological linguistics,
maintained a lifelong interest in the field of personality and culture.
Sapir argued that it would require a belief in “social determinism
amounting to religion” to accept Kroeber’s viewpoint. Although he

327



===== PAGE 169 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

admitted that the “average historian” tended to exaggerate the deter-
mining influence of specific personalities, this was no reason to elim-
inate the individual from all consideration as a cultural factor. Sapir
then threw out a challenge which goes a long way toward explaining
the main thread of Kroeber's career. Kroeber was finding his superor-
ganic forces by a kind of trick:

Shrewdly enough Dr. Kroeber chooses his examples from the
realm of inventions and scientific theories. Here it is relatively
easy to justify a sweeping social determinism in view of a certain
general inevitability in the course of the acquirement of knowl-
edge. This inevitability, however, does not altogether reside, as
Dr. Kroeber seems to imply, in a social “force” but, to a very
large extent, in the fixity, conceptually speaking, of the objective
world. This fixity forms the sharpest of predetermined grooves
for the unfolding of man’s knowledge. Had he occupied himself
more with the religious, philosophic, aesthetic, and crudely voli-
tional activities and tendencies of man, I believe that Dr. Kroe-
ber’s case for the non-cultural significance of the individual would
have been a far more difficult one to make. , . . One has only to
think seriously of what such personalities as Aristotle, Jesus,
Mahomet, Shakespeare, Goethe, Beethoven mean in the history
of culture to hesitate to commit oneself to a completely non-indi-
vidualistic interpretation of history [SAPIR 1917:442-43]-

PATTERNS

Kroeber spent the rest of his career doing something very
similar to what Sapir had said could not be done: showing how pat-
terns of art, religion, philosophy, as well as of technology and science,
waxed and waned, acquired their characteristic content and kept roll-
ing majestically along, quite independently of particular individuals.
Among American Indians as well as the ancient Greeks, it is the cul-
tural pattern which summons forth geniuses in appropriate numbers,
whenever the time is ripe, be they Edisons or Christs.

As a matter of fact, it was Kroeber's special delight to pick out as-
pects of culture which seemed most vulnerable to the effect of indi-
vidual fancy and to demonstrate the existence of patterns unknown
to the culture carriers. His study of dress fashions, going back to an
inspiration first felt in 19og, was an impressive accomplishment along
these lines. By 1919 he had measured enough changes of evening gown
styles to identify regular pulsations in the width and length of skirt
and area of decolletage. There is a note of triumph in his conclusions:

328

12. Kroeber

We are all in the habit of talking glibly of how this year’s fashion
upsets that of last year. Details, trimmings, pleats, and ruffles,
perhaps colors and materials—all the conspicuous externalities
of dress—do undoubtedly alter fairly rapidly; and it is in the very
nature of fashion to bring these to the fore. They are driven into
our attention, and soon leave a blurred but overwhelming impres-
sion of incalculably chaotic fluctuations, of reversals that arc at
once bewildering and meaningless, of a sort of lightninglike
prestidigitation to which we bow in dumb rccognition of its un-
controllability. But underneath this glittering maze, the major
proportions of dress change rather with a slow majesty, in periods
often cxceeding the duration of human life . . . [KROEBER 1952:336;

orig. 1919a].

In 1940, collaborating with Jane Richardson, he published a statistical
study which covered three hundred years of fashion changes. The ex-
istence of unsuspected periodicities was confirmed, short-run “modes”
of style distinguished from the long-run patterns, and the role of the
haute couture designer explicitly assimilated to that of the genius in
biology or physics:

It is evident that the basic features of style as distinct from
more rapidly fluctuating mode, being taken for granted at any
given moment, are largely unconscious in the sense that they are
felt as axiomatic and derivations arc made from them, but they are
not tampered with, except again unconsciously. ’

This in turn scems to imply that the role of particular indi-
viduals in molding basic dress style is slight. The influence of
creative or important individuals is perhaps largely exerted on
the accessories of transient mode [ibid.:370; orig. 1940].

Kroeber maintained this diachronic and superorganic orientation right
.through the period of anthropology’s greatest retreat into psycholog-
ical reductionism and synchronic functionalism. During the twenties
and thirtics, the unconscious patterns which sct the limits for the “in”
look in social science and which governed the intellectual behavior of
the profession’s Christian Diors and Balenciagas cast Krocber in the
f‘ole of a potential if not actual wild-eyed radical. It definitely strained
bourgeois” anthropology to the limits of its patterns to insist history
could be studicd without becoming involved in individual biographies.
Even his “gurn” becamc alarmed and felt obliged to call for a purge of
thle mystical patterns that Krocber claimed were the decisive forces of
history: “It has been claimed,” wrote Boas, “that human culture is
something superorganic, that it follows laws that are not willed by any
individual participating in the culture, but that are inherent in the

329

e e


===== PAGE 170 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

culture itself. . . .” This was too much for Boas’ no-nonsense em-
piricism: “It seems hardly necessary to consider culture a mystic entity
that exists outside the society of its individual carriers, and that moves
by its own force” (Boas 1928:245).

CONFIGURATIONS

Kroeber’s fascination with the superorganic culminated in the
publication of the singularly monumental Configurations of Culture
Growth (1944). His wife, Theodora, has said that this book was the
product of seven years of labor, during which “every summer, every
holiday and free hour” (. krOEBER 1963:xviii) were devoted to it. Tt
was intended as a magnum opus. The task he assigned himself was no
less than that of discovering “the common features in the growth” of
philology, sculpture, painting, drama, literature, and music in Egypt,
Mesopotamia, India, Japan, Greece, Rome, Europe, and China. Al-
though he “cheerfully renounces search for causes” (1944:7), he does
ask the question, have civilizations been alike or unlike in producing
their “highest manifestations”?

Despite the prodigious research effort expended upon this task,
Configurations was a failure. Kroeber was able to discover no similari-
ties whatsoever in the abstract growth curves of different civilizations.
He did find everywhere the mysterious “patterns” exemplified by sud-
den simultaneous bursts of creative energy in one or several of the
aesthetic domains, but the climaxes were sometimes multiple, some-
times singular, sometimes confined to one or two domains, elsewhere
“across the board.” At a time when people like Sorokin, Spengler,
Toynbee, and other universal historians were propounding all sorts of
grand neo-Hegelian national destinies, Kroeber could find nothing but
unpredictable culture growths: “In reviewing the ground covered, I
wish to say at the outset that T see no evidence of any true law in
the phenomena dealt with; nothing cyclical, regularly repetitive, or
necessary” (KROEBER 1944:761).

METHODOLOGICAL ABUSES

Added to the painful disappointment of this labor, whose
fruit is nothing other than the elaboration of the concept of the super-
organic, is the diminishing resistance which Kroeber displays toward
reliance upon idiosyncratic and ethnocentric intuitions. Few anthro-
pologists would wish to accompany Kroeber in his self-assigned task,

330

12. Kroeber

essential to the methodology of Configurations, of evaluating the
worth of the aesthetic productions of different civilizations and differ-
ent phases of the same civilization: how far they tend to be “success-
ful” in their several activities simultaneously (ibid.:6). We are
evidently in the prescnce of a substantial retreat from the higher
standards of evidence demanded by Boas, when the assertion is made
that there was no growth of philosophy in Egypt, Mesopotamia,
Rome, and Japan; or when we are told that painting did not undergo
any significant development in Mesopotamia (ibid.:778). Anthropol-
ogists, having spent a good part of their lives with peasants and tribes-
men, tend to be a rather crusty and skeptical crew. It is disappointing
that their “grand old man” could have authored judgments which
relied so heavily upon the effete standards of salon gossip:

In occidental sculpture, Italy holds preeminence—Michelangelo
is considered as marking the culmination. But can we be certain
that he was inherently by his native gifts, a greater sculptor than
Ghiberti, Donatello, Bernini or Canova? . . . We rate Bernini
much lower. But can we be at all sure that in his imagination,
sense of form, technical skill, he was inferior to Michelangelo?
His themes, his invoking of emotions, and perhaps his taste were
on a lower level; but they were the emotions and taste of his age.
The same holds for Canova. For sculptural ability we cannot
with certainty rate him one notch below the highest; it is the
tepid neoclassicism of his period which we rate below Renais-
sance intensity [ibid.:14].

Can one seriously propose that “Good sculpture was produced in
Dynasties 1, IV, V, XII, XVIII, XXVI” (ibid.:241), or that “Japanese
sculpture was a great art from 600 to 1300,” or that “England, which
had real music until 1700, has had none since! According to Steward
(1961:1055), “Kroeber always remained a relativist. . . .” Indeed,
Kroeber himself reacted with pique to the suggestion by Dorothy
Gregg and Elgin Williams (1948) that overt value positions should
replace the covert values embodied in the “Dismal Science of Func-
tionalism” (sce p. 534). Asserting that this point of view would
“quickly undermine and destroy science,” Kroeber formulated three
professions which were not included in his 1915 article:

[1] The method of science is to begin with questions, not with answers,
least of all with value judgments.

[2] Science is dispassionate inquiry and therefore cannot take over out-
right any ideologies “already formulated in everyday life,” since these are

themselves inevitably traditional and normally tinged with emotional prej-
udice.

331



===== PAGE 171 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

[3] Sweeping all-or-none, black-or-white judgments are characteristic of
totalitarian attitudes and have no place in science, whose very nature is
inferential and judicial.

[KROEBER 1949:319].

If one admits that this affirmation of relativism is an appropriate re-
joinder to Gregg and Williams, it certainly merits application to much
of the substance and method of Configurations.

Although Configurations failed to identify any cross-cultural regu-
larities, Kroeber evidently drew satisfaction from demonstrating the
cluster effect of patterns upon the appearance of geniuses. This posi-
tion continued to attract the criticism of Boas and his students. Thus,
Ruth Benedict in Patterns of Culture (1934:231) accused Kroeber of
expressing himself in “mystical phraseology” by calling in “the super-
organic to account for cultural process.” In 1944 the philosopher David
Bidney joined the attack by accusing Kroeber of participating in the
“culturalistic fallacy” as shown in the

tendency to hypostasize culture and to conceive it as a tran-
scendental, superorganic, or superpsychic force which alone deter-
mines human historical destiny . . . with . . . the assumption
that culture is a force that may make and develop itself
[BIDNEY 1944:42, quoted in KROEBER 1948c:407].

Strongest support for Kroeber’s superorganic came from an unlikely
quarter. In Leslie White’s “The Fxpansion of the Scope of Science”
Kroeber is portrayed as one of the few anthropologists who “have
undertaken to formulate the philosophy of a science of culture”
(WHITE 19492:90; orig. 1947). It has of course been clear at least since
Hegel that a scientific approach to sociocultural phenomena must
proceed on the assumption that individual choices are the products
of and not the originators of social forces. Hence, the first step toward
a science of culture is nece.sarily the one which Kroeber had taken in
the “Superorganic.” But Kroeber took just that one step and then no
more. It is a curious commentary on White’s isolation as an histor-
ical determinist that he should have felt obliged to enlist Kroeber
among the standard-bearers of his “science of culture.” Kroeber, while
expressing a high regard for White, never missed an opportunity to
dissociate himself from that larger enterprise. He and White merely
shared the belief that culture is a distinct level of phenomena which,
although reducible to lower levels in theory, cannot in practice be so
reduced without diminishing our chances of understanding it. But
beyond this reaffirmation of the value of the superorganic concept on
exclusively heuristic grounds, Kroeber made certain epistemological
concessions to his critics which produced harmony at the expense of

332

12. Kroeber

enlightenment: “I take this opportunity of formally and publicly re-
canting,” wrote Kroeber, “any extravagances and overstatements of

which I may have been guilty through overardor of conviction, in my
‘Superorganic.””

As of 1948 it scems to me both unnecessary and productive of
new difficulties, if, in order to account for the phenomena of
culture, one assumes any entity, substance, kind of being,
or set of scparate, autonomous and wholly self-sufficient forces

[1948c:407-8].

For my part I am ready to concede that culture exists only in

persons in the sense that it resides, has its locus, only in them
[ibid.:408].

As part of this same recantation, Kroeber modified the stand he had
taken concerning the relationship between culture and individual be-
havior. Acknowledging a debt to Bidney, he proposed that Aristotle’s
distinction between “efficient” and “formal” cause is relevant. Indi-
viduals are the efficient causes; culture is the formal cause. But Kroe-
ber further assures us that a formal cause is nothing like the kind of
cause with which science is concerned. And indeed it is not. For the
only meaning to be derived from Kroeber’s proposal that culture is a
“formal” cause, in the context of his explicit hostility to historical de-
terminism, is that culture is culture. His new position follows: “So
far as the latter (mechanicalscientific causes) are concerned, the
prospect seems to me that they will continue to reside in the psychic
or psychosomatic level” (ibid.:412). But this is precisely the position
set forth in Profession Number 3, in 1915, and corresponds exactly to
Boas’ final conclusion concerning the possibility of formulating cul-
tural laws. The futility of the entire exchange between Bidney, White,
and Krocber is its most salient feature. As far as the epistemological
problem of the nature of culture is concerned, Kroeber's retreat to an
Aristotelian deus ex machina merely intensified the lack of clarity
which had characterized his earlier enthusiasm for the Superorganic.
His “recantation” helped not one bit to set the matter straight and
indeed was nothing more than an unnecessary and irrelevant reas-
surance that he did not believe in ghosts.

THE REALITY OF CULTURAL THINGS

A kindly historian, Philip Bagby, was the first to place Kroe-
ber § recantation in proper perspective. Starting from the position
that if culture was anything worth talking about, it was an abstraction

333



===== PAGE 172 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

built up from the observation of behavior, Bagby disposed at once of
the question of the “reality” of cultural things:

The regularities which the anthropologist studies are just as real
as the subjects of the other sciences or indeed as the objects of
ordinary discourse. If we had defined culture in terms of some
such hypothetical construct as values we should be on shaky
ground, but we have defined it in terms of behavior and no one
doubts the reality of behavior. . . . Of course, it is true that cul-
ture has no substance; it is composed of forms and nothing more.
But in the view of almost all modern philosophers, idealists as
well as positivists, this is equally true of everything else. There
was no need for Kroeber to make his famous recantation . . . to
object to the reification of culture is to object to talking about it
at all [BAGBY 1953:541].

Bagby here pointed the way to the attempt to solve the question of
“reductionism” by showing precisely how, starting with the smallest
idiosyncratic bits of behavior, it is possible to construct a data lan-
guage of progressively higher-order abstractions (cf. HARRIS 1964a).
None of the people who were engaged with Krocber in arguing the
“reality” of cultural things had made themselves face the issue of how
one observes such entities in the first place. When this question, the
question of operational procedures, is squarely faced, the problem
turns out to be not how to reduce cultural entities to psychological
phenomena, but rather how to move from the facts of individual be-
havior to constructs such as “patrisib,” “matrilateral cross-cousin mar-
riage,” and “Oriental despotism.”

STYLES AND SUPER-STYLES

After Configurations, Kroeber's substantive contributions be-
came more frankly intuitive and aesthetic. As his wife, Theodora, ex-
plains in the introduction to his posthumous An Anthropologist Looks
at History:

‘When Configurations was at last behind him, Kroeber came out
literally on the sunny side of it, somehow free at last as he had not
felt before, to add his sensibility to form, styles, values, and aes-
thetic truths to his other approaches to the always fascinating
phenomena of culture. This sensibility should have been given
fuller expression in a book on the arts [T. KROEBER 1963:xviii].

Kroeber’s inclination during the last two decades of his life was to
deal with the question of growths of civilizations without bothering
with the encyclopedic inventories which had given Configurations its

334

12. Kroeber

saving claim as an inductive product. Instead, the free play of intuition
characteristic of the more lurid judgments in Configurations was now
explicitly defended. Each civilization is to be characterized by a
multiplicity of patterns whose common denominators added up to its
particular style or “super-style.” Kroeber himself suggested the com-
parison between these “super-styles” and the kind of pattern portraits
which Ruth Benedict had achieved. The comparisons reveal the fun-
damental connectedness of Benedict and Kroeber within the historical-
particularistic tradition. Although Benedict's patterns are described
in a psychological idiom, this is a superficial difference. As far as Kroe-
ber was concerned, the only important distinction between his ap-
proach and Benedict’s was that his portraits were to be dynamic,
covering the early as well as mature phases of style growths (1963:72—
74). Thus, the approach Kroeber now favored was that of pluralistic
and diachronic formulations, exemplified in Toynbee, Spengler, and
Danilevsky (ibid.:77-83). His styles are like organic growths, unfold-
ing through time in an irreversible but inexplicable process.

Although Kroeber reaffirmed his belief that “successful insight into
the nature and history of human civilizations or cultures will be made
via an empirical route, by means of something akin to natural his-
tory” (ibid.:83), his method for identifying “super-styles” scarcely
conformed to empiricist models. “The mental processes called for in
dealing with styles are somewhat different from those ordinarily used
by the historian or scientist” (ibid.:71). What is needed is the kind of
faculty we call on when we identify individuals or identify organisms
as members of this or that species. It is a “total, immediate and final
judgment,” and it “is neither inductive nor deductive.” Artists and
biologists seem to best represent the necessary qualities.

The creative artist undoubtedly is highly sensitive in his ability
to recognize both particular and patterned or stylistic identity in
the field of his creativity. However, this faculty is one which is
ordinarily not called for to any notable degree in the prosecution
of scientific research, especially of the laboratory type. It does en-
ter into many aspects of humanistic scholarship. In science it is
perhaps most called for in the basic natural history aspects of
biology—the accumulation of a broad organized body of under-
lying knowledge on which the remainder of biologic science
largely rests, and which is often designated as systematic or
taxonomic biology [ibid.:71]

Kroeber in thus comparing artist to biologist neglected to take into
account the relationship between species identification and the for-
mulation of the principles of natural selection and other lawful bio-

335



===== PAGE 173 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 12. Kroeber

logical processes. It is the fact that species differences have proven
useful in the formulation of these principles that establishes their
scientific worth. There is thus a fundamental difference between the
paintings hanging on the walls of an art museum and the taxonomies
developed within the science of life. One makes possible the system-
atic exploration of hypotheses concerning the recurrent processes of
nature, and the other does not. Kroeber’s proposal to classify civi-
lizations on the basis of intuited styles shows little promise of making
such a contribution. Indeed, Kroeber himself repeatedly rejected the
possibility that anything like a theory of natural selection would ever
be achieved by social science.

ANTISCIENCE

The point here is not that room is lacking in anthropology
for the kind of artistic empathizing which Kroeber regarded as the
central part of his professional legacy. To be against empathy is after
all something like being opposed to motherhood or baseball. The ob-
jections arise not from one’s wish to cut off the approach, but rather
in reaction to Kroeber's aggressive opposition to research strategies
which could conceivably have led to the formulation of lawful dia-
chronic and synchronic processes. This opposition, because it began as
a full-fledged dogma, because it was frequently repeated, and because it
often disguised itself in a reflective rhetoric that gave the impression
of an open mind, is an onus which all of the historical particularists
must shoulder.

Kroeber rejected the possibility of a scientific approach to history
in his 1901 thesis on Arapaho art; he repeated the objection in the
1915 “Professions,” the 1917 “Superorganic,” the 1919 and 1940 dress
design papers, and the 1944 Configurations. He declared in 1920:
“There are in short no causal explanations” (1920b:380). He insisted
that parallel evolution was a rarity and he even doubted if “the ten-
dency of agriculture to be followed by town life,” constitutes an ac-
ceptable example (1923:238). In 1943 he doubted that the patterns
of Old and New World agriculture provided a valid basis for cross-
cultural comparison (1952:89-91). In 1938 he declared, “the findings
of history can never be substantiated like proofs of natural science”
(ibid.:79). He consistently belittled the nomothetic approach and
followed Boas to the conclusion that all generalizations would neces-
sarily be vapid: “Allegations of regular recurrences in culture refer to
shadowy, large resemblances which are only dubiously substantiable

336

because they are not precisely definable” (ibid.:132). He thought the
concepts of the clan and feudalism among others were quite useless

because actual cultural content of such general concepts has been

acquired . . . during . . . historical development, which is al-

ways complex and always tending toward the unique as historians

have long ago learned to take for granted [ibid.:134; italics added].

Krocber was entitled to his empathy, but he was not justified in

flicking away two centuries of social science by asserting in 1957 of

civilizations: “we know as good as nothing of what produced their
wholes” (1957:79).

KROEBER AND STEWARD

There is an increasingly ironic quality in Kroeber’s denial of
the possibility of a scientific understanding of historical processes.
During the forties and fifties a generation of his own students were
already pioneering in the renaissance of the comparative method and
the quest for historical causal sequences. In Kroeber's festschrift,
presented to him on his sixticth birthday, Julian Steward proposed
“that every cultural phenomenon is the product of some definite
cause or causes.” Kroeber seems to have ignored Steward’s ecological
explanation of hunting and gathering bands, a decisive event in the
history of anthropological theory (see p. 666).

At the momentous 1947 Viking Fund conference on Peruvian
archaeology, held in New York, Kroeber presided as William Duncan
Strong, Pedro Armillas, Gordon Willey, and Julian Steward delivered
papers which demonstrated the central influence of techno-environ-
mental factors in the evolution of new world civilizations, and thereby
flung wide the door to precisely the kind of scientific explanations
that Kroeber had scorned. Steward, in particular, acquired from this
conference the boldness to propose that “agricultural proficiency, pop-
ulation density, settlement patterns, sociological complexity, and craft
technologies were functionally related” and that there were probably
“certain regularities in the development of these features in the dif-
ferent arcas of native American high cultures” (STEWARD 1048:103).
Krocber’s response to these suggestions which have come to dominate
contemporary archacological research and which show promise of

achieving a similar degree of importance in ethnology (sce Chap. 23)
was uncomprehending as well as patronizing:

) The archacologist, of course, cannot commence with considera-
tions as remote from evidence as these. He has to begin with ob-
jects which are material and which . . . show style. . . . Not

337



===== PAGE 174 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

having worked at first hand in the Peruvian field, [Steward’s] de-
sire to convert the stylistic period-concepts into economic-politi-
cal ones is natural—espccially in view of his previous correlations
of ccological with socio-political factors. On the other hand, those
like Bennet who have been active in Peruvian prehistory for
twenty years, and with whom it has been the main specific field of
study, are likely to go somewhat more slowly. . . . This is not in
the way of a slur, because Steward has had half a dozen years of
editing the great South American Handbook. But his knowledge
is synthetic and tends therefore to be strong precisely on perspec-
tive. It is fortunate that we should have here participants like him,
pushing eagerly and perhaps straining interpretation to the ut-
most [KROEBER 1948b:115].

Steward’s ideas were interesting baubles. They appear to have been
incapable of deflecting Kroeber’s determination to regard each civi-
lization as a fundamentally unique stylistic growth. In Kroeber’'s own
approach the cards remained stacked against nomothetic explanations
of the Peruvian sequence by avoiding questions concerning the nature
of productive and distributive systems in relation to social stratifi-
cation, political organization, warfare, demography, and settlement
patterns. None of these had received sustained treatment in Con-
figurations.

Kroeber's rather frigid reception of Steward’s ideas reposes at a
sharp angle against Steward’s own steady respect for his former teacher.
Oddly enough, Steward does not appear to be overly uncomfortable
with Kroeber’s rejection of cultural ecology as a method for the solution
of the great questions which Kroeber’s own approach so conspicuously
failed to achieve. It is of course unlikely that an obituary article would
contain strong criticism of a beloved colleague and mentor, but there
is one circumstance yet to be discussed which requires us to believe
that Steward did not feel as intellectually removed from Kroeber as
the surface content of their positions might at first suggest:

In spite of my views, which differ in some ways from Kroeber's,
I am deeply convinced that Kroeber’s five hundred odd publica-
tions are, and will be for many decades, an almost inexhaustible
mine not only of information but of problems, concepts, and hy-
potheses which have not yet made sufficient impact upon the
world of scholarship. 1 have tried to indicate that Krocber fre-
quently touched, with deep insights, many problems that searchers
for causes might well heed. Some of his syntheses and inter-
pretations could readily be classed as “hard science” [STEWARD

1961:1059)].
338

12. Kroeber

KROEBER AS ECOLOGIST

Kroeber’s early interest in regional surveys of aboriginal cul-
tures, as exemplified in his Handbook of the Indians of Cadlifornia
(1925), gave priority of treatment to religion and ideology. Later, he
approached the construction of culture areas by means of increasingly
elaborate statistical manipulations of disjointed trait-clement lists
consisting of as many as six thousand items (see Chap. 14). But when
it came to the formulation of his definitive 1939 statement, Cultural
and Natural Areas of Native North America, he departed from these
earlier methods and followed instead the example set by Clark Wissler
(1926) and Otis T. Mason (1894b:148). Kroeber now set up his basic
regional categories to reflect modes of subsistence and population
density. These in turn he saw as closely related in most cases to the
potentialities of the natural habitat. His position with respect to the
culture-environment equations was typically eclectic along the lines
being proposed by C. Daryll Forde (1934) (see p. 664) and based on
the assumption

. . that on the one hand culture can be understood primarily
only in terms of cultural factors, but that on the other hand no
culture is wholly intelligible without reference to the noncul-
tural or so-called environmental factors with which it is in relation
and which condition it [KROEBER 1939:205].

There are, however, very few regularities, if any, to be derived from
this relationship.

. . the interactions of culture and environment become ex-
ceedingly complex when followed out. And this complexity makes
generalization unprofitable, on the whole. In each situation or
area different natural factors are likely to be impinging on cul-
ture with different intensity [ibid.].

Thus although Kroeber systematically explored North American
environment-culture interrelationships, mapping limits of natural
floral and faunal provinces against the distribution of cultigens, and
evaluating the best estimates of precontact human population, he was
far from achieving a consistent ecological approach. For example, in
attempting to explain the low population density of the Eastern
Woodlands, he quickly retreated to the position that the underlying
factor was the absence of the “idea of the state” (1939:149). The
theoretical viewpoint harked back to Friedrich Ratzel; Kroeber did not

339

|


===== PAGE 175 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

see in the techno-environmental equation much beyond that of a
vaguely restrictive or permissive parameter. The creative aspects of
the cultural traditions which come to be identified with particular nat-
ural provinces are never predictable in any but a negative sense from
the environmental givens. He certainly never went so far as to suggest,
as Steward had already begun to do, that a similar techno-environmen-
tal core would tend to be causally and functionally related to similar
social structures. Nonetheless, given Steward’s own tendency to with-
draw from—or at least to vacillate around—the definition of culture
core from which ideology is sometimes excluded and sometimes in-
cluded (see p. 661), Kroeber’s Cultural and Natural Areas must be
reckoned as an accomplishment that anticipates many of Steward’s
own interests, especially as expressed in the initial treatment of culture
areas in the Handbook of the South American Indians. As we shall
sec later on (Chap. 23), Steward shifted his approach to culture
areas in the middle of editing and writing the Handbook’s six vol-
umes. Nonetheless, there was enough cultural ecology in Kroeber’s
treatment of North American culture areas to establish a close affin-
ity between it and both the initial and subsequent treatments in the
Handbook. Steward’s debt to Kroeber is thus more than that of
sentiment.

But there is a final irony in the relationship between these two men.
Cultural and Natural Areas was actually the prelude to Kroeber’s fas-
cination with civilizational growths conceived as far as possible with-
out regard to their techno-environmental-economic bases or cores.

CLIMAX AREA AND THE ROAD TO
CONFIGURATIONS

Kroeber certainly gave no indication that he regarded the
ecological aspects of Cultural and Natural Areas as a central theoret-
ical contribution. Instead, he chose to regard the refinements of
culture areas by means of the concepts of “cultural intensity” and
“climax” as the most important basis for his future work. According
to Kroeber, each of the six major North American areas, with the
exception of the Eskimo, contained a climax subarea which exhibited
the “highest intensity” of the area’s patterns. In addition each of the
areas relative to each other was depicted as possessing a particular level
of intensity on a scale of one to seven. Kroeber admitted that his
identification of the climax areas and of their relative intensities was
for the time being “no more than a personal estimate” (1939:223).

340

12. Kroeber

It is of course symptomatic of Kroeber’s inflexible theoretical position
that he did not attempt to define intensity and climax in terms of the
eminently measurable factors of population density, total population
involved in a common production and distribution network, size and
duration of armies and concentrated corvée labor, or other factors re-
lated to general evolutionary processes. No one has ever taken up his
suggestion to measure intensity and climax by counting fragmented
trait lists. This procedure would be a waste of time since as long as
each trait is weighted evenly and as long as there is no agreement on
how to count them, a canoe paddle might count as much as a twenty-
million-cubic-foot pyramid.

Comparison of culture arcas from the point of view of levels of in-
tensity can be achieved with greater objectivity and theoretical signif-
icance by employing Steward’s concept of “levels of socio-cultural
integration” (see p. 377). Once again, there is the shadowy anticipation
of the approach Steward was to develop; but Kroeber was in reality
traveling along a rapidly diverging track. He was off on the road to
configurations, to the subtleties of unique stylistic growths:

Parallels with historic civilizations suggest themselves. Wherever
one of these attained a clearly recognizable culmination, this
seems to have corresponded essentially with a period of successful
organization of culture content—organization in part into a con-
scious system of ideas, but especially into an integrated nexus of
styles, standards and values [KROEBER 1939:225].

The relationship between Kroeber’s treatment of culture areas and
Configurations has been correctly understood by Milton Singer:

It is noteworthy that he developed this concept of “climax” when
he was finishing his book Cultural and Natural Areas of Native
North America, just before he turned to a serious study of civi-
lizations. His theory of civilizations is thus continuous with his
theory of preliterate cultures and his work on archacology. The
findings of the Configurations of Culture Growth in any case give
support to the general conclusions of the Culture Areas study on
the relations of growth culminations to degree and intensity of
organization of culture content: namely, that the growth peak of
a civilization tends to coincide with a period of successful organi-
zation of culture content—that is, the organization of ideas,
styles, and standards. Kroeber sees cultural creativity and assimila-
tion running ahead of organization before the culmination, and
running behind it after, as the organization tends more and more
to repetition and rigidity [1963:vi].

341



===== PAGE 176 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE DETERMINIST ILLUSION

Singer’s theoretical position, it is interesting to note, is ideal-
ist and antideterminist, providing not the slightest opening for recon-
ciliation with that of Steward. Yet Singer has no difficulty in
wholeheartedly embracing Kroeber’s contributions, even the super-
organic. Singer’s version of Kroeber’s theoretical position is much more
aceurate than that of Steward. Singer points out three features of
Kroeber’s theory of culture which have contributed to “an impression

of determinism.”

(1) Because culture patterns abstract from the events of history
and from the concrete acts of particular individuals the impres-
sion arises that individuals and their choices and actions do not
count. (2) This impression is reinforced by the fact that, in the
long view of history which Kroeber takes, particular individuals are
rarely visible or known. (3) Finally, the descriptions of patterns
are apt to be read as laws of general application [ibid.:vii].

These impressions, continues Singer, are misleading. ‘What seems like
deterministic laws are merely the patterned way people have of acting,
thinking, and doing things. Kroeber’s “repression” of individuals is
merely a methodological procedure for holding psychological and other
noncultural factors constant in order to permit the study of the
“quality and sequences” of cultural forms. Kroeber was not concerned
to investigate the relationship of these forms to individual personality
just as he was not interested in their relationship to social structure,
social organization, “and many other factors” (among which presum-
ably Singer was referring to environment, technology, demography,
production, and distribution). These other things “were problems to
be investigated by others.” “Kroeber's theory of culture does not
necessarily imply any strict determinism or causality, cultural or oth-
erwise” (ibid.).

The attempt by Steward, Murdock, White, and others to identify
Kroeber with neo-evolutionism and scientific varieties of determinism
is unfounded and wholly misses the point of Kroeber's anthropological
style, which in every respect remained well within the Boasian pro-
gram, inheriting all of its initial limitations of theory and method,
adding to them only in ways appropriate to a frank denial of scientific
pretense.

342

——_—_———Yﬁ

§

Lowie

At least as erudite as Kroeber (without the charisma), probably to
this day.unsurpusssd in his knowledge of primitive ethnography, Rob-
ert Lowie was by far the most sophisticated advocate of, and lat’er the
most effective defender of, the historical-particularist position. In
LOW.IE, the Boasian program came closest to achieving that most es-
sential of all scientific standards, the capacity to sustain a continuous
and self-correcting expansion of knowledge. Unlike Kroeber, Lowie’s
underst?nding of cultural theory matured along empirically viable and
thForetlcally productive lines. It is Lowie who provides the safest
bridge across the abyss of particularist no-nothingism back to the
master builders of the nineteenth century. However, despite the clar-
I;Iy and honcstyvof the personal vision to which his work was devoted
there were barriers to the perfection of his understanding of cultumi
processes over which he could not rise and which maintained him
perpetually within the Boasian mold.
mg:(lilkhe] mamyt of his contemporaries, Lowie’s dedication to Boas was
fooed | th:anal tempt to appraise the precise epistemological implica-

oasian program with respect to the main currents of un-

343


===== PAGE 177 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

folding Western philosophies. He possessed a capacity unique among
his contemporaries, to represent that program as the embodiment of
the finest flowering of empiricism, by which anthropology could win
and hold a proud position among the natural sciences. Intuited visions
of art and myth triumphantly veiling the inner mysteries of human life
had little appeal for him. Unlike Kroeber, he did not for long
propose the futility of science applied to history. Indeed, in most re-
spects, Lowie’s conception of scientific method as exemplified in his
own programmatic pronouncements is unimpeachable. Whereas Kroe-
ber’s errors are clearly the result of imperfect method, of a premature
hardening against a nomothetic approach, Lowie’s most serious lapses
are of a totally different nature. In the long run, one has the impres-
sion that he was led astray, not by a faulty model of social science,
but by his failure to apply the model he espoused. Lowie is be-
trayed by facts—by false facts collected to an astonishing degree as
part of the Boasian program. But there is no denying that Lowie
was also the victim of the antimaterialist current that swirled around
him and whose strength he drastically underestimated. In the final
analysis these currents impaired the fiber of his skepticism, lowered
his resistance to hearsay, and prevented him from challenging the
prevailing views of primitive economic life. Exasperatingly rigorous
in everything else, he willingly permitted himself to be guided by a
pack of veritable old wives” tales whenever he was obliged to consider
the claims of cultural materialism.

Initially, there was, by Lowie’s own admission, a powerful influence
exerted over his own work by the “Southwest German” school of phi-
losophy—Dilthey, Windelband, and Rickert. Thus, Lowie speaks of
himself as having been led by the “idiographic conception of history”
to “deprecate Schurtz’s and Webster’s ‘belief in a law of social evo-
lution’ as ‘unhistorical’ ” (LowIE 1956b:1008). This influence however,
became progressively more diluted. Before mid-carcer it was distinctly
less important in shaping Lowie’s outlook than was the influence of
Emst Mach, to whom we return in a moment. Lowie was too firmly
committed to the exposure and combat of premature generalizations
to permit himself to dogmatize the idiographic proposals that Kroeber
incorporated into the “Eighteen Professions.” Indeed, Lowie eventu-
ally came to regard the dogma that scientific causes could not be found
in history as a “pusillanimous” subterfuge:

The ficld of culture, then, is not a region of complete lawlessness.
Like causes produce like effects here as clsewhere, though the
complex conditions with which we are grappling require unusual

344

13. Lowie

caution in definitely correlating phenomena. It is true that Ameri-
can ethnologists have shown that in several instances like phe-
nomena can be traced to diverse causes; that, in short, unlike
antecedents converge to the same point. However, at the risk of
being anathematized as a person of utterly unhistorical mentality,
I must register my belicf that this point has been overdone and
that the continued insistence on it by Americanists is itself an
illustration of cultural inertia. . . . Nevertheless, in contradis-
tinction to some of my colleagues and to the position I myself
once shared, T now believe that it is pusillanimous to shirk the
real problem involved, and that in so far as any explanation ad-
mits the problem, any explanation is preferable to the flaunting
of fine phrases about the unique character of cultural phenomena
[1929:88-90].

INFLUENCE OF ERNST MACH

The pedigree that Lowie sought to establish for Boasian an-
thropology was not the neo-Kantianism of Dilthey, Rickert, and Win-
delband, but that of the hardest of hardheaded pragmatists, Ernst
Mach. The relationship between Mach and Lowie was a prolonged
one based upon personal acquaintance and an informal correspon-
dence. Apparently, Lowie’s interest in Mach developed out of the
discussions of the philosophy of science among the members of a
group called the “Pearson Circle.” This was a club established by
Lowie and other Columbia University graduate students whose mem-
bers studied the implication of Karl Pearson’s portrayal of science as an
ethic and a “calling,” for their own disciplinary careers. By 1911 Low-
ie’s enthusiasm for Mach had advanced to a point of consummate
devotion: In that year, it was he who proposed Mach to honorary
membership in the New York Academy of Science.

In presenting to your notice the name of Ernst Mach, I propose
not merely the greatest historian of physics, not only an original
experimenter and thinker in the field of psychology and a keen
logician of scientific method, but the founder and leader of a new
and genuine scientific liberalism [1947:65n].

Tt will not be possible here to digress into a study of Mach’s major
contributions to philosophy. In main outline however, it can be said
that Mach was committed to the rooting out of all vestiges of meta-
Physics from every branch of science. These vestiges he saw as linger-
g on especially in the mechanistic categories of space, time, matter,
and of causality attributed to mechanical “forces.” Radically empiri-

345

—————es e et et tme e


===== PAGE 178 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

cist in all of his thinking, Mach also showed strong positivist affinities.
Like Comte, he stressed the irrelevance of explanation via metaphys-
ical constructs. The business of science is to describe the functional
relations between phenomena, not to explain them.

Suffice it to say that one has not the slightest difficulty in accepting
Mach’s views as a basis for scientific methodology. According to
Lowie, Mach was to be admired for his “tough mindedness,” and who
could object to such a posture? “He abhorred systems, he eliminated
the supernatural, he looked askance upon the use of hypotheses, de-
manding description rather than explanation” (1916a:335). It should
not be concluded from the disparagement of hypothesis, that Lowie,
following Mach, intended to deprive the scientific method of the
interplay between hypothesis and experiment; rather, the emphasis
is upon eliminating the nonempirical metaphysical and hypothetical
residues from the descriptive end-product:

Ernst Mach’s denial of hypothesis is a denial of the existential
character of the conditions or things, supposed in the proposition
which are purely imaginative or drawn from analogy, or beyond
empirical proof. This is simply a reiteration in slightly varied
form, of Mach’s . . . thesis that description and not explanation
is the business of science [WEINBERG 1937:44].

Lowie certainly did not shy away from making hypotheses concerning
sociocultural processes; on the contrary, his writings are rich in for-
mulations concerning the origin and functioning of sodalities, kinship
groups, and kinship rules. What he objected to was any weakening of
the empiricist standards on behalf of preserving poorly studied or
imaginary entities as part of the description of a particular domain.
This objection is rendered explicit in the enthusiastic exegesis that he
performed on Goldenweiser's study of totemism. The latter had
cleared away an accretion of fanciful hypotheses associated with such
luminaries as Frazer, Freud, and Durkheim by showing that the entity,
“totemism,” consisted of a number of elements assumed to be in sta-
ble association but which in reality were sometimes absent or com-
bined in markedly different ways.

What was at first supposed to be a neccssary connection is re-
duced to a mere conjunction of elements. Thought is no longer
arrested by a contemplation of the mystic underlying units and
their relations with the observed elements; to determine the na-
ture and interrelations of those elements themselves becomes
the highest, nay the only possible, goal of investigation
[LowIE 19114, in DU BOIS 1960:306].

346

13. Lowie

There is no doubt that Lowie pictured Boas as the man whose mission
it had become to impose Mach’s program upon anthropology. Lowie’s
perspective on Boas was thus always somewhat in the nature of a
double image in which Boas and Mach blurred into a single heroic
figure:

In the domain of physical science, a critical reformation of this
type has been, within recent decades, effected by Professor Ernst
Mach. In ethnology, the school which has set itself a correspond-
ing aim, which endeavors to supplant the traditional belief in
mystic ethnological complexes with a deeper, though, it may be,
still only proximate, analysis into provisional elements, is the
school headed by Professor Franz Boas [ibid.].

From this perspective, the negative, picayune, and dilettantish as-
pects of the Boasian movement take on a bright new clean look. We
can accept Lowie’s reminiscences about turn-of-the-century anthro-
pology with wholehearted approval. When he writes that the Boasian
movement was not the concoction of isolationists, nor the creation of
people who abhorred generalization, and whose intellectual aspirations
rose no higher than the question of whether the Plains Indians put up

tepees on four or five poles, there is certainly no reason to doubt his
memory:

The point is that by 1900 the intellectual climate had changed.
- .. What had figured as the quintessence of scientific insight
suddenly shrank into a farrago of dubious hypotheses. . . . Criti-

cal votaries . . . had simply arrived at higher standards of proof
[LowE 1956b:1006].

The only question is whether Lowie and his fellow Boasians were
willing or able to apply these higher standards of proof when the is-

sues before them related to the validity of cultural materialism and
historical determinism.

CRITIQUE OF MORGAN

In 1920, Lowie published the singularly most important and
most exasperating book in the historical-particularist tradition. Com-
mencing with its corrective title, Primitive Society (with the emphasis
upon Primitive), this work served the function of introducing a wide
auc!ience to the major flaws in Lewis Henry Morgan’s Ancient Society
(with the emphasis upon Ancient). After the publication of Lowie’s
book, no one who proposed to make use of anthropological findings
could cite Morgan without running the risk of being caught in with-

347



===== PAGE 179 =====

The Risc of Anthropological Theory

ering error. Yet, as we look back upon this achievement, across half a
century of new evidence and new perspectives, we may detect in
Lowie’s arguments just about as much chaff as he was able to find in
his predecessor. To spell out all that is right and all that is wrong in
Primitive Society would require a book in itself. It is a pity, but
symptomatic of contemporary anthropology’s bootless, headlong
plunge away from its past, that no one has seen fit or found the time
to write that book. Yet no understanding of contemporary anthro-
pological theory is admissable which does not begin by righting the
balance between Lowie and Morgan. Only the briefest of summaries
can be attempted here.

First, on the positive side, we may dispense with the notion that
Primitive Society was an “antievolutionary” treatise. As we have seen,
Lowie rightly objected to Leslic White’s characterization of the Boas-
ians as being guilty of a “reactionary philosophy of antievolution.”
This is a complete misrepresentation of the problem, not only for
the Boasians but also for all the other major schools of contemporary
anthropology. To confuse Lowic’s position with the kind of anti-
evolutionism that the proponents of degeneration theory, such as De
Maistre, had offered before Spencer and Darwin swept the field is a
grave injustice.

LOWIE'S EVOLUTIONISM

Primitive Society is nothing if it is not a major contribution
to the theory of cultural evolution. It is such a contribution because
time and again in its pages Morgan’s view of the sequence of the
emergence of specific institutions on both a worldwide and more lo-
calized basis are examined, criticized, and reformulated with the
positing of a new sequence. Thus Lowie correctly rejects the notion,
shared by Morgan, Lubbock, McLennan, and many other nineteenth-
century theorists that the earliest form of marriage was group promis-
cuity. He does so, not because of antievolutionism but because there
is insufficient evidence to establish such a condition. He further rejects
Morgan’s notion of a succeeding stage of group marriage involving a
set of brothers and a set of sisters. He rejects this not because he
rejects evolution, but because Morgan’s interpretation of Hawaiian
kinship terminology as a survival of the time when all fathers and
mothers were also brothers and sisters had become utterly untenable
in relationship to standard ethnographic knowledge of Polynesia. In the
light of such knowledge nothing could be more absurd than to propose
that the Hawaiians (who arc nowadays seen as having had an incipient

348

Rl

13.

Lowie
form of Oriental despotism) were on the lowest levels of “Savag-
ery.” Since almost all contemporary primitives present some form of
nuclear family, Lowie comes to the conclusion that the family is a
primeval human grouping. This conclusion may run counter to Marx-
ist evolutionary dogma, but it does not constitute, in Lowie’s han-
dling of it, a refutation of evolutionary theory in general. On the
contrary, he is mainly concerned to show that Morgan was wrong in
attempting to demonstrate that sibs (gens in Morgan’s terminology)
evolved before the monogamous family. Lowie insists that the sequence
should be reversed.

Thus, in the chapter entitled “History of the Sib,” Lowie pursues
the question of the origin of the sib in a manner that is thoroughly
compatible with Morgan’s own evolutionary approach. To be sure, he
substitutes the word history for evolution, but this is a bit of word
magic. Since John Swanton had pointed out that virtually all of the
“ruder Indian cultures” lacked the sib, a fact unknown to Morgan,
there remained little by way of evidence to support its evolutionary
priority. Few anthropologists of the neo-evolutionary persuasion
would argue the point.

But Lowic’s treatment of the origin of the sib is much more than a
mere reversal of Morgan’s evolutionary scheme. It also happens to be
one of the strongest cases ever made for parallel and convergent
evolutionary processes. In this respect Lowie’s explanation of the
origin of the sib far out-Morganned Morgan. To Morgan, as we have
seen, the idea of unilinear descent seemed so ingenious that he pos-
tulated a single origin for its invention and a subsequent worldwide
dispersal on the basis of migration and “blood descent.” By com-
paring the distribution of sibs and the associated elements in the way
that Goldenweiser had done for totemism, Lowie came to the con-
clusion that the sib had been indcpendently invented four and possibly
five times in North America alone. This is “evolutionism” with a
vengeance! Rejecting Morgan’s explanation of the spread of the sib in
terms of the psychophysical advantages connected with exogamy,
]_:owie suggested his own causal mechanisms. The factors he empha-
Sizes—transmission of property rights, mode of residence after mar-
nage, and cooperative association in economic activities—are by
neo-evolutionist theories closer to the truth than Morgan’s notions of
the deleterious effects of inbreeding (LowE 1920:157-60).

Lowie also partially rejects Morgan’s sequence for the origin of bi-
furcate merging (Iroquoian or Dakota) kinship terminologies. Whereas
Morgan saw this system as a direct product of the invention of the
gens, Lowie viewed it as a product of both the gens and the syste-

349

i
i


===== PAGE 180 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

matic application of the levirate and sororate. Because these marriage
forms have a wider distribution than unilinear kinship groupings,
Lowie insisted that they were evolutionarily prior to the sib (ibid.:
163).

Lowie then proceeded to clear up in a definitive fashion the hoary
problem of which came first, matrilineal or patrilineal sibs. His rejec-
tion of a universal matrilineal phase prior to the appearance of patri-
lineal descent corresponds to one of the basic cornerstones of modern
ethnology. But Lowic once again does mot leave the situation in
complete disarray. Instead he carefully examines E. Hahn’s (1905)
suggestion that plow agriculture, which he admits as being later, is
frequently associated with patrilineal descent, while hoe gardening,
being women’s work, and more primordial, is associated with matri-
lineal descent. Lowie concludes, however, that there are too many
exceptions to make the sequence stick on a universal basis, and this
once again is a viewpoint that corresponds to the best modern opinion
on the subject.

Lowie’s evolutionary contribution is again conspicuously in evidence
in his treatment of sodalities and the origin of the territorial as op-
posed to the kinship principle of achieving political organization. “The
soundness of Morgan’s and Maine’s position,” writes Lowie, “in
drawing a sharp distinction between kinship (tribal) and territorial
(political) organization is beyond cavil” (1920:391). Lowie, however,
was unwilling to posit the priority of kinship relations over territorial
relations, except perhaps in the most distant past. For the most part,
he secks to emphasize that both kin and non-kin forms of groupings,
including those with a territorial ingredient, are present “even in very
humble cultural levels” (ibid.:395). However, he does try to prove that
the state form of organization arises on the basis of the prior evolution
of clubs, age grades, and other sodalities which had been neglected
by Morgan, but emphasized by H. Schurtz (1goz). “It is indeed one
of Schurtz’s most signal services to have explained the early origin of
political society in Morgan’s sense without recourse to any deliberate
legal enactment” (LOWIE 1920:394-95). Lowie follows this up not
only with an evolutionary sequence but one which stands on a foun-
dation of rather classic lack of evidence:

Even at a very early time and in a very lowly environment there
was no necessity for disrupting the ties of kinship in order to
found a political state. For concomitantly with the family and the

sib there have existed for untold centuries such associations as
the men’s clubs, age classes and secret organizations, all of them

350

13. Lowie

indql)elndent of kinship . . . and all of them capable of readily
acquiring political character if not invested with it from their in-
ception [ibid.:395-96).

For confirmation of the intemperate nature of this speculative foray
into the evolutionary origins of political institutions, no less an au-
thority than Lowie himself bears witness. In his The Origin of the
State (1927), Lowie spurns Schurtz’s contribution and turns instead
to processes associated with military conquest. “Obviously, then,” he
admitted, “associations do not play the preponderant role in political
development which T was at one time inclined to ascribe to them”
(LowIE 1927:111). Summing up the situation later in his article on
social organization in the Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, he
added: “Although local contiguity creates union among pre-literate
peoples, the tie of kinship unquestionably eclipses it” (1933a:142).
In this instance, by his honest commitment to hardheaded empiri-
cism, Lowie corrected himself right back to Morgan’s and Maine's
insistence that kinship systems of solidarity preceded the state on a

worldwide basis. It is, of course, the only acceptable view of the
matter.

LOWIE'S DEBT TO MORGAN

At the risk of digressing somewhat, let me here emphasize
that between Kroeber and Lowie nothing is more revealing of their
differences than their respective treatments of Morgan. There is
scarcely a single paper on social organization written by Lowie that
does not implicitly or explicitly begin where Morgan had left off. It is
clear that he had read Morgan and that he had returned to “Systems”
and Ancient Society throughout his maturity. Lowie, for example, did
not share Kroeber’s confusion concerning Morgan’s distinction be-
tween classificatory and descriptive kinship systems:

Morgan’s earliest expressions on the subject indicate that it was
the merging of lineal and collateral relatives—the use of a single
term, e.g., for mother and mother’s sister, for father and father’s
brother—that impressed this pioneer investigator, and this is the
feature that actually characterizes the classificatory systems of all
the regions of the globe [Lowie 1915:347].

Ilndeed, in this same article, Lowie not only accepts Morgan’s distinc-
tion, but follows Morgan, Tylor, and Rivers in relating the occurrence
of classificatory systems to the development of exogamous, unilinear
descent groups. While Kroeber sought to undermine Morgan’s classi-

351

i e


===== PAGE 181 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

fication of kinship terminologies and thereby topple the whole
“speculative scheme,” Lowie accepted and made use of the basic
premises of Morgan’s comparative method. Lowie chose the occasion
of the celebration of Kroeber's sixtieth birthday to praise Morgan’s
“magnificent and valid” pioneering efforts and to vindicate Morgan’s
major postulate that “kinship terminologies in some measure cor-
respond to social facts.” He even went so far on that occasion as to
uphold the use which Morgan and most of the pre-Boasians had made
of terminological “survivals” as a method of reconstructing earlier
phases of social organization:

Trained to view “survival” arguments with suspicion, I have be-
come convinced that the avowed skepticism on this point har-
bors as much cant as the evolutionary zeal of our predecessors.
Indubitably cultural changes proceed with uneven velocity, hence
certain elements lag while others spurt ahead; further, linguistic
phenomena are markedly conservative. These accepted facts war-
rant the assumption that a terminological feature in harmony
with a certain custom may survive that custom. The only question
is whether the social factor is the only possible determinant,
whether the really vital factor is not rather one of its correlates,
whether the same result may not be effected by a different cause.
But when due allowance is made for this, Morgan’s principle of
survivals remains a valuable procedure [LowrE 1936:180].

In this connection it is relevant to point out that Lowie went much
further than any of the other Boasians in maintaining the legitimacy
of the search for regularities, of which kinship and social organizational
correlations are the most conspicuous. Denying that there were “ab-
solute laws” he nonetheless insisted that the phenomena of social
science point toward certain regularities, and that it is our duty to as-
certain these as rigorously as possible. Consistent with this view and in
extreme opposition to Kroeber, Lowie held Tylor in highest esteem,
not for the tempering of evolutionary sequence with diffusion, but
rather for Tylor’s suggestions concerning method. Indeed, Lowie com-
pletely anticipates Murdock’s evaluation of the great “On a Method of
Investigating the Development of Institutions Applied to Laws of
Marriage and Descent.” He might have been a “super-Lang or a super-
Frazer,” wrote Lowie in 1917, “but the paper on Method raises him
at once into an entirely different kind of being” (1917a:266).

All of these considerations make it manifestly unfair to represent
Lowic as a typical member of the Boasian school as far as historical
determinism and idiographic historicism are concerned. True, there
are some unkind words for Morgan, as in his contribution to Kroe-
ber’s birthday volume and repeated in The History of Ethnological

352

I

13

Lowie

Theory: There’s no better example of Darwin’s saying, “It’s dogged
does it.” But in the main, Lowie, at least on his own behalf, was
perfectly justified in berating Leslic White for claiming that M(;rg;m
]-lnad been ignored. “What precisely does White expect?” he inquires.
“An academic muezzin at every center of learning who shall lead an-
thropglogists in daily Rochester-ward obeisances and genuflections?”
-(Lowlle }960:412). Similarly one may find in Culture and Ethnology,
in Primitive Society, and elsewhere statements which seem to be sav‘—
ing that historical explanations are the only admissable explanations in
the.social sciences, as for example when Lowie notes that “the expla-
nation of a cultural phenomenon will consist in referring it back to
the particular circumstances that preceded it” (1917b:82). Or as
wheq he rashly asserts: “One fact, however, encountered at every stage
ar}d in every phase of society, by itself lays the axe to any t]xéory of
historical laws—the extensive occurrence of diffusion” (see p- 174)

THE SHREDS AND PATCHES INCIDENT

The famous rodomontade of “shreds and patches” a i
S ears
the last paragraph of Primitive Society: P PP "

To that planless hodgepodge, that thing of shreds and patches
called civilization, its historian can no longer yield superstitious
reverence. He will realize better than others the obstacles to in-
fusing design into the amorphous product; but in thought at
least he will not grovel before it in fatalistic acquiescence but
dream of a rational scheme to supplant the chaotic jumble
[LowIE 1920:441].

This statement was widely interpreted as a declaration of an anti-
fungtlonalist point of view (p. 520). But no one argued more per-
sgasnv_cly than Lowie for the functional interrelationships between
kmshxp. terminologies and social organization. There is no doubt that
the main import of Lowie’s substantive work cancels out the extreme
lmphca.tmns of his shreds-and-patches remark, and there are plenty of
thcoreh?al proposals which counterbalance his more extreme prmmﬁcia—
mentos in favor of diffusionist and particularist interpretations:

Ethnology is simply science grappling with the phenomena segre-
gated fwn} the remainder of the universe as “cultural.” It is a
wholly objective discipline, whether it deals with subjective atti-
tud_cs or not, for its function is the determination of reality in
Vcnﬁ_:lhl(; terms. It coordinates it data spatially, in so far forth
duplicating the procedure of geography. It coordinates its data
chronologically to that extent sharing the logic of geology, paleon-

353

]

|
]
!

f
|



===== PAGE 182 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 13. Lowie

tology, historical astronomy, and political history; the particular
techniques employed must vary with the problem, as in other
branches of learning. Finally, it coordinates in terms of causality
as the concept has been epistemologically purified; and by the
demonstration of functional relationships it may attain the de-
gree of generalization consistent with its own section of the uni-

verse [LOWIE 1960:410].

ATTACK AGAINST CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

These and many other positive scientific and evolutionary
contributions emanate from Primitive Society. A complete review is
not needed for the point at issue. To accuse Lowie of antievolution-
ism or antiscientism is absurd. On the other hand, Lowie does prove
himself to be an implacable opponent of cultural materialism. Again
and again Lowie drives home the point that schemes cannot substi-
tute for history; that catchwords and catch phrases must be driven
out of respectable discourse; that entities like the sib or exogamy
must be resolved into their components, and each of these carefully
compared in their reallife context before judgments concerning their
similarity or difference can be rendered. And yet in vast domains of
social life, wherever social structural and ideological features articulate
with the organization of labor, with the production and distribution
of goods, and with the other material conditions of human existence,
Lowic abandons the hardheaded ethnographic empiricism for which
he is otherwise so greatly admired. The most consistent theme in
Primitive Society is not antievolutionism, but anti-cultural materialism.

What Lowie attacked was a scarecrow of economic determinism, an
effigy which no economic determinist would recognize. These attacks
occur at points too numerous to permit a case by case examination,
but a similar pattern of error characterizes each one. First, a proposi-
tion advanced by Morgan or some other evolutionist establishing a
relationship between economic factors and social organization is pre-
sented. Second, a handful of exceptions to the rule are brought forth.
Third, the puerility of economic determinism is proclaimed. His treat-
ment of the economic interpretation of slavery may be taken as an
example of this routine.

THE CASE OF SLAVERY

Lowie vehemently attacked the notion (rooted in the En-
lightenment) that slavery must have originated at an advanced level
of productivity associated with substantial food surpluses:

354

Slavery did not commence as Morgan fancied, in communitics
conversant with the smelting of iron, the domestication of cattle
or the use of imrigation and stone architecture. It occurs in the far
ruder stage represented by the Neolithic Polynesians and the
non-agricultural Nootka, as does the scgmcntatibn of society into
castes and gradations of rank [1920:356].

At once Lowie’s distaste for metaphysical entities evaporates. Where
P{C\’IOUSIY he has poked at, pushed, and pulled apart into a half dozen
picces such concepts as “totemism,” the “sib,” and “exogamy,” now
suddenly we have sLAVERY, singular and unfractionable. It is tn,lc that
many pre-state societies have emic actor-types (role positions), the
native terms for which ultimately get ‘glosscd into Englisil as
“slaves.” But the practices behind this word bear no structural re-
s;rl?l_)lan.ce to the slavery that existed among the Oriental hydraulic
cxv1!1zafcmns or among the Greeks and Romans or among New World
capitalist plantation agriculturalists. In the case of the Samoan
“slaves” (his example from Polynesia), Lowie himself notes that they
were war captives, that “their lot was not one of material degrada-
tion,” a‘l"nd that “the poorer men of the tribe often married slave
‘v‘vomen. _Contrary to Lowic’s view, there is little to indicate that the
Slaves'i in Samoa constituted a social stratum which played a distinc-
tive or important economic function in Samoan society. On the other
hand, that the Samoans had a highly stratified social order is not to
b'e doubted. However, again contrary to Lowic’s picture of the situa-
tion, the techno-economic-environmental basis upon which that sys-
tem had been reared was perfectly compatible with a gcne}al
correlation between productivity and degree of social stratification in
.Po.lynesia. In Sahlins’ (1958) synthesis of Polynesian social structure,
it is demonstrated that Samoa belongs in the same category as Ha—’
waii, Tflhiti, and Tonga, the most economically advanced of the
Polynesian systems. For Lowie to identify the Samoans as Neolithic
on the basis of the absence of metallurgy is as objectionable as for
Morgan to have put the Hawaiians in Savagery on the basis of their
lack of the bow and arrow.
] Equally inappropriate is the use made of the occurrence of so-called
slaves among the quixotic “nonagricultural Nootka.” Enough has al-
YCCady been said of the failure of Boas and other students of Northwest
f[:::t;u]turcs to identify the extensive changes which had resulted
iy N.uropean contact, depopulation, and intensive trade relations.
h e Nootka ;m.d other Northwest groups took war prisoners, set them
0 work at menial tasks, and exercised continuing life and death power
over them. We shall not here be able to follow the labyrinthine argu-

355



===== PAGE 183 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ments surrounding the interpretation of the economic functions of
these low-ranking strata. The essential point, however, is that the
existence of slavelike statuses among the postcontact Northwest
Coast peoples is again perfectly compatible with an economic inter-
pretation of the development of slavery. The only way that Lowie can
make it out to be otherwise is by engaging in a bit of typological
legerdemain which is even more metaphysical than his slavery con-
cept. Although these socicties did not practice agriculture, they did
produce large annual “harvest” surpluses based upon the exploitation
of unusually favorable riverine and maritime resources. In addition,
they maintained extensive trading relations with Furopean companies
which greatly increased their ability to produce nonfood types of sur-
pluses. No more inappropriate ethnographic examples can be found
for disproving the general relationship between techno-environmental
conditions and features of social organization. After trotting forth these
two examples (which even if they were not ethnographically some-
thing quite different from what Lowic intends them to be would still
not have the power to destroy a generalization based on hundreds of
contrary cases), Lowie prepares to administer the coup de grdce upon
the economic interpretation of history:

Still another point merits attention. How far do the facts cited
harmonize with that economic interpretation of history which we
have had occasion to scrutinize once before? It must be confessed,
very indifferently. When a Tsimshian chief murders a slave to
retrieve the prestige his daughter has lost by a wound or when a
Kwakiutl in a paroxysm of vainglory confounds a social rival by
destroying a canoe and breaking a copper plate valued at a thou-
sand blankets, the motive is manifestly as far removed from the

economic as it can well be [1920:356].

Since the Tsimshian slave is killed for the psychological uplift it brings
his owner, Lowie concludes that the institution of slavery does not
have economic significance. But if Tsimshian slavery is not an econom-
ically significant institution, should it be treated as slavery? Over and
above such contradictions, it should be pointed out that the psycho-
logical motivations which animate the production or destruction of
property and people have nothing to do with the question of whether
such phenomena are amenable to economic interpretations. If it were
otherwise, the annual destruction of several million American automo-
biles would emerge as the world’s most inscrutable custom. When
an American junks his four-year-old car (a vehicle which a taxicab
driver in Brazil would give four years of his wages to own), his desire

356

13 Lowie

to kcep. up with the Joneses scarcely eliminates the fact that the
under}yllig determinants of his behavior reside in the structure of the
American economy.

THE CASE OF COMMUNAL HUNTING
TERRITORIES

To evolutionists like Morgan, Maine, Marx, and even as far
back as Turgot, it had secemed a wellestablished principle that
groups which depended upon the hunting of animals for their food
supply would not possess strongly individualized proprictary rights
over hunting territories and that the land-owning group would tend to
correspond to the maximum effective social group. This would seem
to be an eminently reasonable deduction in view of the fact that there
is no conceivable way to get wild animals to stick to one part of a
territory—except by domestication, of course! By 1920, an overwhelm-
ing m‘lmbcr of ethnographic instances confirming the correctness of
this view had accumulated. Lowie accepted the prevalence of family
or clan joint ownership of land which had so strongly impressed Sir
Henry Maine, but he refused to see joint tenure as being more
notably a characteristic of the most primitive hunting and gathering
groups. As for the widely accepted relationship between true com-
ml.mal tenure and the hunting and gathering mode of existence, the
evidence, Lowie claimed, was all to the contrary:

It is often assumed that when peoples support themselves by the
chase there is of necessity communal ownership of the huhling
grounds. This proposition, however, has not only been seriously
shaken but invalidated by testimony from a number of distinct
Tegions [1920:211].

Llowie fchcn relentlessly follows out the above-mentioned pattern for
filSCl’Cdlting economic-determinist interpetations. Three nonconform-
Ing cases, the Vedda, the Algonkians, and the aborigines of Queens-
land are brought forth. In each case he concludes that less than
communal tenure is characteristic of the aboriginal patterns. Among
the ._A]gonkians and the Vedda, there is even evidence for private own-
ership of land in association with the rudest level of cultural develop-
ment. Lowie ends his argument with the memorable challenge:

Th_c burden of the proof surely rests with those who believe in a
universal stage of communal ownership antecedent to individual
tenure of land. Let them advance evidence to show that land was
once communally owned in the Torres Straits; that the Algon-

357

|
|
§
|



===== PAGE 184 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

kians at some definite period failed to recognize the individual
hunter’s domain; that separate ownership was unknown to the
Vedda of some specified period [ibid.:231].

One might take up this challenge by inquiring why the burden of
proof rests with those who have dozens of cases of band-level socicties
in which there is an unequivocal correlation between the hunting
mode of existence and communal tenure. Given the fact that the three
cases advanced by Lowie appear to be aberrant, would it not be more
in keeping with the Machian temper to seck the reasons for this de-
parture from the norm than to throw doubt upon the entire general-
ization? If smoke rises, are the laws of motion less valid? But the
matter is much more serious. One would suppose that for Lowie to
have issued such an audacious challenge, he must have been arguing
from a position of great empirical strength. One can almost see
“Fortress Lowie,” a wall of impregnable facts. Alas, it now appears
that the strength of his position lay exclusively in the improbability
that any of his colleagues or students would think it worth their while
to call his bluff. All three cases are spurious. Not one of them stands
up to careful scrutiny.

CHALLENGE ACCEPTED: THE
ALGONKIANS

For the Algonkians we have the ethnographic and ethnohis-
torical restudy carried out among the Montagnais Naskapi by Eleanor
Leacock. This study was specifically dedicated to the examination of
the conclusions reached by Lowie’s chief source, Frank G. Speck
(1915). Leacock denies the existence of individually owned beaver
trapping territories (a conclusion toward which Speck’s later writings
also tended), confirms the existence of joint family tracts, but strongly
opposes the contention that such patterns were aboriginal. The intro-
duction of family tracts closely followed the movements of the
geographical and chronological centers of the fur trade. She attributes
the breakdown in communal tenure to the shift from dependence upon
caribou hunting to beaver trapping and beaver-skin trading. Her
explanation of the social change consequent upon the shift from
hunting to trapping is as follows:

Owing to the uncertainty of the hunt, several families were
necessarily dependent upon each other, thus providing a kind of
subsistence insurance or greater security than indivic 1al families
could achieve. With production for trade, however, the individu-

358

13. Lowie

al’s most important ties, economically speaking, were transferred
from within the band to without, and his objective relation to
other band members changed from the cooperative to the com-
petitive. With storable, transportable, and individually acquired
supplies—principally flour and lard—as staple foods, the indi-
vidual family becomes self-sufficient, and larger group living is
not only superfluous in the struggle for existence but a positive
hindrance to the personal acquisition of furs [LEACOCK 1954:7].

A second and independent study of the Canadian Indian tenure
system has been carried out by Rolf Knight in the East James Bay area
of Labrador. Knight’s conclusions are even more devastating than Lea-
cock’s for he doubts that family territories even with the fur trade
could have been a viable adaptation for more than a small part of the
population for any prolonged period. Knight insists that until the early
1940’s hunting and fishing continued to supply the bulk of the food
consumed by the Indians but that . . . any hunting-trapping group
that was forced to remain on a particular ‘hunting territory’ sized
tract would probably starve to death, at one time or another, within a
generation” (RNIGHT 1965:33).

CHALLENGE ACCEPTED: THE VEDDA

The Vedda, known to Lowie through C. G. Seligman’s 1911
monograph, inhabit a small portion of the eastern side of the island
of Ceylon. Since the Vedda have been surrounded on all sides by
highly stratified kingdoms for at least two thousand years, they imme-
diately strike us as being an unlikely fount of information concerning
paleolithic social organization. Seligman tells us that the Mahayangana,
the oldest Buddhist shrine on Ceylon, is immediately adjacent to
Vedda country. We learn further that there are two kinds of Vedda:
village-dwelling farmers and those who are “wild” and live from hunt-
ing. Yet Knox, an early traveler, writing in 1681, establishes the fact
that even the “wild” Vedda have been in constant contact with the
Sinhalese, who constitute the majority of the island’s population. Ac-
cording to this early authority, the hunting groups regularly sold
smoked venison to their sedentary neighbors, from whom in return
they received iron arrowheads. In times of crises, the kings of Ceylon
employed both “wild” and “tame” Vedda as archers in their armies
and they “fought in the service of the king against the Dutch”
(quoted in SELIGMAN 1911:7). Seligman further remarks that by 1911
there were very few Vedda living in the forests and that their territory
had been encroached upon by the Sinhalese “who are inveterate poach-

359

¢


===== PAGE 185 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ers” (ibid.:35). Against this unpromising background Seligman intro-
duces undeniably convincing evidence that the Vedda with whom he
had come in contact not only had band territories but that they had
in addition family and individual ownership of smaller tracts. As Lowie
says, “Dr. Seligman was able to map the territories of distinct Hene-
bedda [i.e., Henebedda band] families.” And among the Sitala Wan-
niya band, as Lowie once again quotes from Seligman, “A man would
not hunt even on his brother’s land without permission” (SELIGMAN
1911:111). Indeed, for the Sitala Wanniya, Seligman not only provides
a map of individual territories but cites five specific transfers of land
ownership that had occurred in the memory of his informants. But
who are the Henebedda and the Sitala Wanniya? Are they the “wild”
Vedda or the “tame” ones? Are they hunters and gatherers or village
farmers?

The Henebedda
These people make chenas [i.e., practice slash-and-burn agricul-
ture] on which they live temporarily in bark-covered huts . . .
several of them possess guns . . . and some of them rear cattle
for the Sinhalese villagers [SELIGMAN 1911:36].

The Sitala Wanniya

After visiting so many decaying or degenerate communities a re-
freshing state of affairs was found at Sitala Wanniya. Here there
were at least four families who were living the life their fore-
fathers had lived. . . .They still found game, honey and yams in
quantities sufficient not only to support life, but to leave a
surplus to barter with the Moormen on their annual visit, or to
take into the nearest Sinhalese village to exchange for iron, cloth,
pots, and occasional rice and coconuts [ibid.:44].

It is clear that Lowie had no right to include the Henebedda in a
discussion of tenure among hunters and gatherers. As for the Sitala
Wanniya, although there is some ambiguity concerning their status as
farmers, there is none concerning their close relations with nearby
village communities. Every one of the specific private transfers cited
by Seligman involved honey spots, a condition which would at once
render intelligible the individualized tenure. No one had ever sug-
gested that a group which can earn its livelihood by trading or selling
honey would derive an adaptive advantage from maintaining commu-
nal hunting grounds. The false pretense under which this group
also appears in Lowic’s argument is made even more painful if one
inspects the chart which Seligman presents to sum up the extent to

360

. il

13. Lowie

which the Vedda bands had surrendered a purely hunting and gather-
ing mode of life. Of the nine nonvillage bands listed, the Sitala
Wanniya is the only one said to have no agriculture. However, in the
adjacent “remarks,” we learn that “The older men of this community
had never made chena.” This carries with it the unavoidable con-
clusion that at the time of Seligman’s visit, the young men at least
were making gardens (ibid.:58)!

CHALLENGE ACCEPTED: QUEENSLAND

For the Queensland-Torres Straits family hunting territories,
Lowie relied on the report of Walter E. Roth, the Australian govern-
ment’s “Chief Protector of Aboriginals” in Queensland. Exactly
twenty-seven lines of this report are devoted to the matter at hand.
The Cape Bedford, Bloomfield River, and Cairns hinterland groups are
said to have the usual band-owned territories. In addition and “inde-
pendently” of this larger area, there are smaller tracts of named por-
tions of the country controlled by families rather than by the band as a
whole. The economic significance of these tracts, however, is dis-
cussed neither by Lowie nor Roth. We are not told what portion of a
family’s product comes from the communal territory and what portion
from the family’s own tract. Whatever may be the answer to that
question, however, it is clear that trespass on the family property by
fellow band members does not result in very serious consequences.
Indeed, among the Bloomfield River groups, trespass produces “a
slanging match, with both parties indulging in epithets” (rorm
1905:8). But Roth assures us that such intraband trespass is sel-
dom committed because “when one family experiences a super-
abundance of food of any description, its friends and neighbors are
generally invited to come and partake of it” (ibid.). Roth offers no
specific instances of such trespass, and we are left unenlightened
concerning the reallife (etic) significance of the jural ideals that he
identifies. It is certain that if we wish to speak of these family lands
as being “owned,” it must be in a sense that is totally different from
tenure, which is associated with politically enforced laws of trespass.
What is critical for us to know beyond this point is whether family
groups within the band generally refuse or generally grant requests by
their fellow band members to utilize each other’s family territories
(in the event that such territories do indeed contain significant stra-
tegic resources). Roth’s account thus fails to provide a safe basis for
any kind of ethnographic conclusion. Least of all does it- provide the

361

|
i


===== PAGE 186 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

basis for destroying a generalization which is supported by hundreds
of independent observers and dozens of monographs.

Lowie’s notion of the quintessence of scientific insight thus shrinks
into its own “farrago of dubious hypotheses.”

LOWIE'S IDEOLOGICAL BIAS

We have seen that in proposing limited parallelisms and in
supporting the possibility of identifying repetitive causal sequences,
Lowie contended that the more conservative Boasian outlook was it-
self an “illustration of cultural inertia.” In response to Lesliec White’s
attacks against the supposed antievolutionism of the Boasians, Lowie
thus could and repeatedly did demolish the point of view that he and
his colleagues were the victims of reactionary antievolutionistic cur-
rents allegedly endemic to the intellectual milieu in which they oper-
ated. But there is another charge to be brought against the Boasians,
the charge of entrenched dogmatic antimaterialism. As Buettner-
Janusch (1957:322) has put it, we must recognize that “a powerful
ideology against materialism and naturalism” had found spokesmen in
the new anthropology. Lowie was quick to take up this challenge in his
characteristically peppery idiom by recounting the story of how he
helped to vindicate Morgan concerning the existence of clans among
the Crow:

In 1906 I found no such tribal subdivisions among the Lemni
Shoshone; my predecessors and successors had the same experi-
ence among the Ute and Paiute. On the Plains, investigators dis-
covered no clans among the Arapaho, Kiowa, and Comanche,
whence sprang the dogma that Morgan had mistakenly credited
the institution to the Crow, Hidatsa, and Mandan. In 1907, as a
callow novice, I could not help stumbling upon the Crow clan
system and so reported. Was I the unwitting tool of reactionary
ideologies in 1906 and the unwitting spokesman of enlightenment
in 1907? Obviously the idea is preposterous: it was field work,
and nothing but field work that corrected Morgan regarding
Shoshoneans and vindicated him regarding the Crow (also the
Hidatsa and Mandan [1957:884; italics added].

But Lowie missed the point. To “stumble” upon an ethnographic
fact is one thing; to deliberately set out to look for it is another.
Leacock and Knight did not stumble upon the reinterpretation of
Algonkian land tenure. They were able to correct Speck because there
existed an established body of scientific theory which Speck’s descrip-
tions seemed to falsify, thereby demanding that every aspect of his

362

13. Lowie

evidence be gone over with the greatest possible skepticism. In order
for Lowie to establish his method as free from the ideological biases of
his milieu, he must show that his skepticism is not evenly dispersed,
but that it is concentrated precisely upon those critical empirical tests
upon whose outcome whole universes of theory were being dashed to
smithereens. This Lowie failed to do, not in relation to evolutionism,
not in relation to Morgan’s and Tylor’s theories, for both of whom he
had the greatest of respect, but rather in relation to cultural material-
ism and the theoretical prospectus which like it or not had at the
beginning of the century been furthest advanced by Marx and Engels.

Over a span of more than thirty years, Lowie published numerous
articles and books in which the same tenuous ethnographic material
was brought forth repeatedly to show how a bowdlerized version of
economic determinism could be destroyed by the advent of fieldwork
and “higher standards of proof.” The most important theme running
through this span is that the relationship between human populations
and their natural habitats is mediated by ideologies and cultural tradi-
tions which lead to such wasteful, quixotic, irrational, and useless
sorts of relationships as permanently to baffle the creation of general-
ized “economic” theories of culture history.

The presence of these numerous, powerful, inscrutible, and ca-
pricious features of cultures did not disturb Lowie’s empiricist pos-
ture. He seemed willing to abandon the attempt to achieve a
nomothetic understanding of an indefinitely large number of appar-
ently inscrutable patterns because, following Mach, he believed that
“there are phenomena which we are obliged to accept as realities
without the possibility of further analysis” (LOWIE 1929:96). But it is
one thing to accept ignorance in preference to metaphysical forces and
essences, and another to vevel in it and propound it as a faith. If this
sounds uncharitable, how else explain Lowie’s dogmatic insistence
that an economic explanation could not be found for certain other-
wise never-to-be-explained phenomena? As, for example, “among the
Toda the cause of female infanticide is obscure, but we know posi-
tively that it bears no relation to economic life” (LOWIE 1920:48).

ETHNOGRAPHIC BASIS OF I.OWIE’S

CRITIQUE OF ECONOMIC DETERMINISM
Let us look a little more closely at the ethnographic basis

for Lowie’s rejection of economic explanations. Three great domains

of allegedly inscrutable and capricious phenomena provided Lowie
with the bulk of his arguments. First, he was convinced that in the

363



===== PAGE 187 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

elaboration of primitive hierarchical systems, the drive for “prestige”
was strong enough to efface the adaptive and utilitarian aspects of
ranking and stratification. Second, primitive warfare, he believed, for
the most part was also a kind of prestige-motivated sport. Third, he
pointed over and over again to the way in which religious or other
ideological factors prevented many cultures from managing their pro-
ductive resources in conformity with objective utilitarian standards.
Space does not permit the exposure of Lowie’s ethnographic blunders
in the detail which is merited. For his mistaken notions concerning
the unrelatedness of specific techno-environmental conditions and
specific hierarchical structures, he was greatly indebted to Boas’ North-
west Coast ethnography, some of whose errors have already been
discussed. With our heightened understanding of redistributive eco-
nomic forms, not only the Northwest Coast but many other hierar-
chical systems, especially in Oceania, which appeared inscrutable to
Lowie, now appear eminently intelligible (cf. saHLINS 1958; OLIVER
1955). As we have seen above (p. 356), Lowie claimed in Primitive
Society that the motive for the potlatch was far removed from econom-
ics. Insofar as this opinion confuses individual psychological motiva-
tion with the supra-individual nature of cultural adaptations it is
irrelevant; insofar as it blocks research into the material conditions
responsible for the aboriginal potlatch patterns and their peculiar in-
tensification under acculturative pressures, it is obscurantist and has
been condemned to oblivion.

AN EMIC VIEW OF WARFARE

For the interpretation of warfare, Lowie was not the victim
of other people’s ethnographic biases. He had himself to blame,
largely as a result of the peculiar methods of research which he was
obliged to maintain in his study of the Crow. In Primitive Society,
Lowie also claimed that

the Plains Indian fought not for territorial aggrandizement nor for
the victor’s spoils, but above all because fighting was a game
worth while because of the social recognition it brought when
played according to the rules. True, the stealing of horses was one
of the principal factors in warfare. But why did a Crow risk his
neck to cut loose a picketed horse in the midst of the hostile camp
when he could easily have driven off a whole herd from the out-
skirts? And what was the point in granting distinction not to the
warrior who had killed or wounded the foeman but to him who,
however lightly, touched his body [1920:356]?

364

B ol

13. Lowie

Aside from the confusion between an individual’s motivation in car-
rying out culturally prescribed patterns of action and the nomothetic
conditions responsible for the presence of those patterns, we must
here consider another and more cutting defect. Lowie was the world’s
greatest authority on Crow warfare, religion, and social organization.
But he appears not to have ever attempted a serious study of Crow
economy. Turning to his monograph on the Crow, we search in vain
for a chapter in which there is a discussion of the possible links be-
tween the vainglory of counting coup and the material conditions of
a hunting, marauding, stealing, horse-adapted way of life. Indeed,
in the book’s six-page double-columned index, the entry “economics”
does not appear! In the chapter on warfare, there is scarcely a para-
graph dealing with the relationship of the Crow’s constant preoccupa-
tion with bravery, horsemanship, and martial skills and the means by
which the Crow earned their livelihood, protected themselves from
the encroachment of the whites and other Plains Indians, and made
the best of what with the advent of the horse, rifle, and plow was
probably one of the world’s most rapidly evolving ecosystems.

It was of course very convenient for Lowie who had to learn about
Crow warfare and Crow economics exclusively through the memories
of aged informants to adopt the principle that his actors’ view of
things was the most important ethnographic product. Indeed, it is
not for me to detract from the vitality and interest of the mono-
graph in question. But when such material is harnessed to the task
of baffling our understanding, we shirk our responsibility if we do not
attempt to expose its limitations.

Thus, like all the Boasians, Lowie suffered from a failure to separate
emic from ctic data. He believed that in the final analysis, the most
important kind of data for identifying cross-cultural similarities are
the psychological matrix in which etic events unfold:

The field worker’s business is always and everywhere to under-
stand the true inwardness of the beliefs and practices of the
people he studies. He is not content to record that infants are
suffocated, aged parents abandoned, or enemies eaten. Unless he
can also recover the accompanying sentiments, he has failed in his
task [LOwIE 1963:534].

This is a defensible option as long as it is not permitted to deteriorate
into a rationalization for the omission of the etic context. Yet this is
what seems to have happened in Lowie’s treatment of the economics
of Plains warfare. How else explain the absence of any hard data
concerning the role warfare played in spacing out the Plains’ popula-
tion, maintenance of territory, provision of subsistence, distribution

365



===== PAGE 188 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of food and nonfood energy rations, regulation of population growth,
articulation with the natural biota, and dozens of other crucial “eco-
nomic questions.” And yet we find him asserting with great convic-
tion:

It is possible to turn the tables on economic determinism and to
show how largely economic life is affected by considerations that
although irrelevant from our point of view, are of the utmost im-
portance to the people concerned [LowIE 1938:320].

This is surely an attitude about which we may from our own experi-
ence with warfare be profoundly skeptical. There is no more self-evi-
dent truth than that the politicians who have been the most eager
fomentors of our own wars are usually least capable of explaining
why they have done so.

In recent years, dramatic contradictions of Lowie’s conclusions con-
cerning the “motivations” of primitive warfare have been achieved
by ethnographers who had adopted a consistent etic approach. Andrew
P. Vayda for example has suggested that there are commonalities in
the ecosystems underlying the warfare patterns of the Maori, Iban,
Mundurucu, Tiv, and other swidden agriculturalists (vaypa 1956,
1960, 1961a, 1961b, 1961c). Roy Rappaport (1966) has shown how
an apparently chaotic series of patterns involving warfare, sweet po-
tatoes, pigs, human populations, and magical plants among the
Maring of New Guinea fit together to form an ecologically adaptive
syndrome. This brilliant tour de force is distinguished by its quanti-
tative richness and its awareness of the demographic, nutritional,
caloric, edaphic, medical, and climatological parameters, all of which
must be considered before judgments concerning the anti-economic
functions of particular institutions can safely be rendered.

MISMANAGEMENT OF RESOURCES

This brings us to the third of Lowie’s pet areas of chaos: the
alleged mismanagement of resources as a result of historical quirks
and ideological idiosyncracies. One thread of this argument is especially
long and influential. Tt is the notion that capricious food taboos and
similar ideological quirks frequently prevent the utilization or effective
exploitation of potentially significant food sources, especially of certain
animal foods. Thus, in Culture and Ethnology Lowie attaches con-
siderable significance to the fact that “The Chinaman will not milk
his cattle; while the Zulu’s diet consists largely of milk” (1966:82;

orig. 1917).
366

Dol

'y

13. Lowie

Most startling of all perhaps is the different attitude assumed in
different countries towards cattle. To us nothing secems more
obvious than that cattle should be kept both for meat and dairy
products. This, however, is by no means a universal practice. The
Zulu and other Bantu tribes of South Africa use milk extensively
but hardly ever slaughter their animals except on festive occa-
sions. On the other hand, we have the even more astonishing fact
that Eastern Asiatics, such as the Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, and
Indo-Chinese, have an inveterate aversion to the use of milk

[ibid.:57].

In 1938, in his article on subsistence in the textbook edited by Boas,
Lowie elaborated on this theme in the context of a direct attack on
economic determinism. Wrote Lowie, “it should be once more empha-
sized that even where practical considerations play a dominant role,
capricious irrationality checks the full and rationalistic exploitation
of domestic beasts” (1938:306). As examples, Lowie mentions our
failure to milk mares, the Egyptian taboos against pork, the “Negro
stockbreeders” lack of cheese, the way the Bantu “spurn” beef, and
the Chinese failure to “have conceived the idea of milking their
cows” (ibid.:306~7). Among Lowie’s manuscripts there was found a
paper, assumed by Cora DuBois to have been written in 1939 or 1940,
which has been published under the title, “Economic Factors and
Culture.” Once again the same refrain:

One main objection to the economic interpretations of culture
that have hitherto been offered is that they fail to come to grips
with those problems that obtrude themselves spontaneously on
any unprejudiced observer of the data. The theorists of this school
ignore even so obvious a fact as the irrational ingredients of
economic activity, a fact so convincingly established by the late
Eduard Hahn and so overwhelmingly corroborated by later in-
quiry. To take a single example, East Africans are enthusiastic
stock-breeders; but is their animal husbandry to be gauged by our
standards? Far from it. A Shilluk keeps hundreds of cattle, yet
slaughters them so rarely that he is obliged to maintain his hunt-
ing techniques for an adequate supply of meat. His small cows
yield but little milk, his oxen normally serve no purpose at all.
But these Negroes, who have failed to perfect their dairying in-
dustry and who eschew a beef diet, expend enormous effort on
massaging the humps of their beasts and twisting their horns into
grotesque shapes [LOWIE 1960:242].

Again in 1942 he drew attention to the mismanagement of pigs.

367

i
i



===== PAGE 189 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Throughout Melanesia the pig greatly affects social prestige with-
out noticeably adding to mass subsistence. Such examples deter
us from over-emphasizing rationalistic considerations in recon-
structing an undocumented past [LOWIE 1942:541].

CHINESE AVERSION TO MILK

Fach of these examples represents an abuse of the comparative
method, wrenching out of functional context, comparison of non-
comparables, obedience to metaphysical entities, and a serious de-
parture from empirical standards of proof. Consider the Chinese
“aversion” to milk as opposed to our own lactic complex. To regard
this contrast as capricious is to ignore the basic differences in the food
production systems of the two societies. China, with its great de-
pendence upon intensive irrigated rice production, traditionally main-
tained only as many bovines and buffalos as were needed for draft and
draft-breeding requirements. Animal protein and fat were supplied by
pigs, more efficient scavengers than cattle. Morton Fried (personal
communication) offers a simple explanation for why the Chinese in the
village he studied in 1949 would not milk their cows: there weren’t
any worth milking. The breeds which develop from centuries of
adaptive response to the prime requirements of rice agriculture are
not going to be Holsteins and Jerseys. Furthermore, to convert a
portion of irrigated farmland to dairy pasture under pre-industrial
conditions would lower rather than raise the carrying capacity of the
ecosystem. Under these circumstances, failure to develop a dairy
industry is scarcely an example of a flagrant mismanagement of re-
sources. The density of the Chinese population should have in itself
warned Lowie of any such simplistic conclusion. Indeed, it could well
be argued that the national “aversion” to cow’s milk among the
Chinese points to a “rational” adjustment between food tastes and
China’s basic mode of food production.

THE MYTH OF THE SILLY BANTU

Lowie’s case against the Fastern and Southern Bantu fares
even worse. The myth of the silly African dairymen had become
enshrined by Melville Herskovits as the principle diagnostic of the
East African culture area and as such was disseminated among hun-
dreds of Africanists, administrators, and connoisseurs of African
exotica. Here the question has been amply explored by Harold
Schneider (1957). Among the Pakot, as among the other groups

368

v

13. Lowie

"

mentioned by Lowie, there is a great love of cattle and much care is
lavished upon them. And why not? The animals represent a walking
bank account, the living embodiment of surplus production, the best
defense against famine, and the next best thing to a woman, if one
intends to lead the local dolce vita. As for taboos against slaughter,
once again the emics of the matter led Lowie to disaster. In Fast
Africa, cattle are killed and they are eaten in relation to ceremonial
occasions. As Lowie says, “they do not slaughter except on festive
occasions.” But how often do these occasions occur? The answer
according to Schneider is that they occur often enough to lead to a
constant culling of the herds at a level suited to the carrying capacity
of the native ranges. In this connection, care must be taken to eval-
uate the widespread belief in overstocking and overgrazing among
modern Bantu populations. It must be remembered that popula-
tion increase and the conversion of aboriginal ranges to Furopean-
dominated cash-crop agriculture has drastically altered the entire eco-
system.

SACRED COWS, PIGS, AND HORSES

The rebuttal of Lowie’s cattle mismanagement argument
should also include an analysis of the role of cattle in India. The case
is too complex for a bricf treatment. Suffice it to say that the relation-
ship between Indian cattle and human populations is demonstrably
symbiotic. Cattle and people derive their calorie ration from separate
spheres of the eccosystem; cattle are India’s prime scavengers; their
dung is essential for fuel and fertilizer; their traction contribution
is indispensable under the prevailing techno-environmental conditions
of agriculturc. Dairying is carried out to maximum limits compatible
with traction and good planting requirements, while Hindu taboos
against slaughter and consumption of beef do not prevent culling of
herds nor consumption of beef by low castes and Moslems. There is
no evidence that these taboos under present-day techno-environ-
mental conditions adversely affect the welfare of the rural populations.
Indeed, insofar as there is a severe shortage of cattle in India, such
beliefs may be regarded as an adaption by which the exploitation of
cattle, especially during famine, is kept within safe limits (cf. HARRIS
1966a).

Similar kinds of analysis have been proposed for the role of Mela-
nesian and New Guinea pigs, another of Lowie’s examples (VAYDA,
LEEDS, and sMITH 1961). Emic, short-run, and impressionistic data
have produced many cases of sensational mismanagement of pig-

369

§
i


===== PAGE 190 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

raising. Few ethnographers have hitherto concerned themsclves to
assess the nutritional importance of relatively small amounts of animal
fat and protein in diets which consist of root crops (cf. RAPPAPORT
1966). Similarly, judgments concerning the economic nature of pigs
and other animal raising practices have seldom properly weighed
long against short-run needs, especially as these may relate to Liebig’s
law of the minimum; i.e. that adaptations are made not to average,
but to extreme, conditions.

Lowie’s mention of the failure to milk mares pertains to another
set of misunderstood cases in which belong the reluctance to ecat
insects, dogs, and snails. When alternative sources of nutritional values
are available, cultural ecological theory predicts that in the long run,
the most efficient will be utilized. It does not predict that all of the
techno-environmental possibilities will be realized to an equal de-
gree. Why should Western European agriculturalists milk mares? To
make any substantial difference in the average calorie, protein, and
calcium rations, mares would have to replace cows. Under the techno-
environmental conditions which gave rise to the European mixed
farming tradition, that would indeed have been grist for Lowie’s
chaos mill.

In these and the remaining cases that Lowie brings forth (e.g., the
Moslem resistance to pork), the burden of proof is quite different
from what Lowie said it was. We have every good logico-empirical
reason to suppose that most human populations reach an adaptive
equilibrium within their ecosystem. If a particular culturally induced
practice appears to contravene that generalization, it is unequivocally
the burden of those who present such cases to make certain that they
have carefully examined the allegedly capricious traits in a reasonably
real-life functional context. Failure to do this is in essence what the
Boasians had charged was the chief defect of their evolutionist prede-
cessors. In post-Boasian ethnography, standards of a reasonably com-
plete reallife functional context, however, were completely overridden
by a preference for emic data, even when, as seldom happened, full
scale studies of techno-environmental systems were attempted.

CONCLUSION

I do not wish to create the impression that Lowie’s view of
economic determinism exhibits no signs of development throughout
his career. On the contrary, there are clear indications of a later
tendency to give more and more weight to economic factors. In his
last major book-length publication, Social Organization, Lowie de-
clares in the preface,

370

13. Lowie

I have pointed out the potency of economic forces, not in ab-
stract, which is hardly necessary nowadays, but by suggesting that
certain specific changes in economic life have led to specific modi-
fications in the social life, even affecting sentimental attitudes
[1948a:v].

Of course, such daring admissions are carefully hedged by assurances
that, come what may, he will never admit any affinity to the devilish
proposals made by Marx and Engels. Instead, one should turn to less
influential but saner figures, such as Henri Sée:

As the eminent I'rench scholar Henri Sée has remarked, it is
difficult “to unravel the tangle of causes and effects” in history;
but “in the infinite sea of historical events economic determinism
has helped to furnish us with a guiding thread which keeps us
from being lost” [ibid.:24].

One must also take note of Lowie’s rather pathetic citation of
Henry Maine as a guarantor of orthodoxy for economic interpretations:
“Any of the material alterations in aboriginal life may, as Maine
recognized decades ago, produce far-reaching changes in ideology”
(LowIE 1942:541). We must conclude, however, that Lowie never
rose above the restraints of his Boasian heritage to a clear under-
standing of the cultural-materialist option. He never fully recovered
from the historically intelligible but logico-empirically indefensible
prejudice that the burden of proof rested upon those who offered
“economic” explanations. Immediately after insisting upon the im-
portance of the influence of Potosi silver mining upon Andean
culture patterns, of woolen industries upon the urbanization of
Er)g]and, of the introduction of the horse upon the Bannock, and of
reindeer among the Chuckchee he lapses back into the glorification
of what, for all we know, are some more old wives' tales. Thus, the
South American aborigines gain their livelihood in basically similar
ways—yet their matrimonial arrangements are far from uniform.
Chuckchee old men are respected, Lapp old men are pitiable, yet
both ;apps and Chuckchee depend upon reindeers. “The difference
must lie in the prior norms of Lapps and Chuckchee,” declares Lowie,
and those norms thus codetermine the observed treatment of old
people” (1948a:36). The “guiding thread” seems to cut Lowie’s
hands; he remains all too eager to chase the first “will-o™-the-wisp.”
And why? Surely not because it can safely be said that the matrilineal
as opposed to the patrilineal tropical forest groups in Brazil really
have no important techno-environmental differences; nor because
the Lapps and Chuckchee are identical in their basic material com-
plexes. And for what? To show that culture really is after all in-

371



===== PAGE 191 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

scrutable? No doubt that is so in the ultimate balancing of human

intelligence against the infinity of unknowns in nature. But to be

faithful to Mach and the empiricist vision is to postpone such ad-

missions to an indefinite future. What Mach had not foreseen, nor

Lowie grasped, is that metaphysical residues maintain themselves in

both positive and negative guise. A man is known not only by what

he declares true and false, but also by what he fails to declare either

true or false. Lowie committed few errors of a positive sort; the '
errors he exposed are legion; but there were many falsehoods he

tolerated for no better reason than that they were fashionable.

Diffusionism 14

S
B3

As the idiographic trend engulfed European and American scholar-
ship, it brought into prominence within anthropology explanatory
sch‘cmes founded on the nonprinciple of “diffusion.” The use to
which this concept was put in the Boasian critique of nineteenth-
century evolutionism and the falseness of the dichotomies between
1n4€pcxldent invention and diffusion and parallel and convergent evo-
lution has already been discussed (see Chap. 6). It remains for us to
take brief note of the way in which diffusion was actually employed
as an explanatory principle characteristic of the idiographic pcrifodA i
. In the United States diffusionist thinking culminated in the elabora- !
tion of the concept of culture areas, relatively small geographical
units based on the contiguous distribution of cultural elements. In
Europe, the same trend gave rise to the notion of Kulturkreise, or
Culture-Circles, large complexes of traits which had lost their for;ner
geographical unity and were now dispersed throughout the world.

372 373



===== PAGE 192 =====

I

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ORIGIN OF THE CULTURE-AREA
CONCEPT

The culture-area concept had its origin in the practical exi-
gencies of American ethnographic research, as a heuristic device for
mapping and classifying the tribal groups of North and South Amer-
ica. The development of ethnographic collections at the American
Museum of Natural History and the Chicago Field Museum in par-
ticular, coinciding with the trend against evolutionary typologies,
fostered the development of geographical categories as display units
implicit in the names of sections or halls. In reviewing the history of
the concept, Kroeber (1931:250) gave passing credit to Otis T. Ma-
son, referring to a 1go7 article in the Handbook of the American
Indian North of Mexico, in which Mason listed twelve “ethnic en-
vironments.” Kroeber was apparently unaware that Mason had ac-
tually employed the term “culture area” in an 1895 article in the
Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, entitled “Influence of
Environment upon Human Industries or Arts.” In this article, Mason
(18952:646) identified cighteen “American Indian environments or
culture areas: Arctic, Athabascan, Algonkian, Iroquoian, Muskhogean,
Plains of the Great West, North Pacific Coast, Columbia Drainage, In-
terior Basin, California-Oregon, Pueblo, Middle American, Andean,
Andean Atlantic Slope, Fastern Brazilian, Central Brazilian, Argentine-
Patagonian, Fuegian. In 1899, Mason produced a modified list which
went as follows: Arctic, Canadian, Louisiana or Gulf, Plains, Southeast
Alaska, Columbian, Interior Basin, California, Pueblo, Middle Ameri-
can, Antillean, Cordilleran, Upper Amazon, Eastern Brazil, Matto
Grosso, Argentine-Patagonian, Feugian. Mason’s areas were subse-
quently refined by G. Holmes (1914) and made the basis for a land-
mark treatment of American Indian ethnology by Clark Wissler (1917)
and by Kroeber himself in his Cultural and Natural Areas (1939). De-
spite Mason’s clear priority, there is no need to dispute Kroeber's
(1931:250) observation that the culture-area concept was “a commun-
ity product of nearly the whole school of American anthropologists.”
This follows from the extreme simplicity of the concept. Nothing is
more obvious than the prospective utility of an ethnographic map
which groups tribal entities in relationship to some geographically
delineated aspect of the environment. It is quite another matter,
however, to suppose that this geographical grouping in and of itself
contributes to an understanding of cultural differences and similarities.

374

14. Diffusionism

WEAKNESS OF THE CULTURE-AREA
CONCEPT

As an explanatory device, the culture area was impaled at the
outset on the horns of a dilemma: if too much emphasis is given to
t]lE natural geographical substratum, the mapper falls victim to a
naive f91n1 of geographical determinism; if simple contiguity is
emp?]gmzed, the “cause” of each assemblage appears to be wholly
capricious and the question of boundaries becomes insuperable. The
first “horn” hurts because similar natural environments in diéerent
parts of the world are obviously inhabited by peoples with widel
different cultures. For example, the tropical rain forests of the Ne\z
World were inhabited at different times or in different regions b
temple-building  agriculturalists; village horticulturalists; and semi}i
nomadic hunters, fishers, and collectors. The prime fact(;r which dis-
turbs the explanatory usefulness of a straightforward arrangement of
cultures })y natural environmental areas is that it is the techno-environ-
rnelntal interaction which is decisive, not merely the environment
This aspect of the dilemma is well illustrated in Wissler's (191 )
attempt to base his culture areas on “food areas,” as follows: 77

Food Areas Culture Areas

Caribou Eskimo, Mackenzie (and north part of
Eastern Woodland)

lS3ison Plains

almon Ni aci 2

Wild Seed C:lritflr:r:ilcmc oty Platean

Eastern Maize Southeast, Eastern Woodland
(except north nonagricultural

) portion)

Intensive Agriculture Southwest, Nahua-Mexico, Chibcha
Inca-Peru ’

Manioc Amazon, Antilles

Guanaco Guanaco

Not.c that three of these “food” areas—Eastern Maize, Intensive
Agriculture, and Manioc—refer to domesticated species, WilﬂC all the
Iefst refer to natural resources. There arises from this pzirtial inclusion
;)hetglcmteclmologlcal aspect of the. techno-environmental equation
e fu her anomaly that t]u? area singled out as “Intensive Agricul-
ure” is divided into three discontinuous sub areas, each of which is
several thousand miles away from the others. The existence of two or

375



===== PAGE 193 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

three widely separated areas of native high civilization in the Americas
thus raises at once the question of to what extent mere propin-
quity may be advanced as an explanation of resemblance.

CENTERS, CLIMAXES, AND THE LAW
OF DIFFUSION

Despite these evident anomalies, the American schools con-
tinued throughout the twenties and thirties to lavish a great deal of
effort on the attempt to make the culture-area concept shoulder the
burden for explaining cultural differences and similarities. Wissler
sought to overcome some of the difficulties by attributing the charac-
teristic features of each area to a “culture center” from which the
assemblage of traits had diffused outward. From the beginning, the
concept of this “center” exhibited the full-scale effects of the basic
dilemma: how to combine the environmental conditions with the
apparently capricious freedom of culture. Hence, Wissler's vague
references to “ethnic factors and historic accident”:

The origin of a culture center seems due to ethnic factors more
than to geographical ones. The location of these centers is largely
a matter of historic accident, but once located and the adjust-
ments made, the stability of the environment doubtless tends to
hold each particular type of culture to its initial locality, even in
the face of many changes in blood and language [1926:372].

FElaborating further on the notion of “culture center,” Wissler (ibid.:
183) set forth a “law of diffusion,” to wit, “that anthropological traits
tend to diffuse in all directions from their centers of origin.” This
law constitutes the basis of the “agearea principle,” which is a
method for inferring the relative age of culture traits from their
geographical distribution: the most widely distributed traits around
2 center would be the oldest, if the direction of diffusion were
always from the center outwards. Needless to say, the “law of diffu-
sion” is a highly unreliable guide to actual historical cvents and can
be applied only with the greatest caution. Were we to regard it un-
skeptically, we should soon find ourselves arguing that Coca-Cola
must have been bottled long before the invention of the coup de
poing.

Much to Kroeber's credit, an attempt was initiated during the
twenties to define culture areas in terms of comprehensive lists of
items. These lists were used to establish coefficients of similarity.
The logical extreme of this approach was reached with the Univer-
sity of California clement list surveys which compared Indian groups

376

14. Diffusionism

west of the Rockies on the basis of some 3,000 to 6,000 items (KROEBER
and DRIVER 1932). Extension of this method to other areas has been
blocked, however, by the difficulties encountered in defining unit
_clcmcnts. Thus, even 6,000 traits might be inadequate for measur-
ing overall similarity if the traits utilized were not svstematic;lll

identified on the same level of detail. (Polygyny mig];t count fo};
one trait, while the bow and arrow might count for four or five.)
After the rather inconclusive experience with massive trait lists Kro.e—
ber turned increasingly to impressionistic interpretations of th:? “cul-
ture center,” or as he called it, the “culture climax,” with ultimate
consequences which have been previously discussed.

STEWARD'S CRITIQUE

Although culture-area classifications may be regarded as
essential at the initial fact-gathering and fact-orderiﬁg levels of ethnog-
raphy, the concept has been as much of a deterrent to the growth of
nf)mothetic theory as it has been an asset. Steward (1955:82) has
d1§cussed the consequences of a reliance upon culture-area typologies
w¥th respect to three problems: (1) center and boundary change
with passage of time;  (2) culture within the area may c’hangc S0
thatAlt resembles cultures in different areas at different times; (3)
portions of the area may be regarded as containing radically diéferent
cultU{cs despite sharing of many features. All of these problems are
wgll illustrated in the case of Kroeber's Greater Southwest Area
Fll’S‘t, archaeological studies of the Southwest do not confirm the'
notion of a single stable center, nor a small number of climaxes. Sec-
ond, there are known to be at least two principal developmental
sequences: one, the Hohokam sequence, running from the hunting
and gathering Cochise through the agricultural but pre-historic Ho-
hokam; the other, the Anasazi sequence, connecting pre-ceramic Bas-
kgt Maker peoples with the modern Pueblos. Third, the area despite
Wldespread similarities in culture “content,” was inhabited in7 historic
times by peoples whose social organization was as widely contrastive

as that of the sedentary Pueblos, tl N:
oot jolig y , the pastoral Navaho, and the ma-

STERILITY OF THE CONCEPT OF
DIFFUSION

These objections to the culture-area
bj 2 concept expose the
fur:ida{ne_nta_l.stenhty of the attempt to explain cultural differences
and similarities by appealing to the nonprinciple of diffusion. Al-

377

i



===== PAGE 194 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

though it is true, as Driver (1966) has shown, that geographical-
historical propinquity is often a better predictor of traits than
psychofunctional causality, under no circumstances can geographical-
historical propinquity constitute a valid explanation of cultural differ-
ences and similarities. First of all, diffusion is admittedly incapable of
accounting for the origin of a given trait, except by “passing the buck”
back through an infinite regression: A «— B «— C «—...7
As soon as we admit, as the archaeology of the New World now
compels, that independent invention has occurred on a massive
scale, diffusion is by definition not only superfluous, but the very
incarnation of antiscience. But even if we obstinately cling to the
assumption that independent invention is a rarity, nothing is more
obvious than the fact that there is no simple relationship between
distance and cultural type. Indeed, all diffusionists would agree that
there is differential receptivity to cultural influences independent of
distance. If this is so, then we must inevitably find ourselves involved
in the consideration of all the factors of environment, technology,
economy, social organization, and ideology which concern those who
seek to explain sociocultural differences and similarities in terms of
nomothetic principles. Such principles deal with the general classes of
conditions under which classes of institutions become more probable.
True enough, the specific form in which these institutions are mani-
fested is usually related to whether they are introduced as a result of
invention or diffusion. Diffused innovations tend to show greater
cross-cultural resemblances in finer detail than independently invented
innovations. The focus of nomothetic explanations is not, however,
on the fine detail, but on the general structural and functional cate-
gory of which a particular institution or trait is an example. A
diffused innovation, no less than an independently invented one, must
withstand the selective pressures of the social system if it is to be-
come a part of the cultural repertory. In this larger sense, the adoption
of diffused and independently invented innovations must be viewed
as part of a single process. The sterility of the purely historical ap-
proach resides ultimately in the fact that nomothetic principles are
adequate only to the extent that they can explain specific instances of
independent invention and of diffusion. Diffusion, however, cannot,
by definition, explain independent invention.

If it could be proved, however, that independent invention was
indeed an insignificant and rare event and that all of the important
inventions in world history had been discovered once and only once,
then the need for nomothetic explanations could be challenged in a
way that was inadmissible to the Boasians. Given the premium re-

378

. ol

14. Diffusionism

wards on disproving the nomothetic position, it is not altogether
remarkable that precisely this interpretation was fostered and not
once but twice—almost simultaneously—in Germany and England.

EXTREME DIFFUSIONISM

The German diffusionists, dominated by members of the
Catholic clergy, were responsible for one last grandiose attempt to
reconcile anthropological prehistory and cultural evolution with the
Book of Genesis. The English school, smaller and less influential,
concerned itself with proving that almost all the sociocultural traits
of interest to anthropologists had been invented once and only once
in Egypt, from whence they had spread to the rest of the world. Both
of these movements were palpably bankrupt by mid-century; they
require our attention today only as evidence of the international
extent of the tide that was running against nomothetic principles.
Toward one of the schools—the British “diffusionists”—the Boasians
were openly contemptuous. Toward the adherents of the other—the
Vienna-based Kulturkreis, or “Culture-Circle,” approach—the Boas-
ians were critical but not unsympathetic. It can be shown, however,
that the English and Germans matched each other very neatly in the
extent to which they sought to return the science of history to the
study of accidents and miracles.

Both schools have been conventionally categorized as stressing
diffusion and therefore as necessarily opposing evolution. The wholly
fabricated nature of this dichotomy has already been discussed in
relation to the views of the ninetecnth-century evolutionists. It was
the English idiographers who fostered the error that Morgan and
Tylor were unaware of the importance of contact and migration in
the spread of cultural innovation (cf. Lowe 1938:172). And it was
both the German and British idiographers, who by virtue of their
tepeated attacks on “evolutionism,” had only themselves to blame
for their identification as “antievolutionists.” This muddled situation
h_as survived Lowie’s attempts to draw attention to the Germans’
d1§tincti0n between “evolution” and “evolutionism.” But even Lowie
failed to do justice to the extent to which the Kulturkreis school
was d.cpendent upon evolutionary theories and methods, while the
evolutionary component in the British schemes has gone virtually
unnoticed. This muddle will only be resolved when we freely and
emph:gtically proclaim both the British and the German idiographers as
evolutionists. Their distinctive contribution, never quite adequately
defined by Lowie, was their denial of Jawful regularities in history.

379

|
E
j
E
!


===== PAGE 195 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

BRITISH DIFFUSIONISM

The most prominent British “diffusionists” were W. H. R.
Rivers, Grafton Elliot Smith and W. J. Perry. Rivers, the founder of
the trend, converted to diffusionism during the writing of his The
History of Melanesian Society. Thwarted in his attempt to organize
the ethnography of Oceania on the basis of nomothetic principles,
Rivers sought the explanation of contrasts among Melanesian and
Polynesian cultures in terms of original complexes which had allegedly
been spread by successive waves of migrants. For these postulated
diffusionary effects to account for the known distribution of Oceanic
traits, Rivers had to assume that nonconforming cases had either
been brought about by the accidental disappearance of characteristic
features of the original complex, or by the advent of small boatloads
of migrants whose physical presence could no longer be detected.
Insofar as Rivers mainly confined his historical reconstructions to
Oceania, he resembled the Boasians more than the remainder of
the British school. It was Rivers (1911), however, who first raised
the hue and cry against “evolutionism,” claiming that anthropology
“was wholly under the domination of a crude evolutionary stand-
point.” Rivers falsely attributed to the evolutionists the view that
“after the original dispersal of mankind . . . large portions of the
earth had been cut off from intercourse with others, so that the
process of evolution had taken place in them independently” (RIVERS,
quoted in PERRY 1923:468).

Under G. Elliot Smith and Rivers’ pupil, W. J. Perry, the strategy
of explaining cultural differences and similarities by appealing to
convenient combinations of migrations, additions, losses, and mixings
of trait complexes was applied on a worldwide scale. Smith de-
veloped the idée fixe that practically the entire inventory of world
culture had evolved in Egypt. He and Perry believed that this de-
velopment had begun about 6,000 years ago. Prior to that time, the
carth was inhabited by “Natural Man,” who not only lacked do-
mesticated animals, agriculture, houses, clothing, but religion, social
organization, hereditary chiefs, and formal laws or ceremonies of
marriage or burial (sMiTH 1928:22). In approximately 4000 B.C. the
inhabitants of the Nile Valley “appreciated the fortunate chance
provided them” by a “natural crop” of barley and adopted a settled
mode of life (ibid.:32). Henceforth, in rapid succession they invented
pottery, basketry, matting, houses, and flax; learned to domesticate
animals; built towns; and began to bury their dead in cemcteries
and to develop notions of deity. As the Egyptians progressed in

380

Rl

14. Diffusionism

civilization, they set about journeying by land and sea over great
distances in search of precious metals and other raw materials. And in
so doing, they rapidly spread, through diffusion and colonization,
varieties of the original archaic civilization, which had been founded
on the banks of the Nile. While many of the new centers of archaic
civilization survived and prospered, others, like the New World
Maya, declined or died out. Many cultures of contemporary primitive
groups thus represent a decline from archaic civilized status rather
than an advance from the condition of “natural man”; other primi-
tive cultures represent the mixture of “natural man” and degenerated
cultures; while still others represent mixtures of different varieties of
degenerated cultures. Despite this emphasis upon degeneration, it is
clear that Smith’s stages of Fgyptian culture history are merely lo-
calized versions of conventional ecighteenth- and nineteenth-century
evolutionary sequences. Even the familiar leisure time and surplus
theories of civilization and social stratification are present in Smith’s
explanation of the Egyptian events:

It was the agricultural mode of life that furnished the favorable
conditions of settled existence, conditions which brought with
them the need for such things as represent the material founda-
tion of civilization [ibid.].

Smith’s account of the evolution of archaic civilization in Egypt and
its subsequent spread to other parts of the world greatly resembled
the Biblical version of world history, which we have previously treated
as folk precedent for the scientific doctrines of cultural evolution.
Culture evolves in the scheme of Perry and Smith, no less than it
does in Genesis. The problem in both cases is that the explanation of
thlc course it takes cannot be rendered in terms of nomothetic
principles. Since the essentials of the Egyptian sequence are alleged
to have'occuned only once, there can be no correlation analyses, much
1e5§ assignment of causal priorities. Indeed, the entire weight of the
British and German diffusionist schools was bent toward the denial of
the possibility that the main sequence of events at the originating
center or centers could have been repeated anywhere else.

HISTORY NEVER REPEATS ITSELF

) Since Smith and Perry were convinced that the evolution of
Eg}jptlan culture was eminently intelligible once the adoption of
agrl_culture was granted, we may very well regard it as puzzling that
similar sequences could not have occurred elsewhere. To the charge
that the cvents attributed exclusively to the Nile Valley were simple

381



===== PAGE 196 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

enough to have been reenacted many times over in similar river
valleys, Smith and Perry replied with the dogma that man was by
nature “uninventive’’:

Those field-workers who have acquired an intimate acquaintance
with relatively uncultured people have repeatedly called attention
to the lack of that inventiveness which the theorists are so fond of
taking for granted, or rather to their failure to appreciate the need
for inventing devices that we regard as obvious and essential in
character [ibid.:20].

It was nothing but a “fashionable fallacy” which had led anthro-
pologists since the time of William Robertson (described as a “Carte-
sian scholar”) to assume that the ingredients of civilization were
obvious and inevitable things for man to have invented. “If there were
any truth in this opinion, why did men wait all those hundreds of
thousands, perhaps millions, of years before any of them took such
a so-called obvious and inevitable step?” (Ibid.:25.) Not only did
Smith believe that the circumstances which led to the development of
civilization were “arbitrary” (ibid.:20), but he also asserted that
“the distinctive fact in human behavior is the impossibility of pre-
dicting the nature of the response to any set of circumstances . . .”
(ibid.:19). All this adds up to the classic reductio ad absurdum of the
extreme historicist position: “history does not repeat itself.” This
position, as we have previously admitted, is unassailable. No one
who deliberately secks to enlarge the apparent chaos of events shall
be denied the fruit of his ambition.

From the perspective of the English diffusionists, it would almost
appear as if the evolution of culture beyond the hunting and gathering
level was a miracle. Although Smith and Perry refrained from any such
conclusion, the German diffusionists, under Father Wilhelm Schmidt,
did assert that anthropology would get nowhere as long as it at-
tempted to deprive history of its miraculous foundations.

ORIGIN OF THE GERMAN CULTURE-
HISTORICAL METHOD

The Kulturkreis school traced itself to the inspiration of
Friedrich Ratzel, the founder of anthropogeography. Ratzel had criti-
cized his contemporaries, especially Adolf Bastian, for relying too
heavily on explanations in terms of psychic unity and independent
invention. He had insisted that possible migration or other contact
phenomena be ruled out in each particular case before cross-cultural
similarities could be attributed to independent invention. “We must

382

- w

14. Diffusionism

beware of thinking even simple inventions necessary,” warned Ratzel
(1896:79). “It seems far more correct to credit the intellect of
‘natural’ races with great sterility in all that does not touch the most
immediate objects of life.” Ratzel was not only impressed by the
frequency of migration and other diffusionary processes, but he was
at a loss to explain their general principles. Intergroup contacts ap-
peared to him to be “very capricious,” and he insisted that “human
will takes a hand in the game which, not without caprice, indolently
declines some things and all the more readily accepts others” (ibid.).
For all of his encouragement to the extreme diffusionists, Ratzel
may properly be described only as an eclectic. Certainly the difference
between Ratzel and Tylor was not so great as to prevent the latter
from recommending the English translation of Ratzel’s The History of
Mankind (1896) as “a solid foundation in anthropological study.”

On the basis of a study of the .imilarities in the cross section of
the bow shaft, the material and fastening of the bow string, and the
feathering of the arrow, Ratzel had concluded that the bow and
arrow of Indonesia and West Africa were related. Ratzel’s pupil, Leo
Frobenius, went further and drew attention to similarities between
masks, houses, drums, clothing, and shiclds in Melanesia, Indonesia,

arlld West Africa. According to Wilhelm Schmidt (1939:26), Frobe-
nius

thus proved that similarities existed not only between single
elements of culture, but also between whole culture complexes
and even whole culture circles, so that we have here to reckon not
only with migrations of mere individual culture elements but
even of entire culture circles.

) It was this suggestion of whole large complexes of culture elements,
involving all of the categories of the universal pattern, which in 1904
stimulated Fritz Graebner and his fellow assistant, B. Ankermann, at
the Berlin Ethnological Museum to write respectively about the cul-
ture circles and culture strata in Oceania and the culture circles and
culture strata in Africa. In 1906, Graebner went on to apply the
culture-circle and culture-strata idea on a worldwide basis. At about
the same time, Father Wilhelm Schmidt declared himself a follower
nf Gracebner, founded the journal Anthropos, and began to elaborate
his own version of the Kulturkreise.

CRITERIA OF FORM AND QUANTITY

) The l}igh point of Graebner’s career came with the publica-
tion of his Die Methode der Ethnologie (1911), noteworthy for its
attempt to elaborate criteria for identifying affinities and chronologies.

383



===== PAGE 197 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

The two basic rules were simple enough and were accepted by both
Graebner and Schmidt. The first, called by Graebner the “Criterion
of Form” and by Schmidt the “Criterion of Quality,” states that
similarities between two culture clements which do not automatically
arise out of the nature, material, or purpose of the traits or objects
should be interpreted as resulting from diffusion, regardless of the
distance which scparates the two instances. The second, called by both
the “Criterion of Quantity,” states that the probability of historical
relationship between two items increases as the number of additional
items showing similarities increases; ie., “several similarities prove
more than a single one” (scHMIDT 1939:150). It is interesting to note
that the Criterion of Form, whose discovery Schmidt (1939:143)
attributes to Ratzel (cf. PENNIMAN 1965:178), had actually been
formulated by William Robertson (see p. 34), the very same eigh-
teenth-century “evolutionist” whom G. Elliot Smith proposed as the
fountainhead of all “Cartesian” nonsense. This fact serves to
strengthen one’s suspicion that the two “Criteria” cannot form part
of a bona fide “method” and that they are “criteria” only in a purely
scholastic sense. How does one distinguish culture elements which
arise out of the nature, material, or purpose of a trait or object from
elements that are arbitrary? Is patrilineality an arbitrary or inherent
aspect of patrilocality? In order to separate the arbitrary from the in-
herent aspects of culture elements, one must be able to specify the no-
mothetic conditions under which traits occur—precisely the task which
the Kulturkreis movement sought to avoid. It should be noted in this
regard that there are some very interesting resemblances between
the Criterion of Form and the Boasian doctrine known as the “prin-
ciple of limited possibilities” (scc p. 624). By supposing that similari-
ties occurred simply because there was no other way to do certain
things (e.g, canoe paddle blades must have broad surfaces), Boas,
Lowie, and Goldenweiser vainly sought to eliminate large classes of
cross-cultural similarities as evidence for either diffusion or independent
invention.

SCHMIDT S SCHEME

By applying their spurious culture-historical method to the
known distribution of contemporary culture traits, Gracbner and
Schmidt claimed to be able to reconstruct a limited number of
original culture circles. All of world history was thus to be under-
stood as the diffusion of these Kreise out of the regions in which
they were supposed to have evolved. Bearing in mind that there

384

B <t

14. Diffusionism

were many points of disagreement among the members of the
§chool, we may take Father Schmidt’s list of Kreise as the most
Lnﬂuentxal example. Schmidt distinguished four major phases or
‘gmdcs”lofl culture circles: Primitive, Primary, Secondary, and Ter-
tiary. V.Vlt.h.m each of these grades there were several Kreis,e. Thus in
the Primitive or hunting and gathering grade we find: (1) the
cen.tral or exogamous Kreis, corresponding to the Pygmy i:eoples of
Africa and Asia, distinguished by their exogamous hordes and their
monogamous families; (2) the Arctic Kreis (Samoyeds, Eskimo,
Alggnklzms, etc.), exogamous with sexual equality; and (;)’ the Antj
arctic Kreis (Southeastern Australians, Bushmen: Tasmanians, etc.)
exogamous with sex totems. In the next or Primary grade th’ere alrey
also three culture circles: (1) patriarchical cattlé—raising nomads;
(2) exogamous patrilineal totemic higher hunters; (3) exogamou;

matrilineal, village-dwelling horticulturalists. Th ini
and their Kreise are as follows: . ¢ remaining grades

B III. Secondary grade.
Fre'e patrilineal systems (Poly- Free matrilineal systems
nesia, the Sudan, India, western (southern China, Indo-China
Asia, southern Europe, etc.). Melanesia, northeastern South'
America, etc.).
) ) IV. Tertiary grade.
Earliest higher civilization of Asia, Europe, and America.

[scrmMIpT 1939:104)

The ‘most striking feature of this scheme is its evolutionism. The
succession ofl"grades" is nothing less than the familiar sequen‘ce of
stages” leading from hunting and gathering types of sociocultural
systems thfo‘u‘gh horticultural and pastoral types and on to complex
stratified civilizations. The evolutionary signiﬂcance of the Kreise is
further strengthened by the fact that Schmidt attempted to associate

the sequence of i i
he grades with the main Europe i i
visons of prehiatory. pean archaeological di-

Wx_th the numerous parallels in points of detail between prehis-
toric cultures and ethnological spheres of culture, we may estab-
lish a twofold parallelism in the classification of Yﬂlcsc two series
of results: (1) the ethnological division into primitive and
primary cuI_tu_rcs is in fairly complete agreement with the pre-
historical division into the earlier and later paleolithic penPOd‘
(2) the ethnological division into primitive and primary cultures
on the one hand and secondary and tertiary cultures on the other,
corresponds with the prehistoric division into the paleolithic andy
the neolithic periods [ibid.:104-5].

385



===== PAGE 198 =====

14. Diffusionism

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Schmidt’s evolutionism was by no means confined merely to the
generalities of the hunting, gathering civilization sequence. His no-
tion of a matrilineal-horticultural Kreis was hcavily in dcbt to the
evolutionary logic of Bachofen, Morgan, and Eduard Hahn. Accord-
ing to Schmidt, during the hunting and gathering stage, women
specialized in the collection of wild plants. This led women to invent
horticulture and thus to become the owners of the products of the
soil and of the land itself. On the basis of their economic ascen-
dancy, women insisted on matrilocal residence and matrilineal de-
scent. The supreme deity was given feminine attributes, girls” puberty
rites were stressed, and the couvade instituted: full gynecocracy
reigned. Schmidt (1935:253) called this the “classical phase of
mother-right.” Since this phase is no longer found in existence,
Schmidt had to explain what had happened to it. Gradually, he
claimed, the brothers of the ruling women began to take over “duties
and tasks which could be better performed by men than by women”
(ibid.:254). This trend eventually resulted in the usurpation of fe
male rights, with males administering the family property and passing
their authority on to their sisters” sons—what Schmidt called a “mas-
culinized mother-right.” Thus, despite the absence of examples of
the “classic phase,” there is no reason, Schmidt argued, for “the
astounding conclusion that matriarchy nowhere exists, merely mother-
right” (ibid.:255).

Tt is true that Schmidt made no attempt to arrange the three
Kreise of the Primary Stage in an evolutionary order; ie., he did not
propose that the matrilineal Kreis had evolved before the two patri-
lineal Kreise. All three Kreise of the Primary Stage apparently existed
side by side, having evolved out of the Primitive hunting-gathering
stage along separate lines. Nonectheless, the evolutionary sequence
which Schmidt outlined for the matrilineal-horticultural Kreis covered
an extensive series of transformations. Property rights, for example,
were supposed to have gone from equality in the Primitive stage, to
female-dominated in classic mother-right, to male-dominated under
masculine mother-right. The highly speculative nature of these re-
constructions did not fail to impress Lowie with their close resem-
blance to Morgan’s privileged insights into sociocultural systems
which no one had ever seen. Said Lowie (1933b:290) of Schmidt: “His
discussion of the matrilineal Kulturkreis . . . is wholly evolutionistic,
schematic, unhistorical, and full of a priori psychologizing.” Ac-
tually, the only difference between Morgan’s and Schmidt’s evolu-
tionistic schemes is that Schmidt’s main sequence was supposed to

386

have happened only once, whereas aspects of Morgan’s sequence
were supposed to have happened over and over again. Yet, as Lowie
wus“qumk‘t(,) grasp, as soon as Schmidt began to argue that there was
an “organic” (ie., causal) relationship between farming and mother-
rxgl?t, the claim that the sequence had happened only once became
ludicrous. Since agriculture was supposed to have been invented
only once, its appearance all over the world had to be a result of

diffusion. What happened, Lowie wanted to know, if it diffused
before mother-right had evolved?

Let women invent horticulture in tribe A. What prevents its
spread to B, C, D, before any matriarchal institutions have time
to d_cvelop in A? Evidently nothing whatsoever. Now, ex hypo-
thesi, feminine ascendancy results from feminine tillage. Hence,

in each recipient tribe adoption of the latter sets up a parallel
sequence of maternal descent, girls’ puberty rites, female

deities, . . - There would still be a single origin for farming,
but- th.c social corrclates would arise independently over and over
again in parallel series [LOWIE 1933b:291].

Schn}idt answered this charge with memorable élan. Noting that
Lowie had taunted him with being an evolutionist, he expressed his
regrets at not being able to afford his critics any such consolation.
His sequence of mother-right is not to be confused with evolutionism
bgcau.se it is “one of the most firmly established results of modem)
hlxstnncal_ctlmology” (scuMIDT 1935:250). Evolutionism is aprioris-
th,. and its sequences are unnatural and illogical. The culture-his-
torical method, however, deals with “logical” and “natural” sequences.
The male response to female dominance was “to such a degree a
nvatulral, almost an inevitable one, that it is not aprioristic evolu-
tionism, but quite logical deduction from the very nature of things
and men, to armange them in a certain series of phases of develop-
ment” (ibid.). This was, of course, precisely the defense given by

the nineteenth-century evolutionists on behalf of their own recon-
struction of evolutionary sequences.

USE OF THE COMPARATIVE METHOD

) Lven Lowie failed to grasp the full extent of Schmidt's com-
mitment to ecvolutionary schema. Lowie apparently regarded the
sequence of the matrilincal Kreis as some sort of anomaly. He
seemc_d to believe that “in general tendency Father Wilhelm
Schmidt’s position s unquestionably  anti-evolutionary”  (Lowrr

387



===== PAGE 199 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

1933b:2g0). But exactly the contrary is true, for both Schmidt and
Graebner were fundamentally and inextricably dependent upon the
central feature of nineteenth-century evolutionism: the comparative
method. Tt was not the vaunted criteria of form and quantity, but
the comparative method, upon which the German “historical” school
rested. For their task was precisely the same as that of the evolu-
tionists: they sought to derive from an inspection of contemporary
peoples a knowledge of origins and of the successive modifications
which cultures had experienced. The Kreise were not only “Circles”
but they were “Strata”—a part of a universal chronological scheme,
which rested entirely on the assumption that contemporary cultures
could be arranged according to degree of primitiveness. Schmidt
made no attempt to conceal his dependence on the comparative
method. Indeed, he called it the “crown” of ethnology and attributed
its discovery to Pére Lafitau, an association which no doubt enhanced
its appeal to the faithful. Criticizing the tendency among ethnologists
and sociologists in Britain and America who limit themselves to a
purely synchronic interest, Schmidt (1933:9-10) wrote:

I think that such a scholar would deprive ethnology of its crown
by his disbelief in the axiom established already by Pere Lafitau
in his famous work Moeurs des sauvages américains comparées
aux moeurs des premiers temps (Paris, 1724), that primitive peo-
ples are stages of the past of humanity and living witnesses of
them. And if ethnology should despair of establishing objectively
and trustworthily the succession of these stages, it seems to me
that it would abdicate its prerogative to be our guide into those
first ages of humanity from which sprang the deepest roots of all
its institutions, of religion and of ethics, of the family and the
state.

Tt is clear that the culture-historical method was as remote from
the methodological reforms of the historical particularists as were
Lubbock and McLennan. Yet Lowie (1938:193), for all of his tren-
chant criticism, went out of his way to declare that in the “final bal-
ancing of the books,” the German diffusionists are left “with very
considerable assets.” Lowie was undoubtedly prepared to go to greater
lengths to find words of praise for Gracbner and Schmidt than he was
willing to do for Morgan. He asserted that the diffusionists were “by
no means so intransigent” as might appear from some of their writ-
ings, and that “a reconciliation with the views of many contemporary
and supposedly hostile colleagues is not at all barred” (ibid.:191).

388

e

14. Diffusionism

SCHMIDT'S AMERICAN DEFENDERS

The Kulturkreis school received even higher grades from
Clyde Kluckhohn, who was for a time one of Schmidt’s students
Kluckhohn lauded Schmidt for his attempt to grasp the archaeologicai
'fmd ethnological facts of the whole world at a time when, under the
influence of Boas, American anthropologists were content to “collect
and to cull” on a piecemeal basis.

The followers of the Kulturkreislehre have at least resolutely de-
voted themselves to the true task of scholars: they have endeav-
ored to ferret out and establish unperceived relationships between
facts, and we will be unwise to condemn them too austerely if the
relations they think to have discovered are not always approved in
detail by their fellow scholars [kLUCKHOHN 1936:19‘6].

The most intriguing aspect of the relationship between the Ameri-
can historical school and its German counterpart was the genial
acceptance of Schmidt’s split allegiance to anthropology and religion.
Let me make it perfectly clear that anthropology cannot be repre-
sented as opposing this or that article of faith. It is not the business
of science to go about intruding into and damaging the private
beliefs of religiously orthodox individuals. On the other hand, it
cannot be denied that there are certain doctrines of political ;nd
rf:hglous inspiration which seck to intrude and to damage the integ-
rity of the scientific process. When it becomes certain that religious or
political dogmas have set themselves the task of dominating the re-
search strategy of a particular discipline, those who believe in science
can scarcely afford to be indifferent. Both Lowie and Kluckhohn were
of the opinion that Schmidt’s theories were in no way compromised or
even seriously influenced by his priestly role. This broad-minded toler-
ance of Schmidt’s ulterior purpose is itself a revealing commentary
on "the drift of the times. Evidently, neither Kluckhohn nor Lowie
believed strongly enough in the possibility of a science of man to
fecl threatened by Schmidt’s attempt to return the discussion of
cultural evolution to its pre-Enlightenment premises. Kluckhohn
(1936:»17;) himself painted Schmidt’s intellectual heritage in the
‘f(ollowmg terms: rationalistic, deductive logic, “trained theologian,”
steeped in the dialectical subtleties of Thomas Aquinas and Albe;t
Magnus,” as a priest “almost compelled to reject Evolutionismus . . .
as based upon the assumption that human beings are subject to the

389

|
i
i
|



===== PAGE 200 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

rigid determinism which seems to prevail in nature generally.” He
also admitted that “some of Schmidt’s . . . observations upon
anthropological matters . . . seem to have a direct ulterior relation
to certain tenets of the Roman Catholic Church . . .” and that “one
also rather often gets a sense of their lack of detachment in viewing
certain questions” (ibid.:173-74). Kluckhohn did not shrink from
admitting that “the writers of the Kulturkreislehre reject the physico-
mathematical notion of causality as meaningless in culture-historical
phenomena . . .” (ibid.:172). Despite this rather unpromising set of
preconceptions, Kluckhohn insisted that there was no reason to ac-
cord the Kulturkreis school any less respectful a hearing than that
which was given to the other schools of anthropology.

Kant was surely right in maintaining that cognition is impossible
without the application of interpretative principles—and those
underlying the metaphysics of the Roman Catholic Church are
as intellectually respectable as any others in the present state of
our knowledge about man and the universe. We must, I think,
rigorously avoid the temptation to dismiss the Kulturkreislehre
as founded upon a “bias” [ibid.:173].

Although Kluckhohn was perfectly correct to point out that ob-
servation must be carried out in the context of theoretical bias, his
defense of Schmidt’s bias is inadmissible. The particular bias which
declares that physico-mathematical causality is “meaningless in cul-
ture-historical phenomena” cannot be tolerated by those who profess
themselves interested in a science of human history. To declare in
advance that the physico-mathematical model cannot be applied and
then to refrain from attempting to apply it is to proceed in a fashion
exactly contrary to that which every bona fide scientific strategy
requires as an initial condition of research. It is no circumstance other
than this intolerable bias which accounts for Schmidt’s insistence on
the uniqueness of the evolutionary experience of each Kreis. The
idiographic ingredient in these ideas could not but appeal to Lowie,
even though he himself accepted the possibility of “limited paral-
lelism.” Evidently this served as enough of a common bond to hold
Lowic’s sympathy despite the additional consequences which flowed
from Schmidt’s theological commitment.

SCHMIDT’S SUPERNATURALISM

Not only was Schmidt, like Boas, opposed to a nomothetic
explanation of history, but he was also opposed even to a naturalistic
explanation. In his reconstruction of cultural evolution, Schmidt was

390

-

14. Diffusionism

dominated by the necessity of reconciling the findings of anthro-
pology with scriptural precedent. The areas of fact in which specific
theological dogmas exerted their most damaging influence concerned,
as one might imagine, the origin of religious beliefs themselves.
Here Schmidt, like Archbishop Whately, De Bonald, and De Maistre,
was an unyielding “degenerationist.” His immense, twelve-volume
Der Ursprung der Gottesidee (Origin of the Idea of God) was wholly
given over to the proof that those cultures most nearly approximating
the condition of the primitive hunting and gathering Kreis possessed
a purer and more ethical understanding of the nature of God. As
culture evolved, perfection in science and technology was accom-
panied by a degeneration in the religious sphere. The most perfect
phase of religion existed at the very outset of prehistory, for religion
was given to man by God in a revelation, the memory of which
became more and more distorted and confused as time wore on;
moreover, by “revelation,” Schmidt insisted that he meant a literal,
personal appearance such as is described in Genesis. He explicitly
denied that this revelation could have been “a merely subjective
process” or a “purely impersonal, common experience”:

Noj; it must have been a tremendous, mighty personality that pre-
sented itself to them: capable of captivating their intellect with
luminous truths, of binding their will by high and noble moral
commands, and of winning their hearts through ravishing beauty
and goodness. Moreover, this personality cannot have been a
merely internal image of the mind and imagination; for such an
image could by no means have possessed the power of awakening
those effects which we note in that oldest religion. Rather, it must
have been really and truly a personality that presented itself to
them from without, and that precisely by the power of its reality
convinced and overwhelmed them [scHMIDT 1939:183].

Schmidt went even further in antiscientism and made it plain that he
considered it a matter essential to his conscience to support the
teachings of his faith in this matter:

It is Catholic teaching, binding in conscience and founded on
Scripture and the fathers, together with various declarations of
the Church, that the very first human beings were not in a merely
natural state but were possessed of the supernatural gift of divine
sonship and destined to the supernatural end of the immediate
vision of God. Men thus endowed entered upon a relationship

with God that is properly characterized as supernatural religion
[ibid.].

391



===== PAGE 201 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

When Leslie White (see p. 291) attacked Boas, along with the
writers of the Kulturkreis school, as reactionary antievolutionists,

L]
Lowie rejoined by claiming that not only Boas but Father Schmidt ‘ lt d P 1 t
were evolutionists in White’s sense of the term. I concur that neither u ure an ersona 1
Boas nor Schmidt was an antievolutionist, but it cannot be said of

Schmidt that he was uninfluenced by what are usually referred to as
reactionary doctrines harking back to the early part of the nineteenth

.
century. The misunderstanding alluded to in the following excerpt Pre —Freudlan 15

from Lowie’s (1960:423; orig. 1946) rejoinder is not confined to
White:

Leslie White misunderstands the status of the problem. It is false |
that any reputable anthropologist nowadays professes an anti- }
evolutionist philosophy in the sense alleged. The “anti-evolution- i
ism” of the Boasians and of the Kulturkreislehre has nothing to i
do with, say, the degeneration theory of de Maistre.

The lack of connection between Boas and De Maistre is certainly
well founded; but nothing could be more inappropriate than to

deny Schmidt’s affinities with De Maistre’s degenerationism. %ﬁ

Dlring the interval between the two world wars, the individualizing
trend in historical particularism met with and interacted with the
doctrines of Sigmund Freud. On the face of it, psychoanalysis and
Boasian anthropology seemed to have very little in common. Freud ;
» was essentially a nineteenth-century leftover. His theory was a grand
scale, evolutionist, materialist, and determinist scheme of precisely
the sort most condemned in Boas’ attack on the comparative method.
Yet there was one overriding favorable predisposition in the Boasian
approach. Boas had for long maintained the proposition that cul-
tural anthropology had to be the study of man’s “mental life,” and
no one could deny that Freud had shown more ways of penetrating
into man’s mind than anyone else before him. Anthropology’s drive
toward mentalism and the study of the individual eventually was to
prove stronger than the taint of Freud’s grandiose physicalism, but
not before both schools underwent drastic changes: the Freudians
gave up their evolutionism and their instinctive universal complexes
for cultural relativism; while the Boasians for their part gave up their
emphasis upon history and diffusion. The result was the American
version of synchronic functionalism: culture and personality.

i

392 393


===== PAGE 202 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

EPISTEMOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Care should be taken to extricate this movement, with its
specifically Freudian and Boasian inspiration, from the much older
and more pervasive occurrence of psychologically oriented ethnology.
Psychocultural analyses, carried out in the idiom of mentalistic
and ideational data languages and concepts, antedate the modern
culture and personality movement by thousands of years. A brief
digression into some relevant epistemological issues should make
this clear.

Cultural entities are logico-empirical constructs built up out of the
observation of the verbal or nonverbal behavior of individual human
actors. The scientific vocabulary for the description of these entities
is still in a very primitive state. Operationally valid definitions have
yet to be achieved for even the most commonly employed terms.
Attempts to develop data languages for cultural descriptions have
invariably followed the intuitive path of combining etic responses with
their emotional and cognitive concomitants.

It is very widely accepted that the statement of psychologically
meaningful “goals” and “purposes” is a minimum requirement of
ethnographic description. This is obviously true of all the members of
the culture and personality movement per se. We have already seen
how important the mentalistic or “emic” point of view was in the
development of Boas’ mature orientation to the theoretical prospects
of cultural anthropology. There were many convergences from other
backgrounds toward a similar elaboration of mentalistic premises.
Ralph Linton, one of the key figures in the neo-Freudian culture and
personality movement, defined all cultural traits in a mentalistic idiom.
A trait, in Linton’s (1936) influential formulation, consisted not only
of a particular form and substance with its sociocultural function, but
of the meaning of such an entity to the people who manifested or used
it. Clyde Kluckhohn, another central figure in the history of per-
sonality and culture studies, shared a similar epistemological position
(see p. 597). In British social anthropology, Malinowski, an important
contributor to the refinement of Freudian and other psychological
concepts in anthropology, was also explicit concerning the epistemo-
logical and methodological necessity of emic categories.

But most of the anthropologists, such as Boas himself, his student
Robert Lowie, and the influential English theoretician S. F. Nadel,
who stress the importance of an emic perspective have not been
associated with culture and personality research. For this reason, the

394

Bl

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

historical significance of the emic/etic option is discussed in a
separate chapter in connection with the so-called New Ethnography.
But it must be made clear at the outset that whoever operates with
a strong implicit or explicit bias in favor of emics is committed to
an cpistemological tradition shared by the culture and personality
school.

THE PERVASIVENESS OF EMIC AND
PSYCHOLOGICAL CATEGORIES

The most obvious diagnostic of this commonality is the
occurrence within the average ethnographic monograph of numerous
terms and concepts which are derived from vernacular or scientific
lexicons devoted to expressing the mental and emotional condition of
individual human actors. Actually, from the earliest recorded de-
scriptions of cultural phenomena to the advent of modern anthro-
pology, most ethnographic descriptions have consisted of a melange
of data-language concepts drawn partially from a psychological and
partially from a sociocultural idiom. Tacitus, writing in the first cen-
tury ap., described the marriage arrangements, rules of chastity,
weaponry, mode of punishment, military organization, divinatory
practices, and many other sociocultural features of the Germanic
tribes. He also availed himself of a psychological idiom and attributed
to the Germans an ability to endure hard work, a slight capacity for
withstanding hunger and cold, and “a taste for peace”; furthermore,
he said they were “pleasantly courteous,” “neither canny nor cunning,”
and “devoid of self-control when they drink.”

As a modern example of the same practice, one of the monographs
of Raymond Firth, whose main theoretical affiliation is with Brit-
ish social anthropology, and certainly not with the culture and
personality movement, may serve as an example. Opening We, the
Tikopia at random, we encounter the following typical description
of household patterns:

A married couple are expected by custom to share such things
as areca nut and tobacco, and refusal or evasion is apt to cause a
quarrel. Conduct in such matters depends of course upon the
temperament of individuals. Food, too, should be shared, though
some latitude is given to the claims of differential appetitc. The
effect of this rule is seen most clearly outside the household.
Whenever a visitor calls at another house he is usually offered
food, and at meal time such an invitation is never omitted. A
close kinsman may eat, but another man, if married, will com-

395



===== PAGE 203 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

monly decline with a “Makona,” “satisfied.” This he will say
whether he has eaten or not, since he fears the tongue of slander,
which will murmur behind his back, “Ah! There he sits and eats,
but what of his wife and children, hungry at home?” An unmar-
ried person may eat without fear, since he has not such responsi-
bilities. Property which is not specifically linked with one sex is
shared by husband and wife, or used indifferently by them both.
A gift of a string of beads which I made to the Ariki Kafika—
beads are highly valued and worn by men as well as women—
was calmly appropriated by his wife, who took charge of them at
once with the word “Mine,” cliciting merely a joking remark from
the Ariki [FIRTH 1963:124].

The psychologically derived categories in this paragraph range over a
broad spectrum of phenomena. There is not only refusal of sharing
but there is evasion. The married visitor fears being exposed to
slander. Property is used indifferently, beads are highly valued and are
calmly appropriated to the accompaniment of a joking remark.

The most “structural” of the British structural-functionalists is
Meyer Fortes; theoretically, one can go no further in a direction
away from psychological “reductionism.” Yet in The Dynamics of Clan-
ship among the Tallensi, passages such as the one which follows
turn up on almost every page:

A man who married the former wife of another, even if the
marriage was severed for just and accepted reasons, incurs the
hostility of the first husband’s entire lineage both towards himself
personally and towards his clansmen as a group. Reprisals will be
taken when an opportunity occurs. When the parties are clans-
men, feelings about such acts become very bitter, and the more
so the closer the tie. Marriages of this kind take place from time
to time, producing conflicts and reprisals but not disruption of
clanship ties [FORTES 1945:42].

Note here how the feelings of the actors, as expressed in the terms
hostility, bitter, and conflicts, are essential for maintaining the ethno-
graphic thread. If one makes an effort to find still more emphatically
mentalistic statements, it is not difficult to locate the following sort
of descriptions even in The Dynamics of Clanship, which is Fortes’
most abstract and “structural” book:

Tallensi say this is just fun (koohog); but we see again that this
apparently spontancous jesting acts as a means of reconciling and
counter-acting the tensions of a double-edged social relationship.
Where two corporate groups are structurally divided from each

396

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

other to the point of having potentially competitive interests
likely to lead to conflict at one level of the social organization, but
are at the same time bound to each other by strong ties of oblig-
atory co-operation and goodwill in another aspect of their social
relations, the undercurrent of hostility and mutual wariness is
deflected by jest. You jest with people who must be friendly to
you in terms of one set of loyalties and may be hostile to you in
terms of another, and with whom you are on an equal footing as
far as mutual rights and duties go [ibid.:g5].

In this vein it is of considerable interest to note that Leslie White,
one of the anthropologists who have been most critical of the culture
and personality approach, employs in his own ethnography a typical
psychologistic lexicon of cognitive and emotional terms:

In society as in mechanics, the closer moving particles are to
each other, the greater is the friction between them. And the dis-
tance between individuals in a pueblo is very small. A pueblo
is no place for an individualist; an aggressive “go-getter” is espe-
cially obnoxious. He makes life unbearable for his neighbors.
Close contact within a pueblo tends to wear off the sharp corners
and edges of a personality and make it smooth and inconspicuous,
like a water-worn pebble. Children are taught that kindness and
tespect are the greatest virtues. Every effort is made to lubricate
social life, to reduce friction to a minimum so that the pueblo
will function smoothly like a well-built machine. Quarrelling is
intolerable, physical violence rare, murder unheard of.

Although pucblo social life discourages, if indeed it does not
penalize, aggressive individualism, and although intimate social
intercourse tends to rub down the sharp corners and edges of the
individual ego, differences between individuals do, nevertheless,
remain and find significant expression in the life of the commu-
nity. Some men are regarded with more than ordinary respect,
others with less; some are influential, others are mot [WHITE

1942:190].

These examples should suffice to establish the fact that psycholo-
gizing is a deeply rooted habit among cultural anthropologists. It
Is interesting to note that Mead’s (1953:642) paradigm of a cul-
tural as opposed to a psychological statement contains a covert men-
talist concept: “In culture X, married men must avoid their mothers

" as opposed to “In culture X, the mother-inlaw avoidance is
enforced through a sense of shame.” Although the second statement
is obviously more dependent on a psychological frame, the word
“must” in the first statement contains a universe of psychological

397



===== PAGE 204 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

assumptions in its own right. But this merely confirms Mead’s point
that there is no sharp line in practice between personality and cul-
ture and traditional ethnography.

ROOTS OF BENEDICT S PATTERNS OF
CULTURE

One of the characteristics of the modern culture and per-
sonality school is simply the intensification and expansion of ethno-
graphic coverage involving psychological terms and concepts. During
the 1920s a kind of descriptive threshold was crossed, and the usual
mixed data language gave way among the founders of the culture
and personality movement to a conscious selection in favor of psy-
chologistic emphases. This transition is associated above all with the
work of Ruth Benedict who, under the influence of Edward Sapir and
in interaction with Margaret Mead, proposed that the description
of entire cultures might be integrated around one or two major
psychologistic traits. “Cultures from this point of view are individual
psychology thrown large upon the screen, given gigantic proportions
and a long time span” (BENEDICT 1932:24).

It is of considerable interest in terms of the continuity be-
tween Boasian historical particularism and Benedict’s initial “con-
figurationalist” approach in Patterns of Culture (1934), that the
specific psychological idiom that was utilized owed little if anything
to Freudian concepts. Benedict herself traced her major intellectual
heritage to “the German school headed by Wilhelm Dilthey” (ibid.:
2), and this constitutes an additional reason for associating the
Boasians with neo-Kantianism. Mead’s objection that Benedict’s al-
lusion to Dilthey was a pro forma afterthought included to satisfy
Boas’” demands for scholarly acknowledgment, scarcely modifies the
sitvation. Benedict read Dilthey and recognized her indebtedness.
The relevance of Dilthey, as Benedict saw him, was that he ap-
proached history through the grouping together of philosophical
Weltanschauungen expressing distinctive and incommensurable psy-
chological categories which “cannot be resolved the one unto the
other” (ibid.:3). We do not require Mead’s acknowledgment to
assert that she too was influenced by the same school, with or
without having read Dilthey. As for the source of the particular
configurationalist idiom employed in Patterns of Culture, it was, as
Benedict tells us, Nietzsche’s study of Greek drama, The Birth of
Tragedy. It was here that Benedict picked up the idea of the contrast

398

I ol

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

between Dionysian and Apollonian “psychological types,” the “in-
commensurables” around which Patterns of Culture is built (BENE-
DICT 1928:572).

EARLIER PRECEDENTS

Setting aside for the moment the special history of the
Dionysian and Apollonian categories, it is clear that a much more
ancient tradition of pithy psychological portraits underlies not only
Benedict’s scheme, but Dilthey’s and Nietzsche’s as well. For in
addition to the more or less mixed sociocultural and psychological
ethnographies produced by the ancients, condensed psychological por-
traiture slipping imperceptibly into stereotype has always been a vice
of learned as well as vulgar observers of cultural phenomena. In her
description of anthropology in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies, Margaret Hodgen (1964:178) attributes the technique of
presenting capsular epitomes, stereotypes, and typologies to the
brevity characteristic of the medieval scholastic encyclopedias. I
would prefer to stress a more vernacular origin in the common ten-
dency of tribes and nations to stereotype cach other as a consequence
of various forms of intergroup relations. At any rate, early European
prototypes of ethnographers such as Sebastian Miinster, Henry
Agrippa, Johann Boemus, and Gerardus Mercator all indulged in the
practice of condensing ethnographic descriptions into pithy psycho-
logical formulae. For example, in Muenster’s breviary, the Scotch are
faithful and vengeful; the Suevi bellicose; the Jews prudent but en-
vious; the Persians steadfast but disloyal; the Egyptians stable and
crafty; the Grecks wise but deceitful; and the Spaniards drunken,
violent, and sophistic. Writing in 1527, Agrippa declared:

The Scythians were always infamous for Savageness and Cruelty.
The Italians were always eminent for their Magnanimity. The
Gaules were reproached for Stupidity. The Sicilians were al-
ways Subtile. The Asiaticks Luxurious, the Spaniards Jealous, and
great Boasters. . . . Who that sees a man marching in more state
than a Dung-hill-Cock, in gate like a Fencer, a confident Look, a
deep Tone, grave Speech, severe in his Carriage, and tatter'd in
Habit, that will not straight judge him to be a German? Do we
not know the French by their moderate Gate, effeminate Car-
riage, smiling Countenance, pleasing Voice, courteous Speech,
modest Behaviour, and careless Habit? The Italians we behold
more slow in Gate, their Carriage grave, their Countenances
varying, of few words, captious in Discourse, in their Behaviour

399



===== PAGE 205 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

magnificent, and decent in their Habit. In singing also the Italians
bleat, the Spaniards Whine, the Germans Howl, and the French
Quaver [quoted in HODGEN 1964:180].

Boemus in the 1611 edition of his Omnium Gentium Mores associated
Suevia with whores, Franconia with thieves and beggars, Bavaria with
pilferers and slaves, Helvetia with butchers and bawds, Saxonie with
drunkards, Frisia with perjurers, and the Rheinland with gluttons.
For Mercator:

The Francons are simple, blockish, & furious; the Barvarians
sumptuous, gluttons, and brazen-faced; the Sweeds light, bablers
and boasters; the Thuringeans distrustfull, slovens, and quarrel-
some; the Saxons dissemblers, double-hearted, and opinionative;
the Belgians good horsemen, tender, docible, and delicate; the
Italians proud, revengeful and ingenious; the Spaniard disdainful,
cautious and greedie; the Gaules proper, intemperate, rash-
headed; the Cimbrians high-minded, seditious, and terrible; the
Saramates gluttons, proud, and theeves; the Bohemians cruell,
lovers of novelties, filtchers; the Illyricks variable, malicious, and
ryotous; the Pannonians rude, superstitious; the Grecians miser-
able [quoted in HODGEN 1964:181].

ET TU SPENCER

Some idea of the pervasiveness of this kind of psychological
portraiture may be gained from the fact that Herbert Spencer, an
influence which was highly distasteful to Boas and his pupils, in-
cluded the rubric Emotional Characters as a fundamental heading in
his great Descriptive Sociology. Spencer’s capsule portraits are pre-
posterous amusements:

Samoans. Not so lively as Tahitians. Good humored, social in
disposition, very desirous of pleasing, and fond of amusement
and traveling. Indolent, fickle, and deceitful.

Dyaks. Not very impulsive. Seldom, except on festive occasions
going the length of boisterous mirth. Generally mild, polite, and
respectful to superiors. Sociable, amiable, sympathetic and capable
of strong mutual attachments.

Andaman Islanders. Vivacious and affectionate; impulsive and
frightfully passionate; revengeful, crafty, and merciless. Suspicious
of strangers to an inconceivable degree. Manifest no ferocity
when once subdued.

[1873-1933, T1]

Troquois. Show little desirc for social intercourse between the
sexes, and have been said to be incapable of sexual love. The fa-

400

I

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

ther rarely caresses his children. Fond of jest, repartee and
ridicule; also of the excitement of the chase.

[ibid., VI]
Ancient Peruvians. Not impulsive. Patient obedient, industri-

ous, Friendly to one another and kind to animals. Good hu-
mored and gentle.

[ibid., 1)

OUT OF THE DIFFUSIONIST CUL DE SAC

The taxonomic assumptions of Patterns of Culture are

of course considerably more sophisticated than anything Spencer or
medieval and ancient predecessors had been able to achieve. Benedict
based her portraits of the Apollonian Zuni and Dionysian Kwakiutl
on a sustained and highly detailed comparison of institutions and
ideologies ranging across the entire fabric of sociocultural life, from
family to warfare.
] In contrast to vulgar stereotypes, which frequently manifest blatant
inconsistencies and contradictions (Indians are crafty but dumb, Jews
are clannish but cosmopolitan), Benedict's configurations emphasize
a culture’s strain toward consistency. Indeed, the integration and
functional coherence of cultural life when viewed from the configura-
tionist perspective constitutes the main theoretical pretension of
Benedict’s work.

Benedict’s training under Boas had begun in 1921, shortly after the
publication of Lowie’s Primitive Society with its famous “shreds
and patches” conclusion. The model of cultures built up out of
diffusionary hodgepodges was thrust upon her before she had an
opportunity to prepare her own outlook. The influence of Lowie,
with whom she took a course at the Museum of Natural History, is
prominent in her first publication, “The Vision in Plains Culture”
(1922). Margaret Mead (1959a:14) teports her as having said, “
wrote that for Dr. Lowie.” This article presents a point of view
bearing little resemblance to that of Patterns of Culture. Tt even
contains a strident echo of Lowie’s “shreds and patches” declaration,
which was picked up by Radcliffe-Brown and incorporated into the
bogey of the antifunctionalist American school:

It is, so far as we can see, an ultimate fact of human nature
tl_mt man builds up his culture out of disparate elements, com-
bining and recombining them, and until we have abandoned the
superstition that the result is an organism functionally interre-
lated, we shall be unable to see our cultural life objectively, or to
control its manifestations [BENEDICT 1923:84-85].

401



===== PAGE 206 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

But Benedict, who was a poetess (publishing under the name Anne
Singleton) as much as she was an anthropologist, could not long abide
the negativism and emotionally impoverished medium of diffusionist
discourse. In Margaret Mead’s words, she worked “steadily to find
some integrating principle that would explain both the disparate
origins of the elements of which a culture was built and the whole-
ness which she felt was there in each culture” (MEAD 1959a:204).
Psychologistic patterns and configurations were the result of this
search,

THE END OF EXPLANATION

Mead’s use of the term “explanation” in conjunction with
the integrative effect of “individual psychology thrown large upon the
screen” is misleading. The historical function of Patterns of Culture
within the Boasian school was its ingenious evocation of a Dilthian
fecling of understanding, achieved entirely in the absence of explana-
tion in any scientific sense. However useful the configurationist
approach may have seemed to Benedict as a way out of the diffusionist
cul de sac, its contribution to the explanation of cultural differences
and similarities was miniscule. This result was built into the basic
premises upon which she proceeded to employ Nietzsche’s cate-
gories, for she was careful to insist, in proper neo-Kantian style,
that the Apollonian-Dionysian polarity may not be usefully applied to
any but a small number of the world’s cultures. Moreover, Benedict
stressed the improbability that most of the cultures which do not
fit into the Apollonian-Dionysian scheme can be fitted into any
other comparable well-integrated configuration. “All cultures,” she
wrote in Patterns of Culture, “have not shaped their thousand items
of behavior to a balanced and rhythmic pattern; lack of integration
seems to be as characteristic of certain cultures as extreme integra-
tion is of others” (ibid.:196).

Benedict was possibly the student whom Boas in his later years
most admired in his paternal fashion. By 1929, she was addressing
him as “Dear Papa Franz” and complaining that “It seems very
lonely without you,” when he was away (MEAD 1959a:400). Upon
Boas’ retirement in 1937, Benedict became the acting Chairman of
the Department of Anthropology at Columbia. The fact that she
was Boas’ protégée probably helped to obscure the ethnographic
defects in Patterns of Culture, and Boas’ “Introduction” was un-
doubtedly an important asset in its acceptance by the anthropological
community. But there is nothing about her configurationalist ideas

402

halll

Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

which ran counter to Boas’ tutelage. On the contrary, Boas undoubt-
edly felt that his dream of achieving a more intimate knowledge of the
workings of the minds of primitive peoples had been advanced by
her efforts. At the same time, the care which she took to disassociate
the configurations from any global scheme, the strictly limited sample
with which she worked, and the absence of causal explanations were
fully in accord with historical-particularist beliefs.

The central theme of Patterns of Culture is simply that ecach
culture “selects” or “chooses” from the infinite variety of behavioral
possibilities a limited segment which sometimes conforms to a con-
figuration and sometimes does not. In its least flattering light, one
might sum it up as the observation that some cultures are different
and others are similar. One searches in vain through Patterns of
Culture for any explanation. There is not even the saving grace of
the earlier diffusionistic “explanations” by which Apollonian patterns
might be traced back to an originating tribe (the Greeks?). All that
we get by way of accounting for cultural differences and similarities
is the myth of the Digger Indians: “God gave to every people a cup,
a cup of clay, and from this cup they drank their life. . . . They
all dipped in the water but their cups were different” (BENEDICT

1934:33).

ART, CULTURE, AND FREEDOM

In one sense, of course, it is manifestly unfair to judge
Benedict’s contribution in the light of the canons and traditions of
the social sciences. Like Sapir, with whom she exchanged poems and
carried on a voluminous and romantic correspondence, Benedict
seems intuitively to have chaffed at the very notion of cultural de-
terminism. The patterns of culture and language had to be given their
due (how else could one contemplate a separate discipline of an-
thropology or linguistics?), but wherever possible the quixotic con-
ditions by which patterns arise, are adopted, or are cast out deserve
equal emphasis.

It is in this light that Benedict’s discussion of individual deviancy,
the subject of the final chapter in Patterns of Culture, is most
profitably interpreted. Deviants occur in every culture; hence no-

where are men merely puppets dancing on the strings of their cultural
destinies:

Anthropology is often believed to be a counsel of despair which
makes untenable a beneficent human illusion. But no anthropolo-
gist with a background of experience in other cultures has ever

403

i



===== PAGE 207 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

believed that individuals were automatons, mechanically carving
out the decrees of their civilization. No culture yet observed has
been able to eradicate the differences in the temperaments of the
persons who compose it. It is always a give-and-take {ibid.:220].

It is clear that Benedict’s image of cultural anthropology was that
of a discipline whose main function it was artfully to describe the
varieties of man’s cultural traditions and not to explain them. Like
Kroeber, she was not at all averse to the prospect of severing an-
thropology’s ties to the social sciences: “To my mind the very nature
of the problems posed and discussed in the humanities is closer,
chapter by chapter, to those in anthropology than are the investiga-
tions carried on in most of the social sciences” (BENEDICT 1948:585).
The affinity with the humanistic studies expressed by Benedict is
even stronger than that put forth by Kroeber. Her “patterns,” as
Kroeber himself recognized, were very similar to the configurations
of style to which Krocber devoted his later years. The main difference
resides in the diachronic pulsations which Kroeber attempted to dis-
cover. But, in the controversy between Sapir and Kroeber, Benedict
as we have seen, and as might be guessed from the great sympathy
with which she and Sapir regarded each other’s poetry, was very
much on Sapir’s side. “Man is a creature with such freedom of action
and imagination that he can, for instance, by not accepting a trait,
prevent the occurrence of diffusion, or he can at any stage of techno-
logical development create his gods in the most diverse forms”
(ibid.:589). In Patterns of Culture (1934:10) we also find the as-
tonishing remark: “A very little acquaintance with other conventions,
and a knowledge of how various these may be, would do much to
promote a rational social order.”

ETHNOGRAPHIC DIFFICULTIES

The slight theoretical contribution of Patterns of Culture
fails to justify Benedict’s emphasis upon an idiom appropriate to
individual psychology. But the larger functional significance of this
work cannot be appreciated without reference to the dubious factual
foundation on which Benedict reared her psychologistic portraits.
Not only was the success of her book unrelated to its theoretical
payoff, but it was from the outset the object of intense criticism
by anthropologists who possessed relevant ethnographic area special-
ties. I have already indicated some of the main lines of this critique in
reference to Benedict’s portrayal of the Kwakiutl. The reaction among

404

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

Southwest specialists to her treatment of the Pueblo Indians was
more severe, perhaps because so many anthropologists have made
this area the focus of their field research. An excellent summary of
this critical literature has recently been put together by Victor Bar-
nouw (1963), whose own commitment to the personality and culture
movement and whose training under Benedict provide a moderating
note.

It is now generally agreed that Benedict’s sketch of the Apollonian
way of life achieved its beautiful symmetry only as a result of the
omission or selective de-emphasis of nonconforming data. For ex-
ample, one of the first commentators, Li An-Che (1937), noted
that Benedict’s picture of the allegedly noncompetitive and retiring
Zuiii failed to acknowledge historically known incidents of factional
internecine strife. “. . . not only do ordinary forms of struggle for
individual supremacy exist, but violent forms occur once in a while”
(L1 ANcHE 1937:69). One of the deepest splits in the Zufii pueblo
occurred along the lines of rival missionization, and Li An-Che wrote
that “a strife of immense magnitude took place between the Catho-
lic and Protestant elements” (ibid.). Ruth Bunzel (1952:xv) reported
that the Zufii were frequently split into rival factions over the issue of
cooperation or noncooperation with anthropologists. According to
Elsie Clews Parsons, Benedict and other Zufii observers had not had
an opportunity to witness the ceremonial of the Zufi medicine
societies which featured walking over red hot coals and sword swal-
lowing. This contributed to the tendency to “underestimate the or-
giastic potentiality of Zufii character” (PARSONS 1939:879).

If Zuiii puberty practices and child training patterns were any-
thing like those of the neighboring Hopi (Benedict did argue that
all of the Pueblos were Apollonians), the gentle peaceloving stereo-
type must be discarded. Benedict knew that initiates were whipped,
but she denied that blood was drawn or even that welts were raised.
Other eye witnesses report Hopi floggings as “very severe” and as
taking place while “pandemonium reigns” ( H. R. ROTH, quoted by
BARNOUW 1963:46). In the autobiography of a Hopi chief, there
appears an account of one very un-Apollonian initiation:

I stood them fairly well, without crying, and thought my suf-
fering was past; but then the Ho Katcina struck me four more
times and cut me to pieces. I struggled, yelled, and urinated.
- . . Blood was running down over my body. . . . When they
let me go, I wrapped the blanket around my painful body and sat
down. I tried to stop sobbing, but continued to cry in my
heart. . . . I was led home and put to bed on a sheepskin. The

405



===== PAGE 208 =====

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

next morning when I awoke, the pelt had stuck fast to my body,
so that when I tried to get up it came with me [siMMONS 1942:83,
quoted in BARNOUW 1963:46].

Equally distressing is Benedict’s failure to provide a balanced picture
of Pueblo behavior under the influence of alcohol. Although strong
disapproval of drinking exists, actual behavior frequently runs in a
definitely Dionysian direction. “Drunkenness is repulsive to them”
wrote Benedict (1934:82). But this scarcely tells the whole story:

After we read this, it comes as a surprise to learn, in Smith and
Roberts’ recent report on Zuiii law, that by far the most common
“crimes” at Zuiii are drunkenness and drunken driving. “In 1949
there were 57 arrests for drunkenncss on the first night of the
Shalako festival and 150 bottles of liquor were confiscated.”
The anthropologist E. A. Hoebel informs us that “Field work
among the Central Pueblos in 1945 to 1947 revealed the Pueblo
governments almost helpless in the face of uncontrollable drunk-
enness and violence.” And Edmund Wilson, describing a visit to
Zuiii in 1947, tells how his car was searched for liquor by the
police when he entered the Pueblo at the time of the Shalako
festival. He adds: “This I was later told, failed almost completely
in its purpose, since the Zuiiis, by way of their grapevine, would
send the word back to Gallup for their bootleggers to come in
around the hills” [BARNOUW 1963:44].

DECLINING STANDARDS

There are anthropologists who regard criticism of Benedict’s
Patterns of Culture as a kind of sacrilege. This was admittedly a
pioneer work in the field of culture and personality which achieved
the unusual distinction of stimulating both professional and lay in-
terest. Because of its great popularity, it has served as the most
important single source of recruitment for anthropology as a pro-
fession. Moreover, as Barnouw has tried to show, Benedict was aware
of some of the inconsistencies in both the Kwakiutl and Pueblo
configurations. She herself drew attention to the “amiable side” of
Kwakiut] life within the family and noted that “not all situations in
Kwakiutl existence require equally the motives that are most character-
istic of their lives” (BENEDICT 1934:122, quoted in BARNOUW 1957:
533). She further protected herself, according to Barnouw, by stating
that “Integration . . . may take place in the face of fundamental
conflicts.” But Barnouw also tries to show that there was no substan-
tial difference of opinion between Boas and Benedict on the question

406

of configurations and in particular concerning the Kwakiutl con-
figuration. It is this continuity between Boas, Benedict, Mead,
and the other configurationists and psychologically oriented anthro-
pologists which raises the central issue to which we must address
ourselves. This issue is one of method, of scientific standards, and of
the functional significance of the historical-particularist reform. Bene-
dict’s “extravagant assertions,” such as, suicide being “too violent an
act . . . for the Pueblos to contemplate . . . they have no idea what
it could be” (BENEDICT 1934:117), cannot be dismissed as a mere
peccadillo. Tt is difficult to shrug off the “easy refutation” which
Hoebel (1949:452) achieved in citing three documented Pueblo sui-
cides, in view of the captious negativism with which the Boasians
had attacked the use of the comparative method. This is not a
matter of spite, but of principle; it is simply impossible to reconcile
the Boasian self-image of methodological rigor with the highly im-
pressionistic and scientifically unreliable procedures which charac-
terize the early phases of the culture and personality movement.

EARLY MEAD

Configurationalism, the identification of salient cultural
characteristics and their presentation in a familiar psychological idiom,
was the forerunner of the rapprochement between historical par-
ticularism and psychoanalysis. We see this quite clearly in the case
of Margaret Mead, who as a student of both Benedict and Boas
made extensive use of the configurationalist frame during her for-
mative period. Indeed, without minimizing Benedict’s contribution,
Mead claims to have been an active participant in all the important
events leading up to the publication of Patterns of Culture and at-

tributes to hersclf the first published statement of the configuration-
alist idea:

Historically, the first written application of her conceptualiza-
tion was in my chapter on “Dominant Cultural Attitudes,” in
Social Organization of Manu'a, written in the winter of 1927-
1928, before she wrote her own first formulation in “Psychological
T}pC§ in the Cultures of the Southwest.” None of her theoretical
phraS{ngs were included in my chapter, but every detail of the
phr;smg was thrashed out between us. The clarity of her concept,
which owed so much to the lack of a sensory screen between the
field worker and the pattern and to her search for meaning within
fragments, was also subjected to the test of living field work as I

407



===== PAGE 209 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

marshaled a procession of identified Samoan children to challenge
or confirm a formulation [MEAD 1959a:207].

Coming of Age in Samoa (1928), the first major product of Mead’s
prodigious outpouring of field-based books and monographs, bore
the subtitle A Psychological Study of Primitive Youth for Western
Civilization. Although this book was far richer in psychologistic
phrasings than the usual ethnographic report, it cannot be said to
reflect an interest in the summing up of a whole culture in terms of
a few dominant categories. Mead’s mission, chosen for her by Boas,
was to emphasize the existence of biopsychological plasticity in human
affairs sufficient to permit the cultural conditioning of adolescent
behavioral patterns along lines which contrast with the stereotype of
adolescence in middle-class Euro-American culture. The use of the
phrase “for Western Civilization” in the subtitle and the inclusion of
two chapters concerned with the comparison of the Samoan ado-
lescent girl with her counterpart in the United States indicate the
importance which Boas and Mead attached to the simple demonstra-
tion of the power of cultural conditioning in this area of life. The
fact that Samoan sex patterns tumed out to be strikingly less in-
hibited than their Western analogues could not have been unantici-
pated. That adolescence was not necessarily a stormy and awkward
biological epoch was additional support for Boas’ emphasis upon the
influence of culture as opposed to biology. And it also corresponded
well with the contemporary interest in Freudian psychology and the
role of sex in pathological personalities. The Samoan’s relative free-
dom from sexually inspired frustrations was eagerly incorporated into
the scientific foundation of the “sexual revolution” which the Ameri-
can middle class was the process of experiencing. There was also a
strong feminist moral in Coming of Age in Samoa, highlighted by the
description of a carefree premarital sex life for adolescent girls. But
the most important moral proposed by Mead was very similar to that
which Benedict was to urge in Patterns of Culture six years later:
Knowledge of the spectrum of possibilities of enculturation should
be made to contribute to our own process of sociocultural change.
Like Benedict, Mead found an antidote for cultural determinism in
the prospect that once a knowledge of alternative patterns become
widespread, significant changes in the Euro-American way of life
would necessarily ensue:

. it is unthinkable that a final recognition of the great num-
ber of ways in which man, during the course of history and at the
present time, is solving the problems of life, should not bring

408

D

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

with it in turn the downfall of our belief in a single standard
[ibid.:162].

The artful presentation of cultural differences to a wide professional
and lay public by Mead and Benedict must be reckoned among the |
important events in the history of American intellectual thought. The |
significance of their contributions as far as cultural theory is con- i
cerned cannot be regarded as of a similar magnitude. Mead herself i
makes this clear in the preface to one of the reissues of her book,
although she would certainly not agree with the construal just ren-
dered: “It was a simple—a very simple—point to which our materials
were organized in the 1920’s, merely the documentation over and
over of the fact that human nature is not rigid and unyielding”

(1939:x).

METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

Coming of Age in Samoa did not attempt the configura-
tionalist synthesis of the sort on which Benedict was working. But
there are many points of similarity between Mead’s and Benedict’s
early writings, especially from a methodological perspective, and
these resemblances increased as time wore on. Mead as much as
Benedict succumbed to the temptation to exaggerate the decisiveness
with which both individual and cultural personality types can be
identified and contrasted. Although the proposal to find out what is
going on “inside of peoples” heads”—to find out how they think and
feel—is perfectly respectable, it must be admitted that other forms of
cultural investigation are decidedly less risky. No one would wish to
assert that even a matter so simple as counting the members of a
household is without its methodological pitfalls, but the problems
associated with developing verifiable statements about how a man
feels toward his mother or his wife are more numerous and much
more exposed to the observer’'s moods and fancies.

Mead (1962a:134) has recently argued that the adherence to a
physicalist model of science in anthropology is premature, and she
has underscored the “need for waiting until appropriate theories
and methods have been developed to fit our exceedingly complex
materials into an evolving framework.” Yet it cannot be said that
her own launching into the domain of culture and personality was
anything less than precipitous. In the absence of operationally ac-
ceptable research techniques, it might very well be argued that the
entire configurationalist approach was premature and that the attempt

409


===== PAGE 210 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

to sketch the typical Samoan girl’s feelings and emotions during the
transition from puberty to marriage was entirely too ambitious an
undertaking.

In this regard it should be stressed that ethnography can easily
become overcautious and obsessed with a passion for verifiable minu-
tiae. That is also a grave threat to scientific standards, and T would
certainly not wish to be associated with a point of view which de-
means the role of impressionistic, nonstatistical data in cultural
anthropology. But the most important consideration regarding the
appropriateness of rescarch methods, which are relatively “soft” in
terms of verifiability, is the nature of the articulation between the
data and the corpus of orienting theory. If the data-collecting process
is designed to maximize the opportunities for continuous correction
in relationship to a set of cross-culturally relevant hypotheses, one
may tolerate a considerable amount of guesswork and nonquantitative
generalization out of the conviction that some data is better than no
data and that the errors will call attention to themselves during the
process of cross-cultural comparison. Yet it is precisely the de-
velopment of systematic cross-cultural comparisons which Mead be-
lieves is premature for culture and personality studies and which she
believes involve a “violation of the actual complexity of the materials”
(ibid.).

Let us consider what this means in terms of one of the sweeping eth-
nographic generalities which leave many of her colleagues in a state of
wide-eyed wonder. Samoan girls, according to Mead, move through pu-
berty and adolescence without major psychological conflicts, and this is
especially true in the area of sexual development. The result is that
“The girls’ minds were perplexed by no conflicts, troubled by no
philosophical queries, beset by no remote ambitions” (MEaD 194qc:
107). For a generalization which is at once so sweeping and so thor-
oughly dependent upon “getting inside of heads,” Mead’s style
conveys an unnerving degree of conviction. To be sure, Mead does
take up several cases of girls “in conflict.” But these are treated as
deviants and as requiring no modification in her major point. It is not
possible to bring this picture of a serene, even apathetic, passage to
maturity into line with a corpus of interrelated and testable hypotheses
of cross-cultural and causal significance. There is some evidence from
other Occanic societies which suggests that Mead’s Samoan findings
were cxaggerated. As Barnouw points out, studies in Truk and Ifaluk
by Gladwin, Sarason, and Spiro indicate that premarital sexual free-
dom and an apparently placid and leisurely life is no guarantee that
deep inner frustrations and anxieties are not also present.

410

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

MEAD’S DEFENSE OF HER METHOD

It would be a grave injustice to one of anthropology’s most
creative and brilliant personalities to suggest that Mead has not paid
sufficient attention to the special methodological issues associated
with a psychocultural approach. On the contrary, Mead has always
been keenly aware of the need for explicit descriptions of field tech-
niques and methodological assumptions (the same cannot be said
for her sense of philosophical and epistemological issues); and in
certain research specialties to which we shall refer in a moment, she is
without peer. Coming of Age in Samoa contains an appendix on
method in which Mead anticipated the main outlines of the criticism
which she and Benedict were about to provoke. Arguing against
the relevance of statistics for the type of study that requires complex
situational and emotional statements of context, she compared her
role to that of an insightful medical diagnostician:

As the physician and the psychiatrist have found it necessary
to describe cach case scparately and to use their cases as illumi-
nations of a thesis rather than as irrefutable proof such as it is
possible to adduce in the physical sciences, so the student of the
more intangible and psychological aspects of human behaviour
is forced to illuminate rather than demonstrate a thesis

[1949¢:169].
This attitude carries through Mead’s cntire voluminous output and
has been the focus of repeated attacks and counteiattacks concerning
the methodology of psychocultural ethnography. It is once again in-
teresting to note the specific disavowal by one of Boas’ most famous
students of the physicalist model which Kroeber had insisted was
central to Boas’ influence. Writing retrospectively, some  thirty-six
years later, Mead was still unprepared to yield up the intuitive preroga-
tives of a clinical diagnostician. She declared her continuing lack of
sympathy for the attempt to build from the outset, a science of man
which “would conform to the ideal science, physics” and her sympathy
for “those who have insisted on the complexity and uniqueness of

significant events in the life of a bird or the life of a human being”
(MEAD 1962a:135).

FLAWS IN THE DEFENSE

This image of the psychologically oriented anthropologist as
physician or psychoanalyst is dispelled at once when we consider the dif-
ferences between applied and “pure” sciences. Although we may deplore

411

i
|
i
|

———


===== PAGE 211 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the large measure of intuition and guesswork in our doctor’s practice, we
gratefully pay our bills in the knowledge that there is no alternative.
This has never been the case as far as Mead’s explorations of the cul-
tural psyche are concerned. I shall make no attempt here to evaluate the
possible contribution which Mead may have rendered to the improve-
ment of psychiatric therapy. The tone of breathless urgency in some of
her writings seems to promise catastrophic penalties for our failure to
come to grips with the most subtle and variable nuances of the human
mind in its myriad cultural settings. But this leap into the intuited
essences of personality was not a requirement imposed by the profes-
sion in which she had elected to achieve eminence. That it was urgent
to do an ethnographic study of the Samoans (or other Polynesians)
before all traces of the aboriginal patterns were obliterated, none will
deny. But from the point of view of experiment design, there is no
special reason why Boas’ theories about the power of culture could not
have been tested in any number of different settings all of which
would have permitted the use of statistical controls.

It must be remembered that the kind of psychologizing upon which
Mead based her portrait of Samoan adolescence has its analogue in
everyday attempts by notably mature and intelligent people to sum up
their mutual acquaintances along any of the thousands of available
avenues of vernacular characterization. Our common experience in as-
serting that John is clever, Mary dull, Henry gullible, Fred jealous, and
Linda a flirt is that someone who has seen these same people under
different circumstances forthwith challenges our opinion and sets
forth an entirely different interpretation. Life would be decidedly less
complicated were there a larger measure of agreement concerning what
it takes to be a beautiful, intelligent, warm, dependable, magnani-
mous, and charming person. Yet it is just this kind of judgment in
which Mead was obliged to indulge in her efforts to obtain a psycho-
logical portrait of Samoan youth. Here is an enterprise which plainly
requires the courage of one’s convictions, a blessing with which Mead
has been liberally endowed. Thus in Coming of Age, Mead wrote that
Lita was “clever and executive”; Sona “overbearing in manner, arbi-
trary and tyrannous, impudently deferential”; Manita was “haughty
and aggressive”; Ana was “mild, quiescent”; Lola was “quarrelsome, in-
subordinate, impertinent”; Sami was “mild and gentle with a soft
undercurrent of resentment”; Nito was “high spirited”; Siva was “pas-
sionate and easily aroused”; Pusa was “strong minded”; Fuativa was
“cautious and calculating”; Mala was “treacherous”; and poor Tino
was “a dull and good child” (ibid.:112-20, 168). It should be pointed
out that whatever difficulties we might suffer in accepting these vi-

412

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

gnettes as verifiable statements were they delivered in their usual
cultural context, we must now reckon with the additional problem
that Mead was twenty-three years old when she left for Samoa and that
she had to form her impressions of personality differences through the
muffling effect of an imperfectly learned second language, and finally
that the ordinary gestural, facial, and behavioral cues associated with
personality traits in Western culture could not be assumed to corre-
spond to analogous traits in Polynesia.

INTERPRETATION OF MANUS
CHILDHOOD

Mead’s next major book, Growing Up in New Guinea (1930a),
was essentially a repeat performance in a new locale of her Samoan
study. It was concerned with the kind of enculturation processes by
which the Manus brought their children to adulthood. According to
her introductory remarks, she “made this study of Manus education
to prove no thesis, to support no preconceived theories,” but
in the appendix and in retrospective articles she describes how she
had originally intended to test the belief propounded by Lévy-Bruhl
that the animistic ingredients in primitive mentality were similar to
childish thoughtways and that they would therefore be more pro-
nounced among primitive children than among their parents. This hy-
pothesis is interesting for its continuation of the main Boasian thrust
against biological determinism. The Manus child turned out to be less
animistic than his parents and even less animistic than American chil-
dren. Left largely to their own devices, Manus children remained
stunted and they manifested a conspicuously “dull unimaginative, play
life,” a fact from which Mead drew the not altogether shattering con-
clusion that the movement in American education to give more free-
dom to children would produce no desirable results unless they were
given “something upon which to exercise their imagination” (ibid.:152).

DIFFICULT PORTRAITURE

In her third major psychocultural study, Sex and Tempera-
ment in Three Primitive Societies, Mead turned to the question of the
degree of malleability of the sexes with respect to culturally assigned,
sex-linked behavior (1935a). In this book the parallelism in method
between Mead and Benedict is clearly visible and has been pointed out
by Mead herself (1962a:126). Perhaps the major difference was that
Mead’s materials were largely drawn from her own field research. Like

413



===== PAGE 212 =====

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Benedict, Mead compared three different cultures to test the range of
variation of cultural patterns. Instead of a psychologistic portraiture of
the entire culture, however, Mead restricted herself largely to the
problem of typing the varieties of sexually assigned behavioral roles.
Nonetheless, there are some unnerving examples of the more general
kind of portraiture. Undoubtedly these provoked less criticism (cf.
THURNWALD 1036; BERNARD 1045; MEAD 1937a) than was directed
toward Benedict’s treatment of the Pueblos only because of the
paucity of relevant area specialists. For instance:

As the Arapesh made growing food and children the greatest ad-
venture of their lives, and the Mundugumor found greatest satis-
faction in fighting and competitive acquisition of women, the
Tchambuli may be said to live principally for art [MEAD 1950:170].

In pursuing the main thread, Mead appears to have had the extraordi-
nary good fortune to have selected the Arapesh, Mundugumor, and
Tchambuli as the cultures in which to do fieldwork. For as she noted
in the Preface to the 1950 edition, “many readers felt that her analysis
was too pretty” and that “I must have found what I was looking for.”

Here, admittedly looking for light on the subject of sex differ-
ences, I found three tribes all conveniently within a hundred
mile area. In one, both men and women act as we expect women
to act—in a mild parental responsive way; in the second, both act
as we expect men to act—in a fierce initiating fashion; and in the
third, the men act according to our stereotype for women—are
catty, wear curls and go shopping, while the women are energetic,
managerial, unadorned partners [ibid.].

Mead goes on to insist that although it seemed “too good to be true,”
she had reported what was actually there and not what she had wanted
to find. Tt is obvious, however, that such oath-takings are irrelevant.
The issue is not one of good faith but rather of demonstration, verifi-
ability, and intersubjectivity.

CRITIQUE OF CONFIGURATIONAL
HOMOGENEITY

This problem is not restricted to Mead’s work but is, of
course, a matter of grave concern in all ethnographic research. It does
seem, however, to be true that psychocultural studies are especially vul-
nerable to criticisms which challenge their evidential foundations. This
difficulty increases in direct proportion to the size and sociocultural

414

cE)mplcxity of the population from which the typical impressionistic
vignettes are derived. Mead’s rejection of statistical validation tech-
niques cannot be justified when one moves from the world of the
Arapesh, total population several hundred, to Bali, population several
tens of thousands, to Russia, Japan, and the United States, population
several tens of millions. Insight, empathy, intuition, everyday experi-
ence, training as observer—no matter how highly developed these
skills are—provide an inadequate basis for making statements which
purport to describe some typical aspect of the personality of millions
of human beings. As a matter of fact, evidence has accumulated that
even in relatively small populations the amount of emotional and cog-
nitive variability is far beyond that with which nonquantitative psycho-
cultural analysts are prepared to cope.

An early indication of this was implicit in Mead’s own data. The very
fact that personality of the sexes differed so markedly in some societies
—as in Mead’s own account of the Tchambuli and as in Bateson’s
(1936) description of the Iatmul—leads one to expect that other status
differences may also be associated with quite different psychic patterns.
In stratified societies class and caste differences obviously intrude, and
there is every reason to expect that many of the myriad occupational
specialties characteristic of the larger statc-organized societies are as-
sociated with important personality differences.

Actually, the main thrust of the methodological critique to which
Mead, Benedict, and the other pioneers of this field have been sub-
jected comes from within the field itself. Among anthropologists, a
second generation of culture and personality studies have been ap-
proached with a more modest and sober if considerably less exciting
regard for methodological complexities. One of the most conspicuous
results of the increased use of standardized psychological tests and
statistical analysis has been the proof that the variability even in small
populations is too great to be ignored. For example, Anthony Wallace
(1952) in a highly operationalized approach to the analysis of Iroquois
personality, used Rorschach tests to establish statistic;ﬂly meaningful
expressions of modal personality. Working with 21 scoring variables
and setting arbitrary limits upon deviation from each mode, he
counted the number of individuals whose scores on all 21 variables fell
within the modal range. By this approach, only 37 percent of the Tus-
carora could be said to manifest the “modal” personality of their group
(but it should be emphasized that no one can say how much deviation
from the mode constitutes an acceptable definition of “shared” traits.
B. I_\’aplan (1954) compared Rorschach responses in four cultures—
Zuiii, Navaho, Spanish American, and Mormon—with respect to four-

415



===== PAGE 213 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

teen variables. Between-group differences turned out to be much
smaller than expected with only five of these variables exhibiting
statistically valid cross-cultural differences. Moreover, the range of
variability within each of the cultures appeared to be comparable to
that which Wallace found for the Tuscarora. As Kaplan notes:

That great variability exists does not argue against the influence
of culture on personality; it means merely that cultural influences
do not necessarily create uniformity in a group. All individuals
interact with their cultures. However human beings are not pas-
sive recipients of their culture. They accept, reject, or rebel
against the cultural forces to which they are oriented. In many
cultures, including our own, there exists a pattern of outward
conformity and inner rebellion and deviation. It is probably cor-
rect to say that individuals scem a good deal more similar than

they really are [1954:32].

In the same vein, but with different methods, C. W. M. Hart has drawn
personality portraits of five Tiwi brothers, cach of whom showed many
striking diffcrences in such patterns as aggressiveness, cheerfulness,
sexuality, and other personality dimensions. Hart ironically draws at-
tention to Boas’ insistence that there is no uniform mentality to be
associated with primitive cultures:

. if the personality and culture literature is leading young an-

thropologists into the field expecting to find “stereotyped per-
sonalities” in the simpler cultures, they are doomed to

disappointment [1954:259].
Wallace, speaking of what he calls the “New Culture and Personality,”

believes that a fundamental shift away from the search for configura-
tional homogeneity on a tribal or national scale has already occurred.

The magnitude of individual psychological differences within cul-
tural boundaries is rccognized as being so large that the analytical
problem would appear to be the elucidation of the processes of
the organization of diversity rather than the mechanisms of in-
ducing a supposed uniformity [WALLACE 1962:6-7).

MEAD'S USE OF PHOTOGRAPHY

Mead’s response to criticism of her methodology has been ex-
tremely complex. By 1936 she herself had become convinced that the
method she had been using to describe the “ethos” of the Samoans
and the New Guineans was unsatisfactory from several points of view:

416

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

This method had many serious limitations: it transgressed the
canons O.f precise and operational scientific exposition proper to
science; it was far too dependent upon idiosyncratic factors of
style and literary skill; it was difficult to duplicate; and it was
difficult to evaluate [BaTESON and MEAD 1942:xi]. '

One ofvthe ways in which Mead has attempted to overcome this dif-
ficulty is strictly methodological. She has sought to improve the de-
monstrative power of her observations by employing cameras and tape
‘recordgrs to capture characteriologically significant behavioral events
in their situational context and to publish or display these records
along with word descriptions. The latter are in turn based on a phe-
nomenally skilled facility for note-taking.

Mead's turning to photography, both still and cine, was a direct re-
sponse to the criticism to which her first three configurational books
were subjected. In preparation for her fieldwork in Bali in 1936 jointly
with Gregory Bateson, Mead took along an unprecedented array of
phqtographic equipment and film. All together, during the ficldwork
period some 25,000 Leica stills and over 22,000 feet of 16 mm. film
were cxpgsed These pioneering experiments in the use of mechanical
aids to give ethnography an unimpeachable documentary foundation
may very well constitute Mead’s most enduring contribution to the
qevelopment of anthropology as a discipline. The ability to record con-
tmupus sequences of specimens of naturally unfolding human be-
havior—the actual raw material of history and sociocultural evolution
—at once maises the scientific prospects of ethnography far beyond its
prototechnic horizons. It must be emphasized that these prospects
have now become much more obvious than they were only a few years
ago. When it first occurred to Mead that part of the answer to her
critics lay in the hardware of the communications industry, she had
little by way of precedent to guide her. Now, within the né);t decade,
we may anticipate a leap to entirely new levels of machine-assisted
ethnography as the technical advances associated with miniaturization
are declassified and made available to nonmilitary personnel. (We may
of course also anticipate a concomitant intensification of the moral
and ethical dilemmas of the ethnographer whose “snooping” has al-
ways been likened to gossiping at best and spying at worst.) But Mead
was undoubtedly years ahead of her collcagués in this matter, and she
quite properly berated her critics with the observation that “the pro-
ponents of quantification and ‘scientific’ accuracy have made very little
use of the new tools that make greater accuracy ‘available for all of us”

(1962a:135).

417



===== PAGE 214 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Despite its long-run promise, it cannot be said that Mead’s and Bate-
son’s utilization of photography solved the immediate methodological
problem of documenting the intuited personality differences associated
with the large, multivillage, stratified, and specialized Balinese popula-
tion. Several selective processes, some of them unconscious, intervene
between the actual unfolding of Balinese behavior during Bateson’s
and Mead’s sojourn and the printing of the stills and movies, which are
intended as proof if not of the representativity at least of the reality of
these events. In view of the fact that Bateson and Mead were both the
cthnographers and the photographers, it scarcely seems possible that
sustained divergences between written observations and the photo-
graphic record would come to light. The camera had to be aimed and
the shutter made to operate in conformity with the interests, hypoth-
eses, and dramatic and aesthetic inclinations of the moment. The re-
sult is that the photographs have superb illustrative value. As far as
their demonstrative value is concerned, however, they are not con-
spicuously less subjective than a straight verbal report. The use of
photographs in other words has not solved Mead’s difficulties with the
problem of intersubjectivity. In this connection the fact that we are
asked to accept the visual representation of body motion as clues to
the emotional events within the brain places an additional burden
upon the verbal interpretations that Mead and Bateson attached to
each photograph. Both the problems of representativity and of verifi-
ability have thus remained essentially immune to Mead’s photographic
innovations.

INFORMANT REPRESENTATIVITY
AND NATIONAL CHARACTER

One of Mead’s answers to her critics has taken her along quite
a different path, of great interest in relationship to the development of
a similar strategy by certain proponents of the “New Ethnography,” of
the “linguistic model,” and of French anthropology under Claude
Lévi-Strauss.

While recognizing the need for better validation procedures, Mead
and her followers and collaborators plunged ahead into a number of
ambitious psychocultural projects, none of which are notably more
convincing than her analysis of Samoan adolescence, and to which the
photographic innovations of her Balinese experiment have not been ap-
plied. Studies of the national character of the United States, Russia,
and England by Geoffrey Gorer (1948, 1949, 1955); of Japan by Ruth
Benedict (1946); and of the United States by Mead herself (1942,

418

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

1949a) have all been attacked for their unorthodox methodology. The
use of a small number of informants as the basis for gcneralfzation
about the intimate psychic constellations of great masses of people is
the most troublesome aspect of these studies. Mead has responded to
sm}xch criticism by insisting that a single informant, provided that his so-
cial and cultural position is carefully specified, can be a satisfactory
source of information about widely distributed patterns: ’

Any member of a group, provided that his position within that
group is properly specified, is a perfect sample of the group-wide
pattern on which he is acting as an informant. So a twenty-one-
year-old boy born of Chinese-American parents in a small ui:state
New York town who has just graduated summa cum laude from
H?r\fard and a tenth-generation Boston-born deaf mute of United
Kingdom stock are equally perfect examples of American national
character, provided that their individual position and individual
characteristics are taken fully into account [MEAD 1953:648].

Although presented with Mead’s characteristic energy and sense of
conviction, this statement leaves the major challenge to her position
essentially untouched. Mead makes the assumption here that the
atypicality of the Chinese American or the deaf mute can be sur-
mounted by fully specifying their atypicality; but to do this, we must
have already achieved some knowledge of the typical patterns. Al-
though it is doubtless a safe bet that Harvard boys and deaf mutes
have noteworthy psychological specialties, what additional varieties of
actor types in the United States require special identification? Are
tugboat captains and insurance office workers notably different in their
Sexugl standards? Mead in effect runs out from under the methodological
requirement for sampling only to have it drop back on her with in-
creased force. For if we are to take fully into account individual posi-
tion and characteristics, then we must either content ourselves with
200 million different national characters or avail ourselves of sampling

techniques in order to identify our informants in relationship to the
test of the American population.

THE LINGUISTIC ANALOGY

Like many anthropologists, and among them more than a few
who are hostile to her approach, Mead believes that cultural patterns
are somehow peculiarly immune to the need for statistically structured
Samp]’es.' In this regard there is a fascinating convergence between
Mead’s invocation of the linguistic model as a methodological prece-
dent and the similar use of the same model by the practitioners of

419

|
|
|
i
|
i
i
i
|
|
{
|
|
i
I
|
|



===== PAGE 215 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the “New Ethnography.” Unlike the sociologist or the social psycholo-
gist, she argues, the anthropologist is not primarily interested in the
distribution or incidence of a pattern such as “resistance to paternal
authority” but merely in the existence of this pattern as it is mani-
fested in regard to parents, grandparents, siblings, and other sets of
relationships. If one wants to know the grammatical structure of a
language, “it is sufficient to use very few informants.” The same is true
of the rest of culture.

In dealing with culture, the anthropologist makes the same as-
sumptions about the rest of a culture that the linguist makes
about the language—that he is dealing with a system which can
be delineated by analysis of a small number of very highly speci-
fied samples [ibid.:655].

Mead attributes to linguistics the belief that the statement “to be is
an auxiliary verb in English” will not be improved by the collection of
more and more samples of English speech. So too, she argues, will our
statements about patterns not be improved by additional sampling.
The distinction which Mead is making here is also precisely that which
Lévi-Strauss has attempted to set up under the rubrics “mechanical”
and “statistical” models (see Chap. 18). All of these attempts to cir-
cumvent the labor of counting and measuring human responses echo
the idealism and intuitionism of Vico, Kant, Hegel, and Dilthey. The
strongest case for Mead’s point is certainly that furnished by language
and other communication systems. But there are important reasons
why culture as a whole cannot profitably be looked upon as a communi-
cation system. Even in linguistics it is not so apparent that the testing
for behavioral variations will not improve the statement of grammatical
rules. Were linguists not to test for some additional instances of the
use of the sound train “to be,” they would be as much victims of
philosophical idealism as their colleagues in cultural anthropology. To
learn that “to be” occurs not only as an auxiliary verb, but also as three
or more intransitive verbs with meanings such as “to exist,” “to re-
main,” and “to happen” is the kind of improvement which one might
expect from collecting more samples of English speech.

As we shall see, the invocation of linguistics as the patron of intuited
regularities is sometimes more appropriate than in the case of person-
ality studies. Some domains of culture are more highly patterned than
others. Textbook English obviously lies at one end of a very broad
continuum of interpersonal regularities. In between there are such
matters as when to plant corn, where to live after marriage, how to
grect a chief. At the other extreme, there are such concerns as how one

420

15. Culture and Personality: Pre-Freudian

feels and what one thinks in reaction to a mother’s nagging, a sexual ad-
vance, the death of one’s father. It is to the study of this most perplex-
ing of all areas of human bchavior that Mead’s professional life has
been dedicated. And it is precisely in this area that firm statistical con-

trq] and carefully operationalized and instrumented research methodol-
ogies are most urgently required.

421

i


===== PAGE 216 =====

Culture and Personality.

Freudian 16

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

S
BB

rl_l:e research investment in culture and personality exemplifies the
attraction of mentalistic and individualistic themes in American social
science. The extraordinary influence of Freudian and other depth psy-
chologies is possibly linked with the heightening of social, political,
and economic tension associated with two world wars and the ap-
parently deteriorating prospects of achieving human happiness through
sociocultural evolution. It seems to me not without significance for the
development of theories of culture that widespread attention to psy-
chocultural analysis among anthropologists historically accompanied
the inward-turning of the depth psychologists toward the family’s and
the individual’s responsibility for frustrations and anxieties, and a con-
sequent turning away from the techno-environmental, techno-eco-
nomic, and social and political conditions that control the destiny of
both family and individual.

422

FUNCTIONALIST PARADIGMS

In addition to constituting an enlargement of the descriptive
interests of ethnography, the culture and personality movement has
made a number of tentative theoretical contributions toward the ex-
planation of cultural differences and similarities. For the most part
these contributions have been phrased in terms of loosely formulated,
functionalist paradigms. That is, certain kinds of personality configura-
tions are presented as somehow appropriate to, or consistent with, cer-
tain kinds of institutions or other aspects of the group’s typical or
modal personality. In this sense Benedict’s configurations are obviously
a form of functional analysis which is fully analogous to the attempt by
Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski to show the interdependence and
functional “fit” of less conspicuously psychologistic elements. There
is the further resemblance in that most psychological functionalism
involves a timeless or synchronic cross-section in which no commit-
ment is made conceming the relative permanence of the observed in-
stitutional and psychological concatenation. Milton Singer’s (1961:28)
observation concerning the timelessness of patterns in the configura-
tional approach actually also applies to the culture and personality
movement as a whole:

The overwhelming impression given by works of this period is
that configurations arc timeless entities without known antece-
dents or consequences, but that, once established in a particular
territory, they automatically become all-powerful shapers of events
and personalities.

A general critique of synchronic functionalism will be found in the
chapter, British Social Anthropology. Tt will then be shown that the
strategy is not a viable alternative to historical determinism. Here we
may note the philosopher Ernest Nagel’s (1953) proof that any logico-
empirically meaningful functional statement must be translatable into
a cause and effect paradigm. The reverse is also true: any cause and
effect statement may also be restated as a functional one. Functional
analysis implies that some sort of covariance of a long- or short-range
time period can be identified in a set of variables.

HOMEOSTATIC MODEL

Paul Collins (1965) has recently formulated the logical prin-
ciples which sustain short-range functional analysis and has advanced
the analogy of homeostatic control through negative feedback as the

423



===== PAGE 217 =====

.

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

basis for functional concatenation between system-maintaining varia-
bles. In Collins’ view, elements of the system are seen as changing
through a range of limited values maintained by sociocultural servo-
mechanisms. The analysis of Melanesian and New Guinea pig popula-
tions has been carried out with this paradigm in mind (VAYDA, LEEDS,
and smiTH 1961¢; RAPPAPORT 1966 ). Homeostasis is assured by periodic
slaughter, under ritual coordination, of herds which place excessive de-
mand on labor input and garden lands. Another variety of short-range
covariance involves a safety-valve effect. This admits the existence of
“waste” or “noise” in the system and assigns to certain cultural ele-
ments the function of ridding the system of potentially disruptive
ingredients. In psychocultural analyses, some combination of these two
short-time functional paradigms seems to be implied whenever ana-
Iytic propositions advance beyond the level of mere equivocation. It is
this kind of covariance, for example, that is implied when one speaks
of the “projective” functions of magico-religious elements. Religious
ceremonial is frequently thought of as fulfilling the psychological func-
tion of allaying anxiety and also as a coordinating mechanism for
heightening cooperation. Translated into the normal cause and effect,
covariant statement, this means that the rituals in question drain off
individual anxieties when system-destroying levels are approached. It
also means that as ceremonials take place, levels of cooperation which
had fallen in the direction of system-destroying values are restored to
tolerable limits.

EVOLUTIONARY MODEL

Homeostatic functional paradigms should be kept distinct
from statements of the conditions under which the system develops
new functional or dysfunctional concatenations: in other words, the
conditions under which cultural evolution takes place. When the sys-
tem cvolves, changes in the value of the clements in one sector ac-
cumulate and in so doing cause changes in other sectors. The cause and
effect sequence may produce positive feedback with the consequence
that the analytical separation of the dependent and independent varia-
bles is made extremely difficult. But the factors responsible for cultural
evolution are both functionally and causally related. Nothing could be
more futile than to oppose functionalism to historical determinism.
An understanding of cultural evolution requires the study of both
system-maintaining and system-changing phenomena, and in both
cases we are concerned with probabilistic versions of causality. When
a functional statement cannot be made to yield a prediction of the

424

changes of state of dependent and independent variables, it is not
properly speaking a functional statement, but rather a functional
equivocation.

This brings us back to the matter at hand, for any attempt to assess
the contribution made by culture and personality studies to cultural
theory must grapple with the highly equivocal nature of the relational
propositions that dominate the field. These propositions are frequently
worded in such a way as to defy all efforts to categorize them as either
of the two viable varieties of functionalism. Yet, it is the evident in-
tent of the responsible parties that psychocultural analysis be regarded
as more than mere descriptions barren of testable hypotheses.

FREUD S EVOLUTIONISM

The basic psychological frame of reference for the modern
culture and personality school derives directly or indirectly from
Sigmund Freud. Paradoxically, there is no equivocation in Freud’s
psychocultural pronouncements as regarding the category of functional-
ism to which they are meant to conform. When Freud turned his at-
tention from the analysis of the individual psyche to psychocultural
phenomena, it was to identify the causal processes in cultural evolu-
tion. This was the avowed objective of Totem and Taboo (1913), his
first sustained foray into the domain of culture. In every respect,
Totem and Taboo may be taken as representative of what the Boasians
considered to be the worst form of evolutionary speculation. In the
grandiosity of its compass, the flimsiness of its evidence, and the gen-
erality of its conclusions, it was scarcely approached by anything Mor-
gan had conceived. A direct clash between Freud and the Boasians
was thus inevitable.

According to Freud, man began his cultural career under a form of
social organization in which a single patriarch held exclusive sexual
privileges over his sisters and daughters. At some unspecified moment,
his sexually deprived sons plotted their father's murder, killed him,
and ate him. But the brothers were overcome with guilt; they hence-
forth repressed their desire to have sexual relations with their mothers,
sisters, or daughters. At the same time, in expiation of their murder-
ous deed and cannibalistic orgy, they created the myth of the totem,
the animal symbol of their father, henceforth taboo as food except on
titual occasions. In this fashion, the primal patricide, helped along by
hereditary memory traces in the “racial unconscious,” gave rise to the
Oedipus complex, nuclear family incest taboo, group exogamy, totem-
ism, and many other features of primitive civilization.

425



===== PAGE 218 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Within this anachronistic framework Freud sought to handle the
problem of the diversity of cultures. Savage personality was equated
with infantile personality; each modern individual in a sense recapitu-
lates the evolution of culture by passing through the various stages of
progress toward maturity, and some cultures like some individuals have
their development arrested at various points short of “civilization”
(maturity). Nothing in these doctrines prepared orthodox Freudians
to cope with the great variety of culturally determined personality
structures which the data being collected by Malinowski, Mead, Bene-
dict, and other psychologically oriented fieldworkers seemed to demon-
strate.

THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL CRITIQUE OF
FREUD

The reaction of the Boasians to Totem and Taboo is well
represented by Kroeber’s 1920 review of the book’s English translation.
Although Freud is called a “gallant and stimulating adventurer into
ethnology,” his theories are scoffed at wherever they purport to explain
social origins and evolutionary phases. The entire historical dimension
is associated with the era of discredited speculative anthropology. The
Boasians, understandably enough, were not about to substitute the
phantasies of neurotic patients for a study of actual historical events.
Boas himself was considerably less charitable than Kroeber:

While, therefore, we may welcome the application of every ad-
vance in the method of psychological investigation, we cannot
accept as an advance in ethnological method the crude transfer of
a novel, one-sided method of psychological investigation of the in-
dividual to social phenomena the origin of which can be shown to
be historically determined and to be subject to influences that are
not at all comparable to those that control the psychology of the
individual [Boas 1948:28¢; orig. 1920a).

The anthropological critique of Freudian theories centers on Mal-
inowski’s (1923; 1927a) “disproof” of the universality of the Oedipus
complex. Having had his attention drawn to the strategic value of the
matrilineal, avunculocal Trobrianders by C. G. Seligman, Malinowski
threatened the entire Freudian edifice with his description of how in
a Trobriand family it was mother’s brother and not father who was
the figure of authority. This meant that repressive discipline did not
originate in the man who sexually monopolized ego’s mother, thereby
depriving the father-son relationship of the ambivalent love-hatred
which Freud had observed in his European patients.

426

.

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

To a significant extent, the first three of Margaret Mead’s field stud-
ies must also be seen as part of the anthropological critique of Freud.
Not that Freud was the specific target of her fieldwork, but rather that
her main concern was to disprove the widespread belief of which
Freud was one of the most prominent advocates, that human nature
contained biopsychological components, such as libido and its com-
plexes, which express themselves in definite behavioral stages indepen-
dently of the specific sociocultural environment. Freud, in other
words, in the nature-nurture controversy, leaned heavily toward the
side of the physiologists, biologists, instinct psychologists, and Spen-
cerian anthropologists. Boas and his students were concerned to prove
that culture has the power to make every human being different from
what “nature” has decreed, while Freud and his disciples were con-
vinced that cultural differences were superficial and that in the most
significant psychological sense, all human beings were led along similar
developmental routes by their common hereditary endowment.

From the morphology of the id, ego, and superego, to the interpreta-
tion of dreams, to the origin of civilization, Freud’s scheme depended
upon the existence of a well-defined universal human instinctual en-
dowment and a definite universal ontogenetic progress through ma-
turational stages (oral, anal, genital). Freud originally gave the name
libido to the instinctual source of human behavior. Later, with the
publication of Civilization and Its Discontents (1930), he spoke of
“eros” and opposed this life force to a death instinct (from which he
derived such phenomena as masochism, suicide, and war). Every-
thing in Mead’s approach weighed against such compulsory psychic
freight. It was her mission, set for her by Boas, to defeat the notion of
a narrowly fixed racial or panhuman hereditary human nature. And it
was for this reason that she tirelessly stressed the absence of matura-
tional regularities: adolescence is not always a time of stress; children
are not necessarily more imaginative than adults; women are not
necessarily more passive than men (MEAD 1939:x-xi).

THE FREUDIAN PURITY OF RCSHEINI

During the period under discussion there was one field-experi-
enced anthropologist of major stature who argued on behalf of the
whole Freudian doctrine: Hungarian-born Géza Réheim. By Réheim’s
own reckoning, Bruno Bettelheim was the only other authority with
possibly comparable credentials (including clinical practice).

Roéheim is one of the most flamboyant figures in the history of the
culture and personality movement. Although his method of reaching
psychoanalytical conclusions is intolerably linked with clinical author-

427



===== PAGE 219 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ity, his didactic “einschnappen” are not appreciably more amazing
than those associated with the Mead-Bateson-Gorer axis. On the other
hand, Réheim had the virtue of clarity and frankness, always stipulat-
ing that the fundamental causal sequence rises from infant experience
to adult practice. Everything else is superficial. It is the Oedipus com-
plex which lies at the root of all psychologically significant sociocultural
happenings, and from Réheim’s perspective anyone who denies this
is suffering from a repressed Oedipus complex of his own and should
at once tush off to be analyzed. Contrary to popular impression, in the
argument between Réheim and Malinowski over the effect of the
Trobriand matrilineal organization on the Oedipal situation, it is
Réheim who holds the trump card. By Malinowski’s own admission,
the Trobriand child is brought up largely under the influence of the
usual nuclear pairs. Mother’s brother enters the picture only when
the child is seven or eight years old, an age by which the Oedipal
constellation is firmly entrenched.

Réheim’s long-running battle with the members of particularist and
synchronic anthropological schools on both sides of the Atlantic en-
gendered much acrimonious debate. His rejection of the Boasian
emphasis on the alleged uniqueness of each culture, due to its separate
historical growth, has many points in common with the neo-evolution-
ist critique of historical particularism. Yet Roheim’s style was so
thoroughly calculated to insult the majority of his anthropological
peers that he gained few converts, and even those who were influenced
by him preferred not to acknowledge his existence. Especially painful
was Roheim’s accusation that when it came down to it, the Boasian
relativists were simply repressed nationalists. The reason why they re-
jected Freud’s evolutionary theory and went about trying to prove
that cultural factors could prevent the formation of Oedipal feelings
was that they themselves were suffering from unresolved Oedipal
urges. His audacious accusations aptly convey both the strength and
weakness of his doctrines:

But the point we are now making is that this impression of
complete diversity of various human groups is largely created by
the Oedipus complex, that is to say, the Oedipus complex of the
anthropologist or psychiatrist or psychologist. He does not know
what to do with his own Ocdipus complex—he therefore scoto-
mizes clear evidence for the Oedipus complex, even when his

training ought to enable him to see it [ROHEIM 1950:362].

Although this seems like a hit below the belt, there are more vicious
blows to come. Réheim must have thoroughly enjoyed the sputtering

428

v—

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

in professional circles which greeted his preposterous notion that
Freud was rejected because the Boasians were crypto-racists:

This repression of the Oedipus complex is paralleled by another
preconscious tendency, that of nationalism. The idea that all na-
tions are completely different from each other and that the goal
of anthropology is simply to find how different they are is a thinly
veiled manifestation of nationalism, the democratic Ccunterparlt
of the Nazi racial doctrine or the communist class doctrine. Now
of course, I am quite aware of the fact that all those who advocate
the study of differences are well-meaning people and that con-
sciously they are in favor of the brotherhood of mankind. The
slogan of “cultural relativity” is supposed to mean just this. But
I am a psychoanalyst. I know that all human attitudes result
from a compromise formation of two opposite trends and I know
the meaning of reaction formation: “You are completely differ-
ent, but I forgive you” is what it amounts to. Anthlupoldgy is in
danger of being led down a blind alley by being subjected to one
of the most ancient tendencies of mankind, that of in-group versus
out-group [ibid.].

The audacious ironies in which Réheim delighted are not wholly
devoid of rational substance. One of the basic requirements of a theory
of cultural continuity and change is a description of what used to be
called human nature. All cultural items are partially the product of a
set of biophysical constants which are shared by most if not all Homo
sapiens. Correct though it may be that the explanation of differences
and similarities cannot be achieved merely by invoking these con-
stants, it is no less improbable that explanations can be achieved with-
out them. These constants interact with the variables of specific
cultural and natural environments, and they form a necessary part of
the equation by which we seek to explain specific classes of phenomena
of less than universal occurrence. At a minimum, the species-given re-
quirement of metabolism, the conditions and phases of human sexual-
ity, the universals of somatic and psychic health and discase—all
must be plugged into the equation by which differences as well as simi-
larities are to be understood. In this respect, despite the obsessive
quality of Réheim’s search for Oedipal taboos, Oedipal ceremonies,
and Oedipal organization, we must maintain an open mind regarding
the possibility that much of the recurrent symbolism of dreams and
myths reflects an underlying commonality of Oedipal strivings.

In his later years, Réheim’s case for the primacy of the Oedipal situa-
tion gained immeasurably from his abandonment of Freud’s idea of a
phylogenetic memory of the primal patricide. Réheim pointed instead

429



===== PAGE 220 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

to certain species-given characteristics of Homo sapiens which might
very well account for a universal sexual complex. There is first the
universal affection from mother to child (“sheltered, i.e., libidinal,
mother-child situation”); there is second a precocious sexuality which
sets in before physical or mental maturity is reached; and third, it is
the combination of precocious sexuality and maturing mental processes
which fills the human child with libidinal images. Réheim concludes
that psychoanalysis is not culture-bound and that its methods are
of universal validity: “There can be many types of personality but
only one Unconscious” (1950:491).

Réheim recognized that his defense of a single “unconscious” was a
restatement of the doctrine of psychic unity, which he attributes to
Adolf Bastian, in an acknowledgment almost unique among twen-
tieth-century anthropologists. But Roheim points out that in addition
to universal germ thoughts, Bastian was also aware of the specific devel-
opment which these received in specific cultures. Réheim was similarly
unprepared to dismiss individual cultural elaboration as unimportant,
but he denied that they could be understood apart from their universal
ingredients. This led him to a kind of psychocultural analysis which
was clearly antecedent to that of the entire neo-Freudian culture and
personality movement. Although he insisted on centering all of his
description on the Oedipus complex, he regularly accounted for spe-
cific cultural phenomena in terms of the modification of childhood
experiences by culturally established customs. Among the Arunta for
example, he claimed that the mother slept with her male child under
her as if she were copulating with him from the male position. This
produces a certain amount of confusion in the child, which gets in-
stitutional expression in the famous rite of sub-incision—the slitting
of the underside of the penis back to the urcthra—an anatomical alter-
ation which Réheim declares is an attempt to possess both a vagina
and a penis. The same projective phenomena are invoked to explain
the circular patterns which the adult males incise on their sacred
phallic stones (tchuringas). Let it not be said therefore that Roheim
was insensitive to cultural specialities or that he attempted to reduce
them all to a uniform Ocdipal situation. On the other hand, the ten-
uous nature of his interpretation surely requires no further comment.

IRRESISTIBLE LURE OF FREUDIANISM

Despite the isolated situation in which Roheim found him-
self (not without considerable satisfaction, one suspects), the re-
sistance to Freud was not as great as he seemed to think it was. Freud’s
doctrines held a great appeal for the intellectual denizens of the in-

430

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

terval between the two world wars. Even in the dispute concerning
the universality of the Oedipus complex, Freudian doctrine was actu-
ally accorded a relatively favorable reception. On closer inspection
Malinowski’s point turns out to be rather supportive of Freud’s outi
look. He himself felt that he was vindicating, not destroying, the essen-
tials of Freud’s contributions. '

By my analysis, 1 have established that Freud’s theories not only
roughly correspond to human psychology, but that they follow
closely the modification in human nature brought about by vari-
ous constitutions of Society. In other words, I have established a
deep correlation between the type of society and the nuclear
complex found there. While this is a notable confirmation of the
main tenet of Freudian psychology, it might compel us to modify
certain of its details, or rather to make some of the formulae more
clastic [MALINOWSKI 1923:331].

As Kroeber pointed out, in a reconsideration of Totem and Taboo
{1952:309; orig. 1939), the orthodox psychoanalytic movement re-
vealed “itself as partaking of a religion—a system of mysticism” from
which each deviation was a heresy, and as such, grossly exaggerated the
anthropologist’s resistance to Freudian psychological principles.

During the 1920’s, anthropologists and psychoanalysts were natural
allies in the intellectual revolt against the constraints of sexual and
other forms of provincialism. Anthropologists enjoyed a reputation for
Bohemianism which they carned as proponents of the relativity of
morals, as taboo-breaking feminists, or as practitioners of exotic custom
picked up in jungle villages and Pacific atolls. Freud’s exposure of the
pathological results of Euro-American sexual taboos and family organi-
zation struck a responsive chord in the Boasian progran;. Moral
relativism was an important side effect of the critique of nineteenth-
century evolutionism. Among some of the Boasians, as for example,
Melville Herskovits, the disproof of the superiority of Euro-American
culture in the realm of religion, social organization, and family life
Iloomed so large that the very word “primitive” came to be regarded as
inadmissibly invidious and pejorative.

One of the most important themes running through Patterns of Cul-
ture is concerned with the alternative ways in which different cultures
acf:(?mmodate deviants, with an explicit psychoanalytically derived
critique of our own failings in this respect. The net attractiveness of
psychoanalysis is well illustrated by the fact that about the time Kroe-
ber wrote his rather scathing critique of Totem and Taboo he himself
was undergoing analysis. For two years, Kroeber even maintained an
office in San Francisco in which he set himself up as a lay analyst

431



===== PAGE 221 =====

—————7—‘

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

(sTEwaRD 1961:1050). Moreover, the drift into ever more individual-
ized versions of historical particularism as practiced and advocated by
Sapir, Radin, and Boas also set a premium on achieving a theo-
retical framework for the description of the cognitive and emotional
inner life of one’s informants. In brief, the attraction of Freud’s
psychological, as distinct from his evolutionary and psychocultural,
theories was so great that anthropologists were not prepared to read
themselves out of the Freudian circle simply because of a few crimes
against history. What was needed was a de-mythologized, de-evolution-
ized, de-Europeanized Freud.

Sapir, responding to W. H. R. Rivers’ early criticism, was among
the first to realize that this transfiguration would actually take place
and that Freud’s influence would survive the flames of the anthro-
pological crucible. During the First World War, Rivers had observed
that battle-induced hysteria and anxiety neuroses among British sol-
diers apparently occurred independent of sexual frustrations. Rivers’
book, Instinct and the Unconscious (1920a), challenged Freud’s libido
theory. In his review, Sapir looked beyond the specific defects to a re-
markably prophetic vision of the neo-Freudian movement:

Nearly everything that is specific in Freudian theory, such as the
“QOedipus-complex” as a normative image or the definite inter-
pretation of certain symbols or the distinctively sexual nature of
certain infantile reactions, may well prove to be cither ill-founded
or seen in a distorted perspective, but there can be little doubt of
the immense service that Dr. Freud has rendered psychology in
his revelation of typical psychic mechanism. Such relational ideas
as the emotionally integrated complex, the tendency to suppres-
sion under the stress of a conflict, the symptomatic expression of
a suppressed impulse, the transfer of emotion and the canalizing
or pooling of impulses, the tendency to regression, are so many
powerful clues to an understanding of how the “soul” of man sets
to work. Psychology will not willingly let go of these and still
other Freudian concepts, but will build upon them, gradually
coming to sec them in their wider significance [SAPIR 1049:520;

orig. 1921].

RECONCILIATION OF ANTHROPOLOGY
AND FREUDIANISM

Only after Freud’s scheme had been purged of its historical

determinism was it embraced by the culture and personality move-
ment (which is not to minimize the importance of the other modifica-

tions demanded by the known facts of cthnography). Before this

432

tra.nsformation took place, one can vaguely discern Freud’s influence
l")cmg transmitted through Sapir to Benedict and Mead and adumbrat-
ing the popular treatment of deviant behavior, early childhood pat-
terns, and comparative sexology. After this transformation the debt to
Freud was readily acknowledged. But in the meantime something had
been lost: the definiteness of Freud’s position as far as causality is
concerned. Henceforth, the accent was on synchronic functionalisn; It
should be noted that this transformation conformed to the Boasian
treatment of all other evolutionary schema. The discredited evolution-
ary section of the Freudian synthesis was eliminated with no attempt
made to reformulate the diachronic regularities on the basis of revised
eth'nographic information. Although many anthropologists now gave
their energies and talents to the task of helping the ‘psychoanalysts
and psychologists reform Freud’s psychological theories, they dumpeé
Freud’s cvolutionary views into the same dustbin into which Morgan
and Spencer had been thrown. But for all its errors, Freud’s evolution-
ary hypothesis was presented in terms of a recognizable cause and ef-
fect variety of diachronic functionalism. On the other hand, the
fleo-Frct1dian movement in anthropology, for all of its better gr(;und»
ing in ethnographic data, operates with a highly equivocal version of
synchronic functionalism. From this circumstance there arose a brand
of psychocultural analysis whose relational propositions elude com-
monly understood standards of scientific verification.

One would need a separate volume to unravel the extent to which
anthropological criticism of Freud played a role in bringing about the
new approaches to psychoanalysis. Here it can only be mentioned that
such neo-Freudians as Karen Horney, Erich From;n, Abram Kardiner,
and Erik Erkson were very much involved in a give and take with’
anthropologists who insisted upon opening the Freudian system to
the‘ effects of cultural variables. The resulting neo-Freudianism was
built very much in the image of Sapir’s prophecy. It stressed the im-
portance of early childhood experience, especially such matters as toilet
tr.au_un-g, nursing experience, weaning, sibling ﬁ\;alry, patterns of sexual
qlsc1p11ne, and body contact, which contribute to the human encultura-
tion process. Freud’s emphasis upon the oral, anal, and genital phases of
SeXl'Jélllty was incorporated into a broader spectrum of conditioning
varlal?lesf all of which could be presumed to be related to the adult per-
sonality in different cultural settings. At the same time an eclectic view
was a.dopted toward the application of Freud’s basic psychodynamic
pnnc}ples such as repression, the formation of guilt and anxiéty the
relationship between frustration and aggression, sublimation rcsist;ncc
and symbolization. They were all to be utilized as needed to draw a
connection between childhood experiences and adult personality.

433


===== PAGE 222 =====

—_—_—_7‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

MEAD' S TURN TOWARD FREUD

Mead has set a date—1934—the occasion of the meeting of
an interdisciplinary group at Hanover, as the turning point in her own
utilization of Freudian principles.

From the Hanover Seminar T learned how to handle the prob-
lem of character formation in what I now believe should be
described as a Neo-Freudian way. My understanding of this prob-
lem developed out of long discussions at the Seminar and during
the following winter with John Dollard, whose approach was also
influenced by the work of Karen Horney and Erich Fromm
(Dollard 935). These discussions focused on the relationship be-
tween character formation and the way in which the developing
individual learns to cope with his impulse structure on the one
hand, and with the institutions of his society on the other [MEAD

1962a:127-28].

As remarked previously, however, Freud’s influence was pervasive.
Mead had already adopted certain Freudian premises long before the
Hanover Seminar as revealed in her treatment of ambivalence toward
the dead in a contribution to the Psychoanalytic Review (1930b).
Affirming the cssential correctness of Freud’s use of the ambivalence
concept, she simply adds the usual relativist footnote that it is within
the power of cultural conditioning to find modes of belief and expres-
sion which obviate the need for suppressing either one’s sorrow or joy
at the death of a kinsman. Nonctheless, her Balinese field trip, already
commented on for its methodological innovations, was the first occa-
sion for which Freudian principles provided the major research frame.
Even Réheim later referred to the Balinese study as an instance of
exemplary Freudian technique. Balinese Character is indeed saturated
with psychoanalytic terms, concepts, and nuances. Everything from the
way men handle their fighting rooster to how infants cross open spaces
and women carry their babies is alive with Freudian innuendoes. But
few of these hints are brought into a cause and effect focus.

Mead has never formulated a model of how the parts of culture in
which she has been interested articulate to produce either homeostasis
or predictable transformations. Fach of her sustained attempts at
psychocultural analysis has involved proposals for connecting one set of
institutions with another or with typical character traits. In each case,
however, the items that have been singled out and their functional con-
sequences have been different. In Bali, for example, it is proposed that
Dehavior during conventionalized trance performance is related to the

434

flrustrated attempts of Balinese children to produce climaxes of affec-
tion and anger in their parents (GorER and MEAD 1942:168). None of
Mead's other studies take up a similar theme, and although her analy-
sis sounds plausible, we do not know whether a similar relationshi

can be expected anywhere else in the world. We do have the sugge@tiol;
that Balinese trance is a “return to repressed patterns of l)eha\;ior ”
butlthe pmblem of connecting these two features in terms of homeZJ»
static covariance or diachronic transformation is scarcely touched
upon. As we shall see in a moment from the case of the swaddlin,

hypotheses, Mead has flatly dissociated herself from all attempts tg
establish direct causal connections between any given infantile experi-
ence and developed cultural forms (cf. MEAD 1954:398) P

KARDINER'S SYNTHESIS

The neo-Freudian approach which came closest to achieving
a theory of psychocultural analysis was that of Abram Kardiner. In
1936 Kardiner, a practicing analyst, organized a seminar at the I.\ch
York Psychoanalytic Institute in which Sapir, Benedict, and Bunzel
were participants. In 1937, the seminar moved to Columbia University
and it was joined by Ralph Linton, Cora DuBois, and Carl Withers alf
of whom submitted ethnographic data for Kardiner’s psychocult{nal
an.al.ysis. Kardiner operated with only the barest remnants of Freud’s
ongl.nal scheme. He had dropped the Oedipus complex, with its primal
patnci.dc and phylogenetic memory; the threestage development of
se)fuahty; and the exclusive emphasis upon the sexual aspect of human
drives. With this “superstructure” eliminated, what remained was “a
method for identifying the reaction of men to the realities of life”
(RARDINER 1939:407). Kardiner grasped the fact that the source of
perso-nality differences must be sought in a much broader spectrum of
conditioning factors than Freud had envisioned. In a sense, Freud’s
ana]yl.:ic scheme had concentrated only on those aspects of childhood
experience which permitted him to identify the processes of gratifica-
tion, frustration, and discipline relevant to the typical personality of
Euu.)—American man. In different cultures, varieties of frustration,
gmtlﬁc?tion, and discipline, unknown to Freud, would produce peri
sonalities having little in common with those familiar to psychoana-
lysts from their clinical practice. All this had been apparent to the
psychologically oriented anthropologists with whom Kardiner had come
In contact. But Kardiner now went beyond their documentation of the
Plasticity of institutions and personalities and attempted to create a

435



===== PAGE 223 =====

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

theory involving testable hypotheses concerning the relationship be-
tween institutional matrix and personality.

Postulating the existence of a “basic personality structure” typical of
the members of a given society, he divided the institutional aspects of
culture into two categories—primary and secondary. Primary institu-
tions were those responsible for forming the basic personality structure.
On analogy with Freudian doctrine, these institutions were the ones
most directly concerned with disciplining, gratifying, and inhibiting
the infant and young child. However, Kardiner did not produce a
fixed list of primary institutions. He believed that the relevant
disciplines were administered in different institutional forms from one
culture to the next. In general, the indicated research focus is upon
family organization, in-group formation, feeding, weaning, care or ne-
glect of children, sexual training, and subsistence patterns. “A primary
institution is one which is older, more stable, and less likely to be inter-
fered with by vicissitudes of climate or economy” (ibid.:471).

Secondary institutions are those which “satisfy the needs and ten-
sions created by the primary or fixed ones” (ibid.:476). Among the
secondary institutions Kardiner gave greatest prominence to “taboo
systems, religion, rituals, folktales and techniques of thinking” (ibid.
471). Between the primary and secondary institutions Kardiner inter-
posed the basic personality structure. Fashioned by the childhood
disciplines, the basic personality in turn expressed itself in the group’s
ideologies, in emotional and cognitive orientation to life and death.

According to Kardiner, it was Freud’s The Future of an Illusion
(1928) which contained the most powerful suggestion for adapting
psychoanalytic theory to psychocultural analysis. During his considera-
tion of the illusions which constitute the core of religious phenomena,
Freud detected a correspondence between the methods men use to
approach, communicate with, and control their deities and the expe-
rience which they have had with their parents. The Judeo-Christian
God was thus simply the projected image of Western man’s stern,
patriarchical father. As Kardiner put it, Freud was on the brink of a

new technique.

For the first time, Freud describes here the origin of what may
be called a projective system, that is to say, a system for structur-
ing the outer world and one’s relation to it in accordance with a
pattern laid down in an earlier experience during ontogenesis.
This is a powerful idea and one with many uses [KARDINER and

PREBLE 1961:236].

436

IF s_hould be kept in mind, however, that Roheim had already made
snmx];.n suggestions in his study of Australian totemism (1925) and
tl)at in all essentials Malinowski’s critique of the Oedipus theory had
envisioned precisely the role which Kardiner was now about to assign
to cultural variables. According to Malinowski:

In that full version of my psycho-analytic results I shall be able to
sho_w that in the social life, as well as in the folk-lore, of these
natives their specific repressions manifest themselves unmistaka-
bly. Whenever the passions, kept normally within traditional
bounds by rigid taboos, customs and lcéal penalties, break
thm‘ugh in crime, perversion, aberration, or in one of those dra-
matic occurrences which shake from time to time the hum-drum
hf'e of a savage community—then these passions reveal the ma-
triarchal hatred of the maternal uncle or the incestuous wishes
toward the sister. The folk-lore of these Melanesians also mirrors
the Matrilineal Complex. The examination of myth, fairy tales

and legenq, as well as of magic, will show . . . the repressed
hatred against the maternal uncle, ordinarily masked by conven-
tional reverence . . . [MALINOWSKI 1923:331].

Kardiner’s contribution was to remove Freud’s theories further from
their culture-bound Viennese-European matrix and enlarge the scope
of the basic experiences which have projective consequences. Using
the Freudian mechanisms of repression, substitution, and symboliza-
tion, he proposed to trace the infantile reactions into the inldividual's
psyche, and out again onto a widened projective screen which included
legends, myths, and ceremonial as well as religious doctrine.

SIGNIFICANCE OF KARDINER'S
CONTRIBUTION

The great promise of neo-Freudian schemes like Kardiner's is
that they embody one of the few suggestions which have ever been
made to bring the subtleties of specific magico-religious practices and
beliefs within the compass of determinist explanations. We should
Ppause to note that this task has baffled the ingenuity of some of the
greatest figures in the social sciences. To achieve a causal explanation
of th'e apparently fortuitous minutiae of magico-religious beliefs and
practices was preciscly the kind of accomplishment which the histori-
cal particularists had regarded as forever unattainable except through
the infinite regress of diffusion. Although still only in its most incipient
Phases, neo-Freudian analysis must be recognized as having the poten-

437

{
|
|


===== PAGE 224 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tial of achieving a great advance toward the perfection of the historical-
determinist program. It promises to go far beyond the areas blocked
out by traditional Marxian theory, and it certainly renders obsolete
attempts by Durkheim, Kroeber, Radcliffe-Brown, and White to fight
off “psychological reductionism.”

In actual practice, of course, no culturologists or superorganicists
have been capable of a completely “superorganic” or “culturological”
approach. But the psychological principles upon which they depended
entered through the back door, so to speak, and were poorly elaborated.
Marx and Engels, for example, accorded magico-religious phenomena a
homeostatic psychofunctional role in the social system, as suggested in
the phrase, “religion is the opiate of the masses.” But they had little
insight into how the distinctive characteristics of puberty rites, totem
designs, myths of winged serpents, ctc., might be related to the mate-
rial conditions of social life. As for Morgan, he despaired of any scientific
explanation. Like Freud’s predecessors among psychologists, Morgan
was prepared to cope only with “sane” ideas. Dreams and religion are
irrational, and hence the rational intellect can scarcely aspire to an un-

derstanding of them:

Religion deals so largely with the imaginative and emotional na-
ture, and consequently with such uncertain elements of knowl-
edge, that all primitive religions are grotesque and to some extent
unintelligible [norean 1877:5}.

To be sure, many of Morgan's contemporaries including Spencer,
Tylor, Lang, and Bastian were prepared to offer explanations of recur-
rent religious phenomena on the basis of “elementary ideas” and com-
mon exposure to recurrent natural phenomena (dreams, death, mirror
reflections) . None of them, however, made noteworthy progress toward
the explanation of variable magico-religious content. The same may be
said of Frazer, Durkheim, and the British structural-functionalists, all
of whom made suggestions as to how to explain the generalities of
magico-religious systems, but remained baffled by the problems of the
concrete instance.

Kardiner, with the aid of his anthropological collaborators, now at-
tempted to tackle such questions as why female ghosts are unimportant
among the Tanala, why the Marquesans believed that certain women
could enlist the spirits of dead men called “fanaua” to injure other
women but not men, and why the Alorese make slipshod spirit effigies
which they use in a perfunctory fashion and then throw away. The
answers to such questions lay in the peculiar patterns of childhood dis-
ciplines embodied in the primary institutions. For example, the Alor-

438

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

ese failure to elaborate religious art was said to be associated with their
low expectation of beneficent rewards from supernatural sources: this
apathctlc attitude toward the supernatural was in turn traced t;) the
relationship between Alorese children and their mothers. The overall
treatment of children in Alor was characterized as one of neglect and
inconsistency, the basic pattern for which was set by the way Alorese
mothers left their children behind in the village while they spent lon

hours at work in their subsistence gardens. P ¢

KARDINER'S MODEL BOTH
HOMEOSTATIC AND EVOLUTIONARY

» The logical nature of the propositions advanced by Kardiner
and his collaborators represent an advance over the equivocation of the
Gorer-Mead-Bateson school. Kardiner’s scheme provided for both ho-
meostatic and evolutionary cause and effect relations. On the one
hand, as we have seen, primary institutions are said to be older and
more stable than the secondary ones. This means that in an evolu-
tionary context, the occurrence of certain primary institutions makes
the occurrence of certain secondary institutions more probable. The
fun?tmnal reason for this is revealed by an implicit concept of hémeo—
stasis in which the mechanism of projection is needed to maintain the
tyPlcal individual personality in a condition of relative mental well-
ll)emg. Kardiner specifically rejected the belicf of “the extreme relatiy-
ists w}'lo hold that in social patterning anything goes.” A penalty must
be paid for “bad social patterning” which sooner or later places the
entire glllture “in jeopardy” (KARDINER and PREBLE 1961:245). Some
f‘nshtutmns promote cooperation; others stimulate rage and ;;nxietv
The success or failure of a society depends on a balance in favor of tl{é
former” (ibid.). Earlier Kardiner wrote that “secondary institutions
must” satisfy the needs and tensions created by the prixﬁary or fixed
ones” (1939:476). If this is the case, then it should be possible within
a given culture to show how needs and tensions fluctuate within toler-

able limits set by the feedbacks and saf
mits nd safety valves of the secondary

METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

Kardiner and his collaborators attem i
. Kardi ) a pted to improve the
;ntersub]echvxty of‘thelr psychocultural analysis. They were painfully
Wlare' of the gaps in the ethnographic accounts rendered by anthro-
Pologists whose fieldwork had not been planned to feed information

439



===== PAGE 225 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

into the psychodynamic scheme. To overcome this difficulty, Kardiner
obtained the cooperation of Cora DuBois, who set out in 1937 for
Alor in the Dutch East Indies in order to gather a corpus of appropri-
ate material. DuBois returned in 1939 with a set of Rorschach test
protocols, children’s drawings, and most importantly, eight extensive
life histories, emphasizing childhood experiences, emotional effect,
and dream life. Kardiner then used the interview materials to construct
a picture of the Alorese basic personality. At the same time, the draw-
ings and Rorschachs were given to a specialist who performed inde-
pendent analyses. The conclusions of DuBois, Kardiner, and Emil
Oberholzer turned out to be strikingly similar with respect to the
main features of Alorese personality. Each analyst independently
stressed the shallowness of Alorese emotional life, a prevailing insecur-
ity, suspiciousness, indifference, and apathy. Although this procedure
obviously represented a methodological advance as far as the descrip-
tion of Alorese personality was concerned (provided that DuBois’
informants were representative), the whole elaborate procedure did
little to advance the credibility of the psychodynamic analysis which
was to have been Kardiner's crowning contribution.

Kardiner concluded that the main factor in the etiology of the ob-
served basic personality structure was the maternal neglect experienced
by the Alorese infant. (Although maternal neglect corresponded to his
previous definition of a primary institution, the fact that the Alorese
did not formally recognize such a pattern seemed to Kardiner to re-
move it from institutional status.) But as in all of the other neo-
Freudian psychocultural analyses, the linking up of childhood patterns
with adult character and cultural forms can be achieved in several
alternate ways. Apathy, as DuBois herself pointed out, might be pro-
duced by disease. In other instances, similar syndromes have been
associated with the suspension of warfare and other contact effects.
Furthermore, many cultures practice the kind of division of labor which
lies at the basis of Alorese maternal neglect; yet turning the child over
to relatives while the mother works in her garden is certainly not uni-
formly productive of the psychological constellation emphasized for
the Alorese. In the Alorese case, therefore, we are left, once again, with
an ingenious but highly speculative psychoanalytic tour de force.

The demonstration of the validity of the two varieties of functional-
ist relation with which Kardiner was involved requires certain kinds of
data which he and his group were unable or unwilling to take into
consideration. For the homeostatic and safety-valve effects of his
secondary institutions, short-run fluctuations in group tensions would
have had to be related to fluctuations in the intensity or frequency of

40

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

the projective constellations. For the long-run evolutionary causal rela
tion bgtween primary and secondary institutions, parallel cases subje t
to statistical control would have had to be amassed so that cm’relat]ioC
b§tw?en one and the other could be demonstrated. Although Ka:
diner’s seminar concerned itself with several different cultures, the
comparative study of parallel cases was not achieved. As in Mcadzs ap-

proach, each of the cases involved a differe )
ch of t a nt set of primary
secondary institutions. ? and

MAJOR DEFECT OF KARDINER' S
SCHEME

) Kardiner’s clinically based acceptance of th
etlologicgl statements places him in thepmainstrcameur;etel?cfgslilcr?a?c;
personality movement. But we can scarcely credit his group with a
umquy satisfactory contribution to the theory of culture and per-
sgnahty. When Mead (1959c:1514) noted that “the major theoretical
lines for the study of personality and culture . . . had alread been
worked out . . .” before Kardiner's seminar began to meet, s]};e was
on firm historical footing. The rage into which Kardiner ﬂe,w at this

remark is not justified by the list of accomplishmen i
1 s ts that h
to his group and to none other: ? # he credied

. Inany case, T request that Mead expose me, not by decree or
innuendo, but by documentation. This will require/ finding a
technique (meaning a procedure, based on demonstrable princi-
plcs,lnot an ideology, or intention of finding a procedure) that
was in existence before 1938 and that could perform the follow-
ing: derive the personality formation specific to each culture
w\rthout the aid of the libido theory; demonstrate the relation of
this personality to the adaptational problems of the community
asa whole; demonstrate the relation of the products of fantasy to
this personality; demonstrate the relation of child-rearing p‘rac—
tices to the development of affectivity; demonstrate the relation
of‘ this latter development to the devices the society has for main-
taining . . . social balance . . . [xARDINER 19;():17:‘81.

g::nsl(:rdm.er actuall): succeeded in accomplishing all that he here
et s faz.t 'accomplz, one would be obliged to agree with him. But
; act is, hl'S actual :‘xchlevement was considerably less impressive.
def:;‘ﬁllu:;”'lg Kardiner's contr{hution we must écknowledge the large
JootA :LK IIS'SChC'm.E shared with all gtller psychocultural systems of
o y. Kardiner himself, much to his credit, was perfectly aware of
is problem and made no attempt to minimize it. The rub is that his

441



===== PAGE 226 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

scheme could not explain the existence of the primary institutions.
These were simply the givens from which basic personality might be
predicted but whose origin was inaccessible to psychodynamic tech-
niques:

. . . psychology can cast no light whatsoever without the aid of
history on how these primary institutions took their final forms.
So far as we know, no satisfactory explanations have ever been
made of primary institutions [KARDINER 1939:471].

This admission betrays the influence of historical particularism passed
on to Kardiner through his anthropological collaborators. There is an
immense irony in the way the prevailing hostility to diachronic theory
obscured from Kardiner's view the possibility of linking his formula-
tions with those of cultural materialism and historical determinism.
The domain of cultural phenomena for which he was prepared to offer
causal explanations was precisely the most intractable from the point of
view of long-range diachronic theory. Contrary to his impressions, gar-
nered from the anthropologists who had turned to culture and personal-
ity as a substitute for diachronic interests, excellent hypotheses were
available for explaining the origins of the main features of relatively
stable techno-environmental, techno-economic, and social systems im-
plicit in his concept of “primary institutions.” Indeed, the grand
strategy of psychocultural analysis called for giving priority to the ex-
amination of the effects upon personality of those categories of the
techno-environmental and techno-economic order for which reasonable
diachronic hypotheses were already available. Unfortunately, Kardiner
could not surmount the barriers which the negativism of the period had
erected between him and such an optimal program. Nor does all the
blame fall upon the members of the culture and personality school.
The uniting of psychodynamic theory and historical determinism has
also been made difficult by an overreaction among neo-evolutionists to
anything smacking of psychocultural analysis. It will probably take a
long time before the interests of the two viewpoints will assume their
proper mutually supportive roles.

ERIK ERIKSON’S NEO-FREUDIAN
SYSTEM

Kardiner's adaptation of psychoanalytic theory to the task of
psychocultural analysis appears to be merely the best formulated of
several convergent neo-Freudian approaches which were being tried
during the thirties and forties. Somewhat closer to the Freudian model

was the work of the psychoanalyst Erik Erikson.
442

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

Elaborating on Freud’s three-stage ontogeny, Erikson developed a
theory of infantile sexuality in which various “organ modes” were seen
as modifying the child’s progress through the oral, anal, and genital
“stages.”” These modes are “incorporative” (two phases), “retentive,”
“eliminative,” and “intrusive.” In this fashion Erikson sought to utilize
a much broader spectrum of childhood experience than was allowed
for in Freud’s three-stage scheme. Thus, “retention,” which Freud as-
sociated with anal fixation, may in Erikson’s scheme arise with respect
to oral, anal, and genital functions. In general, Erikson’s psychody-
namic was less formal than Kardiner’s, although there was much in
common between the two:

. . thus a primitive culture scems to do three things: it gives
specific meanings to early bodily and interpersonal experience so
as to create the right combination of organ modes and the proper
emphasis on social modalities; it carefully and systematically
channelizes throughout the intricate pattern of its daily life the
energies thus provoked and deflected; and it gives consistent su-
pernatural meaning to the infantile anxieties which it has exploited
by such provocation [ERIKSON 1950:160].

When applied to the Sioux and Yurok, this psychocultural approach
produced many ingenious connections between stages of growth, type
of “organ modes,” and adult personality and cultural institutions. The
Yurok, for example, are stingy, suspicious, and compulsively dedicated
to the amassment of wealth. Prayers and daydreams, accompanied by
tearful entreaties, center on getting rich. Erikson related these traits to
the retentive mode of the oral stage. The Yurok seem to have no
special phobic or pleasurable focus on feces, but they do suffer an
abrupt weaning at about the time of the “biting” phase of orality.
Erikson’s Sioux and Yurok interpretations have certainly failed to con-
vince psychoanalysts of somewhat variant persuasions. Kardiner says
that he makes a “fecble case for the Sioux and none at all for the
Yurok” (kARDINER and PREBLE 1961:243). Here we may simply draw
attention to the vague functionalist framework and its typical inability
to deal with the origin of the observed variations in training patterns.

THE CASE OF THE JAPANESE
SPHINCTER

Among similar amorphous neo-Freudian synchronic ap-
proaches we must now take note of two famous attempts to relate
ll.lfant training institutions to adult personality and cultural institu-
tions. Both of these involve a group centering on Mead, Benedict, and

3



===== PAGE 227 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Geoffrey Gorer, and both grew out of hot- and cold-war pressures to
. heighten the combatants’ knowledge of themselves and each other.

The first was concerned with the relationship between toilet training
and the allegedly compulsive personality of the Japanese as embodied
in both national character and cultural institutions. During the height
of the Second World War Geoffrey Gorer invoked a toilet-training
hypothesis to account for the “. . . contrast between the all-pervasive
gentleness of Japanese life in Japan, which has charmed nearly every
visitor, and the overwhelming brutality and sadism of the Japanese at
war” (GORER 1043, quoted in BARNOUW 1963:121). According to Gorer
this brutality was associated with “severe early cleanliness training”
which created a repressed rage in Japanese infants because they are
obliged to control their sphincters before the appropriate muscular and
intellectual development has been acquired. Weston La Barre (1945)
had independently been led to the same conclusion. He called the
Japanese “the most compulsive people in the world ethnographic
museum” (quoted in BARNOUW 1963:122) and like Gorer, emphasized
the severity of toilet training. In Ruth Benedict’s The Chrysanthemum
and the Sword (1946:259) there is a similar affirmation of the strictness
of Japanese toilet training, but its effects are not interpreted in psycho-
analytic terms. Instead, the pattern is seen merely as one of the facets
of the Japanese concern for neatness and orderliness.

All of these theories about Japanese national character and toilet
training were made without benefit of field research. After the war,
when such research was undertaken, it quickly became apparent that a
serious error had been committed with respect to the nature of
Japanese toilet behavior. Studies by Edward and Margaret Norbeck
(1956), B. Lanham (1956), and Douglas Haring (1956) all indicated
that Japanese children were not subject to any egregiously severe
threats or punishments. Moreover, the rapidity with which the Japa-
nese adapted to their defeat, accepted American influence, changed
many basic patterns of behavior, and took the lead in the peace move-
ment in the Orient scarcely seems to confirm the wartime portraits
which emphasized their frustration and their brutality.

THE CASE OF THE SWADDLED
RUSSIANS

Another notable attempt to achieve a psychocultural analysis
of a modern nation state in neo-Freudian terms was embodied in
Gorer and Rickman’s (1949) study of Russian national character.
Gorer has indicated that he owed a debt to Margaret Mead for the

444

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

suggestion that Russian national character could best be understood in
relationship to the long and severely restricting form of infant swad-
dling allegedly practiced by the Great Russians (ibid.:211). This case
is very informative because it brings into sharp focus just what kind of i
functional statements can be expected in the absence of a cause and i
effect framework. According to Gorer, swaddling was associated with
a kind of manic-depressive personality corresponding to the alternating
constraint and freedom experienced by the Russian infant, his pent-up
rage while swaddled, his sudden freedom when the swaddling bandages
are removed. The rage is directed toward a diffuse object since the
infant is handled in a very impersonal way and hence never gets a
good “fix” on its tormenters. This rage gives rise to guilt, but once |
again, the emotion is not fixed on any specific set of persons. Gorer \
attempted to show that such phenomena as the Bolshevik revolution,
the Stalin purge trials, the confessions of guilt at these trials, and man}; i
other events of recent Sovict history were “related” to the generalized !
rage and guilt feclings associated with swaddling. He even went so far / E
i
i
!

as to suggest that the Russian interest in the expressiveness of eyes
(think of how the song “Dark Eyes” evokes a characteristic Russian
fecling) stemmed from the fact that the restriction of the other parts
of its body forced the Russian child to depend upon vision for his main
contact with the world.

_Unfortunately, Gorer had no firm evidence concerning the exten-
siveness of swaddling. Indeed, the intellectuals who confessed their
glullt at Stalin’s purge trials were probably not swaddled. The oppres-
sive and fear-haunted ambience of the Stalin period can be found in
association with dictatorships from Ghana to Guatemala, and the al-
leggd compatibility between Russian national character and the des-
potism of the Stalin period is contradicted by the very fact of the '
Russian Revolution. To attribute the uprising against Tsarist despo- i
tism to rage induced by swaddling bandages is to miss the whole point !
of recent FEuropean history. Stalin’s tyranny was founded on the i
corpses of his enemies. Only by filling the Siberian camps with millions
D‘flnonconformists and by relentlessly rooting out all vestiges of po-
litical opposition did Stalin manage to impose his will on his country- 1
men. The notion that the mass of Russians were somehow being \
psychologically fulfilled by the terror of the Stalinist period is abso- \1
lutely without basis in fact. ’

Follow-up studies on the character of Russian exiles—groups com-
parabl_e to those interviewed by Gorer—have drawn conclusions quite
opposite to those indicated by the swaddling hypotheses. A high degree
of incongruence has been found between the central personality modes

445


===== PAGE 228 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of the peasants and workers and the political behavior of the governing
clique (INKELES et al. 1961). Moreover, Gorer’s analysis leaves one ab-
solutely at a loss to explain the whole process of de-Stalinization and
the rapidity with which the monolithic structure of the Stalinist ap-
paratus, so essential to his point, suddenly gave way to a more flexible
if not yet “open” system.

As an application of Freudian insights into political processes,
Gorer’s essay is unacceptable. For example, nothing could have been
less prophetic concerning the directions of Soviet foreign policy than
his comments on the future of the empire which Stalin had put
together in Eastern Europe:

‘Whatever their conscious intentions may be, it would appear that
the Soviet elites find it psychologically impossible to permit their
satellites relative independence, because it is a state they cannot
envisage. The moment the balance is tipped to the slightest
measurable degree from complete equality, they seem to fear that
they will become completely subordinate [GORER and RrICKMAN

1949:179].

GORER’S DISCLAIMER OF CAUSALITY

While assiduously pursuing the relationship between swad-
dling and Russian national character, even to the extent of including a
twenty-five-page historical appendix entitled “A Note on the Develop-
ment of the Swaddling Hypotheses,” Gorer sought to protect himself
from the consequences of his analysis by insisting that he was not
attributing any causal efficacy to swaddling.

It is the argument of this study that the situation outlined in
the preceding paragraphs is one of the major determinants in the
development of the character of adult Great Russians.

It is not the argument of this study that the Russian manner
of swaddling their children produces the Russian character, and it
is not intended to imply that the Russian character would be
changed or modified if some other technique of infant training
were adopted [ibid.:128-29].

A careful reading of this disclaimer does not improve its intelligibility.
Swaddling is said to be one of the major determinants of Great Russian
character in one sentence, while in the next, it is said not to be any
kind of determinant. Gorer goes on to stress what might be called the
heuristic value of the swaddling hypothesis and likens it to a “thread
which led through the labyrinth of the apparent contradictions of

446

)

16. Culture and Personality: Freudian

Russian adult behavior.” But one is hard pressed to understand the
epistemological nature of this “thread.” What kind of hypothesis is it
which docs not involve a correlation of some degree of quantity or
quality? ’

MEAD'S DEFENSE OF GORER

In Gorer’s defense, Mead has enlarged at length on Gorer’s
disclaimer, denying that anyone had suggested that Russian national
character was attributable to the swaddling practice. Rather than saying
that “swaddling makes Russians,” Gorer was actually affirming some-
thing else:

From an analysis of the way Russians swaddle infants, it is possi-
ble to build a model of Russian character formation which enables
us to relate what we know about human behavior and what we
know about Russian culture in such a way that Russian behavior
becomes more understandable [MEAD 1954:401-2].

According to Mead, this kind of analysis must be clearly separated
from the kind of psychodynamic relationships which Kardiner had
sought to establish between childhood disciplines and adult character.
Kardiner’s brand of psychoanalytic extrapolation, she insisted, was re-
jected by the majority of anthropologists. Gorer was not saying that
“swaddling per se by members of any culture will have definite pre-
dictable effects of the same sort on all infants, regardless of their
culture” (ibid.:398). No claim was being made that “swaddling was
essential in the Russian pattern” (ibid.:403). Given the facts of Rus-
sian culture and Russian character, it can be shown that swaddling is
one of the techniques by which “Russians become Russians.” She
admits that there are many other techniques by which the same results
might be obtained in different cultures. The Russians themselves
might give up swaddling and still maintain the same personality.

All of this would appear to add up to a unique form of scientific
statement. The relationship between swaddling and the Russian char-
acter is crucial for an understanding of that character, yet there is no
reason to suppose that they are causally related in the sense that one
makcs the other more probable. The vagueness of a statement in
which a “major” variable is held to be neither dependent nor inde-
pendent, neither cause nor effect, neither sufficient nor necessary, is
brought out in an additional comment by Mead in which there is a
lapse back into a more familiar idiom:

447



===== PAGE 229 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

It is the combination of an unusually confining version of a wide-
spread practice, the age of the child which is thus confined, and
an adult insistence on the need to protect the child from itself—
the duration and type of swaddling—which are assumed to have
distinctive effects in the formation of Russian character [ibid.:40z2,
italics added].

With this statement, the entire argument is returned to its initial form,
and the lack of evidence for the “assumed” “effects” once moge sum-
mons forth its full measure of amazement.

ANTHROPOLOGISTS ARE NOT
THERAPISTS

The meeting of anthropology and psychoanalysis has pro-
duced a rich harvest of ingenious functional hypotheses in which psy-
chological mechanisms can be seen as intermediating the connection
between disparate parts of culture. Psychoanalysis, however, had little
to offer cultural anthropology by way of scientific methodology. In this
respect the meeting of the two disciplines tended to reinforce the in-
herent tendencies toward uncontrolled, speculative, and histrionic
generalizations which each in its own sphere had cultivated as part of
its professional license. The anthropologist carrying out a psycho-
cultural analysis resembled the psychoanalyst whose attempt to iden-
tify the basic personality structure of his patient remains largely inter-
pretive and immune to normal verification procedures. In a sense, what
the great figures in the formative phases of the culture and personality
movement were asking us to do was to trust them as we would trust
an analyst, not for the demonstrated truth of any particular item, but
for the accumulating evidence of coherence in a believable pattern.
Although such faith is essential to psychoanalytic therapy in which it
scarcely matters whether childhood events of particular kinds did or
did not take place as long as both analyst and patient are convinced
that they did, the separation of myth from concrete event is the
highest goal of all disciplines which concern themselves with human
history.

448

Culture and

Personality:

New Directions 17

S5
SO

Shortly after the end of the Second World War, the culture and
personality movement was penetrated by an entirely new kind of
psy_chological influence emanating from the deve]oprflcnt within ex-
perimental psychology of neobahaviorist learning theories under the
IEadcrship of Clark Hull and, to a lesser extent, B. F. Skinner. The
most significant feature of learning theory in the present context is
that it embodies a vast eipistemological and methodological reform,
th§ outcome of a deliberate attempt by operationally minded psychol-
ogists to raise the standards of intersubjectivity and verifiability. It is
through the intermediation of culture and pers‘onality studies that this
wave of scientism in psychology is now being passed into the entire
field 9f cultural anthropology. Thus in a remarkable turnabout, the
adoption of the basic scientific premise of neobehaviorism by social
psychologists and cultural anthropologists has meant that culture and
Personality studies once representative of the most broadly humanistic
methods of anthropology have emerged in the last decade as paragons
of methodological purity. Tt is in this area that some of the most
sophisticated anthropological research is now being carried out. By

49

i
i



===== PAGE 230 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

the 1960’s the methodological and epistemological reforms in the
culture and personality movement spreading throughout the entire
field of cultural anthropology were threatening to bring about a final
rupture of the humanist and scientific traditions.

JOHN WHITING

The main impetus for the revolution in the methodology
of the culture and personality movement derives from the work of
John Whiting and his coworkers. In this group several lines of de-
velopment converge, foremost among which are the neo-Freudian, as
transmitted through Kardiner; learning theory, through the influence
of Hull; and the statistical version of the comparative method, as
outlined by Tylor and further perfected through the development of
the Human Relations Area Files under George Murdock. In essence,
Whiting has carried the work of Kardiner’s seminar into its cross-
cultural phase and produced the first statistically valid proofs of the
feasibility of explaining the details of ideological patterns through a
modified version of Kardiner's causal chain. In Whiting and Child’s
(1953) version this chain runs:

Maintenance Systems —> Child Training Practices — Personal-
ity Variables — Projective Systems.

Whiting and Child’s “maintenance systems” refers to the entire eco-
nomic, political, and social organization. This is scarcely an improve-
ment over the huge bundle tied up in Kardiner’s “primary institutions.”
It is noteworthy, however, that specific child-rearing practices have
been separated from the rest of the primary institutions. The way is
thus prepared for the systematic exploration of the conditions which
govern the occurrence of various kinds of child-training procedures,
a problem which Kardiner had regarded as insoluble. Using George
Murdock’s world ethnographic sample or other specially assembled
samples, Whiting has systematically explored the basic premise of the
neo-Freudian anthropologists, namely that personality serves as a
mediator between the maintenance and projective systems. In an
overview, Whiting (1961) has brought together an impressive com-
pilation of the most successful hypotheses which have been subject to
cross-cultural validation.

One of the most impressive achievements of the Whiting group is
their demonstration of the theoretical productivity of the personality
concept. Although some of their correlations are suggested by fairly

450

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

obvious functional chains, which probably could be short-circuited
directly from child training to adult practice, others require compli-
cated causal sequences within the personality matrix before the logic
of the relationship becomes clear. An example of the former is the
correlation between harsh parental treatment of children and the
belief that the spirit world is harsh and aggressive. (One might predict
such a correlation on the basis of some very simple associational or
behavioral generalization: subject to harsh treatment, the child and
adult look upon the world in general, including its spirits, as a harsh
place in which to live.)

On the other hand, there is the correlation between the length
of time during which an infant sleeps with his mother and the
occurrence of male initiation rites (WHITING, KLUCKHORN, and
ANTHONY, 1958). This relationship flows ecasily, if at all, only from
the corpus of theory specifically associated with neo-Freudian psy-
chology. In terms of psychological principles, the apparently esoteric
connection is demanded by several different hypotheses. One is that the
sleeping arrangement intensifies the Oedipal rivalry between father
and son and that the puberty rites are a means of asserting social
control over the son’s hostility. Another is that the sleeping arrange-
ment produces a strong identification between son and mother which
must be broken if maleness is to be achieved. A more culturological
hypothesis would predict puberty rites as a necessary antidote to the
mother’s overprotection.

It must be counted a triumph of psychological theory that the nega-
tive relationship between couvade and male initiation rites appears to
be governed by a similar set of factors. Societies with exclusive mother-
child sleeping patterns and patrilocal residence have the initiation
tites, while those with similar sleeping arrangements but matrilocal
tesidence tend to have the couvade. This in tum appears to be related
to inhibition versus expression of cross-sex identification.

Along similar lines, a correlation has been established between pro-
ll.)ngcd postpartum sexual taboos and male initiation rites, the explana-
tion being that under such conditions the male child is subject to
Incestuous seductive temptations which must be controlled at puberty.
Other studies inspired by these mixed varieties of psychodynamic and
learning-theory hypotheses have related the indulgence of infants to
absence of fearful ghosts during funerals; early weaning to the belief
that a sick person is responsible for his own illness; severe oral training
to the belief that diseases can be cured by eating and drinking; and
severe sexual discipline to the belief in sorcery.

451

|
|



===== PAGE 231 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Victor Barnouw (1963:356) has noted that “the complexity of the
Whiting and Child demonstration sometimes takes on the dimensions
of a Rube Goldberg machine,” but it is precisely this complexity which
carries the approach beyond ordinary culturological perspectives.

DEFENSE OF THE STATISTICAL
APPROACH

The accomplishments of this group are somewhat less im-
pressive when one takes into consideration the fact that many of their
hypotheses appear to be post hoc. That is, the statistical approach
permits a certain amount of blind searching for correlations. When
these are found, an claborate causal chain is then set up to serve as
the explanation; it is not unusual for several such “Rube Goldberg”
explanations to be proposed at the same time without being able to
discern which is the correct one. It should also be kept in mind that
many hypotheses set up in conformity with the psychological prin-
ciples under discussion turn out not to be confirmed by the statistical
runs. Since it is usually only the successful runs which get written up,
the approach has what one might call a “good press.” Despite these
and other drawbacks, the cross-cultural survey procedure must be
reckoned as a major advance in the methodology of the culture and
personality movement. Although the data which lies at the basis
of the correlations suffers from the usual ethnographic defects, there
are strong methodological reasons to believe that such errors can be
overcome in a sufficiently large sample.

Donald Campbell (1961:346), a social psychologist who believes
that the Whiting movement represents “one of the major events in
the social sciences of the past twenty years,” defends the use of such
admittedly crude instruments as the Human Relations Area Files.
Errors in the files, which result from inadequate ethnographies or
other unsystematic sources, cannot be used to explain away the cor-
relations. Such errors reduce rather than raise the level of association.

It is a fascinating lesson in the ephemerality of scientific styles to
follow Campbell through his closely reasoned defense of Whiting's
approach. The main line of resistance to Whiting’s methods is pre-
cisely the same as that which the Boasians set up against Spencer,
Frazer, Tylor, Morgan, et al. It is alleged that Whiting's type of survey
deals only with fragments. Pieces of culture are wrenched out of con-
text; noncomparables are compared. Unique situations are crammed
into a set of inappropriate pigeonholes. The unity of the individual
case is shattered, and accuracy is sacrificed for specious generalities. But

452

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

these objections can no longer be invoked in the name of superior
scientism. Despite its limitations, the statistical method is recognized
as the only viable substitute for laboratory control. Errors are inevita-
ble in any research procedure; laws are merely approximation; a few
exceptions neither prove nor disprove a rule; all generalizations depend
on the clause ceteris paribus—*“other things being equal”:

The healthy infancy of the successful sciences seems to have been
predicated upon the stimulating nourishment of crude but ef-
fective ceteris paribus laws. For example, the force fields of atomic
nuclei extend in infinite distance in all directions. However, they
decay so rapidly as a function of distance that they can be
disregarded in the statement of many crude laws, such as those em-
bodied in Archimedes’ mechanics. Were this not so, were Archi-
medes to have had to limit himself to statements about each
particular instance, then physics never could have developed. The
critics of the generalizing social scientists are right in cautioning
against claiming effective ceteris paribus laws when one hasn’t
got them, but pointing to the obvious idiosyncracy of every per-
son, tribe, or swinging cathedral chandelier provides no a (priori
basis for rejecting the enterprise [ibid.:347].

It thus seems quite clear that full methodological initiative has been
restored to the nomothetic tradition. The age of the computer will
not be held back by the handful of exceptions with which the Boasians
brought the machinery of social science to a grinding halt. For Lowie,
one negative case out of a hundred meant the triumph of chaos; for
the cross-cultural hypotheses in the Whiting manner, a dozen negative
cases out of a hundred means the triumph of order.

The abstractive-generalizing social scientist knows that in dealing
with natural groups ceteris are not in fact paribus, and he there-
forc expects cxceptions which represent the operation of many
other laws which he as yet knows nothing of. Such exceptions are
repeatedly found in the law-confirming scatter diagrams of biol-
ogy and psychology. If the over-all significant relationship still
persists when the specific errors are corrected and the new cases
plotted, the exceptions are not invalidating [ibid.].

SOME QUALIFICATIONS

When all of the significant advances in recent culture and
Personality studies have been accorded the respect due to the hard
V‘"Ork and ingenuity which has gonc into them, we must take an addi-
tional step away from the canvas and ask ourselves just what it all adds

453

:



===== PAGE 232 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

up to in terms of a theory of culture. It will then be seen that the
picture we have been studying is drastically incomplete. All of the neo-
Freudian formulations assume the existence of particular varieties of
technology, economics, and social organization. This limitation has not
been especially painful in the context of mid-twentieth-century social
science since the drift has been toward a permanent anesthesia on the
question of cultural causality. The era of “middlerange” theory has
grown accustomed to a truncated account of its origin, its significance,
and its destiny. Many of the contributors to the culture and personality
movement are fully aware of the failure of their specialty to answer the
fundamental questions which were set before us in the eighteenth
century. Others are more or less like the Emperor without his clothes
—victims of a lack of controversy. No cultural determinist can doubt
for a moment that Kardiner’s primary institutions or Whiting and
Child’s “maintenance systems” are associated with specific modal per-
sonalities. Indeed, this guarantee is built in, since from a behaviorist
and operationalist view of personality, the way people make their liv-
ing, the number of wives they live with, the kinds of political controls
they experience—all must have some sort of distinctive effect on the
expectation that they will emit determined frequencies of specific re-
sponses which are not merely tautological consequences of the initial
description. If personality is a measure of probability of verbal or non-
verbal response, then every major cultural difference, and not only
those associated with the Freudian disciplines, obviously must corre-
late with personality differences.

But such correlations, even when they are based on the most inge-
nious Rube Goldberg-Freudianisms and are predictable by ad hoc
hypotheses, avoid the main arena of theoretical confrontation. Given
a particular set of “maintenance,” or “primary,” institutions and their
predictable psychocultural concomitants, what do we then know
about the transformation probabilities of maintenance systems and
their characterological projections? To speak in the analogy of cyber-
netics, given the feedback between basic institutions and basic person-
ality, to what extent may this segment of the larger sociocultural net-
work be regarded as an independent and self-sustaining circuit? Since
evolution is as much a characteristic of the realm of sociocultural
phenomena as it is of the biological realm, we cannot simply posit a
stcady state and shrug off the question of how and when the feedback
loop is broken. This question looms all the more menacing to the
cuphoria of psychocultural enthusiasts when it is firmly understood
that the feedback between basic culture and basic personality does not
involve an eradication of nonconforming individuals and psychological

454

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

complexes. It is a fundamental assumption of the culture and personal-
ity movement, and one which is firmly grounded in fact, that every
culture has its deviants. These may be more or less numerous, depend-
ing one might suppose (the question has not really been studied) on
particular constellations of basic conditioning parameters. But regard-
less of the relative frequency of deviance, everything we have learned
about the “simpler” societies, and everything we have always known
about our own, indicates that the spectrum of available types is very
great. And furthermore, from the same sources of knowledge, it is
perfectly obvious that each individual contains within himself re-
sources, potentialities, inhibitions, and anxieties in multitudes and
varieties far beyond the manifest content of actual, momentary exis-
tence.

There thus arises the fundamental question, the one which is most
blatantly ignored throughout the history of the culture and per-
sonality movement: to what extent does the existence of a par-
ticular momentary feedback between basic institutions and basic
personality limit the rate and direction of cultural evolution?
For there remains, as a limiting case, the specter of an answer which
declares, “every basic cultural change finds its own proper individual
agents.” That is, when the culturological forces, systematically ignored
by the culture and personality school, impinge upon the basic institu-
tions, then those individuals who have harbored in the remote recesses
of their personalities the appropriate loves and hates come to the fore,
or the deviants, banished to the margins of the system—the “noise” for
which there had previously been no use—shunt off into a new circuit,
where their behavior is apt to be treated by the functionally minded
anthropologist as the very music of the spheres.

Surely, it is wrong to suppose that every modal personality type is
equally vulnerable to every wind of change. On the other hand, those
who imply that a particular momentary configuration stands for all
time as a limitation of the possibilities of basic institutional evolution
are sadly in error. The contrary evidence is piled all around us in
monumental quantities. The convergence of widely different cultures
toward similar evolutionary novelties is the prime source of such evi-
dence. Whatever kinds of people were needed to invent and maintain
bifurcate merging kinship terminologies, unilineal descent groups, age
grades, slash and burn agriculture, band organization, social stratifica-
tion, classes, castes, and feudalism, “Yankee ingenuity,” capitalism
and colonialism, and one party rule, they were obviously available over
vast stretches of space and time.

And it is not only from such generalized evolutionary events that we

455

i


===== PAGE 233 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

are led to minimize the lag effect of basic personality. Another approach
to the same subject is to demand that time perspective be supplied to
all psychocultural analyses. We then bear witness to the extraordinary
mutability of national character in relation to the evolution of socio-
political systems. We see the spectacle of enemies become friends and
friends become enemies. We sce the Mozart-loving Germans trans-
figured into the beasts of Buchenwald, the authoritarian Japanese be-
come the democrats of Asia, meek Balinese boys joining death squads,
American troops turning over Vietcong for torture, the staid Britishers
dressed in mini-skirts, the racially democratic Portuguese in league
with South African apartheid, promiscuous South Sea Islanders turned
Protestant prudes, and Apollonian Pueblo Indians who have become
the drunken wards of their former encmies. All this was said a long
time ago and with much greater authority:

Nothing is generally more false and ridiculous than the por-
traits drawn to represent the characters of different nations. Some
paint their own nation after the particular society they frequent,
and consequently represent the people as gloomy or gay, dull or
witty. . . . Others copy what a thousand writers have said before
them; they have never examined the changes necessarily produced
in the character of a people, by those which happen in the ad-
ministration, and the alteration of manners. It has been said, that
the French are gay; and this will be repeated to eternity. They do
not perceive, that the misfortunes of the times having obliged the
princes to lay considerable taxes on the country people; the
French nation cannot be gay, because the peasants, who alone
compose two thirds of the nation, are in want, and want can never
be gay: that even, in regard to the cities, the necessity, it is said,
the police of Paris is under of defraying a part of the expence of
the masquerades performed on holidays at St. Anthony’s gate, is
not a proof of the gaiety of the artists and the citizen; spies may
contribute to the safety of Paris; but being carried too far, they
diffuse a general diffidence through the minds of the people, that
is absolutely incompatible with joy, on account of the ill use that
may be made of them [HELVETIUS 1810:357; orig. 1758].

PERSONALITY AND HISTORY

The facts of sociocultural convergence and parallelism would
work for, rather than against, the attribution of important causal ef-
ficacy to basic personality, only if it were maintained that the origin of
such regularities resides in the personality configurations themselves.
Thus we would have the hypothesis that a particular kind of personal-
ity is the necessary and sufficient condition for the occurrence of

456

W

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

unilineal descent groups, swidden farming, colonialism, communism,
etc. Few of the culture and personality specialists would wish to formu-
late so vulnerable a proposition. For at the end of this chimeric rainbow
there floats a cloud of pure idealism. One can very well understand
how appropriate personality types must predominate or come to the
fore when basic institutional transformations occur, but it is impos-
sible to understand how personality changes would alone suffice for
such transformations. Human personalities, like ideas, are potentially
infinite in variety. If one wishes to start the causal chain from person-
ality type and work back toward basic institutions, there shall never be
an explanation of why specific cultures manifest regular differences and
similarities.

FREUD AND MATERIALISM

The culture and personality movement could scarcely accept
the greatness of Freud and at the same time unambiguously proclaim
that personality configurations provide the key to the understanding of
history. The reason why Freud ranks with Darwin and Marx is that he
was the greatest single influence in bringing the phenomena of the
human mind within the compass of historical determinism. It was his
genius which led the way toward our comprehension of the fact that
even the most intimate details of our dreams and wishes—even the
dreams and wishes of madmen—are rooted in the intelligible material
wants and processes of human childhood. These childhood conditions
he derived in turn from the distinctive material components of the
human, species-given, biophysical endowment. The entire idiom of the
Freudian synthesis with its instinctual drives, its ontogenetic recapitu-
lations, its energy flows and its energy blockages, and its epiphenom-
enal symptoms and subterfuges is a physicalist and materialist tour de
force. But Freud’s system could only generate the universals of culture
and a few crude stages of a unilinear evolution. Specific cultural differ-
ences and similarities were beyond his grasp and interests.

It is also true as we have seen that the neo-Freudians purged Freud
of his historical determinism. Despite these modifications, it is impos-
sible to remain a Freudian in any significant sense and adopt an un-
ambiguously idealist position. For if there is one aspect of Freud
which cannot be dispensed with, it is the fact that the human personal-
ity is not free to shape itself into any form or substance to which an
individual may take a fancy. The minimal definition of Freudian

theory drives us back ineluctably to the determining conditions of
childhood.

The neo-Freudian may yet seek to avoid the materialist option: he

457



===== PAGE 234 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

may attribute the origin of childhood disciplines to the whim and
fancy of some adult generation. To save for himself a determinist
image, he may even stop arbitrarily short of an infinite regress some-
where along the route pioneered by the Kulturwissenschaften. He
would then emerge as an historical particularist suffering from the
typical inability to cope with the regularities of cultural evolution.

To sum up: out of the whim and fancy of early or late weaning,
postpartum taboos, crawling, creeping or frogging, one cannot con-
struct a theory of history. Let no one minimize the possible historical
importance of swaddling or toilet training; but to the extent that these
are significant dimensions of the historical process, to that extent they
must be linked with other regular features of sociocultural systems. If
they are not so linked, if they do not turn out to be articulated with
the techno-economic and techno-environmental conditions of socio-
cultural life, then we shall be left with the reductio ad absurdum that
personality generates personality according to its idiosyncratic disposi-
tions. Were human cultural systems infinitely divergent, such a view
would be tolerable. But infinite divergence is the equivalent of unintel-
ligible chaos, a condition which all previous experience of mankind
denies as an apt description of man, culture, or any other segment of
the universe.

CRUCIAL DETERMINANTS OF
PERSONALITY

In granting the importance of the traditional Freudian or
Freudian-inspired enculturation techniques—the anal, the oral, and
genital disciplines—as intervening variables in cultural evolution and
the maintenance of steady state circuits, we must avoid any implication
that these are the most significant psychological factors either for
evolutionary or homeostatic analysis. And this reservation might even
have to be maintained if it proved to be psychoanalytically correct that
the Freudian conditioning factors are crucially relevant to an under-
standing of individual health and disease. For it might very well be that
for an understanding of cultural evolution, quite a different set of con-
ditioning factors may have to be taken into consideration. For example,
the role which television cartoons, nursery school routines, and chil-
dren’s toys play in the formation of the American basic personality
structure might be more important for the homeostasis of the United
States sociopolitical system and more diagnostic of historical processes
than age of weaning and toilet training. The very fact that the feed-
backs being explored by Whiting and his followers require such com-

458

.

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

plicated circuitry may indicate that the more significant functional
relations between personality and primary institutions are being ne-
glected. The correlation between Max Weber’s Protestant ethic and
capitalism or David McClelland’s (1961) “need for achievement” and
industrial development, with proper readjustment of the causal arrows,
need not invoke psychoanalytic mechanisms. There are obviously
many other capitalist, industrial, and mass-society personality charac-
teristics which are more easily explained in terms of learning theory
than in terms of depth psychology. American children are taught by a
system of rewards and punishments, embracing a sociocultural ap-
paratus much larger than the nuclear family, to be aggressively com-
petitive, to seck solace in consumption of commodities, to ignore
death, and to fear old age. It is quite possible that the primary and
high school experiences of the sort described by Jules Henry (1963)
are more determinative of culturally significant personality than all of
the Freudian factors put together. The same might be true of the kind
of personality factors singled out by David Riesman (1950), Vance
Packard, or other non-Freudian observers of the correlation between
American anxicties and values and the basic economic and social insti-
tutions of mass society under corporate welfare capitalism. General
Motors, the Pentagon, and Madison Avenue may have more effect on
the vital circuitry of the historically and culturally significant American
personality than the nuclear family with all its formal and informal
child-training procedures. The significance of Oscar Lewis’s (1966a)
concept of “the culture of poverty” may also reside in a similar obser-
vation: poverty breeds a particular variety of personality configuration
regardless of the culture in which it occurs. (Not to be confused with
the point of view that poverty is merely a state of mind.) As Aberle
(1961b:395) has noted:

Much of the work on achievement and affiliation, as well as on
other features of American child rearing by class and by time pe-
riod can probably be ultimately related to the nature of the
market system in the modern world.

An extension of the same ego-psychology emphasis to cross-cultural
situations points to the possibility of major personality correlations to
be found among villagers as opposed to band migrants; among swidden
horticulturalists as compared with fixed field peasants; among redis-
tributive systems of distribution as opposed to reciprocal systems;
among hunters as opposed to gatherers; and among egalitarian so-
cieties as opposed to stratified societies.

459

—————eeee e


===== PAGE 235 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

BACKING INTO CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

These fundamental sources of personality differences have not
been completely neglected. Ralph Linton’s (1937) contrast between
the dry and wet rice-producing Tanala provided the basic clues for
Kardiner’s analysis of Tanala personality structure. Similarly, the Alor-
ese subsistence requirements were seen to be the controlling factor in
Alorese infant care. In both of these cases, however, the effect on in-
fant experience was deemed decisive rather than any lifelong series of
pressures and expectations as might be the case in market-induced con-
figurations.

A similar observation is called for in connection with the studies
carried out by Barry, Bacon, and Child (1959), in which it is shown by
the Whiting cross-cultural survey method that where stable harvest
surpluses are produced, there is a balance in the socialization process in
favor of passive compliance as opposed to individualized assertiveness.
The latter is in turn correlated with hunting modes of subsistence.
The conclusion that “child training tends to be a suitable adaptation to
subsistence economy” (ibid.:62) is a welcome confirmation of a some-
what peripheral but nonetheless important aspect of techno-economic
determinism. It should not escape our notice however that there is a
peculiar slant to the message before us. The study remains fixated on
the issue of child training. But it is the adult personality—the product
of the socialization process—with which psychocultural theory must
come to grips. True enough, the authors of the study claim that their
research avoids triviality because it indicates something about adult
character:

Pressures toward obedience and responsibility should tend to
make children into the obedient and responsible adults who can
best ensure the continuing welfare of a socicty with a high-accu-
mulation economy, whose food supply must be protected and
developed gradually throughout the year. Pressure toward
self-reliance and achievement should shape children into the ven-
turesome, independent adults who can take initiative in wresting
food daily from nature, and thus ensure survival in societies with
a low-accumulation economy [ibid.].

But it is a matter of considerable interest to inquire why the research
strategy did not involve an attempt to correlate adult personality di-
rectly with subsistence practices and then to seck additional sources of

460

*

Culture and Personality: New Directions

the same characteristics in the childhood enculturation disciplines.
This question takes us to the heart of the historical role of culture and
personality studies in cultural anthropology. The practitioners of this
specialty seem to be slowly backing into a position which they might
profitably have occupied face-forward from the outset.

WHITING DISCOVERS CULTURAL
MATERTIALISM

Another example from Whiting’s approach will help to make
this clear. As a result of several independent studies, a massive set of
correlations had been established, linking the following traits: exclusive
mother-infant sleeping arrangements, prolonged postpartum sexual ta-
boo, prolonged infant nursing, polygyny, patrilocality, and severe male
puberty rites. In searching for a suitable general hypothesis, Whiting
literally backed into the possibility that there might be a techno-
environmental feedback which is strong enough to generate the entire
complex. First, a possible link with climate was explored. This led to
the discovery of a correlation between the complex in question and
tropical climate. A final link was added when tropical climate was cor-
related in turn with Kwashiorkor, a disease associated with protein
deficiency during infancy. The entire chain could now be read as fol-
lows: Protein deficient tropical diets place a premium on prolonged
lactatior. for maintaining infant’s protein intake during critical period.
Interruption of lactation by demands of a second infant is prevented by
prolonged sex taboo while mother nurses. The sex taboo places a pre-
mium on the second wife. The husband in the polygynous houschold
sleeps separate from his wife. Hence, exclusive mother-infant sleeping
arrangement is the by-product. Polygyny, in turn, also makes patrilocal-
ity more probable as the most convenient way to set up a composite
household. Patrilocality, in turn, is correlated with patrilineality.
With a strong patrilineal, patrilocal emphasis, boys who have spent
a prolonged period with a nursing mother are subject to intense pres-
sures to assure proper male role identity (cf. WHITING 1964).

I believe we are justified in a spirit of constructive criticism to point
out that the strategy of Whiting’s research is inferior to its tactics.
Why start one’s inquiries into personality correlates with exclusive
mother-infant sleeping arrangements which turn out to be a mere ap-
pendage to the central causal chain? Why not start with Kwashiorkor,
malaria, tuberculosis, trypanosomiasis, and other pathogenic conditions
which we may confidently expect to be associated with both personality
and institutional specialties? As A. F. C. Wallace (1961:291) has noted

461



===== PAGE 236 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

in a brilliant article concerned with tracing arctic hysteria (pibloktoq)
to hypocalcemia, “The importance of the organic factors in psychopa-
thology has been largely ignored by anthropological theory, which has
emphasized psychological factors almost exclusively.” But it is not
simply anthropological psychopathology which has suffered from a
failure to explore organic linkages, it is the entire field of culture and
personality. Moreover, it is not merely a neglect of nutritional or epi-
demiological factors which needs to be pointed out, but a thorough-
going neglect of the entire parameter of conditioning factors which
relate personality to the human ecosystem, to the conditions of pro-
duction, to the sources of metabolism, to the disease vectors, to cli-
mate, to population density, to human and infrahuman competitors
and parasites—in short, to the techno-environmental and techno-
economic conditions under which people acquire their adult patterns
of behavior.

CLINICAL VERSUS ANTHROPOLOGICAL
PRIORITIES

The study of personality and culture should be the hand-
maiden of diachronic functionalism, that is, of the study of cultural
evolution and cultural causality. Instead it has all along labored on
behalf of questions related to the etiology of individual psychological
complexes. The “should be” carries more than a moralistic innuendo.
The lack of interest in direct causal connections, sustained throughout
life and not just during infancy, between major modes of subsistence
and personality type is a consequence of the poverty of cultural theory
throughout the Boasian period. The members of the culture and per-
sonality movement have themselves grown up in a milieu which has
been hostile to diachronic theory. They have thus either been led to
believe that the achievement of such theories has been proven impos-
sible, or they have never recognized an obligation to consider the rele-
vance of their work to such matters. But that obligation does exist
insofar as a distinction is to be drawn between culture and personality
studies which serve the interests of psychology and those which serve
the interests of cultural anthropology. To serve the interests of psy-
chology, we operate with the hypotheses which are suggested by the
purged synchronic version of neo-Frendian psychoanalysis. We then
achieve an understanding of how clinically significant complexes arise
in the typical individual. To serve the interests of cultural anthropol-
ogy, we must begin with the hypotheses suggested by a theory of cul-
tural evolution, and we must follow out the consequences of these

462

_——————?—

17. Culture and Personality: New Directions

hypotheses upon the formation of feedback circuits between basic
personality and the parameters designated as vital for an understanding
of the behavior not of individuals but of sociocultural systems. The
imperative in the “must” will be evident as soon as we seriously con-
template the very large possibility that the principles governing the
formation of clinically significant syndromes may be quite devoid of
significance in the determination of the main features of sociocultural
evolution. We are left therefore with the unavoidable conclusion that
here as elsewhere in the recent history of cultural anthropology, a re-
search strategy has been pursued which is almost exactly the one least
suited to the solution of the major questions before us.

463



===== PAGE 237 =====

French

Structuralism 18

4

Emile Durkheim led French social science to its emancipation from
biological reductionism. Like Boas m the United States, Durkheim
founded a school of anthropology to which at mid-century the great
majority of French professional anthropologists still owe their origin.
But because of the rigidities and conservatism inherent in the struc-
ture of French higher education, it was not until the 1920’s that
academic curricula resembling the English and American reformula-
tions of anthropology began to appear. To this day, “anthropology”
means physical anthropology to the educated Frenchman. Yet Durk-
heim’s “sociological” school from the outset concerned itself as much
with the data of primitive ethnography as with Euro-American sociol-
ogy. Moreover, as Durkheim’s interests matured, he became increas-
ingly involved with the study of ethnographic data.

‘The rejection of Spencerism in France was not related to a vigorous
expansion of fieldwork. Indecd, the onset of intensive field studies by
French anthropologists began in the 1930’s with pupils sent out by
Marcel Mauss, himself a pupil of Durkheim (cf. BENDER 1965; MERCIER
1966: 104 ff.). Nonethcless, there was much in common between the

464

18.

French Structuralism

trajectories of the French and American schools. Both moved steadily
away from an evolutionary perspective; both tended to encourage emic
approaches on the model of linguistic analysis; and both produced a
steady erosion of the strategy which would have sought the lawful
principles of sociocultural phenomena in the material conditions of
human life. For Durkheim, social facts were entities sui generis, but
from the beginning they resembled mind more than matter. We shall
follow Durkheim’s progressive commitment to a Hegelian form of
idealism, a trend which by mid-century, in the work of Claude Lévi-
Strauss, had returned almost to the rationalism of Descartes.

Durkheim’s influence abroad was perhaps even more important than
it was at home. Between 1893 and 1897 he published in rapid succession
Division of Labor in Society, The Rules of the Sociological Method, and
Suicide. These works eventually provided the basic orientation for the
British school of structural-functionalism, the central movement in
modern British social anthropology. The accomplishments of this
school under the leadership of A. R. Radcliffe-Brown is the subject of
the next chapter.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF DURKHEIM'S
POSITIVIST HERITAGE

Durkheim presents a wide variety of facets from which inter-
pretive efforts (cf. GEHLKE, 1915) reflect at all sorts of unpredictable
angles. He has been classificd as everything from a materialist to a
mystic. In addition to the fact that his outlook underwent consider-
able transformation, he seems to have made less than a total effort to
avoid ambiguity.

Sociologist Talcott Parsons (1949:307) has properly emphasized
Durkheim’s debt to Auguste Comte: “Durkheim is the spiritual heir of
Comte and all the principal elements of his earlier thought are to be
found foreshadowed in Comte’s writings.” But Parsons’ understanding
of Comte is quite different from that presented in Chapter 3. For Par-
sons, Comte’s positivism is the opposite of Hegelian idealism. Thus
Durkheim is represented as a positivist who gradually converts to a
position which mediates between Hegel and Max Weber. Parsons
places himself quite accurately at the end of this sequence. We have
seen, however, that for Comte as much as for Hegel “ideas govern or
overthrow the world.” Parsons’ family tree, in other words, is much
more inbred than he would like us to believe, and French social science
is a much more provincial affair than is usually admitted. It has never,
not to this day, followed a stratcgy other than that of cultural idealism.

465



===== PAGE 238 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Actually, Durkheim and Comte struck remarkably similar balances be-
tween material and ideational factors at similar stages in their careers.
In both cases, they gave increasing emphasis to moral and religious con-
siderations as they grew older.

The suggestion by sociologist Alvin Gouldner (1962:10) that it was
Saint-Simon rather than Comte to whom Durkheim owed the greater
debt should also be seen in the same context. In the crucial matter of
the relationship between ideology and sociocultural change, Comte and
Saint-Simon were like two peas in a pod. Durkheim (1962:127) him-
self provides the decisive quote:

In point of fact the idea from which he [Saint-Simon] takes his
departure and which dominates his entire doctrine, is that a social
system is only the application of a system of ideas. Systems of re-
ligion, of general politics, morality, of public instruction, says he,
are nothing else than applications of a system of ideas, or if one
prefers, it is the system of thought considered under different
aspects.

Gouldner's case rests on the extent to which Durkheim’s first book,
Division of Labor, may be viewed as a polemic directed against
Comte. Because of its divisive effect upon a community’s moral con-
sensus, Comte had pictured specialization as a subversive threat to
orderly progress. Durkheim, on the other hand, set out to show that
the division of labor leads to a different effect, namely an increase in a
new and higher form of social cohesion, which he labeled “organic
solidarity.” According to Durkheim, this new binding ingredient grows
up alongside of, and eventually overshadows, the more archaic “me-
chanical solidarity” based upon cohesion of individuals through the
likeness of their “consciences” (DURKHEIM 1933:226). But Comte’s
apprehensions concerning the possible breakdown in social cohesion
are fully shared by Durkheim. Indeed, Saint-Simon, Comte, and Durk-
heim are all aware of the potentially cohesive as well as divisive effects
of the increase in the division of labor.

Where Comte spoke of order and progress, Durkheim emphasized
“social solidarity.” This idiom is the main relevant positivist contribu-
tion, serving to maintain a focus upon social evolution which denies
the necessity of disorderly structural change.

In this fashion French positivism acted as a buffer between a science
of society and the political and industrial revolutionary agitation
characteristic of the whole century of French history which preceded
the writing of Division of Labor.

466

. A

18. French Structuralism

SOCIAL SOLIDARITY
STRUGGLE

VERSUS CLASS

The use of the concept of social solidarity by Saint-Simon,
Comte, and Durkheim provides an unbroken line of politically conser-
vative theories leading directly to the main varieties of “functionalism”
among contemporary British, French, and American social anthro-
pologists. While radical social science followed Marx into a considera-
tion of what it would take to make the social organism fly apart, the
conservatives, such as Spencer, Durkheim, Radcliffe-Brown, and Mali-
nowski, busied themselves with calculations of the reasons for its hold-
ing together. Let us admit the legitimacy of both interests. In the
ultimate stages of theoretical formulation, no doubt both approaches
are useful. Marx’s effect upon the development of anthropology is
felt, in this regard, as in most others, indirectly, by reaction, in the
painfully elaborate and only partially successful exploration of self-
regulating, sociocultural equilibrium models. Without placing Durk-
heim’s concern with social solidarity in the context of the Marxist
predictions concerning the impending violent explosion of the capitalist
system, the origins of much of recent cultural theory must remain
forever obscure.

Fortunately we have the testimony of Marcel Mauss (1962) and the
text of Durkheim’s (1962; orig. 1896) study of Saint-Simon and social-
ism by which the central historical importance of the political issue is
established beyond doubt. Mauss tells us that Durkheim’s desire to
build a new science of socicty, after the debacle brought about by
Comte’s popish denouement, arose from schoolboy interest in the
“relationship between individualism and socialism.” According to
Mauss, although this interest was temporarily set to one side, it re-
mained with him throughout his life and coincided with a number of
critical biographical events which are relevant to the form in which
Durkheim’s theories were presented to the world.

He clashed with touchy moralists and classic or Christian econ-
omists for their objections to collectivism which they struck at
through his Division of Labor. Due to conflicts of this kind, he
was excluded from professorships in Paris. Some of the most bril-
liant among his own students were converted to socialism, espe-
cially Marxist, and even Guesdist. In one “Social Study” circle
some examined Capital as they elsewhere considered Spinoza.
Durkheim sensed this opposition to liberalism and bourgeois in-
dividualism. In a conference organized by this circle and the
Workers” Party at Bordeaux, Juares in 1893 extolled Durkheim’s

467



===== PAGE 239 =====

18. French Structuralism

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

work. However, if it was Lucien Herr who in 1886-88 converted
Juarés to socialism, it was Durkheim who in 1889-96 had turned
him away from political formalism and the shallow philosophy of
the radicals [MavUss 1962:34].

DURKHEIM, SPENCER, MARX

Between Spencer’s military and industrial types of societies (see p.
209) there is a transition which appears to resemble the transition be-
tween Durkheim’s own mechanical and organic types. This resemblance
is only superficial, argued Durkheim. Spencer was in fundamental error
concerning the importance of social as opposed to individual factors in
the industrial phase. According to Spencer, the sphere of contractual re-
lationships is destined to expand to the point where the entire social
organization will consist of nothing but a network of voluntary indi-
vidual arrangements of convenience. Individuals would depend upon
the group to a diminishing degree, inversely related to the number of
private conventions.

Social solidarity would then be nothing else than the spontaneous
accord of individual interests, an accord of which contracts are the
natural expression. The typical social relation would be the eco-
nomic, stripped of all regulation and resulting from the entirely
free initiative of the parties. In short, society would be solely the
stage where individuals exchanged the products of their labor,
without any action properly social coming to regulate this ex-
change [DURKHEM 1933:202].

Note that there is a curious similarity between Spencer’s ultimate in-
dustrial phase and the nebulous stateless and classless utopia which
Marx had promised would follow the proletarian victory. Both Marx
and Spencer continued to expect the triumph of the individual over
society as in the dream of Rousseau. For both Spencer and Marx, the
withering away of the state was a withering away not only of the
political apparatus but of the entire supra-individual, sociocultural
nexus of restraint.

Durkheim objected to this predicted diminution of the social factor
in the strongest possible terms, and herein lies, as we shall see, the
unique twist imparted by Durkheim to cultural theory.

THE STATE SHALL NOT WITHER

According to Durkheim, the growth of the division of labor,
and hence of organic solidarity, is accompanied by no weakening of the

468

power of the social organism over the individual; there is rather an
intensification of the mutual dependence of individual and social
group. Much of the Division of Labor is concerned with showing that
the evolution of mechanical to organic solidarity is accompanied by a
“normal” or “healthy” expansion of the legal and administrative ap-
paratus of sociality and of an appropriate set of moral and ethical rules.

. economists have believed that . . . human societies could
and would resolve themselves into purely economic associations.
.. . But such a conception is, in all ways, inadequate for the
facts. The division of labor does not present individuals to one
another, but social functions. And society is interested in the play
of the latter; in so far as they regularly concur, it will be healthy
or ill. Its existence thus depends upon them, and the more they
are divided the greater its dependence. That is why it cannot
leave them in a state of indetermination. . . . Thus are formed
those rules whose number grows as labor is divided, and whose
absence makes organic solidarity either impossible or imperfect
[DURKHEIIVI 19;3407]

THE NEED FOR A SCIENCE OF THE
SOCIAL

Out of this refutation of the individualizing effects of the
division of labor there arises in Durkheim’s outlook the necessity for a
discipline which will concern itself with “social,” as distinct from
individual, “functions.” In his next and perhaps his most influential
major endeavor, The Rules of the Sociological Method (1938; orig.
1895), Durkheim proceeded to set forth the epistemological and
methodological principles of such a discipline. In doing so, he reaffirmed
the superorganic position which was already explicit in the Marxist
tradition, but which for that very reason was elsewhere unacceptable.
Durkheim went far beyond Spencer in this regard. Spencer’s super-
organic was trammeled by bitter opposition to the enlargement of
government and was ultimately, despite his denial of free will and his
use of an organismic model, perfectly reducible to individual motives
and individual strengths and weaknesses in the “struggle for survival.”

Durkheim’s superorganic is in every way anticipatory of Kroeber’s
famous exposition of the autonomy of the cultural level, and also of
Leslie White’s “culturology.” It suffered however from an unfortunate
idealist and mentalist bias which eventually overwhelmed all of its
virtues and produced a distinct heritage within French anthropology
of concern with the mystical properties of group minds.

469

i



===== PAGE 240 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

REJECTION OF RACISM

Among Durkheim’s basic requirements for a science of social func-
tions was the assumption that sociocultural phenomena could not be
understood as the expression of either psychobiological instincts, or
individual conscious willful choices. No social phenomenon, he argued,
can be placed in indisputable dependence on race since the “most di-
verse forms of organization are found in societies of the same race,
while striking similarities are observed between societies of different
races” (1938:108). Unlike Boas, Durkheim rejected the appeal to
racial factors largely on methodological grounds. Racial determinism is
an evasion of sociological problems whose solution require sociological
method:

In short, when the artistic character of Athenian civilization is
related with such facility to inherited aesthetic faculties, we show
as little insight as did scholars in the Middle Ages when they ex-
plained fire by phlogiston and the effects of opium by its dormi-
tive property [ibid.:109].

REJECTION OF INDIVIDUAL
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS

To defend the autonomy of the social realm, Durkheim in-
verted the accepted relationship between consciousness and sociocul-
tural conditions in a manner which is superficially reminiscent of Marx
standing Hegel on his head. One of his cardinal methodological rules
is that “the determining cause of a social fact should be sought among
the social facts preceding it and not among the states of the individual
consciousness” (ibid.:110). The seeming congruence with Marx is sus-
tained by Durkheim’s description of the relationship between the
population of human actors, their raw biopsychological capacities, and
the materialization of the social forces which act through them and
upon them:

Collective representations, emotions, and tendencies are caused
not by ccrtain states of the consciousnesses of individual§ bL!t
by the conditions in which the social group in its t.otahtyAls
placed. Such actions can, of course, materialize only if the in-
dividual natures are mercly the indeterminate material that ?he
social factor molds and transforms. Their contribution consists

470

18. French Structuralism

exclusively in very general attitudes, in vague and consequently
plastic predispositions which by themselves, if other agents did
not intervene, could not take on the definite and complex forms
which characterize social phenomena [ibid.:106].

Yet there is actually little resemblance between Durkheim’s notions
of sociocultural causality and Marx’s materialism. We see that Durk-
heim juxtaposed individual consciousness with the totality of social
conditions. According to Marx, however, it is not the “totality” of so-
cial conditions which deserves emphasis, but rather the techno-environ-
mental and techno-economic aspects of those conditions. It is true that
Durkheim, like Marx, believed that individual states of consciousness
were molded by social conditions of which the individual remained un-
aware. But what is the nature of these social conditions?

THE NATURE OF SOCIAL FACTS

What most impressed Durkheim was that there appeared to
be a “coercive effect” which social things exerted over individual be-
havior. Indeed, the principal test of a social “thing” was that it could
be shown to have “coercive” power. Therefore, in a manner that Durk-
heim admitted could not be fully understood by science, such things
must have an “existence of their own.”

The phenomenological status which Durkheim attributed to social
things is operationally unacceptable. Although social science cannot
function without vigorously defending the reality of traits, institutions,
patterns, and sociocultural forces, we confront an even greater danger
if the reality in question is operationally divorced from the observation
of the behavior of specific individuals. The solution to this problem
is to base the hierarchy of social things upon a series of constructs or
logico-empirical abstractions. As the levels of abstractions depart fur-
ther from the substratum of the historical content of the behavior-
stream, they nonctheless preserve concrete, “material” reality defined
by the logico-empirical process (cf. pp. 333-34, 304).

One must agree completely with Durkheim when he stressed the
point that the individual manifestations of a sociocultural enuty (such
as a particular instance of a phonemic utterance or a given act of avoid-
ance of one’s mother-in-law) are not to be regarded as social (cultural)
things. From an operational point of view, the idiosyncratic or histori-
cal instance is merely the observational raw material out of which the
categorics of sociocultural discourse are constructed by the community
of observers. But for Durkheim, the separation of the specific individual

471



===== PAGE 241 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

performance from the social thing derives from a dmstif:all).' different
epistemological posture. Individual behavior for Durkheim is r;{thcr a
“reincarnation” or reflection of social entities (1938:7) enjoying an
existence which is independent not only of the concrete expression in
a given individual but also of the observer’s logico-empirical proce-
dures. Thus when Durkheim states that “sociological phenomena can-
not be defined by their universality” and that “a movement repeated
by all individuals is not thereby a social fact,” he intends a dichotomy
for which it is impossible to conceive any operational justification.

The metaphysical enormity of Durkheim’s “social things” shows up
in his willingness to concede the existence of widely distributed habits
acquired by learning which do not reflect or “incarnate” social phe-
nomena. This becomes possible in Durkheim’s logic because the gen-
erality and coercive restraints of such habits owe their existence to
forces “internal” to ourselves, whereas, the generality and coercive re-
straint of genuine social facts arise from the exterior and collective
“consciousness”:

The pressure exerted by one or several bodies on other bodies, or
even on human wills, cannot be confused with that which the con-
sciousness of a group exercises on the consciousnesses of its mem-
bers. . . . It is true that habits, either physical or social, have in
certain respects this same feature. They dominate us anfl i'mpose
beliefs and practices upon us. But they rule us from within, for
they are in every case an integral part of ourself. On the contrary,
social beliefs and practices act on us from without: thus the in-
fluence exerted by them differs fundamentally from the effect of
habit [purkHEIM 1938:1v].

THE ORIGIN OF THE IDEA OF GROUP
MIND

We see therefore that the independent reality which Durk-
heim postulates for social things gains its sui generis status frorr? t}'le
alleged existence of a group mind. Durkheim’s group mind is in
every respect the heir of a mixture of Hegelian and Comteian ideal-
ism.

As we have seen, attempts to confine the Hegelian influence to the
later phases of Durkheim’s career are based on the false dichotomy
between French positivism and German idealism. Yet much of Durk-
heim’s formative period was spent studying philosophy lin Qermany
(cf. ARSONS, 1049:307). It is true that Durkheim’s idealism is purely

472

Y

18. French Structuralism

secular with no trace at all of gods and world spirits, but these fea-
tures are easily dispatched without altering the fundamentals of the
cultural-idealist strategy.

One should perhaps also take into account Durkheim’s own protes-
tations against being identified as an idealist. In the preface to the
first edition of the Rules, Durkheim assures us that his “reasoning
is not at all revolutionary” and that if he is a determinist, he is less
dangerous than those who see “in social phenomena only the results of
unrestrained manipulation, which can in an instant, by a simple dia-
lectical artifice, be completely upset” (DURKHEIM 1938 xxxvili-Xxxix) .
He expresses the fear that his attempt to study social phenomena
objectively will be “judged crude and will possibly be termed ‘ma-
terialistic.”” Yet he assures the reader that “we would more justly
claim the contrary designation.” In the final analysis, however, neither
the idealist nor materialist appellation is the correct one: the “only
designation we can accept is that of ‘rationalist’ ” (ibid.).

French intellectuals have always sought surccase from the idealist/
materialist dilemma by similar displays of learned ambiguity. It will be
recalled that for Comte, positivism was to occupy a neutral ground
between the materialism associated with the Revolution and the
idealism associated with the counterrevolution. In Durkheim and
his successors, this same exaltation of learned ambiguity continued
to amuse the “ins” and bemuse the “outs.”

But it was as futile for Durkheim as it had been for Comte to
pretend that he had found some sort of neutral ground. His postu-
lated superorganic social entity is explicitly modeled after the concept
of the individual’s subjectively experienced “mind.” Social facts are
“collective representations,” that is, ideas experienced by the group
mind and expressed or “reincarnated” in the minds and behavior of
the individual members of the social group. “Collective conscious-
ness” is a deliberate play on the ambiguity of the distinction be-
tween conscience as a subjectively experienced moral force and the
experience of conscious awareness, both of which are incorporated into
the concept of the group mind. Every pore of Durkheim’s theory is
filled with mentalist and idealist images and predilections. If he
transcends the individual psychological level, it is in terms of a

series of psychological assumptions which stamp social things with an
indelible idealist commitment:

- nothing collective can be produced if individual conscious-
nesses are not assumed; but this necessary condition is by itself
insufficient. These consciousnesses must be combined in a certain
way; social life results from this combination and is, consequently,

473



===== PAGE 242 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

explained by it. Individual minds, forming groups by mingling
and fusing, give birth to a being, psychological if you will, but
constituting a psychic individuality of a new sort [ibid.:103].

Despite this imagery, Durkheim’s critics continued to accuse him
of materialism. He was prompted, therefore, to begin his preface to
the second edition of the Rules with a most emphatic denial of
materialist leanings:

‘Whereas we had declared repeatedly that the individual conscious-
ness was for us not matenal, but only a more or less system-
atized aggregate of phenomena, we were charged with realism and
with ontologism. Whereas we had expressly stated and rciterated
that social life is constituted wholly of collective “representa-
tions,” we were accused of eliminating the mental element from
sociology [ibid.:xli].

.. . social phenomena, although immaterial, are nevertheless
real things [ibid.:lvii].

It is thus clear that there is no kernel of truth in Parson’s argument
that “Idealistic strains appear in Durkheim’s thought . . . only at
the latest stage of its development” (PARSONS 1949:307). The further
development of Durkheim’s career brought an intensified commit-
ment to the idealist position already evident in the earliest mono-
graphs.

WHAT CAUSES THE DIVISION OF
LABOR?

It is Durkheim’s answer to this question that is important if
one is to understand the rise of the French and English functionalist
schools, and the powerful attraction that Durkheim’s approach con-
tinues to manifest among cultural anthropologists.

From Adam Smith onward, the explanation of the increase in
the division of labor had been based upon the common sense notion
that greater specialization provided a cheaper and more efficient means
for producing the economic goods upon which men depended for
their sustenance and pleasure. Although the soundness of this es-
sentially economic explanation would seem to be unassailable, the
main purport of Durkheim’s first monograph is to deny its validity
and to substitute in its place an explanation that emphasizes above
all else the functional-causal importance of social solidarity.

To defeat the established view, Durkheim proceeds first to challenge

474

18. French Structuralism

the notion that the division of labor is associated with a general in-
crease in “happiness.” Given the condition of Europe’s masses
toward the end of the nineteenth century, it is not difficult to win
the point that a simple utilitarian pleasure-pain principle does not
suffice. In this connection, we sec that it is no accident that Durk-
heim’s second substantive study (1892) was concerned with suicide—
a direct outcome of his somber rejection of utilitarian doctrine.

The specific polemic is once again directed toward Spencer. The
latter alleges, in effect, “that happiness increases with the productive
power of work” (1933:265). It thus seems to Spencer impossible for
us not to utilize each new method for dividing up the work task and
increasing output. But we know things do not happen in this way,
argues Durkheim. The difficulty is that primitive man, living under
arrangements of mechanical solidarity, cannot be assumed to have any
desire for material abundance. This remarkable assertion is crucial
for all that follows. We have already encountered it in the Boasian
attempt to destroy the economic explanation of cultural evolution.
It leads in Durkheim’s case to the view that productivity is epiphe-
nomenal, that the desire for material abundance is a consequence and
not a cause of the division of labor:

The division of labor appears to us otherwise than it does to
economists. For them, it essentially consists in greater produc-
tion. For us, this greater productivity is only a necessary conse-
quence, a repercussion of the phenomenon. If we specialize, it is
not to produce more, but it is to enable us to live in new condi-
tions of existence that have been made for us [ibid.:275].

That much of the academic power and intellectual prestige of
Durkheim’s school rests upon its rejection of economic determinism
becomes apparent as soon as we turn to the absurd explanation
which Durkheim substituted for that which had satisfied his prede-
cessors. Appealing first to Darwin, Durkheim notes that competition
in the biological world is most fierce among the members of the same
or similar species: “Darwin justly observed that the struggle between
two organisms is as active as they are analogous. Having the same needs
and pursuing the same objects, they are in rivalry everywhere” (ibid.:
266). In human population this rivalry tends to increase in direct
proportion to the rise in what Durkheim calls “social condensation”—
an cffect related in not too clear a fashion to increases in population
size and density. But as the “condensation” progresses, the mechanical
cohesiveness which is associated with a small undifferentiated social

475



===== PAGE 243 =====

—————-—v»

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

mass gives way to the organic principle, and the tendency of the
social organism to break apart or consume itself in fatal internecine
struggle is countered by the rise of organic solidarity. Each break in
the equilibrium of the social mass is resolved by a more developed
division of labor. The division of labor thus emerges as a social
arrangement not for increasing productivity, but for reducing compe-
tition. Its principal effect is to increase the amount of heterogeneity
among the parts of the social organism, thereby multiplying and
intensifying their mutual dependence. In other words, the function
of the division of labor is to preserve social solidarity.

THERE WILL BE NO REVOLUTION

It seems sclf-evident that the historical function of Durk-
heim’s explanation lies in the paramount emphasis which Marx had
also given to internecine rivalry. Both Marx and Durkheim assign
an important role to struggle, but with this difference: social rivalry
for Marx is not about to be solved by the division of labor. There is
to be an intensification rather than a diminution of social conflict.
Social cohesion in Marx’s theories would grow only among the prole-
tariat, the social stratum which is destined to be bound ever closer
together by increasing “mechanical solidarity.” Between the prole-
tariat and the bourgeoisie, that is, between the most differentiated
segments of the social organism, instead of organic solidarity, there
is to be war.

The crudity of both Marx’s and Durkheim’s formulations need
not detain us. It is clear that one is the obverse of the other and that
both suffer from a lack of sensitivity to quantity, refinement of con-
cept, overabundance of conviction, and a lack of data. Between
the under- and overestimation of the composability of class struggle,
there is little choice. That it was Durkheim’s view and not Marx’s
which provided the basis for British and French functionalism is
lamentable, but for quite a different reason. Durkheim’s rejection of
an irreconcilable class struggle went along with the rejection of eco-
nomic explanations—a package whose reason for being resided princi-
pally in the fact that these two things happened to be put together
by Marx. Durkheim’s unique contribution was thus the founding of
a science of culture which could explain sociocultural phenomena
without getting involved in techno-economic causation. Henceforth
it would suffice merely to investigate the manner by which a given
trait or institution contributed to the maintenance of solidarity among
the members of the social organism.

476

18. French Structuralism

SLOUGHING OFF MALTHUS, SPENCER,
AND DARWIN

Durkheim’s commitment to an idealist strategy in the Di-
vision of Labor is obscured by ambiguities associated with the process
of “social condensation.” Since “social condensation” is produced by
an increase in population density, a more general treatment of the
conditions responsible for the division of labor would obviously re-
quire an explanation of demographic changes. That is, if we accept
Durkheim’s argument that the division of labor does not derive its
functional importance from production, we cannot admit the im-
portance of “social condensation” without re-admitting the factors
responsible for production at an even more fundamental level. To
this question of what causes the “social condensation” that produces
the crises of solidarity whose function it is the division of labor’s to
solve, Durkheim pays practically no attention. Eventually, as his
position matured, the process of “social condensation” was forgotten.
His explanations tended more and more to assume the great variety
of techno-economic and techno-environmental systems as givens.
With economic factors held constant, the analysis of ideology and
social structure was carried to a new pitch, while the concept of the
collective consciousness assumed an increasingly more autonomous
role. Thus, in The Rules of the Sociological Method, the growth
in the volume and dynamic density of socicties is mentioned only
peripherally to a discussion which moves toward dismissing concern
with ultimate causality in the physicalist sense (purkHEIM 1938:115fF.).
In Suicide, as Parsons (1949:327) points out, the question of
density and Darwinian competition drops out entirely, never to
be heard from again. Instead, in Suicide, we have a series of
explanations which relate different suicide rates to various intensities
of the mechanical and organic components of the collective conscious-
ness. For example, where the collective consciousness is associated
with mechanical solidarity, altruistic suicides predominate. On the
ther hand, where organic solidarity is more important, anomic sui-
Cld.e resulting from an absence of well-defined “collective represen-
tations” (i.c., rules of behavior) comes to the fore.

With the further maturation of Durkheim’s position, the social
mfhcu, which is after all nothing but a system of ideas in the group
mind, achieves a more and more blatant autonomy with respect to
the material conditions of individual and collective life. Durkheim’s
thinking continues along this line until we come, in his last major

477

i
|
}
i
!



===== PAGE 244 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

work, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, to an affirmation of
the power of collective representations, which returns us in unmis-
takable terms to an idealism patterned after the worst of Hegel's
“geists.”

THE ORIGIN OF FUNCTIONALIST
EXPLANATIONS

The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, Durkheim’s last
major work, is an attempt to discover the “origins” of religion. By
“origin,” Durkheim did not mean simply “first beginning” but rather
“the everpresent causes upon which the most essential forms of
religious thought and practice depend” (1915:8). The fundamental
conclusions reached are that all of the basic concepts associated with
religion, such as god, soul, spirit, and totem, originate in the recurrent
experience by which human beings feel the force and majesty of
the social group. Men collectively invent the basic categories of re-
ligion in order to explain the unseen but felt force of the collective
consciousness. Several other fundamental ideas, such as logical classes,
physical force, space, and time, are also said to owe their origin to a
similar sort of apotheosis or concretization of the group mind. Aside
from mentioning the slight possibility that these suggestions merit
serious consideration from the peint of view of social psychology, we
shall not attempt to evaluate their empirical status. Of more enduring
interest is the kind of explanation they embody. We must note first
of all that there is a lack of concern with the explanation of specific
variations in religious systems. Once the totem or magical rite has
been shown to be functionally compatible or illustrative of certain
universal “elementary” collective “structures,” the explanatory quest
terminates.

In subsequent elaborations of the functional method, among both
the French and British social anthropologists, essentially the same
strategy was to be followed with respect to such ‘“elementary”
principles as the “unity of the sibling” group and other so-called
universal structural-functional “laws.” In the case of Lévi-Strauss the
similarity is even more profound since the French followers of Durk-
heim do mnot hesitate to propose universal “elementary” principles
cast in an overtly psychological idiom. In addition, the French struc-
turalists have, to a greater extent than their English counterparts,
permitted themselves the luxury of ambiguous metaphorical evolu-
tionary sequences in which primitive and derived forms are playfully

478

I ot

18.

French Structuralism

bandied about in a spirit of double entendre, best exemplified, outside
of Durkheim, by eightcenth-century discussions of the origin of so-
ciety in the “social contract.”

TRIUMPH OF MIND OVER MATTER

In this final phase of Durkheim’s career, considerations of
the material conditions such as are implicit in the Division of Labor
are finally and unequivocally overwhelmed. We confront at last
the autonomous power of the “collective representations” to mold
themselves into myriads of specific forms. Such forms are intelligible,
if at all, only in so far as they continue to represent universal
principles of collective psychology. But they are neither predictable
nor retrodictable. It is not merely that society has the power to
construct idcologies in the processes of “constructing itself” (1915:
423) but that being a higher manifestation of “idea” in its own
right, society can construct itself in any image to which it happens to
take a fancy.

Paradoxically, Durkheim continues, in the midst of all this, to
fend off possible accusations of materialism. The latter, it seems, were
brought on by the mere fact that he attributes so little autonomy to
the individual. Tt would almost seem as if Durkheim feared that his
colleagues had not heard that there were differences between Hegel
and Marx:

Therefore it is necessary to avoid seeing in this theory of re-
ligion a simple restatement of historical materialism: that would
be misunderstanding our thought to an extreme degree. In show-
ing that religion is something essentially social, we do not mean
to say that it confines itself to translating into another language
the material forms of society and its immediate vital necessities.
It is true that we take it as evident that social life depends upon
its material foundation and bears its mark just as the mental life
of an individual depends upon his nervous system and in fact his
whole organism. But collective consciousness is something more
than a mere epiphenomenon of its morphological basis. . . . In
order that the former may appear, a synthesis sui generis of par-
ticular consciousnesses is required. Now this synthesis has the
effect of disengaging a whole world of sentiments, ideas and
images which, once born, obey laws all their own. They attract
each other, repel each other, unite, divide themselves, and multi-
Ply though these combinations are not commended and necessi-
tated by the condition of the underlying reality. The life thus
brought into being even enjoys so great an independence that it

479



===== PAGE 245 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

sometimes indulges in manifestations with no purpose or utility
of any sort, for the mere pleasure of affirming itself. We have
shown that this is often precisely the case with ritual activity and
mythological thought [ibid.:423-24].

Another way of expressing this triumph of mind over matter is to
assert the causal priority of ideology. This Durkheim proceeds to
do with the proclamation (validated by nothing more than the tautol-
ogy deriving from his definition of the collective consciousness) that
most great social institutions are the causal products of religious ideas:

In summing up, then, it may be said that nearly all the great
social institutions have been born in religion. Now in order that
these principal aspects of the collective life may have commenced
by being only varied aspects of the religious life, it is obviousl‘y
necessary that the religious life be the eminent form and, as it
were, concentrated expression of the whole collective life. If re-
ligion had given birth to all that is essential in society, it is be-
cause the idea of socicty is the soul of religion [ibid.:418-19].

In a footnote to this passage Durkheim himself draws attention to
the fact that he has not yet systematically examined how economic
activity is governed by religious ideas. He is convinced, howeve'r, that
there is no dearth of connection: Magic enters into economic pro-
cesses; economic value is a sort of power or efficacy; richness confers
mana. Thus, we see that Durkheim’s conception of economics was,
like Lowie’s, contaminated with the emic sense of rules and ideals.
When his pupil Mauss and when Mauss’ pupil Lévi-Strauss turned
their attention to phenomena which have a manifest relation with
the material conditions of habitat and technology, they did so, as we
shall see in a moment, in a fashion which preserved the anti-economic
and antimaterialist commitment with undiminished ardor, resulting
in additional flights of fancy and displays of learned obscurantism.

THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF
CONSCIOUSNESS

It remains to be noted concerning the fate of Durkheim’s
science of society that in the final chapter of The Elementary Forms
the influence of an Hegelian version of idealism is everywhere con-
spicuous. Skeptics should review the evidence as presented by T?lcf)tt
Parsons, who, unlike the writer, detects in this influence a gratlfylr_lg
convergence toward his own formulation of social sci‘ence. 'But,,n‘l
view of the Hegelian heritage which has been identified in Lévi-

480

v—

18. French Structuralism

Strauss, it is of singular importance that the continuity of such an
outlook in and through Durkheim be clearly established. This is
additionally imperative, since the British social anthropologists have
for the most part failed to understand how much their own position
is also based upon an attenuated but nonetheless active and theo-
retically decisive variety of idealism.

We must recall in this connection that for Hegel, history consists
of the world mind working its way into awareness of itself. In Durk-
heim, the world mind is replaced by the collective consciousness,
but the imprint of animistic survivals is unmistakable:

. the collective consciousness is the highest form of the
psychic life, since it is the consciousness of the consciousnesses.
Being placed outide of and above individual and local contingen-
cies, it sees things only in their permanent and essential aspects,
which it crystallizes into communicable ideas. At the same time
that it sees from above, it sees farther; at every moment of time,
it embraces all known reality; that is why it alone can furnish the
mind with the moulds which are applicable to the totality of
things and which make it possible to think of them. It does not
create these moulds artificially; it finds them within itself; it does
nothing but become conscious of them [ibid.:444].

The influence of an Hegelian outlook is also evident in Durkheim’s
approach to the problem of cross-cultural typologies. Durkheim made
almost no progress in this matter because he could not rid himself
of the romantic notion that each country had a soul which main-
tained it as a separate social “species” throughout the vicissitudes
of historical experience. Especially important in this regard is that
the identification of social “species” must eschew dependence upon
taxonomic contrasts derived from material differences:

Since its origin, France has passed through very different forms
of civilization; it began by being agricultural, passed to craft in-
dustry and to small commerce, then to manufacturing, and finally
to large-scale industry. Now, it is impossible to admit that the
same collective individuality can change its species three or four
times. A species must define itself by more constant characteris-
tics. The economic state, technological state, etc. present phe-
nomena too unstable and complex to furnish the basis of a
classification. It is even very probable that the same industrial,
scientific, and artistic civilization can be found in societies whose
hereditary constitution is very different. Japan may in the future
borrow our arts, our industry, even our political organization; it
will not cease to belong to a different social species from France
and Germany [DURKHEIM 1938:88n].

481



===== PAGE 246 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Everything about this passage is backwards or standing on its head.
France, a “collective individuality,” is declared unique prior to the
statement of the logico-empirical procedures by which entities in
the domain of sociocultural phenomena are to be identified and
classified. Its techno-cconomic base keeps changing, argues Durkheim,
yet France remains; therefore the essence of France must reside else-
where. That is, Durkheim starts with an operationally undefined
and undefinable entity and systematically casts out all the opera-
tionally definable concepts which contradict the basic idealist posture.
And on what does this idea of France rest if not on the emic con-
viction of Frenchmen that they are different from everyone else and
that France is eternal. Thus we end up with a France that is like
Japan in everything but “spirit,” with a national “geist” that remains
the same no matter how much change occurs. French anthropology
continues to pay a high price for this muddled way of thinking.

MARCEL MAUSS

Mauss was the most prominent of the small, closeknit
group of scholars who collaborated with Durkheim at the turn of
the century, especially in the publication of the journal L’Année
Sociologique from 1898 to 1912. The group included Henri Hubert,
Henri Beuchat, Maxime David, and Robert Hertz. After Durkheim’s
death in 1917, and as a result of the heavy toll taken by World
War I on his younger colleagues, Mauss donned the mantle of leader-
ship. He resumed publication of L’Année Sociologique in 1924, and
with Lucien Lévy-Bruhl and Paul Rivet, founded the Institute of
Ethnology of the University of Paris in 1926. As Seth Leacock (1954:
59) has noted, “Throughout his life, Mauss considered himself a
follower of Durkheim and never knowingly violated any of Durk-
heim’s teachings.” Of special interest in this connection is the empha-
sis given by Mauss to explanations of large domains of sociocultural
phenomena through the identification of archetypical “collective rep-
resentations.”

ELEMENTARY FORMS

Mauss attributed the worldwide manifestations of sacrificial
phenomena to the collective idea of a sacred domain or realm. The
sacrificial victim is the medium through which communication with
this realm is achieved (Mauss and HuBERT 1899). Later the explanation

482

18. French Structuralism

of magic was sought in the idea of mand, a collective belief in an im-
personal force accounting for the efficacy of magical as opposed to
religious behavior (maAuss and HUBERT 19o4). In his most influential
work, L'Essai Sur le Don (The Gift), to which we shall return in a
moment, Mauss used the idea of “reciprocity” to explain such appar-
ently qiverse phenomena as the potlatch and kula.

Lévi-Strauss has pointed out the similarity between Mauss’ modus
operandi and Durkheim’s method of reducing complex phenomena
to lunderlying elements: social bonds to organic and mechanical
solidarity; suicide to the egoistic, altruistic, and anomic varieties:
and god and force to the apotheosis of the social group. To thé
unsympathetic critic, this procedure is, at best, an attempt to classify
together a melange of ideas and practices on the basis of what may
be their most trivial resemblances; but for Lévi-Strauss such idea‘s
reach behind superficial differences and similarities to the “hidden,
fundamental elements which are the true components of the phenomz
ena” (LEVISTRAUSS 1045a:524). “This analytical work, trying to
reduce the concrete complexity of the data . . . into more simple
and elementary structures is still the fundamental task of sociology”

(ibid.:525).

FULGURATING INTUITION

) ) Lévi-Strauss” lavish praise of Mauss is instructive for the
light it sheds on the professional ideal type after which the French
school had modeled itself. Mauss is depicted as having “a bold imagi-

nation,” “a genius-like feeling of the social stuff,” and “unlimited
knowledge.”

In }n's work, and still more in his teaching, unthought-of com-
parisons flourish. While he is often obscure by the constant use of
antitheses, short-cuts and apparent paradoxes which, later on,
prove to be the result of a deeper insight, he gratifies his listener,
suddenly, with fulgurating intuitions, providing the substance for
months of fruitful thinking. In such cases, one feels that one has
reached the bottom of the social phenomenon, and has, as he says
somewhere, “hit the bed-rock” [ibid.:527)

Fulgurating intuitions are, of course, the hallmark of Lévi-Strauss’
own dazzling discoveries of hidden clementary structures. But the
bed rock” in both cases is scarcely the kind of stuff which bruises
heads or which can be used to build pyramids.

483



===== PAGE 247 =====

. ol

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

MAUSS GIFT TO LEVI-STRAUSS

Lévi-Strauss’ magnum opus, (Les Structures Elémentaires de
la Parenté (The Elementary Structures of Kinship), reveals the influence
of Mauss and Durkheim in its title, recalling at once Durkheim’s
search for the “elementary forms” of religion. But Lévi-Strauss him-
self has pointed out the greater strength of the inspiration transmitted
to him by Mauss:

Few people have been able to read I'Essai Sur le Don (The Gift)
without experiencing the gamut of emotions described by
Malebranche upon his first reading of Descartes: the beating of
the heart, the boiling up within the head, the mind overcome by
the certainty as yet undefinable but overpowering, of assisting in
a decisive event in the evolution of science [LEvI-sTRAUSS 1950:
Xxxii].

What is this great event? Lévi-Strauss praises The Gift because Mauss
treats the manifestations of gift-giving as a “total social fact” wherein
“all kinds of institutions find simultancous expression: religious, legal,
moral, and economic.”

Everything in a society—cven the most special things—every-
thing is above all a function, and is functioning. Nothing can be
understood except in relation to everything else, to the complete
collectivity and not simply to particular parts. There is no social
phenomenon which is not an integral part of the social whole
[ibid.:139].

Yet according to Lévi-Strauss, this apparently useless truism ushers
in a new and superior form of functional analysis. Perhaps the reason
for this accolade lies in the connection which Lévi-Strauss draws
between “total social fact” and Mauss’ developing rapprochement
with psychology. Prior to the publication of The Gift, Mauss (1924)
had expressed an interest in bringing psychological and sociological
studies into closer proximity than Durkheim had deemed advisable.
Although it is difficult to isolate the portions of The Gift that are
explicitly dependent upon this new outlook, there are many passages
which could be construed as being concerned with the conscious
and unconscious meanings of gift-giving from the individual actor’s
point of view. With his insistence upon a sharp separation between
the collective and individual mind, Durkheim had failed to give

484

18. French Structuralism

proper emphasis to the possibility of understanding social phenomena
from the inside, so to speak, of the minds of the individual partici-
pants. This corresponds, writes Lévi-Strauss, to a general fault of
science whereby the subjective properties are left to one side while
we seek explanations in purely objective terms:

When Mauss speaks of total social facts, he implies that on the
contrary this facile and convenient dichotomy is inadmissible for
sociology. . . . In order to understand a social fact it is neces-
sary to comprehend it totally, that is, from without, as a thing of
which however, the subjective understanding, both conscious and
unconscious, which we have of it is an integral part; as if, being
inescapably human, we were to live the fact as the native does,
instead of merely observing it as the ethnographer [LEvi-sTRAUSS
1950:Xxviii].

In a more modern idiom, which I have had several previous occasions
to employ and which is the subject of a separate chapter, Durkheim
was not “emic” enough for Lévi-Strauss.

UNCONSCIOUS TELEOLOGY OF THE
MIND

Mauss was showing the way toward “elementary structure”
not grasped by Durkheim because the master too rigidly excluded
the psychological meanings of social facts. It scarcely secms possible
to credit Mauss with the dubious achievement of turning French
social anthropology back into its subjective rut. That there was a
convergence of both Mauss and Durkheim toward essentially psy-
chological categorizations is revealed in their collaborative efforts in
the study of religion, which long preceded the writing of The Ele-
mentary Forms of the Religious Life. Credit Mauss with an intensifica-
tion of a trend rather than with a sharp break.

Elsewhere, Lévi-Strauss is more explicit concerning the particular
kind of emic intensification for which Mauss is to be praised; it is
the kind, of course, which Lévi-Strauss employs as the basis of his
own analytical posture. It is not merely that Mauss is aware more
than Durkheim of the relationship between sociological and psy-
chological phenomena. It is rather that Mauss states that although
sociology is a kind of psychology specifically distinct from individual
psychology, “it is nonetheless true that one may pass from the facts
of individual consciousness to collective representations through a
continuous series of intermediaries” (MAUSS 1924, quoted in Livi-

485



===== PAGE 248 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

STRAUSS 1045:529). What this boils down to, as we shall have
ample occasion to witness, is that Mauss is to be admired for his
realization that there might be deep, hidden inner “structures” in
the human mind, which are causally prior to collective representations
as objective social facts. According to Lévi-Strauss, Durkheim took
what appears to be at first glance a strangely intransigent stand
against such a possibility. But when he first formulated the concept
of the collective consciousness, it was only natural that Durkheim
was unable to grasp how social facts might escape the control of
individual minds and at the same time be, to any significant extent,
projections of individual consciousness. The reason for this is that the
fields of depth psychology and structural linguistics had not yet
achieved their impact:

Modem sociologists and psychologists solve such problems by
calling upon the activity of the unconscious mind; but at the time
when Durkheim was writing the main results of modern psychol-
ogy and linguistics were lacking. This explained why Durkheim
struggled between what he conceived—and this was already a con-
siderable progress upon the thinking of the late 1gth century as
illustrated, for instance, by Spencer—as an irreducible antinomy:
the blindness of history, and the finalism of conscience. Between
the two, there is of course the unconscious teleology of the mind

[ibid.:518].

The special achievement of The Gift is related to this reorientation
of functionalism toward “unconscious mental teleology.” What really
set Lévi-Strauss’ heart beating and head boiling in The Gift was that
Mauss had achieved the threshold of a specific discovery concerning the
“unconscious teleology of the mind” which was to provide the basis for
The Elementary Structures of Kinship and for the entire pattern of
French “structural” anthropology.

TO GIVE, TO RECEIVE, AND TO REPAY

As T have already indicated, Mauss had endeavored to reduce
the worldwide varieties of gift-giving practices, including potlatch, the
Kula, Melanesian and Indian feasting and festivals, to their “elemen-
tary form.” In conformity with the standard practice of Durkheim’s
school, Mauss is able to discern in these apparently disparate phe-
nomena an underlying principle which is supposed to render them,
at one fell stroke, intelligible. All of these phenomena are examples
of an “archaic” form of exchange in which there is a “circulation of

486

g

18. French Structuralism

objects side by side with the circulation of persons and rights”
(MAUSS 1954:45). This circulation is maintained neither by barter,
purchase, nor economic utility, but rather by the threefold obligation
deeply ingrained in the human mind to give, to receive, and to
repay (ibid.:37ff.).

All these institutions reveal the same kind of social and psy-
chological pattern. Food, women, children, possessions, charms,
land, labour, services, religious offices, rank—everything is stuff to
be given away and repaid. In perpetual interchange of what we
may call spiritual matter, comprising men and things, these ele-
ments pass and repass between clans and individuals, ranks, sexes
and generations [ibid.:11-12].

In short these are all expressions of the principle of reciprocity
upon which the solidary relations between individuals and groups
so greatly depend.

We should note in passing that The Gift is thus an outstanding
example of the use of familiar ethnographic cases of apparently
irrational management of resources and labor under ideological or
mentalistic pressure. Despite Mauss’ talk about viewing social facts
in their total functional context, and despite his lip service to the
“economic” function, the essay is made possible only by critical
lacunae which promote the highest tolerance for wrenching economic
behavior out of a structural and dynamic context. Dependence upon
the standard anti-economic analysis of Kula and potlatch is es-
pecially diagnostic. Mauss™ interpretation of the Kula never rises
above the fateful decision made by Malinowski not to place the Kula
in the context of “ordinary trade” in which admittedly its principal
“sociological” significance resided. But this is a theme which requires
more extended treatment and to which we shall turn in Chapter 19.

In the meantime, Mauss’ misuse of the potlatch should be obvious
from our previous discussion of the re-evaluation of this material.
Mauss’ remark that “It is only our Western societies that quite re-
cently turned man into an economic animal” (ibid.:74) is typical of
the “emicization” of techno-environmental and techno-economic
phenomena.

EMICS AND ECONOMICS

- To jump ahead of the story, it is interesting to note how
Levx-St_rauss, who again pays lip service to economic functions, follows
Mauss into a complete misunderstanding of the difference between the

487



===== PAGE 249 =====

———-__ﬁ-‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory M

motives which impel an individual to behave in a particular way during
the processes of production, distribution, and consumption, and the
functional-causal systemic reasons for such behavior. In The Elementary
Structures of Kinship, Lévi-Strauss elaborates Mauss’ suggestion that
gift-giving at Christmastime is a modern proof of the strength of the
reciprocal principle. With amusing references to his own experiences as
a culture-shocked Frenchman in New York, Lévi-Strauss likens the
frenzy, competitiveness, and anxiety of the American holiday season to
the fiercest of Kwakiutl potlatches.

The comparison of course is perfectly apt on the psychological
level, but one does not have to be a Marxist to sense that there is
another dimension to our Christmas madness. Why is an intelligence,
so subtle in other respects, unable to penetrate to the not-so-deep
functions of Christmas purchases in an economy whose productive
capacity has raced ahead of the power to buy and consume? It may
be “irrational” for Americans to crowd each other over the tinsel
and ribbon at Macy’s gift-wrapping counter, but the 25 percent of
United States retail sales, for which Christmas shopping now accounts,
have more serious consequences than tired feet.

This criticism must be distinguished from rejection of the hu-
manistically valuable insight which can be derived from comparing
the respective sentiments of Kwakiutl and Americans when  they
exchange gifts. Thus, one does not object to a comparison between
potlatch and Christmas shopping or potlatch and the exchange of
wines in cheap French restaurants, if it is made clear that these
comparisons are merely intended to bring about a greater degree of
insight into the “native point of view.” In replying to J. F. Revel’s
criticism of his method, Lévi-Strauss has indeed invoked just such a
defense:

When, to Revel's great displeasure, I interpret the exchange of
wine in the restaurants of southern France in terms of social
prestations my primary aim is not to explain contemporary cus-
toms by means of archaic institutions but to help the reader, a
member of a contemporary society, to rediscover, in his own ex-
perience and on the basis of either vestigial or embryonic prac-
tices, institutions that would otherwise remain unintelligible to
him. The question, then, is not whether the exchange of wine is a
survival of the potlatch, but whether, by means of this compar-
ison, we succeed better in grasping the feelings, intentions, and
attitudes of the native involved in a cycle of prestations [1963a:338].

But Lévi-Strauss’ theories concerning the expressions of the principle
of reciprocity have been presented by himself and others as relevant

488

to explanations of sociocultural differences and similarities. That task
cannot be solved by means of psychedelic “trips” in which we
achieve the experience of thinking and feeling like a “native.” Al-
though psychic communion may indeed constitute the best result of
the French structural school, a much more ambitious program has
been announced.

THE PROPHET S PROPHET

For Lévi-Strauss, the grand achievement of the Essai Sur le
Don was that it pointed the way toward the understanding of social
life in terms of cycles of reciprocity involving the exchange of
valuables. It is difficult to know how much of what Lévi-Strauss was
able to build upon the foundation provided by Mauss actually was
foreshadowed by Mauss’ thought. The Gift is an extraordinarily dis-
organized book, as Lévi-Strauss himself admits. According to Lévi-
Strauss, Mauss’ role was rather that of a prophet: “He stopped at the
border of vast possibilities like Moses conducting his people to the
very edge of a promised land upon whose splendor he would never
gaze” (ibid.:xxxvii). But at the decisive point in his journey, Mauss
is said to have been distracted by the New Zealand Maori’s‘explana—
tion of reciprocity in terms of hau. This concept credits a gift with a
kind of transferable spirit which must be returned through the me-
dium of a counter gift in order to avoid harm to the receiver. Mauss
was trying to use hau to explain reciprocity as he had used mana and
sacre to explain magic and sacrifice. But, says Lévi-Strauss, hau is
nothing but a native theory, reflecting the underlying structural truth
without exposing it. “Reciprocity” is the concept which will con-
duct us to the underlying mental structure. And this is the task to
which Lévi-Strauss devotes himself in his major work.

The Elementary Structures of Kinship is unquestionably the supreme
accomplishment of French anthropology. Neither Durkheim nor
Mauss was in a position to make use of the ethnographic literature
that had accumulated by the time Lévi-Strauss embarked upon the
completion of the journey to the promised land. No one before him
in the French social sciences could match the combination of literate
ergdition, in the grand manner, plus extensive firsthand knowledge of
primitive tribal groups (based on his fieldwork in Brazil during the
late 1930s).

'1_1}16 effectiveness of cultural anthropology, measured in terms of
an intellectual influence out of all proportions to the size of its pro-
fessional membership, undoubtedly relates to the juxtaposition of

489



===== PAGE 250 =====

e

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 18. French Structuralism

ivory tower and grass hut. This has been a formidable combination
everywhere; but in France, the art of sociological speculation had
flourished well into the 1930’s. As one of the first French anthropolo-
gists who knew what it was like to gather data by living among
primitives, Lévi-Strauss spoke with an authority few in France could
challenge. On the other hand, in turning to confront the field-hard-
ened professionalism of the English functionalists and the American
Boasians, it was his Gallic erudition that frequently placed him at an
advantage.

THE GIFT OF WOMEN

The contribution of The Elementary Structures of Kinship
is the application of Mauss’ suggestions concerning the circulation
of a particular kind of valuable to the explanation of incest prohibi-
tions, preferential marriages, and the principal varicties of kinship
groupings. The valuable in question, merely lumped by Mauss, along
with arm bands, feathers, and yams, is the most precious gift which one
group can give another, namely, women. The fundamental phenome-
non underlying all matrimonial systems is seen as resulting from the
prohibition of incest and is always the same: “that is, starting from the
moment that I prohibited the use of a woman to myself, who thus be-
comes available for another man, there is somewhere, a man who re-
nounces a woman who then becomes disposable for me” (LEvI-sTRAUSS
1949:65). The function of incest prohibition is thus to compel the
reciprocal exchange of women. From this point onward, the study of
kinship resolves itself essentially into the analyses and classification of
the various systems of women-exchange, which are more or less implicit
in the gamut of institutional arrangements that regulate descent, mar-
riage, and intergroup relations. Given Lévi-Strauss’ intellectual pedi-
gree, it is not surprising that at several critical junctures, equivocation
and ambiguity overwhelm the often brilliant and always ingenious
explication. At the very outset, for example, there is the question of
the function of reciprocity. On the one hand, following Durkheim’s
master strategy and Mauss’ specific suggestion, we encounter the
theme that reciprocity is the ancient and continuing condition for
social solidarity in groups larger than the nuclear family. But what
are the rcasons for having socially solidary units larger than the
nuclear family? Evidently, if the gift of women brings people closer
together, fathers and sons would benefit from such an exchange.

490

RENUNCIATION OF SURVIVAL-VALUE
THEORY

Although Lévi-Strauss cites E. B. Tylor’s famous aphorism
concerning the choice between marrying out and dying out (ibid.:
53), the factor of intergroup competition and differential survival is
consistently ignored or underplayed.

It is difficult to share Homans and Schneider’s (1955:17) enthu-
siasm with respect to this unfortunate choice: “He does not use, and
in this we think him wise, a survival-value theory.” It is precisely
because of this strategic error that Lévi-Strauss ends up with a theory
incapable of explaining specific cultural differences and similarities.
Instead of considerations of survival, we are treated to a number of
vague suggestions concerning advantages of a secondary or tertiary
order: social solidarity, the advantage to the group of being able
to control the distribution of women (LEVISTRAUSS 1949:55-56), and
the sexual advantage to the individual of a larger circle of women
from which to choose (ibid.:52). By not concerning himself with
differential survival effects, Lévi-Strauss is able to ignore the rela-
tionships between social structure and productivity, demography,
and warfare in bringing about cultural adaptations.

APPEAL TO THE STRUCTURE OF THE
MIND

In keeping with his praise of Mauss’ “total social facts,” our
author posits, side by side with the sociocultural advantages of re-
ciprocity, a fundamental universal psychological need for gift-giving
and gift-receiving. He argues that historical or geographical studies
would not contribute to the explanation of the basic forms of reci-
procity as embodied in the nuclear constellation of incest categories
and their expression in a simple moiety organization: In order to
comprehend these phenomena, “one must appeal to certain funda-
chntal structures of the human mind” (ibid.:108). The main

structures” in question are based on a dialectic between “self and
others.” It is this opposition which is resolved by the idea of reciproc-
ity. To establish the universality of the opposition and its mode of
resolution, Lévi-Strauss devotes an entire chapter to psychological
studies of children. He concludes that the aptitude for }ecipmcity
is a basic part of the human child’s quest for psychological security.

491



===== PAGE 251 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

It would be pointless to evaluate the psychological evidence and the
use to which it is put. Let it suffice to say that there is no better
example of the futility of psychological reductionism. This search
for elementary mental “structure” is nothing but a return to the
practice of explaining sociocultural phenomena by means of con-
veniently posited instincts. For a universal instinctual dread of
sleeping with one’s mother, Lévi-Strauss substitutes a universal men-
tal duality of self and other. The methodological error is identical.
If exogamic phenomena are the result of an instinct, why are they
so diverse? And if reciprocity is so fundamental to the human psyche,
why do we have the ancient and contemporary condition of the
opulant and powerful haves (possessing, among other valuables,
more than their share of women) and the miserable have nots? In
what way is the concept of reciprocity an improvement over the
Rousseauan conviction that man in his savage state is a noble crea-
ture?

CARTESIANISM

It should be obvious that in order to analyze the variants of
marriage and descent as exchange systems, the positing of a sub-
conscious panhuman mental “structure” goveming reciprocity is
entirely superfluous. The importance attributed to the mental sub-
structure of reciprocity is intelligible only in relation to the history
of the French school. Looking back to Mauss and Durkheim, it
reveals the devotion to a method which depends upon finding col-
lective archetypes or mental common denominators. Looking ahead, it
provides a mid-career manifestation of what looms more and more
important in Lévi-Strauss’ later development. For, as we shall see,
there is a progressively more intense commitment to the discovery of
the mental substratum of which social life is the material embodi-
ment. In this regard, one of the most interesting specialties of the
French tradition is the lingering influence of a kind of Cartesian
rationalism. Cartesian mental structures differ from those which Freud,
Jung, and other depth psychologists were convinced lay at the bot-
tom of social behavior. The relevant components are the structures
of thought rather than the structures of fecling. If emotions are
taken into consideration, they are reduced to mathematized plus
and minus qualities. Lévi-Strauss’ picture of the human psychological
Jandscape is thus noteworthy for its disregard of the biopsychological,
emotional, and affective drives and instincts. Hunger, sex, fear, love,
are present, but they seem to be peripheral. More important for the

492

v‘

18. French Structuralism

French structuralist program is the basic propensity of the human
mind to build logical categories by means of binary contrasts. For
Lévi-Strauss such oppositions or dualities lie at the bottom of large
portions if not the totality of sociocultural phenomena.

At this point, a fascinating confluence of sources occurs. On the
one hand, binary oppositions suggest the dialectical processes as formu-
lated by Hegel and passed on by Marx. The work of Lévi-Strauss
is indeed everywhere pervaded with a dialectic mode of presenta-
tion: first the superficial facts, then the hidden negation, and
finally the dazzling insight into a new and more fundamental
reality. Lévi-Strauss has pointedly sought to achieve some sort of
identification with Marx and has consistently promoted his own work
as being compatible with the Marxist tradition. This claim, which I
shall refute, will be examined at another juncture. Let us take
notice, first, of the other methodological world with which the con-
cept of binary opposition joins. By his own admission, the greatest
influence upon his method has been the development of linguistics
and the convergence of linguistics and cybernetics toward a general
science of communication. It is in the work of the Prague linguistic
circle, founded by N. Trubetzkoy and passed on to Lévi-Strauss by
R. Jakobson, while they were both teaching at the New School, that
the main inspiration for Lévi-Strauss’ notions of binary contrast
analysis has its roots.

THE LINGUISTIC MODEL

The appeal of a linguistic model for general sociocultural
analysis is by no means restricted to Lévi-Strauss. The remarkable
convergence of French structuralism and the rise of the ethno-
semantic approach in the United States is important enough to war-
rant treatment in a separate chapter. For the moment we shall confine
our attention to the profound effect upon Lévi-Strauss of the success
achieved by the Prague school in using the principle of distinctive
feature contrast. A familiarity with general principles will suffice for
an understanding of the school’s impact on Lévi-Strauss’ thought.
The great accomplishment of Trubetzkoy, Jakobson, and their fol-
lowers was to demonstrate the systemic nature of the set of phono-
logical contrasts employed by each language in building its repertory
of significant sounds. The structure of such a system cannot be
described by a simple linear catalogue of the significant sounds; the
structure consists rather of the matrix or network of oppositions in
which binary groupings of sound differences take their position in a

493



===== PAGE 252 =====

——————__—_v—ﬁf

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

multidimensional space. By viewing phonological repertories in this
perspective, the apparently infinite variety of sound specialties charac-
teristic of the world’s languages is reduced to a small number of
systems of contrast in which general categories of contrast substitute
for specific phones (e.g, consonants versus vowels and voiced
versus unvoiced features). This discovery of the deeper structure
underlying surface appearances provides the model scientific achieve-
ment toward the cmulation of which Lévi-Strauss had already turned
his energies during the preparation of his study of kinship. But the
advent of structural linguistics constitutes for Lévi-Strauss a scien-
tific revolution comparable to that which flowed from Copernicus or
from the development of nuclear physics.

Three basic shifts in emphasis are involved. The study of conscious
phenomena is to give way to the study of their “unconscious infra-
structure.” Second, terms or items are not to be treated as inde-
pendent entities; the basis of analysis must become the relationship
between terms or items. Third, general laws in the form of necessary
or cross-culturally valid invariant relationships are to be exposed, over
against the assumption of random and arbitrary concatenations. A
fourth shift, exposited by the linguist Trubetskoy in Lévi-Strauss’
paraphrase, is the demonstration of concrete systems in terms of
specific cases, as opposed to mere abstract theorizing concerning the
systemic nature of phonological phenomena (LEVE-STRAUSS 1963:33).
This last part of the revolution would appear to be either redundant
or trivial with respect to the others, at least as far as applications to
extralinguistic analysis is concerned.

It would appear that the relevance of the linguistic structural model
to the study of kinship had been worked out by Lévi-Strauss sometime
during the preparation of The Elementary Structures of Kinship.
Not until the last chapter is there a sustained discussion of the
similarities between the search for the mental structures which underly
kinship systems and the progress made by linguistics in the same
direction (611fF.). The book constitutes a bridge between a period in
which the characteristic source of structure is found in social soli-
darity to one in which structure is dominated by the distinctive
feature contrasts of the linguistic model. At least this hypothesis
helps in understanding some of the ambiguities of the presentation.

MOTHER’S BROTHER/SISTER’S SON

The clearest exposition of the relevance of structural lin-
guistics to the study of kinship appears in an article published in
Word (1945b). Here Lévi-Strauss attacks the famous problem of the

494

18. French Structuralism

mother’s brother/sister’s son relationship in order to demonstrate
the characteristics of structural as opposed to other brands of socio-
cultural analysis. The regnant interpretation (discussed at length in
thc‘ following chapter) was that of Radcliffe-Brown: in patrilineal
socicties, mother is an indulgent figure with whom her brother is
identified; father is an authoritarian figure, with whom his sistelr
is identified. The trouble with this analysi évi-Strauss observes, is
that it “arbitrarily isolates particular elements of a global struct’ure
which must be treated as a whole” (vLévisTrauss 1963a:41; orig
1945b). This larger system (on the analogy with a l:mguage’s’ com:
plete system of phonological contrasts) should include not only
mother’s brother/sister’s son and father/son but also brother/sister
and husband/wife. The reason for this modification, as expounded at
ler_lgth in The Elementary Structures of Kinship, is that the relation-
ships in question constitute the fundamental “unit of kinship” which
results from the incest prohibition and the exchange of women:

The primitive and irreducible character of the basic unit of
kIﬂ.Shlp, as we have definited it, is actually a direct result of the
universal presence of an incest taboo. This is really saying that in
human society a man must obtain a woman from another man
wh? gives him a daughter or a sister. Thus we do not need to ex-
plain how the maternal uncle emerged in the kinship structure.
He does not emerge—he is present initially. Indeed, the presence
of the matcrnal uncle is a necessary precondition for the structure
to exist. The crror of traditional anthropology, like that of tradi-
tional linguistics, was to consider the terms, and not the relations
between the terms [1949:46].

THE LAW OF NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE
KINSHIP RELATIONS

In order to understand the avunculate one must penetrate
to the systemic relationships which “organically link” brother/sister,
husband/wife, father/son, and mother’s brother/sister’s son. This
penetration is facilitated by grouping together free and familiar rela-
tions under one rubric (4 ) and relations of hostility, antagonism, or
reserve under its opposite (—). According to Lévi-Strauss there is a

'.]aw” which limits the possible combinations of negative and posi-
tive relations as follows:

. . . the relation between maternal uncle and nephew is to the
relation between brother and sister as the relation between father
and son is to that between husband and wife. Thus if we know
one pair of relations, it is always possible to infer the other [ibid.:42].

495



===== PAGE 253 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

As Sahlins (1966:134) points out, this does not amount, as one
might expect from a literal acceptance of the “law,” to a decisive
limitation on possibilities, given one relationshp out of four. In-
stead, we must know two of the relationships in order to predict
the other two. For example, if father/son is positive, husband/wife
may be either positive or negative, and at the same time, brother/
sister may be either negative or positive. Only if we know the
sign for both father/son and husband/wife or both uncle/nephew
and brother/sister can we complete the paradigm. The possibilities
as given in Lévi-Strauss’ examples are as follows:

Trobriand Siuai Cherkess Tonga
uncle/nephew — - + +
bro/si - + + —
fa/so + + - —
hu/wi + — — +

It would be pointless at this juncture to bring up the issue of
whether the relationships in question can in fact be reduced to
simple positive and negative contrasts. In real life as a minimum
acquaintance with the phenomena of ambivalence would suggest,
all the people involved in the formula tend to have, as we say, “mixed
feelings” about each other. But let this be a secondary consideration
for the moment (in Chapter 20, the inability of the linguistic model
to cope with structural ambiguity will receive due emphasis). Yet
even if one accepts the schematization into binary contrasts, we are
left with a dilemma which is characteristic of the structural approach
as embodied not only in the article under consideration but through-
out the rest of Lévi-Strauss’” work, including his treatment of kinship
systems in The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Exposed mental
structures can only explain similarities; they cannot explain similarities
and differences: “. . . to say that one society presents some combina-
tion of main contrasting characteristics and another society some other
combination is not very satisfying” (saHLINS 1966:134). What we
want to know is why the Trobriands have the minus, minus, plus,
plus rather than some other pattern; why they are matrilineal and
avunculocal; why they have exogamous sibs and do not have sections;
and so forth. Now Lévi-Strauss is not unaware of this difficulty; indeed,
he attempts to meet it head on, but with results that are not worthy
of his intellect. If the mother’s brother is part of the kinship “atom,”
he asks, why do we not find the avunculate at all times and places?
His answer is that other factors intervene, factors whose relationship
to the theory in question cannot be defined:

496

v-’

18. French Structuralism

Let us point out, first, that the kinship system does not have
the same importance in all cultures. For some cultures it provides
the active principle regulating all or most of the social relation-
ships. In other groups, as in our own society, this function is
cither absent altogether or greatly reduced. In still others, . . .
it is only partially fulfilled. The kinship system is a language,
and a socicty may prefer other modes of c,:(prcssion and action.
From the viewpoint of the anthropologist this means that in deal-
ing with a specific culture we must always ask a preliminary ques-
tion: Ts the system systematic? Such a question, which” seems
absurd at first, is absurd only in relation to language; for lan-
guage is the semantic system par excellence; it cannot but signify,
and exists only through signification. On the contrary, this ques-
tion must be rigorously examined as we move from the study of
language to the consideration of other systems which also claim to
have semantic functions, but whose fulfillment remains partial,
fragmentary, or subjective, like, for example, social organization,
art, and so forth [1963a:47—48]

The immense latitude of interpretation which this set of qualifica-
tions confers upon those seeking to confirm the validity of the “law”
of negative and positive relations should be obvious. Here we have
the perfect methodological analogue to Merton’s “self-fulfilling proph-
ecy”: only the corroborative cases are acceptable as evidence. Given

this privilege, what structural subtlctics cannot be made to obey a
convenient hypothesis? ’

THE EMPEROR'S NEW LAMP

) Because of the fact that the entities with which Lévi-Strauss
Is concerned in the final analysis are mental structures—what to
Durkheim were collective representations, and what are best simply
called “ideas”—there spreads over the entire corpus of his work a
pargl)'sis of reality whose ultimate consequences we shall have oc-
casion to describe at length. In conformity with his interpretation of
the linguistic model, the surface of events is always misleading; the
structural reality lies beneath and is never accessible to direct mea-
surement. As Sahlins puts it, “what is apparent is false and what is
hidden from perception and contradicts it is true” (saHLINS 1966:
134). -Now, this is a perfectly respectable and, indeed, a vital as-
sumption, provided that there are concrete, material expressions,
direct or indirect, by which the underlying structure issues forth into
some sort of material embodiment. To employ an analogy: if a genie
stays in the lamp and never comes out to do anythiné which his

497



===== PAGE 254 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

master tells him to do, does the genie exist? Yes, argues our 1‘\‘laddin.
Since the essence of what’s in the bottle is ﬂﬂfhll'.lg but a mentgl
structure,” what right has one to expect that rubbing the lamp will

produce a concrete result?

For a theory like ours, which makes certain logical structurcslthg
fundamental basis for understanding matrimouia! customs,v ¥t is
not a matter of indifference that this structure is often visible,
in systems where it has not concretely materialized [LEVI-STRAUSS

1949:184].

STATISTICAL AND MECHANICAL
MODELS

The distinction between “mechanical” and “statis.tical”
models is related to an immense debate centering on the reality of
certain phenomena which are of central sigrliﬁcapc.e in The Eleminifnly
Structures of Kinship. According to Hugo Nutini (1965:716), “Lévi-
Strauss’ most distinctive and important contribution to the t}'leory of
social structure was his dichotomizing of models into mcchamcalAalnd
statistical.” Nutini has to admit, however, that Itévi—S'trauss' exposition
is “not altogether clear.” The definition of the two kinds of models as
set forth by Lévi-Strauss is as follows:

A model the elements of which are on the same scale as the
phenomena will be called a “mechanical model”; when the
elements of the model are on a different scale, we shall be deal-
ing with a “statistical model” [1963a:283].

As Nutini demonstrates by an analysis of examples provided by‘Lléw-
Strauss, the distinction involved is actually quite simp]e-: statistical
models must reflect the frequencies of events, me.chamcal models
are free to ignore such frequencies. Models of marriage systems pro-
vide the best illustration. Let us follow Nutini’s hypothetical ex'amplcl:
in two societies, X and Y, the frequency of polygynous marriages is
10 percent. Yet in X, the ideal cultural standard is monogamy, while
in Y, the ideal cultural standard is polygyny. What to do?

First, we must construct a mechanical model of polygyny‘for so-
ciety X and a mechanical model of monogamy for society Y.
Second, we subordinate a statistical model of monogamy to the
mechanical model of polygyny in society X and statl§hcnl .modcl
of polygyny to the mechanical model of monogamy in society Y
[NUTINI 1965: 722-23].

498

18. French Structuralism

It may disturb the reader that Nutini would take a frequency of
10 percent and urge that a scientific model can be constructed which
takes no account of go percent of the cases. But having gone so far,
can there be an objection to a mechanical model which is fulfilled in
§ percent, 1 percent . . . or fewer instances? Well then, what about a
mechanical model which is never fulfilled in actual practice? As we
shall see in a moment, a decade of fierce polemic has centered on just
such a case, namely Lévi-Strauss’ model of patrilateral and matrilateral
cross-cousin marriage. But let us first complete Nutini’s train of
thought. Why is he convinced that a statistical model should always
be “subordinate” to a mechanical one?

In societies of type X the mechanical model would account for
only a fraction of the total number of marriages, and the statis-
tical model for the great majority. Yet I would still maintain that
the statistical modcl should be subordinated to the mechanical

model, for, given the proper cultural conditions, the overlapping
of ideal and actual behavior would tend to the ideal limit. What
I am saying herc is . . . the allimportant fact that mechanical
models arc always heuristically supcrior to statistical models. . . .

[ihid.:723].

Nutini does not name the corpus of evidence which leads to the
conclusion that “actual behavior tends to the ideal limit.” The
overwhelming evidence to the contrary will be discussed in Chapter
20. Here, let it suffice to say that mechanical and statistical models of
both actual and ideal culture are possible. Insofar as quantification
and science have displayed a conspicuously beneficial partnership in
all of the sister sciences, it is a mystification to urge the superiority of
nonstatistically based models for anthropology. This is not to say that
science and quantification are synonymous, but rather that if we pro-
ceed in ethnography to formulate models which lack statistical au-
thority, we do so out of humility, hoping some day to possess the
research facilities for correcting our lack of data.

Let us return now to The Elementary Structures of Kinship and fol-
low out the consequences of Lévi-Strauss’ privileged disregard of the ma-
terialization of the structural possibilities of kinship systems.

RESTRICTED AND GENERALIZED
EXCHANGE

The aspect of Lévi-Strauss’ book which has stimulated the
greatest amount of cxegesis is concerned with his discovery that mar-
nage systems could be classified into two major types: those which

499



===== PAGE 255 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

produce “restricted” exchanges of women, and those which produce
“generalized” exchanges of women. By a restricted exchange sys-
tem, he meant one in which the obligation of reciprocity was ful-
filled by a direct exchange of females between groups. A moiety
situation in which the men of groups A and B exchange sisters for
wives is the simplest case. In a generalized exchange system, on the
other hand, the reciprocity takes place in a delayed fashion: A gives
women to B, B gives women to C, and C gives women to A. Lévi-
Strauss must be credited with making the important discovery that
these two kinds of exchange are logically associated with different
forms of cousin marriage. Restricted exchange would result auto-
matically from regular cross-cousin marriage, provided that there is
marriage with both the mother’s brother's daughter and father’s
sister’s daughter. This is the symmetrical form of cross-cousin mar-
riage. Generalized exchange, on the other hand, is logically associated
with asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage, specifically of the mother’s
brother’s daughter variety. This is called matrilateral cross-cousin
marriage. That is, where ego marries mother’s brother’s daughter
and does not marry father’s sister’s daughter, there logically results a
form of circulating connubium in which the cycle A-B-C-A takes place.
LéviStrauss must be credited with the further important discovery
that the patrilateral variety of asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage is
not the mirror image of the matrilateral varicty. Instead, there
logically results a shunting effect such that the cycle A-B-C is re-
versed to C-B-A in alternate generations.

Although there is a marked reluctance on the part of Lévi-Strauss
to place his discussion in an evolutionary context (cf. 1049:277),
restricted exchange systems have the nuance of being more archaic,
and general exchange systems seem modern. This would certainly
follow from the emphasis placed upon associating generalized ex-
change with the achievement of a higher degree of social solidarity
than that achieved by restricted exchange:

In effect, generalized exchange allows, the group remaining the
same in extension and composition, the realization, in the heart

of this mechanically stable group, of a greater organic solidarity
[ibid.:548].
From considerations such as these Lévi-Strauss proposes that the
peculiar shunting effect of the patrilateral asymmetrical form must
be associated with an inferior degree of solidarity:

Instead of constituting a global system, as do both bilateral and
matrilateral cross-cousin marriage cach in its own sphere, mar-

500

?’

18. French Structuralism

riage with father’s sister’s daughter is not capable of attaining any
other form tlmr.x a multitude of little closed systems, juxtaposed to
one another, without ever realizing a global structure [ibid.:553).

Noting that the patrilateral variety has a much more restricted distri-

bufio;x than the matrilateral variety, he offers the following Durk-
heimian solution:

1If then, in the last analysis, marriage with the daughter of the fa-
ther’s sister is less frequent than that with the daughter of the
mother’s brother the reason is that the latter not only permits but
favors a better integration of the group, while the former never
succeeds in creating anything more than a precarious edifice, made
f’f merely juxtaposed materials, obeying no plan of cnscmbic* and
its texture is exposed to the same fragility as that of each of the
little local structures of which it is composed [ibid.:558]

The first sustained evaluation of The Elementary Structures of Kin-
ship was written by Josselin de Jong (1952). Confining his critical com-
ments to matters of detail in the Australian systems, Jossclin de
Jong lclndcd his colleagues for their lack of response “t:) one of the
most myx,pmitant contributions to anthropological theory of the present
century” (ibid.:59). But in 1955, a decidedly negative reaction was
b'rought forth by George Homans and David Schneider. Their criti-
cism centered on the explanation of the matrilateral /patrilateral cross-
cousin problem, as outlined above; and it touched off an acrimoniaﬁs
debate which is of central importance in the recent history of anthro-
pology.

THE HOMANS AND SCHNEIDER
CRITIQUE

Homans and Schneider rejected the postulated relationship
betw‘een freqtlellcy of occurrence of matrilateral and patrilateral cross-
cousin marriage and degree of social solidarity resulting from ex-
change cyc}es. Although respectful df Lévi-Strauss’ erudition and
etlmogmphnc competence, they express their suspicion that the in-
vocation of social solidarity as a final cause is mere “rhetoric.” To
:xplam the dlsparity between the incidence of the two asymmetrical
orms of cross-cousin rules, a theory involving “cfficient causes” is
required. That is, the theory must specify how the human actors
short-run personal interests are better served by adopting one form
rather th.:m the other. Such a theory, they propose, is already present
in Radcliffe-Brown’s solution of the avunculate problem. In hl:ief, as

501



===== PAGE 256 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Radcliffe Brown saw it, the presence of patrilineal descent groups
tends to produce a situation where restraint and authority center about
father and the male and female members of his descent group. At
the same time, informality and indulgence characterize relations
with mother and all of the male and female members of mother’s
patrilincage. Mother’s brother is thus a sort of “male mother,” while
father’s sister is a “female father” Homans and Schneider take off
from this point by posing the question of what significance this
“patrilineal complex” might have for the differential treatment of
the mother’s brother’s daughter as compared with father’s sister’s
daughter. Since indulgent freedom characterizes relations with moth-
er's brother, is it not likely that his daughter will be preferred in
marriage? The theory involved could be summed up by the rule:
“Where a man finds love in one generation, he will find it in the
next” (Homans and SCHNEIDER 1955:38). The other cross cousin,
associated with the stern and distant father’s sister, is less likely to
appeal to the sentimental efficient causes of marriage.

Homans and Schneider then take the additional step of postulating
that where the descent rule is matrilineal rather than patrilineal, an
opposite sort of jural and sentimental complex would exist. Mother’s
brother now becomes the stern authoritarian figure, while father, fa-
ther's sister, and father’s sister's daughter bask in the warmth of
indulgent sentiments. This suggests the hypothesis that matrilateral
and patrilateral asymmetrical cross-cousin marriages are rcspectively
correlated with patrilineal and matrilineal descent. This is a prospect
that was not considered by Lévi-Strauss, who states that the structure
of exchange docs not depend upon descent (1949:599). But if the
correlation can be demonstrated, it at once explains why the fre-
quency of matrilateral cross-cousin marriage should be so much
greater than its opposite: the reason is simply that matrilineal descent
occurs much less frequently than patrilineal descent.

With mounting confidence, Homans and Schneider proceeded to
formulate a statistical test of their hypothesis. Assisted by the Human
Relations Area Files they gathered together all the available cases of
preferential asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage and demonstrated a
strong statistical correlation in support of their hypothesis. Of twenty-
six societies in which mother’s brother’s daughter is the preferred
marriage, twenty-two have patrilineal descent, while of the seven
socicties which preferred father’s sister’s daughter, five have matri-
lineal descent. Homans and Schneider conclude that Lévi-Strauss’
theory is not necessarily wrong (solidarity may still have its effect

502

T

18. French Structuralism

somehow), but that it is now unnecessary. Their own theory “pre-

dipts what societies will adopt what form, and Lévi-Strauss’s theory
will not” (ibid.:59).

REPLY TO HOMANS AND SCHNEIDER

In 1958, Lévi-Strauss responded to this critique by means
of a pagelong footnote to the republication of his article, “Social
Stmcturle” (1963a:322; orig. 1958). Homans and Schneider’s statistical
correl.atlon “proves nothing,” he asserts. There was, first of all, the
question of statistics. Since both patrilineal descent and matrilateral
marriage occur so much more frequently than their opposites, a
purely random distribution would result in the kind of correlation

Which was advanced in favor of Homans and Schneider’s hypothe-
sis.

Sogict_ics with patrilineal descent are much more numerous than
SL_)Cletlf:s with matrilineal descent. Furthermore, matrilateral mar-
riage is more frequent than patrilateral marriage. Thus, if the
distribution occurred at random, we might expect that tilC inci-
dence of socicties characterized by an association between
patrilineal descent and matrilateral marriage would be higher, and
thus the correlation claimed by my critics would be meanir;gless

libid.].

We shall note only briefly, as André Kébben (1966:148) points out,
that this suggestion is “contrary to simple statistical theory.” (Hoi
mans and Schneider employed the method of correlation inorder to
rule out the possibility of “random” effects.) The necessity for this
embarrassing comment has scarcely been lessened by ]A‘Pouwcr's
(1965:155) tejoinder to the effect that Lévi-Strauss did not flatly
declafe that the correlation was worthless due to random effects
(preglse.ly what Homans and Schneider’s correlations were intended
to .Ellll"lll‘liltc) but that they “could” be due to random effects. Trans-
latlolnf the great man may have been in error, but you can’t prove it.
LéviStrauss did, however, have a telling point to make with
regard to the statistical‘issue. In 1957, Murdock had tested the Ho-
rSr;ans and Schneider corrclations on an enlarged sample, and Lévi-
so infrequently that

;};e correlation in question, while still evident, could not be relied
on.

Cuntmnmg his rebuttal of Homans and Schneider, however, Lévi-

503



===== PAGE 257 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Strauss went on to express himself as willing to concede, at least for
the sake of argument, that matrilateral and patrilateral marriage rules
are statistically connected with matrilincal and patrilineal descent.
In case this should be so, he is prepared to offer an explanation in
conformity with his theory. Since matrilineal systems are (by general
agreement) inherently more unstable than patrilineal ones, the long
exchange cycle of the matrilateral rule could not be maintained by
matrilineal socicties, “while the extremely short cycles of patrilateral
marriage would be less affected by the conflicts always found in
matrilineal societies.” He then made the following fateful remark:
“If such were the case, matrilateral marriage would be more frequent;
but it would not have to be prescribed” (LEVI-STRAUSS 1963a:322).

PRESCRIPTION VERSUS PREFERENCE

It is at this point that Rodney Needham, a British devotee of
structural anthropology, enters the scene. The italicized “prescribed”
in Lévi-Strauss’ footnote appeared to link with certain additional hints
in The Elementary Structures of Kinship adding up to a crucial distinc-
tion between prescribed and preferred marriage rules. “Prescription”
means absolute, exclusive demand for a certain type of alliance to take
place, while “preference” is merely suggestion and exhortation. Need-
ham then races ahead to the conclusion that Homans and Schneider
have busied themselves with the collection of a lot of data that is
irrelevant for Lévi-Strauss’ main thesis. For in their cross-cultural test,
Homans and Schneider have paid no attention to the difference
between mere preference and absolute prescription.

Homans and Schneider were forthwith attacked by Needham
(1962), in what must be the most surly if not the most sadistic
assault in the annals of scholarly publications. His words dripping
with contempt, Needham pushes his opponents into the figurative
abyss that their failure to separate preference from prescription
scemed to have earned for them. After examining each of the thirty-
three societies in the Homans and Schneider sample, Needham
throws out twenty-four of them as practicing something other than
prescriptive cross-cousin marriage. Of the nine admissible cases, all
have the matrilateral form, and one of these is a combination of
matrilaterality with matrilineality.

Now Homans and Schneider claim to explain both types of

«ynilateral cross-cousin marriage.” The argument is about pre-

scriptions, and their theory applies in part (specifically, not only
by the fact of contending with Lévi-Strauss) to prescriptions. But

504

18. French Structuralism

wh_cn we cxamine their test cascs we see that they have no pre-
scriptive patrilateral cases at all. Their own evidence thus relates
to only one form of prescriptive marriage, and cannot therefore
vield any support whatever for their claim to explain the differ-
ential incidence of both types [ibid.:57].

As for the 8:1 ratio of patrilineal to matrilineal societies with
the matrilateral prescription, there is nothing here but a complete
vindication of Lévi-Strauss’ proposal that there was no necessary rela-
tion between descent rule and type of prescription:

He is not concerned with, and says nothing about, statistical
frequencies. If it were the case that all societies practicing general-
ized cxchange were patrilincal and patrilocal except one, and that
the one were matrilineal and matrilocal, then his proposition
would be validated. Even if no such society existed, the proposi-
tion would still hold in a formal scnse: matrilineal and matrilocal
societies exist and form viable systems, and there is no obvious
structural reason to deny or doubt that such a society might also
practice prescriptive matrilateral cross-cousin marriage [ibid.].

I must confess to a total lack of sympathy for Homans and
Schneider over the drubbing they received  because of  their
failure to distinguish preference from prescription. They in effect
“asked for it” by deliberately confining themselves to mechanical
models. That is, by virtue of their own emic and idealist predilections
they chose to criticize Lévi-Strauss on his own home territory. '['hcilj
test cases arc assembled with respect to the ideological norms of
rules of marriage. They nowhere inquire into the operation by
which the amount of solidarity in a social group can be measured.
(Actually, they reject this strategy at the outset—roMaNs and SCHNEI-
DER 1955:13). More importantly, they do not object to the absence
of a discussion of the measurable material manifestations of the
fules in question, in terms of actual numbers of historically real mar-
riages involving specific men and women and specific kinship groups
at definite times and places. They are content instead to grapple with
the phantoms of idealized rules and idealized marriages, from which
beautifully logical idealized exchange cycles result. Innocents
abroad! They are prepared to deal with phantoms, but not with ele-
mentary ones. They do not realize that among professional idealists,
as distinct from the eclectic American amateurs who have rubbed
shoulders with logical positivism and behaviorism too long to know
how to really get off the ground, a rule which is manifest in a
hundred cases is no better than that which is manifest in none.

505



===== PAGE 258 =====

v—‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 18. French Structuralism

THE SEARCH FOR THE UNICORN

The rout of Homans and Schneider appeared complete, but
Needham would settle for nothing but unconditional surrender. Sta-
tistical correlations are, after all, not very informative, he argued.
What we are after is a knowledge of structure. We need “a total
structural analysis of all the recorded facts of one society” (NEEDHAM
1962:73). The real question before us continues to be the value of
Lévi-Strauss” application of the principle of reciprocity to the under-
standing of marriage systems. We must take one specific case of
matrilateral prescription and see how our understanding of it is
enriched by Lévi-Strauss’ theory of generalized exchange.

This sounds like a reasonable idea as long as one ignores the fact
that Needham was only able to find nine cases of matrilateral pre-
scription in the entire world—nine cases to substantiate empirically
the material existence of the long-cycle, generalized exchange system
which is supposed to be the more organically solidary of the only
two viable elementary exchange systems that have ever existed. If
all the remaining thousands of known cases represent “complex” sys-
tems, do we not have the obligation to insist upon interpretive
principles which are first and foremost responsive to the conditions
of the universe in which we happen to be living? In this regard,
it cannot be overemphasized that there is not the slightest clue in
Lévi-Strauss’ tome as to why one finds so few “generalized” exchange
systems; nor are there, aside from a few evolutionary innuendos, sug-
gestions of what might be the conditions which lead to the appear-
ance of the restricted rather than the generalized form. But let us
follow Needham in his application of the exchange cycle theory to a
specific case, for there are more surprises ahead.

ENTER THE PURUM

The society selected for intensive study are the Purum of
Manipur, as described by T. C. Das (1945). Needham presents a
lucid summary of the rules of the marriage and exchange system
which hinges on a firm matrilateral cross-cousin prescription. Various
alliance cycles are described, some of them binding wife-giving and
wife-receiving lineages in chains involving as many as seven different
patrilineages (e.g., A-B-C-D-E-F-G-A). Moreover, Needham goes on
to show that many symbolic aspects of Purum ritual life, including
such everyday matters as the arrangement of sleeping quarters and

506

household architecture, can be rendered intelligible if they are
interpreted as expressing the fundamental “structural” distinction be-
tween wife-giving and wife-receiving groups. The symbolic confirma-
tion of the importance of Lévi-Strauss’ principle even embraces the
ritual difference between left and right, female and male, sun and
sky, death and life, and below and above (NEEDHAM 1962:96). Crow-
ing with satisfaction, Needham taunts his victims in the following
words:

All this we are able to see thanks ultimately to the astonish-
ingly fertile notion of “exchange” as an analytical concept, fash-
ioned for us by Mauss and developed in the field of marriage by
Lévi-Strauss. It is true that this is only a mediating concept, and
that it alone could not bring the analysis quite to the point of
radical understanding that I think we have reached here; but it is
an essential notion, and it has done for us what a truly scholarly
insight should do—it has made things plain. Would Homans and
Schneider be prepared to claim as much now for their own
theory? Is all this really to be explained, as they say, by “the
Oedipus Complex” [ibid.:9q]?

Now the raison d’étre of the Purum case is that it is supposed to
vindicate Lévi-Strauss by showing: (1) the distinctive results of
generalized versus restricted exchange; (2) the analytical advantage
of viewing kinship in terms of exchange cycles; (3) the importance
of the difference between prescription and preference. Even the skep-
tical reader, having witnessed the merciless destruction of Needham’s
enemies, finds it hard to imagine that the Purum could in any way fail
to accomplish their assigned task. After all, it is Needham who
suggests that a case is mecessary to the exposition, and even then,
there are several from which to choose. But no reasonably alert
graduate student could avoid the tidal wave of disbelief which Need-
ham’s presentation of Purum ethnography sets in motion.

PURUM DO NOT ABIDE BY THEIR
MATRILATERAL PRESCRIPTION

Needham describes circular connubiums of bride-givers and
bride-receivers extending through seven lineages. He lists twenty
such cycles and admits that there are many more. Yet of actual
historical marriages, Das provides information on only 141. Clearly
some of the cycles in entirety or some of the links in some of the
cycles reflect ideal, rather than actual, culture. We begin to wonder,

507

i



===== PAGE 259 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

therefore, what relationship there might possibly be between the
ideal wife-givers and wife-receivers and the actual wife-givers and
wife-receivers.

This question has been pursued by Charles Ackerman (1964). The
141 recorded marriages took place between 39 pairs of lineages; but
12 (30 percent) of the members of these pairs were both wife-takers
and wife-receivers, violating the fundamental condition of general
exchange.

In addition, marriage took place between 15 pairs of lineages out
of the 39 in the absence of any normative status as either wife-giver
or wife-receiver. Yet of the 48 pairs of lineages between whom wives
should have been exchanged, only 23 actually were demonstrably
linked on the basis of recorded marriages.

Turning to the question of whether the pattern of alliances pro-
duced by the actual marriages could have resulted from chance,
Ackerman matches actual against potential forms of alliance and
concludes that “the probability that the distribution arises from chance
and not from any ‘avoidance’ of direct exchange, is greater than
three in ten” (ibid.:60). Ackerman further demonstrates that if the
obscrved pattern were to be maintained through a large number of
marriages, all of the possible alliances would be realized. That is, the
observed alliances could just as well be described as a function of the
number of marriages contracted by a particular lineage as of the
prescriptive rule.

But the rule itself turns out to be something different from what
Needham says it is. The rigorous distinction between prescribed and
preferred begins to slip away when the evidence is given careful
scrutiny. Das does not specify the procedures which he employed to
reach his formulation of the marriage rule. That is, there are no
formal eliciting or polling procedures (and Needham never explains
what he would do with minority opinions—see Chap. 20). The
Purum seem to insist on marriage with either mother’s brother’s
daughter or some other woman of mother’s brother’s sib, but 48 per
cent of the recorded marriages actually contracted are with women
outside of this “prescribed” category (ibid.:56).

Thus, all the uses for which the Purum case is intended are
defeated. Both generalized and restricted exchange occur; reciprocity
is fragmentary and unproven; prescription remains a degree of pref-
erence rather than a sharply different structural matter. As Ackerman
puts it:

508

18. French Structuralism

No tendency to avoid the direct exchange of women exists in
the distribution of actual marriages. On the contrary, in a series
of tests the null hypothesis has been corroborated: the distribu-
tion of actual alliances is a function of the marginal distribution
among the lineages of the total population of marrying acts.
Where direct-exchange cells are not used, the situation is one of
few marrying acts and low a priori expectation of use; such cells
are not “avoided,” they are merely not used—yet. Purum mar-
riage choices are not ordered by a matrilateral connubium [ibid.:

64].
Lévi-Strauss’ basic distinction between restricted and generalized
exchange is thus returned to the logical exercise from which it sprang.
There is one escape from this situation for Lévi-Strauss’ followers
and they were quick to take it; show the bottle instead of the genie.
As for Lévi-Strauss, he had another option, to which we refer in a
moment. Thus, rising to Needham’s defense, David Maybury-Lewis
(1965:221) insists:
When we refer to unilateral cross-cousin marriage as an asym-
metric system, we are referring to an asymmetry in the rule, not
in its social consequences. The consequences are perhaps likely to
be asymmetric but they need not necessarily be so. Similarly it is

possible for a society to have a symmetric marriage rule and for
the application of the rule to result in asymmetry.

Referring specifically to Ackerman’s “erroneous analysis of the Pu-
rum material,”

It can now be seen why there must be a distinction maintained
between prescriptive and preferential marriage systems. A pre-
scriptive marriage rule entails . . . the division of Ego’s concep-
tual universe in a determined fashion, irrespective of the per-
centage of people who marry their actual MBD or into their
MB’s descent group. These percentages may be of considerable
interest in the handling of certain problems. They do not affect
the prescription as here defined or its minimum social entail-
ments [ibid.:225].

THE OLD ROPE TRICK

There is nothing to be shocked about in the proposal that
the existence of the prescribed system depends upon whether or not
an appropriate “conceptual” distinction is made by the culture car-
riers. Setting aside for the moment the nagging operational questions

509



===== PAGE 260 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 18. French Structuralism

which are to be taken up in the chapter on emics and etics, let us
grant the possibility of a neat dichotomization between a preferential
and prescriptive conceptual state. But now what becomes of the
social solidarity argument? If it doesn’t matter whether or not there
are material manifestations (i.e., historically specific arrangements of
people and their behavior), then there can be no basis for supposing
that the matrilateral system occurs more frequently than the patri-
lateral one because one is associated with more solidary consequences
than the other. Unless, of course, the solidary effects are to be viewed
as consisting of the same stuff as the rules! Let it be recorded then
that in this fashion, the structuralists climb up ropes and disappear
off the tops of them.

One of the most impressive exhibitions of this trick is to be found
in J. Pouwer’s defense of Lévi-Strauss against criticisms proposed
by A. J. F. Kobben. The latter supports Homans and Schneider’s
statistics, noting that their opponents “simply cannot disregard their
results” without placing themselves “outside of the sphere of science”
(x0BBEN 1966:147). To which Pouwer (1966:155) replies that Lévi-
Strauss cannot be attacked for the failure of his theories to be corrob-
orated by empirical data. Marriage rules cannot be explained by
actual marriages. There is no necessary connection between the logic
underlying cultural representations and empirical reality! When he
wrote his masterpiece, Lévi-Strauss was well aware that “discontinuity
and discrepancy can occur between the structuring activities of the
human mind and the empirical reality in which those activities
manifest themselves”: “. . . empirical data yield at most an indica-
tion of the direction in which we should seek an explanation for
the occurrence of a phenomenon” (POUWER 1966:155). From this
remark in its actual context one can only conclude that Pouwer is
either beyond the sphere of science or that he would wish science to
be defined as the study of nonempirical phenomena.

A VOICE FROM ON HIGH

The Homans and Schneider and Needham clash gave rise to
a controversy in which dozens of anthropologists became embroiled
and about which scores of learned papers were published in profes-
sional journals. In an early draft of this chapter, I had despaired of
doing justice to the rival claims of so numerous a swarm of exegetical
combatants. At the last minute, however, a new development oc-
curred, which simplifies the problem. This development consists of

510

the publication of a second edition of Lévi-Strauss’ The Elementary
Structures of Kinship with a preface containing the master's comments
upon Needham’s attempt to protect him from the Homans and
Schneider critique. To the astonishment of his entire professional
audience, and certainly not least of all of Needham, Lévi-Strauss has

denied the validity of Needham’s main point. He has expressed him-
self as follows:

Led by Needham, several authors today affirm that my book is
only concerned with prescriptive systems, or more precisely (since
it suffices to glance through it to be convinced of the contrary)
that such would have been the case had I not confused the two
forms [i.e. prescriptive and preferential marriage rules]. But,
since, according to those who defend this distinction, prescriptive
systems are very rare, a curious consequence results, if they are
correct: I would have written a very big book . . . which was
concerned with facts so rare, which applied to such a limited do-
main, that one no longer comprehends what importance it might
have for a general theory of kinship [in press].

Lévi-Strauss goes on to say that if this had been the case he finds
it hard to understand why Needham would have busied himself with
the task of bringing out an English translation or why his publishers
should pay for his work with a “splendid check.” The fact, he asserts,
is that the distinction between prescriptive and preferential systems
does not constitute an important issue as far as he or the groups
which practice asymmetrical cross-cousin marriage are concerned:

If T have indifferently employed the notions of preference and
obligation, even sometimes associating them, as I have been re-
proached for doing, in the same sentence, it’s because to my eyes
they do not connote different social realities, but correspond
rather to slightly different ways by which people think about the
same reality [ibid.].

It cannot but strike the unsympathetic observer that if Rodney
Needham and his followers were unable to understand what was
going on inside of Lévi-Strauss’ head, they show little promise of
getting to understand what goes on inside the heads of the Purum.
Even morc alarming is the possibility that Lévi-Strauss may not even
understand what's going on inside his own head. For, in’ discussing
the problems he confronted in bringing out a second cdition of The
Elementary Structures of Kinship, he confesses that once he has finished
a book it becomes a strange body to him, no longer capable of engaging

511



===== PAGE 261 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

his interest, and that “it is with difficulty sometimes, that I come to
understand it.” All this would be funny were it not for the huge
investment in research time and journal space that has been squan-

dered on this issue.

LEVI-STRAUSS AND MARX

One final aberration requires our attention. Despite all the
evidence of actual behavior to the contrary, Lévi-Strauss has repeatedly
asserted his fidelity to Marx’s teachings. For example, in his reply to
M. Rodinson’s criticism of his mentalistic use of the concept of
“structure,” he says Rodinson, “did not think it profitable to inquire
about my endeavors to reintegrate the anthropological knowledge
acquired during the last fifty years into the Marxian tradition”
(LEVI-STRAUSS 19032:343 ).

Just what do Lévi-Strauss and Marx have in common? A number of
similarities come to mind, but all of them are superficial. We may note,
first of all, that there is a shared suspicion of the devices by which
social systems consciously offer up explanations of themselves. Lévi-
Strauss is concerned always with the discovery of the “true” social
structure as opposed to surface reflexes or epiphenomena. But this atti-
tude merely identifies the basic intellectual posture of every serious
modern social scientist and philosopher. If it were peculiar to Marx,
then we should have to conclude that Freud, Durkheim, and a hun-
dred other unlikely figures were also working within the Marxist
tradition. Secondly, there is the evident infatuation of Lévi-Strauss

1 As the page proofs of this chapter were being corrected, T was able to inspect the
galleys of Rodney Needham’s “Introduction” to the forthcoming English transla-
tion of the second edition of Les Structures Elémentaires de la Parenté. This trans-
lation, upon which Needham and two collaborators worked for over six years,
includes the startling new “Introduction” described above. But Lévi-Strauss opened
this window to his mind only after the hapless Needham had reported that the
translation and editing were finished. Indeed, according to Needham, Lévi-Strauss
steadfastly refused to examine the translation before it went to press. Needham was
thus obliged to add a post-script to his own “Editor’s Note,” in which he admits
that his idol has charged him with a “fundamental misunderstanding of the very
title and subject matter of the book”! Needham “can only explain that if the views
in question had been published earlier, at a more decisive date, he could never
have consented to edit the work (even, as he understood, at the author’s wish) or
to take any part in its translation.” This phrase was deleted in publication, leaving

us in a state of uncertainty concerning Needham's true sentiments.

512

18. French Structuralism

with a dialectic mode of thought. This may be defined as an aversion to
simple dualities, as in his study of Bororo moieties:

. . . the study of so-called dual organizations discloses so many
anomalies and contradictions in relation to extant theory that we
should be well advised to reject the theory and to treat the ap-
parent manifestations of dualism as superficial distortions of struc-

tures whose real nature is quite different and vastly more complex
[ibid.:161].

If fascination with the number three makes a Marxist, then perhaps we
should include Pythagoras. Or shall we argue that the affectation of a
dialectic style is alone sufficient? Shall we make of Hegel the thesis,
Marx the antithesis, and Lévi-Strauss the synthesis? Robert Murphy
(1963:17) shows quite succinctly that when you stand Marx on his
head, you get “Zen Marxism.” I should prefer, however, to call it
French Hegelianism. Although the phrase lacks the brille which Murphy
has managed to put into his, it keeps Marx out of it. For Lévi-Strauss
no more represents the synthesis of materialism and idealism than
Comte did. Every substantative report, every choice of hypothesis,
every sustained analysis, from his Nambikwara research to his studies
of myth, draws its principal sustenance from the mainstreams of
French and German idealism. To protest that Marx was interested in
ideology, that Marx also realized that the ideological expressions of
social structure were dialectically rather than mechanically related, and
that Marx, as well as Lévi-Strauss, assigned creative and determinative
roles to human ideas is to pay tribute to Marx, not to Lévi-Strauss.
But to count the dialectic and the cautions concerning a rigid exclu-
sion of ideology as his chief contributions is to fail utterly to compre-
hend Marx’s role in the development of the social sciences. Unlike
Marx, Lévi-Strauss confronted a great opportunity to which he did
not respond. He found Comte, Durkheim, and Mauss standing on their
heads, and he joined them.

513



===== PAGE 262 =====

British Social Anthro-

pology 19

U
Sl

rI]:e challenge to nineteenth-century evolutionism in England arose
from two uncqually endowed groups of scholars. On the one hand
W. H. R. Rivers, E. J. Perry, and E. G. Smith paralleled many mem-
bers of the Boasian school in their idiographic, diffusionist emphasis.
At approximately the same time the foundations were being 1aid'for
another approach, which spurned both the evolutionists and the diffu-
sionists. Morcover, this second group of scholars, unlike the ﬁrs‘t,
equaled and in many cases surpassed the Boasians in the.ir emphasis
upon and actual exposure to ficldwork. Intensive field studies among a
small number of aboriginal societies, and intensive analysis of the data
from such studies, were organized by this British school around the
theme of synchronic functional relations. It was by means of the syn-
chronic functionalist framework that the British “social arlthlrop(?lo-
gists” hoped to preserve the heritage of nineteent'h.»c'entury scientism
while ridding themselves of the accumulated liabilities of the search
for diachronic, evolutionary regularities. By the late 1930’s thls group
had gained virtually unchallenged control of the anthropological estab-
lishment throughout the British Empire.

514

—_————Y-f

19. British Social Anthropology

DURKHEIM AND STRUCTURAL-
FUNCTIONALISM

The fundamental theoretical premises of British social anthro-
pology are based upon Emile Durkheim’s apotheosis of social solidar-
ity. Durkheim’s influence is especially basic for an understanding of the
rise of the so-called structural-functionalists. Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-
Brown, the principal theoretician of this movement, was quite ex-
plicit about Durkheim’s role. On the one hand he hailed Durkheim’s
definition of “function” as “the first systematic formulation of the
concept applying to the strictly scientific study of society” (RADCLIFIFE-
BROWN 1952b:178). On the other, he explicitly rejected definitions of
function which did not relate to “social structure,” a concept which
can be shown to derive its main inspiration from Durkheim’s emphasis
upon social solidarity. The combination of “function” with “social
structure” gave rise to the awkward but descriptive label, “structural-
functional.” RadcliffeBrown placed great emphasis upon distinguish-
ing structural functions from functions that Bronislaw Malinowski and
others associated with the biopsychological needs of individuals. For
Radcliffe-Brown the only acceptable definition of function was the
“contribution” an institution makes to the maintenance of social
structure. “This theory of society in terms of structure and process,
interconnected by function, has nothing in common with the theory
of culture as derived from individual biological needs” (RADCLIFFE-
BROWN 1049b:322).

This theory does, however, have everything in common with Durk-
heim’s approach to sociocultural phenomena via the conditions of
social cohesiveness or social solidarity. The structural-functionalist’s
basic assumption is that social systems maintain themselves for signifi-
cant intervals of time in a steady state during which a high degree of
cohesion and solidarity characterizes the relationships among its mem-
bers. The only difference between Radcliffe- Brown and Durkheim in
this regard is that Radcliffe Brown substituted the terms “unity,”
“harmony,” or “consistency” for Durkheim’s “solidarity.”

Such a view implies that a social system (the total social structure
of a society together with the totality of social usages in which
that structure appears and on which it depends for its continued
existence) has a certain kind of unity, which we may speak of as a
functional unity. We may define it as a condition in which all
parts of the social system work together with a sufficient degree of

515



===== PAGE 263 =====

-

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 19. British Social Anthropology

harmony or internal consistency, i.c. without producing persistent
conflicts which can neither be resolved nor regulated [RADCLIFFE-
BROWN 1952b:181].

COLONIALISM AND THE HYPOTHESIS
OF FUNCTIONAL UNITY

It is an error to portray the structural-functionalists as polly-
annas, innocent of the occurrence of internal conflict and dissension.
Durkheim made ample provision for such phenomena in his assump-
tions concerning the existence of pathological afflictions to which
social systems are prone. Although Radcliffe-Brown disapproved of
this effort to identify the structural analogues of disease (ibid.:182),
neither he nor his students were unaware of the existence of sharp and
unresolved conflict. But they were not prepared to accept such conflict
as a normal, or fundamental, aspect of the human condition. Assump-
tions concerning functional unity are, according to Radcliffe-Brown,
merely hypotheses which “it seems worthwhile to test by systematic
examination of the facts” (ibid.:181).

One might very well argue that the concept of functional unity is a
necessary heuristic assumption, equivalent to the belief that the system
under observation is a phenomenon which lasts long enough to warrant
abstraction from the stream of history. As Radcliffe-Brown put it, “In
such an analysis we are dealing with a system as it exists at a certain
time, abstracting as far as possible from any change that it may be
undergoing” (1950:3). In theory, there was nothing to prevent
Radcliffe-Brown and his students from exposing and emphasizing the
lack of solidarity and cohesion in the larger societies which they were
studying. But the argument for heuristic advantage must be placed in
the actual research context in which the theory of structural-functional-
ist ethnography was put to the test. Between 1930 and 1955 the over-
whelming bulk of the contributions of the structural-functionalist
school was based upon fieldwork in African tribal societies located in
European, especially British, territories. Under such circumstances it
is impossible not to draw a connection between the proposal to study
social systems as if they were solidary and as if they were timeless, with
sponsorship, employment, and indirect association of the members of
this school by and with a now defunct colonial system (cf. FORDE
1953).

As late as 1950, Radcliffe-Brown’s “Introduction” to African Systems
of Kinship and Marriage included an opening quote from Gobineau ad-

516

vising Europeans who wish their civilizations to spread of the impor-
tance of knowing and comprehending those who were to be benefited.
This is followed by the author’s wish that “this book will be read not
only by anthropologists, but by some of those who are responsible for
formulating or carrying out policies of colonial government in the
African continent.” As we shall sce, there is something to be said for
Gregg and Williams™ portrayal of functionalism as a new kind of
“Dismal Science” whose function it was to provide a scientific ration-
alization of the status quo, especially in reference to the British policy
of indirect rule. Since this relationship is not peculiar to the structural-
functionalist position, but is shared by Malinowski as well, we shall
have to return to it later on.

MEANING OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE

As I have already suggested, at the root of the association be-
tween structuralfunctionalism and the Durkheimian heritage there
lies an insistence upon viewing functional relations exclusively in the
context of social structure.

Just what is this “social structure” which lies at the heart of the
structuralfunctionalist movement? In the context of the research
product achieved by Radcliffe-Brown and his students, a pragmatic
definition might be offered: the study of groups, especially those
organized along territorial, kinship, and political lines and the inter-
relationships among these constitute the core of social-structural phe-
nomena. In a slightly different sense, all differentiated social positions
or statuses derived from a consideration of membership in social
groupings constitute parts of social structure (RADCLIFFE-BROWN
1952b:193).

It is of the greatest importance to specify how this notion of social
structure is related to the other parts of a sociocultural system. Ac-
cording to Radcliffe-Brown, there are three heuristically separable
“adaptational” aspects of the total social system. Social structure, “the
arrangements by which an orderly social life is maintained,” is one of
these three aspects. The other two are the “ecological,” or the way
the system is adapted to the physical environment; and the cultural,
or the mechanisms by which an individual acquires “habits and mental
characteristics that fit him for participation in social life” (ibid.:g).
Substituting the concept “ideology” for the category to which Rad-
cliffe-Brown arbitrarily assigned the term “culture,” we are left with
the familiar Marxist three-part division of sociocultural systems into

517



===== PAGE 264 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

techno-economic, social-structural, and ideological phenomena. ‘What
is of greatest moment in this arrangement is the separability of social
structure from considerations of the techno-environmental and techno-
economic complex.

THE PRIORITY OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE

What is the relationship between ecological-economic “adap-
tion” and social-structural “adaption”? Is it the function of the eco-
nomic and ecological adaptations to sustain the social structure, or is it
rather the function of the social structure to maintain the economic
and ecological adaptations? According to structural-functionalism, it is
the social structure which always deserves priority of analysis. In Rad-
cliffe Brown’s theory and practice of structural-functionalism, it is only
legitimate to ask how the economic system results from, or contributes
to, the maintenance of a given social structure, never, how a particular
social structure results from, and serves to maintain, a given set of
techno-economic adaptations:

The economic machinery of a society appears in quite a new light
if it is studied in relation to the social structure. The exchange of
goods and services is dependent upon, is the result of, and at the
same time is a means of maintaining a certain structure, a net-
work of relations between persons and collections of persons. For
the economists and politicians of Canada the potlatch of the In-
dians of the north-west of America was simply wasteful foolishness
and it was therefore forbidden. For the anthropologist it was the
machinery for maintaining a social structure of lineages, clans and
moieties, with which was combined an arrangement of rank de-
fined by privileges [ibid.:197-98].

Although Radcliffe-Brown’s threefold division of social systems is not
consistently adhered to, either in his own writings or in those of his
students, the tactical and theoretical priority of social-structural factors
is seldom compromised.

Meyer Fortes, for example, confused a good many American cultural
anthropologists by using the term “culture” in a more global sense
than that proposed by Radcliffe Brown. In speaking of “optional
frames of reference,” Fortes (1933b:21) mentions “ideological,” “nor-
mative,” and “biological viewpoints,” omitting the techno-economic
altogether. But according to Fortes all the phenomena observable
within these frames are to be regarded as facets of social structure: “In

518

B ol

19. British Social Anthropology

this sense social structure is not an aspect of culture, but the entire
culture of a given people handled in a special frame of theory” (ibid.).
It is interesting to note how Lowie reacted to this proposal. He could
“admit that it is profitable to view the culture of a people with social
structure as a starting point,” but he felt that there would be an “ap-
pallingly large” residue of other cultural items which would remain
unstudied if one approached the “entire culture” from Fortes” point
of view (LOWIE 1953:531-32). This seems to suppose that an appalling
residue of unstudied facets of culture was not left over by the Bo-
asians. The question cannot be put in the form of why not study the
whole of culture rather than a part—a complete ethnography is impos-
sible to achieve. The decisive question is rather, why one part more
than some other part?

THE ANTIFUNCTIONALIST BOGEY

Before attempting to learn how Radcliffe-Brown and his
students handled this question, let us take time out to bury the mis-
conception that the historical particularists and the structural-function-
alists represent, respectively, anti- and profunctionalist positions. This
popular notion arose as a result of a breakdown in communication
over the meaning of the term “function.”

During the late 1920’s and early 1930’s when the Boasians first began
to take cognizance of the structural-functionalist program, there seems
to have been little comprehension of the highly specific meaning which
Radcliffe-Brown was giving to the concept of function. At a joint ses-
sion of the American Anthropological Association, the American Folk-
Lore Society, and Section H of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science at Pittsburgh in 1934, Radcliffe- Brown was
invited to comment on a paper by Alexander Lesser in which function
was treated as follows:

In its logical essentials, what is a functional relation? Is it any dif-
ferent in kind from functional relations in other fields of science?
I think not. A genuinely functional relation is one which is es-
tablished between two or more terms or variables such that it can
be asserted that under certain defined conditions (which form one
term of the relation) certain determined expressions of those con-
ditions (which is the other term of the relation) are observed. The
functional rclation or relations asserted of any delimited aspect
of culture must be such as to explain the nature and character of
the delimited aspect under defined conditions [LESSER 1935:392].

519



===== PAGE 265 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Radcliffe Brown understandably enough felt that there was so little in
common between his “function” and the one which Lesser had that
he declined to “offer any real criticism of his paper” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN
1935:394). But instead of taking advantage of the opportunity to ad-
vise Lesser on the Durkheimian meaning of function, Radcliffe Brown
added to the confusion by declaring that the “functional hypothesis”
was in conflict with the view held by some ethnologists. He called this
view “the ‘shreds and patches’ theory of culture,” from Lowie’s phrase,
“when he speaks of that planless hodge-podge, that thing of shreds
and patches called civilization” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1952a:186).

The indignation which this produced in the ranks of the Boasians
was certainly justified. Lowie’s phrase, as we have seen, although it
appears on the last page of Primitive Society, bears little resemblance
to the main substance of that work, which at every point emphasized
the importance of examining cultural traits in relationship to their
larger cultural context. Unfortunately, in rebuttal, Lowie shifted the
focus of criticism of both RadcliffeBrown and Malinowski toward
proof that “In his functionalist approach, Boas . . . antedates others
by decades” (LowiE 1938:142).

It was unwise for Radcliffe-Brown to have mixed up the shreds and
patches heresy with the structural-functionalist program; any kind of
functionalism was an antidote to extreme diffusionism, and Lesser,
Boas, and Lowie scarcely needed to be warned about the dangers of
diffusionist schemes. In addition, all the Boasians operated with an
implicit model of total sociocultural systems. On the other hand, the
Americans were certainly guilty of failing to grasp the significance of
Radcliffe-Brown’s Durkheimian heritage.

As a result of this kind of off-center parrying, plus Malinowski’s
crusade against Graebnerian “museum moles,” too many scholars have
befuddled themselves with the question of who was and who was not
a functionalist. It was left for Kingsley Davis to declare that functional
analysis as a special method of social rescarch was nothing but a myth.
Much as Lesser had insisted twenty-six years before him, Davis (1959)
declared that sociological analysis is inscparable from an attempt to
show the relationship between the parts of social systems. Therefore,
sociological analysis and functional analysis should be treated as syn-
onyms. Although Davis is essentially correct, his understanding of the
problem suffers from a lack of historical perspective. If functionalism
is a matter of showing the contribution that one part of culture makes
to another part, teleologically, or by mathematical correlation, then
Turgot, Malthus, Marx, Boas, Lowie, and yes, even Graebner and Graf-

520

v—

19. British Social Anthropology

ton Elliot Smith, were functionalists of sorts. There is no name of con-
sequence in the history of the social sciences who is not in some
measure concerned with the relationships among the parts of culture.

The contrast between different kinds of sociocultural theories is not
built around the question of whether sociocultural systems have parts
which are integrated with or effected by other parts, but rather which
parts, and how often and with what kind of effect and for how long?
In this sense we may distinguish the functionalism of Radcliffe-Brown
from the functionalism of Boas from the functionalism of Marx, etc.
To cut through the verbiage, the ad hominem sniping, the prestige-
building value of obscurantism which baffles our understanding of the
development of the social sciences, we must revert to the fundament
of all such inquiry: how does a particular theoretician propose to ex-
plain observable cultural differences and similarities? If he is to provide
any explanation at all, he must sooner or later commit himself to the
assumption that he is dealing with systems—i.e., sets of causally related
variables. What we want to know, what we must know, is why he
emphasizes certain sets of variables rather than others.

STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONAL LAWS

This brings us back to the question of why the structural-
functionalists insist that social structure provides the central set of
variables for orienting social anthropology. Ostensibly, the answer lies
in the claim that by concentrating on social structure anthropology
could be cured of the explanatory impotence which had followed upon
the demise of evolutionary schemes. This pretension to superior un-
derstanding or explanation is an explicit feature of the program set
forth by Radcliffe-Brown, and it was explicitly opposed to the Boasian
conclusion that the search for sociocultural laws was futile. Radcliffe-

Brown’s displeasure with the dogma of no sociocultural laws was ex-
pressed as early as 1923:

Now while cthnology with its strictly historical method can only
tell us that certain things have happened, or have probably or pos-
sibly happened, social anthropology with its inductive gencraliza-
tions can tell us how and why things happen, i.c., according to
what laws [1958:29].

This attempt to rcturn anthropology to social science deserves our
admiration and reflects with credit upon the guiding influence of Durk-
heim. Later, responding to his American critics, who insisted that

521



===== PAGE 266 =====

—_—_——f

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

there were “no discoverable significant laws such as the functionalist
is seeking,” Radcliffe-Brown delivered a telling blow, very reminiscent
of Spencer’s attack on his ninetecnth-century opponents of a social
science.

I have found it impossible to know what they mean, or on what
sort of evidence (rational or empirical) they would base their
contention. Generalisations about any sort of subject matter are
of two kinds: the generalisations of common opinion, and gen-
eralisations that have been verified or demonstrated by a system-
atic examination of evidence afforded by precise observations
systematically made. Generalisations of the latter kind are called
scientific laws. Those who hold that there are no laws of human
society cannot hold that there are no generalisations about human
society because they themselves hold such generalisations and
even make new ones of their own. They must therefore hold that
in the field of social phenomena, in contradistinction to physical
and biological phenomena, any attempt at the systematic testing
of existing generalisations or towards the discovery and verification
of new ones, is, for some unexplained reason, futile, or, as Dr.
Radin puts it, “crying for the moon”. Argument against such a
contention is unprofitable or indeed impossible [1952a:187].

The structural-functionalist school thus came forward to be judged on
the basis of the adequacy of its explanations of sociocultural differences
and similarities according to the common standards of science. For
Radcliffe-Brown at least, structural-functionalism was not to be valued
merely for its stimulus to improved standards of fieldwork or for its
organizing contribution to ethnographers in search of a theme to hang
their data on. The tests of adequacy were to be the ability to generate
lawful statements in terms of which explanations of sociocultural
phenomena could be achieved that were superior in accuracy, general-
ity, and economy to rival theories. It is by these standards that the
structural-functionalists will be judged here.

Other British social anthropologists have exercized greater caution in
their declarations concerning the ultimate objectives of social anthro-
pology. For some, the concentration upon social structure was probably
little more than a matter of personal taste, to which they are of course
inalienably entitled (but not in the name of science). Many of the
British social anthropologists often allude to the need for specializa-
tion, and it is, after all, impossible for a small group of scholars to study
everything. Raymond Firth, for example, rejected what he called “an
old-fashioned and spurious-unified science of man. . . . What a ‘cul-

522

19. British Social Anthropology

tural’ upbringing does seem to mean in some cases is too great diversifi-
cation of interest and lack of opportunity to get a really specialized
training” (FIRTH 1931:484). Piddington (1957:49) puts this notion
into more pictmesque, if no more accurate, terms:

The British trend toward specialization has had a stimulating ef-
fect on ethnographic research. Social anthropologists no longer
clutter up their minds with information about skulls and pot-
sherds but look instead to cognate social sciences (such as eco-

nomics, jurisprudence and psychology) for a stimulus in extending
and deepening their research.

In this vein, the structural-functionalists have repeatedly expressed
their antipathy to the concept of culture as employed by Malinowski
and the Boasians, arguing that it is too vast and shapeless a notion to
be of much use for the individual researcher. As Fortes (1953b:20) put
it, “A serious limitation to this point of view is that it is bound to treat
everything in social life as of equal weight, all aspects as of equal
significance.” “Malinowski, in common with all who think in terms of
a global concept of culture, had no answer to it” (ibid.:21). Although
Fortes does not specifically claim that the structural-functionalists do
have the answer to this problem, his exposition of the accomplish-
ments of social anthropology is set in the context of superior explana-
tory power: Says Fortes, “Anyone who has tried to understand African
religious beliefs and practices in the field knows, for example, that one
cannot get very far without a very thorough knowledge of the kinship
and political organization” (ibid.:22). One can only conclude that
social structure is to be regarded as “the foundation of the whole of
social life of any continuing society” (ibid.:23) because by so doing
one achieves superior “understandings” or explanations of sociocultural
phenomena.

In view of all that has been said in previous chapters, it is perhaps
repetitious to declare my deepest sympathy for Radcliffe-Brown’s
attempt to return anthropology to social science. His role in keep-
ing alive and nourishing the study of sociocultural regularities has
carned for him a distinguished place in the history of cultural theory.
As an opponent of the relativism, quixoticism, and psychological re-
ductionism which had brought the end of nomothetic theory in the
United States, Radcliffe-Brown was a lonely voice in a wilderness inter-
lude. But there remains the nagging question of why the path back to
science was to be paved with social structure. It is not, I trust, ungrate-
ful to point out that there is no theoretical justification for this

523



===== PAGE 267 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

strategy. Certainly none can be found in the works of Radcliffe-Brown
and his students. Appeals to the richness of the ethnographic report-
ing achieved under the structural-functionalist banner are not relevant
to this discussion. It might be possible to justify the theoretical infatu-
ation with social structure by appeal to the pragmatic results obtained
from such studies in terms of lawful generalizations. One might
possibly say, “Well, but you see, it works,” without specifying the
underlying reason for why it is so conspicuously productive of power-
ful nomothetic statements. But the tragedy of Radcliffe-Brown’s con-
tribution to theory is that the “laws” which he produced were
distinguished by their weakness, their low capacity for prediction and
retrodiction, and their vapidity.

HISTORY, ORIGINS, EVOLUTION

This failure to formulate significant sociocultural laws is not
the simple consequence of the structural-functionalist pursuit of Durk-
‘\‘heim's grail. The deliberate subordination of techno-economic param-
eters would of course constitute a serious flaw in any program
‘concerned with discovering the causes of sociocultural differences and
\similarities. But in Radcliffe- Brown’s case, even if the Durkheimian
mystique of social solidarity is set aside, there remains an additional,
and perhaps even more injurious, ingredient, which cannot be laid at
the door of French anthropology. Radcliffe-Brown set himself the task
of discovering sociocultural laws under the rigid and unprecedented
handicap of restricting anthropology to the data collected from a single
time level, namely the mid-twentieth century.

Uncharitable and not too well-informed critics have turned this
feature around to mean that the structural-functionalists were “op-
posed to the study of history.” This is a vulgar distortion. It is impos-
sible to suppose that reasonable men would deny the importance of
history for achieving a full explanation of sociocultural phenomena.
Indeed, Radcliffe Brown repeatedly urges the importance of historical
inquiry. If the structural-functionalists seldom concerned themselves
with historical perspectives, it was because they remained convinced
that little useful historical information could be obtained with respect
to primitive societies. It was not history, but “pseudo history” to
which they objected:

In the primitive societies that are studied by social anthropology
there are no historical records. We have no knowledge of the de-
velopment of social institutions among the Australian aborigines

524

7’

19. British Social Anthropology

for example. Anthropologists, thinking of their study as a kind of
historical study, fall back on conjecture and imagination, and in-
vent “pseudo-historical” or “pseudo-causal” explanations. We
have had, for example, innumerable and sometimes conflicting
pseudo-historical accounts of the origin and development of the
totemic institutions of the Australian aborigines. . . . The view
taken here is that such speculations are not merely useless but are
worse than useless. This does not in any way imply the rejection of
historical explanation but quite the contrary [RADCLIFFE-BROWN

1952b:3].

Like Boas, Radcliffe-Brown was scomnful of the evolutionary schemes
which his nineteenth-century predecessors had elaborated. Again, like
Boas, this did not mean that he was an antievolutionist in the sense of
being opposed to the Darwinian version of evolution (1947:80). Rad-
cliffe-Brown even declared himself to be a social evolutionist, defined
as one who is interested in studying the process of diversification by
which “new and different forms of societies are produced” (ibid.:80-81).
His expressed objections to evolutionism provide a curious coun-
terpoint to the complaints of the Boasians. According to Radcliffe-
Brown, the trouble with the evolutionists was that they got lost in the
search for origins when what they should have been doing was looking
for laws.

All that T am concerned with here is to point out that the an-
thropologists of this school considered culture and the history of
culture from one standpoint only, namely, as a process of develop-
ment, and were interested only or chiefly in the problem of de-
velopment, and that they regarded the development of culture
from the historical standpoint as a succession of stages rather than
from the inductive standpoint as the action of specific laws . . .

[1958:11].

The effect of the historical bias of the early anthropology, and of
the false idea of evolution to which it led such writers as Morgan,
was to set anthropologists seeking not for laws, but for origins

libid.:19].
This rejection of nincteenth-century evolutionism because classic evo-
lutionary theory did not lead to laws is, of course, contradicted by the
Boasians who allegedly gave up evolutionism because it was predicated
upon the assumption that the search for evolutionary laws had per-
verted the search for historical origins. Since it is clear that Radcliffe-
Brown was doctrinally opposed to the possibility of formulating laws
of parallel and convergent evolution, and that the lawfulness to which

525



===== PAGE 268 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

he alludes is merely that of synchronic regularity, the contradiction
here is more apparent than real. What is essential in the passage just
quoted is that the search for origins could not be carried out by means
of evolutionary formula. Here Boas and Radcliffe-Brown concur. Im-
mediately thereafter, however, a fundamental difference in strategy
separates the two schools. For the Boasians, the remedy for false evo-
lutionary reconstructions are specific historical inquiries; for Radcliffe-
Brown, the remedy is more drastic: avoid all historical inquiry for
which historical documents are not available. Up until the 1950’s, this
restriction resulted in a de facto separation of synchronic structural-
functional studies from diachronic inquiry.

We need not concern ourselves at any great length with the question
of to what extent the alarm over pseudo history with the resulting
synchronic emphasis was another convenient rationalization for avoid-
ing fundamental issues. I shall present evidence in a moment which
proves that the structural-functionalists did not take advantage of
reputable or otherwise useful historical sources even when these were
available in great abundance. Had they used these sources, vital sectors
of sociocultural inquiry would possess a set of assumptions different
from those which prevail at the moment.

STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONALISM AND
THE ORGANISMIC ANALOGY

The theoretical case for Radcliffe-Brown’s synchronic laws de-
pends on the validity of the biological organismic model upon which
he explicitly based his exposition of the principles of structural-
functional analysis. The aspect of the model to which attention is
directed is the set of relations among an organism’s parts which consti-
tute its morphology or physiology. This analogy, which goes back at
least to Hobbes, and which received its highest elaboration by Spencer,
is not necessarily ill-advised. There is much with which we may agree
in Radcliffe-Brown’s defense of it:

In using the terms morphology and physiology, T may secem to be
returning to the analogy between society and organism which was
so popular with medieval philosophers, was taken over and often
misused by nineteenth century sociologists, and is completely re-
jected by many modern writers. But analogies, properly used, are
important aids to scientific thinking and there is a x:cal and sig-
nificant analogy between organic structure and social structure

[1952b:195].
526

v

19. British Social Anthropology

To accept the appropriateness of this analogy is not to concede the
possibility of a synchronic science, from which statements similar to
those describing life-sustaining functions of the pancreas, or the kid-
neys, or some other physiological relationship concerning the parts of
delimited categories of organisms, can be expected. The situation is
scarcely so simple, however, and in practice there results a significant
abuse of the analogy in question. At the core of the matter there lies
an unanswered problem in epistemology, one which I have sought to
attack with draconian measures in The Nature of Cultural Things.
Individual biological organisms, at least as far as all higher forms are
concerned, enjoy an epistemological status which is radically different
from that of sociocultural organisms. It is part of a species-given bio-
psychological gestalt, a product of man’s adaptive phylogeny, that
boundaries of individual organisms are delimited by unequivocal
intersubjective criteria. We see whole bio-organisms, regularly, effort-
lessly, and infallibly. We do not see whole sociocultural organisms.
These, and all their parts, including social structure, must be con-
structed through a process of logico-empirical abstraction out of the
material furnished by the observation of the behavior of specific human
beings. The structural-functional analysis of the functions of parts of
sociocultural organisms is thus obliged to proceed without reasonably
certain knowledge that the whole organism has been laid out, so to
speak, on the dissecting table.

It is as if in attempting to discover the functions of the spinal
columns of amphibia, we ran the risk of examining a series of headless
frogs. By virtue of the same species-given gestalt, the various sectors
of an organism, if not its organs, present themselves to the community
of observers in a fixed and orderly spacial arrangement. But when I look
at an African society, I see whole sets of vital organs, great throbbing
nerves and sinews, which the structural-functionalists either do not
consider part of the organism at all, or which they relegate to the
position of toenails. That this is no idle danger as far as our sociocul-
tural specimens are concerned is evident in the announced program of
the structural-functionalists and abundantly demonstrated in their han-
dling of specific cases to which we shall now turn.

MOTHER'S BROTHER AGAIN

The classic attempt by Radcliffe-Brown to offer a synchronic
explanation of a structural feature is that of the relationship between
the mother’s brother and sister’s son among the Bathonga of Mogam-

527



===== PAGE 269 =====

__—_——.—f'

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

bique. This relationship, an asymmetrical joking relationship, was
characterized by the extraordinary liberties which sister’s son took with
his maternal uncle’s property and wives. In his uncle’s absence, sister’s
son would enter his hut, steal his favorite spear, carry on a lewd con-
versation with his wife, demand to be fed, and in many ways comport
himself in an utterly disrespectful fashion, all without fear of retalia-
tion or remonstrance. These liberties extended even to the solemn oc-
casion of uncle’s funeral when sister’s son was expected to snatch the
sacrificial chicken from amid the grave offerings and run off with it to
his own house. In marked contrast to this behavior was the great re-
spect which the same man would be obliged to display in all of his
dealings with his father’s brother. Junod (1913:253) had treated this
situation in the typically evolutionary style of the times:

Now having enquired with special care into this most curious fea-
ture of the Thonga system, T come to the conclusion that the only
possible explanation is that, in former and very remotc times, our
tribe had passed through the matriarchal phase.

Radcliffe Brown took up this challenge by proposing to offer, if not
to prove, an alternate hypothesis which would require no reference to
history. His explanation, which was alluded to in the previous chapter,
went about like this: among the patrilineal Thonga, there is a tendency
to extend to all of the members of ego’s mother’s patrilineage the kind
of behavior and attitudes which characterize ego’s relation with his
mother, and to all of the members of ego’s father’s patrilineage, the
kind of behavior and attitudes which characterize ego’s relations with
his father. Since mother is a warm and indulgent figure, so will be her
brothers and sisters; since father is a stern patriarch, so will be his
brothers and sisters. But this equivalence is disrupted by the principle
of sexual differentiation. Generally speaking, argues Radcliffe-Brown,
the greatest degree of familiarity is possible only between people of the
same scx. If mother and mother’s sisters are indulgent, then mother’s
brother, the term for whom (malume) actually means “male mother,”
will be even more so. Conversely, if father demands respect, father’s
sister should be even more aloof, since she is called by a kinship term
(nanani) which means “female father.” And that is indeed the case.
Although not spelled out in the original article, it would be correct, I
believe, to add that the structural-functional significance of the Thonga
joking relationship is the contribution which it made to the mainte-

nance of the patrilineages.

528

19. British Social Anthropology

A CULTURAL-MATERIALIST
ALTERNATIVE

One of the problems which such an explanation confronts is
that the structural-functionalists have not cornered the market on the
stuff u)ut.of which “just so stories” can be made. Granting Radcliffe-
Brown's ingenuity in drawing attention to a set of variables which are
analytically ignored by Junod, how do we know that there are not other
functional relationships which are equally relevant or more so? Let
me offer an alternative: Ego takes advantage of mother’s l)rothér be-
cause he has an economic claim on that man’s wife and children, a
claim whi?h by virtue of the corporate nature of the lineage invol\’/es
everyone i it to some extent. The claim arises because mother’s
brot!ler has married his bride directly, or indirectly, with the brideprice
furnished by ego’s patrilineage to mother’s pat}ilincage, When ego
stftals mother’s brother’s spear, propositions his wife, and runs off wi%h
his grave goods, this all functions to remind the members of mother’s
patrilineage that sister’s husband’s patrilineage gave them the cattle
to which they owe so much of their welfare.

In this connection, it should also be mentioned that the most im-
portant “respect relationship” which exists among the Bathonga is that
between a man and his wife’s brother’s wife, i.e., between ego’s father
and ego’s maternal uncle’s wife, a relationship the Thonga explain in
terms of the temptation a man feels to sleep with a woman who has
heel? bought with his cattle. It is not ego alone therefore who enjoys
the joke on mother’s brother; all the members of his patrilineage, who
must maintain proper decorum with their inlaw and his wife, rejoice
at tl}e nephew’s antics. For father to do those things would e;ldanger
the intricate web of marriages, which have been built up around the
exchange of women for cattle, but everyonc knows that sister’s son is
merely joking. ’

Which of these is the correct explanation? T prefer mine, because it
does not involve the assumption that the mother-son relationship is
the basic one from which the other kinship positions derive their
value. It also seems to me preferable insofar as it links the lineage sys-
tem to the economic domain through the emphasis on cattle. For the
Bathonga lineages are not, in my view of the Bathonga “organism,” the
beall and end-all of the Bathonga life. The lineages arise fron; and
reflect the adaptation of the Bathonga population to a mixed pastoral-

529



===== PAGE 270 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

horticultural way of life in which cattle are a vital resource and in
which the techno-economic patterns of cattle breeding and gardcnix.]g
are more important sociocultural “organs” than the lineages. That is,
the function of the mother’s brothersister's son relationship is to
maintain the population’s techno-economic adaptation. Of course, ‘this
institution may also contribute to the maintenance of lineage solidar-
ity, but if that solidarity did not contribute to the maintenance of the
techno-environmental adaptation, or to a better one, it probably would
not long endure.

TIME AND THE ORGANISMIC ANALOGY

It is not essential to my point that a choice be made between
the above explanations of the mother’s brother-sister’s son phenome-
non. Although T believe that definite criteria can be eilaboratcld for
preferring one to the other, these criteria demand that a dtachromc‘ per-
spective be adopted. In effect, in order to assign priorities of functional
order within a sociocultural organism, that is, in order to be able to
describe its structure, we must simultaneously study its history and
the history of similar organisms. From such a study there emerges a
conception of how the parts of sociocultural systems relate to each
other in general and specific terms, for we observe the phenorn@a of
parallel and convergent development and note how the changes in one
part are regularly succeeded by changes in another. Parallel .and con-
vergent evolution made manifest through comparative and dlgclquntc
anthropology is the anthropologist’s equivalent of thc'physmlogl?ts
laboratory. To ignore the results of the natural experiments Wh'lCh
constitute the stuff of history is to abandon all hope of understanding
how sociocultural systems are put together in the present.

SOCIOLOGICAL LAWS, STRUCTURAL
PRINCIPLES, AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
REDUCTIONISM

What, then, are the sociological laws which emerge from syn-
chronic structural-functionalism? In what sense can they be said to
fulfill Radcliffe-Brown’s intentions of achieving a science of society?

Radcliffe-Brown’s thought and technique followed a smqoth and
continuous development stemming directly from the analymg of the
mother’s brother-sister’s son. He gradually came to see the ]ok-mg rela-
tionship as an aspect of a larger complex of phenomena which included

530

19. British Social Anthropology

kinship terminologies, the treatment of lincage members as a unit,
cross-sex differentials, and the differential treatment of adjacent and
alternate gencrations. These notions were gradually formulated as
structural principles and presented as satisfying the quest for socio-
logical laws.

Eggan (1955b:503) refers to two of these principles, “the lineage
principle and the principle of the unity and solidarity of the sibling
group,” as “the most important concepts guiding the analysis of social
structure today. . . .” Under the direct stimulation of Radcliffe-
Brown, during the latter’s stay at the University of Chicago, Tax
(1955b:19ff.) proposed twelve such principles, or rules, which are listed
here in order to convey an idea of the nature of the “structural” laws
associated with this movement: the rule of uniform descent, uniform
reciprocals, uniform siblings, uniform mates, uniform ascent, equiva-
lence, terminological correlation, reciprocal behavior, equivalence of
siblings, sex differentiation, generation principle, and the sex principle.

As discussed in the next chapter, Coult (1966b) has re-established
the relevance of Tax’s structural principles to the ethnosemantic analy-
sis of kinship terminologies. But for Radcliffe-Brown and his American
students, these principles were regarded as useful for the analysis of
both kinship terminologies and social structure. The connection with
cthnosemantics is instructive because it highlights the heavy psycho-
logical component in the generalizations produced by the structural-
functionalists.

Bottomore (1962:44) correctly associates functionalism with the
interpretation of institutions in terms of the values and purposes of
individuals. He seems to regard Radcliffe-Brown as an exception, or at
least as an instance of a functionalist who also managed somehow to
remain on the sociological level. Of course, Radcliffe-Brown shared
Durkheim’s doctrinal opposition to psychological reductionism, but
neither he nor Durkheim, nor the French school, including Lévi-
Strauss, has found a way to avoid dependence upon phychological
universals as one of their main explanatory devices.

The theoretical penalty of this form of reductionism is always the
same: since all men are equipped with the same psychobiological
tendencies, all sociocultural systems should be the same. As White
(1949a:139) correctly insists, constants cannot explain variables. If al-
ternate generations everywhere tend to have friendly relations, while
adjacent generations are more agonistically inclined, then why don’t
all societies have the Australian four-section system in which alternate
generations are formally distinguished? Or why, if the unity of siblings

531



===== PAGE 271 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

is universal, do some systems distinguish collaterals from lineals while
others do not? The answer is that these universals, important aqd
valid as they may be, cross-cut each other and are embcd(.led in still
other crosscutting skeins of additional unive_rsal tlendenC{es (c.g.,.a
principle of least effort, or a principle of Anstote?h:{n loglcal consis-
tency, or a Freudian Ocdipus principle or a behaviorist reinforcement

principle).

SOME PECULIAR LAWS

There were also, to be sure, structural-functional principles

which were less conspicuously psychological. Thus, in 1935 Radcliﬂe—
Brown named three sociological, but otherwise no less peculiar, laws,

as follows:

. if we could define any universal condition to which a social
system would have to conform, we would therel?‘,{ have a sngolog-
ical law. . . . One such law or necessary condition of con}tmued
existence is that of a certain degree of functional consistency
amongst the constituent parts of the social systems. . . . To this
law we may add a second . . . rights and duties need to pc de-
fined in such a way that conflict of rights can be rgsolx’ed “'1thqut
destroying the structure. Another sociological law is the necessity
not merely for stability, definiteness, and consistency in the social
structure, but also for continuity [1952b:44-45].

But the best that can be expected from the application of alll such
universals, be they psychological or sociological, in the cxplahnah(m of
particular concrete varieties of sociocultural ananggments is a‘wgak
form of “interpretation.” Indeed, the general instructions for achieving
such interpretations were given in 1929 as follows:

The functional method aims at discovering general laws and
thereby at explaining any particular element of culturc‘by‘rcfer—
ence to the discovered laws. Thus, if it is a valid g.engrahzauon to
say that the chief function of ritual or ceremonial is to express
and thereby maintain in existence sentiments that are necessary
for social éohesion, we can “explain” any given rltuall or cere-
monial by showing what are the sentiments C)fpreSSCd in it §nd
how these sentiments are related to the cohesion of the society

[RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1958:40].

In other words, given the variety of systems, we can sl}ow how one 10:
another principle is reflected in it. But we cannot-expliam the particula
variety of system in terms of the conditions which yield a generation

532

T

19. British Social Anthropology

terminology here, a lineage organization there, now a moiety system,
sometimes an eight-section system, and then again, no sections at all.

It must be said that Radcliffe-Brown from the outset was probably
quite well aware of the limitations which the synchronic approach im-
posed upon the predictive and retrodictive powers of the laws he in-
tended to discover. It was, however, easy to become confused, as
when in his haste to oppose the Boasian position, he proposed “to tell
how and why things happen” (see above, p. 521). This stirring invita-
tion to science was indeed followed by a series of studies culminating
with a now classic examination of Australian kinship in which the main
synchronic structural-functional principles were blocked out. But Rad-
cliffe-Brown could not resist the temptation to assimilate psychosocial
interpretation to the standards of genuine scientific explanations, and
hence made the mistake of referring to “a universal sociological law
though it is not yet possible to formulate its scope, namely that in
certain specific conditions a society has need to provide itself with a
segmentary (clan) organization” (RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1931:109, quoted

in LOWIE 1937:224-25). Lowie’s (1937:225) scornful retort was per-
haps not completely justified:

Whoever heard of a universal law with an as yet undefinable
scope, of a Taw that works in certain specific but unspecified con-
ditions? Is it a law that some societies have clans, and others
have not? Newton did not tell us that bodies either rise or fall.

CONFESSION OF EXPLANATORY
IMPOTENCE

Radcliffe-Brown by this time had actually achieved a more
realistic appraisal of his “laws” quite on his own. His 1935 paper on
patrilineal and matrilineal succession, after in effect showing how all
societies must somehow or other handle the question of lineality in
conformity with the laws of consistency, control of conflict, and con-
tinuity, leaves the reader with slight expectation of ever getting to
know anything about the classic problems of descent: namely, why are

some descent systems matrilineal, others patrilineal, double, bilateral,
ete?

It might well be expected that such a paper as this would deal
with the question of what general factors determine the sclection
by some people of the matrilineal and by others of the patrilineal
principle in detcrmining status or succession. My opinion is that

533



===== PAGE 272 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

our knowledge and understanding are not sufficient to permit us
to deal with this problem in any satisfactory manner [RADCLIFFE-
BROWN 1952b:48].

This admission of explanatory impotence was repeated in 1941 for th‘e
entire field of kinship terminology, one of the lifelong fog ‘of his
search for lawful principles: “If you ask the question, ‘how is it that
the Omaha (or any tribe we have considered) have the system they
do?’, then it is obvious that the method of structural analysis does not
afford an answer” (1952b:85). With this admission we are brought
back to a point remarkably close to that of the Boasxgns. For, ot
only is structural-functional analysis incapable of answering t‘he ](I.HdS
of ;lussh'ons which have occupied the minds of social scientists since
the cighteenth century and the dreams and mytbs of primitive and
folk philosophers since the dawn of time, but let it be known, hence-
forth and forever more, that no one, no other school, shall ever ﬁqd the
answers to these riddles. For the structural-functional 1n§thod “is Fhe
only method by which we hope ultimately to arrive at valid g’?enerallza»
tions about the nature of human society” (ibid.:86). Anything that a
synchronic study cannot do, cannot be done; apd, as we have seen,
causal explanations have no place in a s_vnchro_mc study. The missing
ingredient is, of course, history, but to establish any probability for
historical explanations, “we should need to haye a knowledge of the
preceding conditions and events which we certzur}ly do not Possesiand
to which I do not think we shall ever attain” (ibid.:50). It is the “can-
not be done” which must strike a generation already acct}smmcd to
the search for the origin of life in the conditions of the prlmal‘a’(mo-
sphere five billion years before our time as‘oddly unprophetic. To
adopt a sociological perspective, which Radchﬁ'etBrown, were he alive
today, might appreciate, does science shackle 1t-sc1f to such narrow
prospects, if not out of obedience to a social function?

THE NEW DISMAL SCIENCE

For an explanation of this function, Dorothy Gregg levld
Elgin Williams (1948) proposed an analogy between thel entire syn-
chronic functionalist movement and the classical laissez-faire floctr|nes
of economics. Although frequently incorrect in fact and ethxcall‘y en-
tirely too wild and presumptuous (KROEBER 1049:318 cz{l]cd it an
“Authoritarian Panacea”), this analogy, nonetheless, requires sc.nou.s
consideration. It is an undeniable consequence of both the Malinow-
skian and Radcliffe-Brownian versions of functionalism that every sor;
of institution, from witchcraft to war, receives its due as a functiona

534

.

19. British Social Anthropology

contribution to the welfare and maintenance of the social system. As
the outraged leftleaning economists saw it, . . . predisposed to think
that all's well, social scientists will devote their time to metaphysical
eulogy, inventing high sounding purposes for the most absurd and per-
nicious customs while their actual social consequences go unregarded”
(GREGG and WILLIAMS 1948:508).

I believe that an objective appraisal of the contribution of the
structural-functionalists requires one to acknowledge the streak of
intellectual know-nothingism which flourished in their work despite
the ostensible emphasis upon scientism and orderliness. This negative,
narrowed-down view of the world, brought on by the deliberate use of
blinders to blot out the significance of history, is not as pronounced as
in the case of the Boasians, nor is it as politically reactionary as Gregg
and Williams claim it to be. Like the Boasians, most of the British so-
cial anthropologists would probably pass muster as left-wing liberals or
socialists. Their emphasis upon the orderliness of contemporary sys-
tems was not, as Gregg and Williams would have it, part of an attempt
to prove that all was well in the world in order to sustain the belief that
“Capitalism is human nature, and the social organization of modern
times, with its depressions, imperialism and war,” is a necessary part
of the human condition. The functionalists may have been naive, but
they were not insensitive. I venture to guess that the question was not
so much whether the world contained evils, but rather whether there
was any likelihood that less evil substitutes were about to be found.

The point here, however, is not to criticize the functionalists for
their political and ethical beliefs, about which we are at any rate very
badly informed. The know-nothingism to which I refer is a scientific
rather than an cthical problem. It is an affliction which leads the
functionalists to ignore, or even deliberately obscure, the amount of
order that human history exhibits. Its most serious intellectual conse-
quence is that it fails to come to grips with the fact that the evolution-
ary careers of both bioforms and sociocultural systems consist of an
array of eminently functional structures, all doomed to extinction.
Dinosaurs were no less a marvel of consistency, coordination, and
continuity than the mammals which replaced them; similarly there is
ample justification for the sympathetic wonder with which an anthro-
pologist describes the subtle perfections of a beautifully organized
patrilineal, patrilocal Omaha system. What history teaches us, how-
ever, is that the great issues of any period are not bound up with the

question of which element in the structure or which structure as a
whole is functional. Rather, it is a matter of which of a number of al-
ternative structures is the most functional under the specific condi-

535



===== PAGE 273 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tions which evolution has provided for them. Without recourse to
diachronic data, the whole question of degrees of functional adaptive-
ness is shut out, and yet surely there is no subject of more vital concern
to social science than the prospects for survival of our own way of life
and of the ways of life of our contemporaries, both primitive and
civilized. Failure to come to grips with this domain of problems is not
an ethical fault, or at least need not, as Gregg and Williams demand, be
phrased as such. It may very well be that many of those functional
adaptations, which “liberals” and “leftists” find most odious, are going
to survive for a long time to come. This does not relieve social
science of the burden of studying the diachronic and synchronic con-
ditions responsible for the origin, perpetuation, and dissemination of
cultural differences and similarities any more than the likelihood of a
more pleasant prospect would constitute by itself sufficient reason for
ignoring the blights of the past.

THE DISMAL CASE OF POLITICAL
ORGANIZATION

The treatment accorded the subject of political organization
was perhaps the most serious victim of the synchronic approach. In
1940 Meyer Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard edited a volume of con-
tributions by their fellow social anthropologists in which the structure
of African political systems was defined in a lasting manner for a large
professional audience. Yet, it is difficult to imagine a less propitious
combination of place and subject for synchronic analysis. The fact that
direct European political control, especially of the interior, goes back
only about one hundred years does not mean that in the days of
Stanley and Livingstone a pristine ethnographic situation existed in
Africa. For as surely as the slave-run plantation system of the New
World sounded the death knell of American aboriginal societies, it also
marked the beginning of vast upheavals of human populations in
Africa. For something like three hundred and fifty years the “Dark
Continent” was utilized as a breeding ground for cheap and docile
labor. It is estimated that forty million Africans were caught up in the
slave trade in one way or another, although possibly only as few as
fourtcen million were still alive when they got to their destinations
overseas. Advancing before this scourge were shock waves of wars, mi-
grations, political upheavals, and vast demographic changes. In such a
context, restriction to an ethnographic present of the 1930’s, in the
name of empiricism, has little to commend it.

536

19. British Social Anthropology

UNDOING THE DAMAGE

~ Distortions introduced by means of the synchronic focus in

African Political Systems threatened to reduce our understanding of
state formation to a shambles. Apparently oblivious of, or uninterested
in, the fact that for every other continent a close correspondence be-
tween state systems and high population density had been established
beyond a doubt, Fortes and Evans-Pritchard reached the conclusion
that “it would be incorrect to suppose that governmental institutions
are found in those societies with greatest densities. The opposite
seems to be equally likely judging by our material” (rorTEs and EvaNs-
PRITCHARD 1940:7-8). This conclusion was based on the evidence pro-
vided by six case studies, the Zulu, Ngwato, Bemba, Nuer, Tallensi, and
Logpli. R. F. Stevenson (1965) has taken each of these cases, applied |
a diachronic perspective, utilizing sources available in any major li-
brary, and reversed or seriously modified every negative instance.

Stevenson shows how Zulu territory and population were influenced
by the compression of the Bantu frontier under the shock of British
anq Boer penetration. M. Gluckman’s 3.5 persons per square mile
estimate accepted by Fortes and Evans-Pritchard is replaced with a
ﬁgur}e of 20 per square mile for the Shaka period (pre-1850), with the
possibility of densities as high as 46 per square mile. The historical !
data requires a similar upward revision for nineteenth-century Ngwato
population. For the Bemba, Stevenson shows that the paradox of
low population density and state apparatus is “an illusion” created
by the collapsing of history into the ethnographic present and the
consequent neglect of the effect of the advent of British indirect rule
upon the aboriginal local political monopoly over slave and ivory
trade: The Nuer paradox of acephalous polity combined with “high
density” also turns out to be illusory. With the upward revision of
the nineteenth-century Zulu and Ngwato densities, the figure of 7 per
square mile for the Nuer fits into the theoretically expected sequence.
The Logoli, who have a population of 391 per square mile, but al-
legedly no state system, probably had a nineteenth-century density
closer to 70 per square mile. They were surrounded on all sides by
state-organized societies and, in addition to possessing a number of
statelike features, were partially under the control of their neighbors.
The most startling case is that of the Tallensi, who have come to
serve as the classic instance of an “acephalous society” due to Fortes’
(1?4;:1949) elaborate descriptions of their kinship ideology. Elliot
Skinner had previously pointed the way for Stevenson:

537


===== PAGE 274 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Fortes’ insistence on the acephalous nature of Tallensi society
stems from his failure to consider that these people had been de-
feated and dispersed by the British at the turn of the century and
had probably lost a great deal of their organization. The society he
describes can be compared to a modern community arbitrarily
divorced from its nation state [SKINNER 1964:7].

Far from being acephalous, as Stevenson shows, the Tallensi inhabited
an area which had been controlled before the advent of the British by
the Mamprusi kingdom.

It must be emphasized that Stevenson’s brilliant defense of the
population density-state formation hypothesis in Africa does not rest
with the reformulation of the Fortes and Evans-Pritchard materials.
Historical and demographic evidence from all over the continent is also
reviewed, including the most puzzling case of all, the Ibo. In total, the
evidence is overwhelming that African political systems, like those
found almost everywhere else, show a definite relationship to density
phenomena. Stevenson’s use of readily available and abundant histori-
cal sources to correct the conclusions of the structural-functionalists
jeopardizes the credibility of the “pseudo-history” excuse for syn-
chronic specialization. At any rate, Radcliffe- Brown’s (1950:2) assertion
that “We cannot have a history of African institutions” can no longer
be taken as anything more than a rationalization for avoiding a con-
frontation with the past.

WAS JUNOD RIGHT?

Among the more sensational rebuttals of Radcliffe-Brown’s
position is Murdock’s (1959a) culture history approach to African
institutions, in which there is a fateful return to the article which
started it all, “The Mother’s Brother in South Africa.” Reviewing the
evidence for Junod’s “pseudo history” of matrilineal descent, Murdock
strikes at the roots of the structural-functionalist movement. According
to Murdock, the speculative shoe belongs on the other foot. Radcliffe-
Brown’s argument with Junod represented an “opposition between
sound historical scholarship and untrammeled sociological specula-
tion” (ibid.:378). There is every reason to believe that the Bathonga
had passed through an earlier matrilineal phase. This does not, of
course, signify that Radcliffc- Brown’s synchronic interpretation was in-
correct but that his conclusions require further interpretation in rela-
tionship to the probable trajectory of Thonga history.

538

19. British Social Anthropology

FRED EGGAN AND THE RESUMPTION
OF DIACHRONIC RESEARCH

It must be made clear that the end of the synchronic obsession
has been brought about less by this kind of attack than by a gradual
drift among the younger generation of British social anthropologists
toward combining diachronic and synchronic interests. This reconcilia-
tion may actually have been stimulated by Radcliffe- Brown himself,
upon his return to Oxford in 1937 as a result of his American
experience.

Certainly, the most profound effect of his sojourn at Chicago was
the development of a point of view, most impressively represented in
the work of Fred Eggan, by which structural-functionalist principles
were combined with the Americanist’s concern with historical docu-
ments. By the time of Radcliffe-Brown’s departure, Eggan (1937) had
already achieved a brilliant synthesis of the structural-functional and
the historical-particularist approaches. Using what he later called the
“method of controlled comparison,” Eggan (1954) attempted to ex-
plain puzzling variations in Crow terminology among the Choctaw,
Creek, Chickasaw, and Cherokee, a group of southeastern United
States tribes which had been exposed to a similar set of acculturative
pressures. Eggan demonstrated that length of time and degree of ex-
posure matched the amount of departure in the terminological systems
from a matrilineal Crow type to something more closely resembling a
patrilineal Omaha type.

It is difficult to discover any definite historical link between Eggan
and Radcliffe- Brown’s students and colleagues in England. Among the
contributors to African Systems of Kinship and Marriage (roroE and
RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1950), only Audrey Richards shows an inclination
toward the kind of comparison which Eggan had proposed. Fggan’s
name does not appear in the volume’s index, although he was a con-
tributor to the Radcliffe-Brown Festschrift (ForTES 1949)

THE COLLAPSE OF SYNCHRONISM

) In 1954, Eggan was still predicting that the social anthropolo-
gists would eventually become more interested in diachronic studies:
“Ultimately the British anthropologists will discover that time per-
spective is also important and will encourage archacology and historical
research” (1954:755). According to Raymond Firth (1951), however,
this interest had already reached important dimensions before the

539



===== PAGE 275 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

1950’s. Rejecting Murdock’s (1951) characterization of social anthro-
pology as not interested in history, Firth cites a number of cases in
which his colleagues had made an attempt to concern themsclves with
social change (e.g, MAIR 1938; WILSON and HUNTER 19Q30; EVANS-
PRITCHARD 1049). Firth (1951:486) correctly emphasizes the im-
portance of culturecontact studies, a theme coincident with the
formalization of acculturation research by American scholars (RED-
FIELD, LINTON, and HERSKOVITS 1936), as one of the sources of dia-
chronic comparisons. For example, Monica Hunter (Wilson) had
written extensively of Pondoland acculturation as early as 1936. Dur-
ing the Second World War, the interest in contact phenomena in-
tensified, and both Malinowski (1945) and Wilson and Hunter (1945)
came out with elaborate theoretical statements concerned with the
trajectory of colonial relations, especially in Africa. Firth (1954) cites
Read (1942), Schapera (1947), Hogbin (1939), Richards (1954), Freed-
man (1950), Gluckman (1955a), and Berndt (1952), among others, as
having produced social anthropological studies involving the analysis
of social change. It must be made clear that important ethnological
contributions employing a wide variety of historical research methods
have become an accepted feature of the most recent period of British
social anthropology (cf. STENNING 1950; M. G. SMITH 1960; J. A. BARNES
1954). According to C. Daryll Forde (1965:19):

There is no need to labour the point that outsiders may have pro-
vided documents concerning the forebears of an unlettered people
which can be of great value to a social anthropologist. The re-
covery of such documentation and its study, when this is done
with detailed knowledge and understanding of the contemporary
ethnography, has enabled social anthropologists to analyse devel-
opments of structure and process over considerable time spans.
The importance of the search for, and the use of, documentation
both indigenous (where it exists) and foreign, is accepted as obvi-
ous by the anthropologist as by any other student of some phase or
aspect of the life of a people. We need to recognise however, that
the extent to which such documentation can be found is very vari-
able, and that for many peoples in Africa it may be nonexistent
before the turn of the century.

It must also be emphasized, however, that this return to diachronic
interests has not as yet contributed to a revival of diachronic theory.
Indeed, as Leach (1961a:1) has commented, “Most of my colleagues
are giving up the attempt to make comparative generalizations; instead
they have begun to write impeccably detailed historical ethnographies
of particular peoples.”

540

.

19. British Social Anthropology

EDMUND LEACH

Leach himself is responsible for one of the most effective
critiques of the structural-functional model. In his Political Systems
of Highland Burma (1954), he was obliged to analyze a region-wide
process involving slow but drastic changes of democratic dispersed hill
peoples (gumlao type) to democratic-in-theory intermediate types
(gumsa), to stratified lowland irrigation rice kingdoms (Shan). This
dynamic could lead to change in the reverse direction as well, involving
the progressive alteration of peoples of Shan background to the
gumlao condition. Leach refused to see this situation in terms of a
static model: “We can no longer be satisfied with attempting to set up
a typology of fixed systems. We must recognise that few if any of the
societies which a modern ficld worker can study show any marked ten-
dency towards stability” (LEacH 1954:285). Leach’s treatment of
evolving political modalities in Burma leaned heavily on an ecological
analysis, since the extreme types, Shan and gumlao, were obviously
dependent upon contrasting forms of cultivation and occupied differ-
ent habitats. The promise of greater attention to such matters has not
been fulfilled. Instead, as we shall sce in a moment, Leach’s fancy has
been captured by Lévi-Strauss.

RAYMOND FIRTH

Among those who have long been dissatisfied with the syn-
chronic limitations of structural-functionalist theory, the name of
Raymond Firth is outstanding. Through his concept of social organiza-
tion, Firth hoped to achieve a closer approximation to actual behavior-
stream events, espccially to the variations which are largely ignored in
the static formulations of social structure. From a study of these
variations, Firth hoped to be able to discover the processes by which
fundamental structural changes occurred (FIRTH 1954; 1961:40ff.). Ac-
cording to Firth, neglect of such variations was responsible for the fact
that “structural analysis alone cannot interpret social change” (ibid.:
35). In 1951 Firth saw British social anthropology, after a quarter of
a century of structural-functional typologies, moving “slowly and un-
evenly toward a more systematic study of variation, including variation
over time” (1951:488). But in 1954 he admitted, “We are hardly yet
on the threshold of any general theory of a dynamic kind which will
enable us to handle comprehensively the range of materials within our
normal anthropological sphere” (quoted in FirTH 1964:7). In 1962

541



===== PAGE 276 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Firth went so far as to base most of his discussion of “dynamic theory”
upon a reconsideration of the contributions of Marx (ibid.:7-29). Al-
though scarcely prepared to embrace a Marxist-derived variety of
historical determinism, Firth has recently made it clear that he believes
no approach to a theory of change can be attempted which does not
seriously reconsider Marx’s proposals concerning the importance of the
material conditions of production. In Firth, we secem almost to have
come full circle, to a social anthropology whose main concern is the
understanding of sociocultural change. Firth’s explanation of this phe-
nomenon is as follows:

The present day interest in dynamic theory for social anthro-
pology is partly a response to increasing perception of deficiencies
in earlier theoretical approaches. But it is partly a response to
changed conditions in our field of observation itsclf, and it has
been influenced by modern intellectual movements of a more
general kind [ibid.:28].

One assumes that, above all, the change in question reflects a Britain
no longer interested in preserving the world’s largest colonial empire.

MYSTICISM, CYNICISM, AND MINI
SKIRTS

With the collapse of the structural-functionalist program,
British social anthropology has entered a phase of confused and con-
flicting trends. It is clear, however, that the return to diachronic data
has not as yet contributed to a revival of diachronic theory. Nor should
we expect, from all that has been said about historical particularism,
that mere attention to change over time will produce thcoretically
interesting results. Indeed, British social anthropology may be on the
verge of something quite different from a return to the formulation
of diachronic-synchronic regularities. For some famous Britishers,
the waning of influence of Radcliffe-Brown and the intensification of
historical research has resulted in complete disillusion with the en-
tire scientist pretension. FEvans-Pritchard is the most outspoken
heretic in this regard. For him, the end of Radcliffe-Brown’s reign has
meant a return to the dichotomy between history and science as
proposed by the Southwest German school of philosophy (see p.
344) and, closer to home, by the philosopher Karl Popper (1957).
The resemblance to Kroeber is striking:

Social anthropology has more in common with history than with
natural science . . . it studies societies as moral or symbolic sys-

542

D

19. British Social Anthropology

tems and not as natural systems . . . is less interested in process
than in design . . . seeks patterns and not laws, demonstrates
consistency and not necessary relations . . . interprets rather
than explains . . . [EVANS-PRITCHARD 1951:60-61].

Up to the present nothing even remotely resembling what are
called laws in the natural sciences has been adduced—only rather
naive deterministic, teleological, and pragmatic assertions. The
generalizations which have so far been attempted have, moreover,
been so vague and general as to be, even if true, of little use, and
they have rather easily tended to become mere tautologies and
platitudes on the level of common sense deduction [ibid.:57].

I do not believe that there can ever be a science of society which
resembles the natural sciences . . . [ibid.:117].

Social anthropology is best regarded as an art and not as a social
science [ibid.:85].

Fortes, who has been the most faithful of Radcliffe-Brown’s pupils,
warns that Evans-Pritchard “contrived to throw out the baby of func-
tionalist theory with the bath-water of evolutionary speculation”
(1953a:32). To save the baby, Fortes recommends that we return to
a view of man which places him squarely in the midst of nature and
which invokes a remembrance of his origin in the processes of organic
evolution. Although these reminders of the material basis of sociocul-
tural systems are better than nothing, Fortes” defense of the scientist
posture does not really break new ground:

I hold with Frazer and Haddon, Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown
that there are regularities independent of period and place in so-
cial organization and culture, and that the main aim of social
anthropology is to investigate the general tendencies, or laws,
manifested in them [ibid.:35].

There is no room to doubt that what is meant here are the uniform-
ities which occur in social life despite the lack of regularity in history,
‘Iather than the uniformities which result because of historical regular-
ity: “It is perhaps superfluous to add that this view does not imply a
belief in mechanical determinism in human life or a denigration of
man’s intellectual and spiritual qualities” (ibid.).

Leach has been no less outspoken than Evans-Pritchard concerning
his “dislike” of the comparative method as proposed by Radcliffe-
Brown (Leacm 1g61a:2). Instead of circling back to the historical-
particularist position, which is implicit in the reaction of Firth and
Evans-Pritchard, and even in Fortes when he invokes “evolution,”

543



===== PAGE 277 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Leach has extended himself along the lines which have made of
Lévi-Strauss a French national treasure. As an “intellectual” (one who
knows how to say less than what he means but more than you can
understand), Leach believes that the “butterfly-collecting followers”
(ibid.:1) of Radcliffe-Brown have got to start rethinking the really
basic issues. However, what Leach considers the basic issue can only
leave the rest of us trembling over our failure to appreciate what is
really important in life. We have not properly conceptualized the
difference between incorporation (as into a lineage) versus alliance (as
through marriage). Previous models of this duality have been overly
ethnocentric. A correct formulation requires a mathematical approach,
preferably a topological one, because topology is nonmetric, thus con-
forming to the criteria of Lévi-Strauss’ “mechanical models” (sec p.
498). It turns out, however, that the topological presentation can easily
be omitted. The central concern settles down to the rather simple idea
that relations of incorporation are emically phrased as those of com-
mon substance (blood, milk, bone, etc.), whereas alliance relationships
are viewed in terms of metaphysical forces. In keeping with this dis-
tinction, there are different kinds of witches: those found in one’s own
lineage have an ability to control their powers to do evil and theirs is a
deliberate witchcraft. But affinal or alliance-type witches are like fate:
they do their evil as a result of “uncontrolled mystic influence.” Other
conclusions relating the varicties of witchcraft to intensities of political
power are also advanced, but we are warned that there can be such a
thing as too much “popshy” (to use Leach’s term) for one night
(ibid.:27). In the same volume of essays, Leach attempts an interpre-
tation of the myth of Cronos and the representation of time in world-
wide ritual calendars. One is amazed at the imaginative fashion in
which Durkheim’s conception of time as a projection of the collective
consciousness is vindicated. For more daring myth fanciers, there is
“Lévi-Strauss in the Garden of Eden” (LEAcH 1961¢), a Biblical exe-
gesis the nature of whose correspondence to empirically verifiable
facts is exceeded in ambiguity only by what Lévi-Strauss has achieved
in his flirtations with Hegel's dialectic.

There are, of course, more serious sides to Leach. His contribution to
the typology of the varieties of cross-cousin marriage will endure as a
solid achievement. But what is most distressing to view is the veritable
debauchery of method which has succeeded Radcliffe-Brown’s puritan-
ical reign. This weakening of the empirical fibers (can it be the same
influence which has made London the exporter of all manner of musi-
cal and sartorial novelty?) stands out in morbid contrast to the utiliza-

544

f

19. British Social Anthropology

tion of the linguistic model by American cultural anthropologists in
their study of emic categories.

The path along which Leach has followed Lévi-Strauss leads in a
remarkably parallel fashion to the swamp of linguistic analysis, where
a search for systems of contrastive meanings is now being carried
out by some of the best brains in the United States. Leach undoubt-
edly deplores the cramped vision of the world which serves its scholars
a steady diet of componential, transformational, and algorithmic anal-
yses of how to distinguish rashes from boils in Subanum, types of
firewood in Chiapas, and varieties of rice in Hanundo. But there is a
limit to the amount of “popshy” which anthropology can absorb, even
when it comes wrapped up in pages torn from topological texts. With
the discovery that synchronic structural-functional models were of little
use for the analysis of the Kachin, with the realization that after fifty
years of polemic concerning the meaning of descent and marriage, no
one yet could define them to his liking, Leach indeed had a lot of
“rethinking” to carry out. Instead of rethinking his way to an unopera-
tional, intuitive, synchronic form of the dialectic, he might well have
pondered why he so devoutly believes, “Now whether or not evolu-
tionary doctrine is true, it is certainly quite irrelevant for the under-
standing of present-day human societies . . .” (LEACH 1957:125).

THE UNCLEAN AND UNHYPHENATED

The publicly announced bankruptcy of the structuralfunc-
tional school provides us with a fresh perspective on one of the most
animated controversies in the history of anthropological theory, that
between Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski. From Radcliffe Brown’s
“Protest” (1949b) over Gregg and Williams’ “The Dismal Science of
Functionalism,” one gathers that the worst of the injuries sustained
appears not to have been the accusation of reactionary politics but the
lumping of the two functionalists in the same category. The indigna-
tion of Radcliffe-Brown was monumental, as he took the opportunity
not only to chastise Gregg and Williams, but to deride Malinowski:

Malinowski has explained that he is the inventor of functionalism,
to which he gave its name. His definition of it is clear; it is the
theory or doctrine that every feature of culture of any people past
or present is to be explained by reference to seven biological
needs of individual human beings. I cannot speak for the other
writers to whom the label functionalist is applied by the authors,
though I very much doubt if Redfield or Linton accepts this doc-

545



===== PAGE 278 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

trine. As for myself I reject it entircly, regarding it as uscless and
worse. As a consistent opponent of Malinowski’s functionalism
I may be called an anti-functionalist [RADCLIFFE-BROWN 194gb:
320-21].

I have no wish to follow further the irresponsible extravagances of
the authors. They certainly do not deserve to be taken seriously.
I only ask to be permitted to register a personal protest against
a procedure, for which they can find no possible justification or
excuse, by which, having applied to me the label “functionalist,”
they attribute to me, first, acceptance of the Malinowskian theory
of culture, which I reject, and second, the quite impossible view
that all customs and institutions of any society are right and good,
and I suppose they might add that all socially accepted beliefs are
true [ibid.:322].

It is true that I make use of the concept of function, and I did so
in my lectures at Cambridge and the London School of Economics
before the time when Malinowski began to study anthropology.
All physiologists make use of the same concept, but they are not
called functionalists [ibid.].

To the outsider, and in retrospect, this fuss about being identified
as a Malinowskian functionalist seems rather like a tempest in a tea-
pot. Both brands of functionalism arose in opposition to the dia-
chronic schools of the evolutionary and diffusionist traditions. Both
devoted their major efforts to intensive field experience, and both
employed an organismic analogy as their main analytical crutch. As one
of Malinowski’s students has said,

Both denied the value of speculative reconstruction of history;
both emphasized the need to study existing social institutions;
both conceived of cultures as wholes; both developed a concept of
function in terms of the social effect of any custom or institution

[kABERRY 1957:75].

The Radcliffe-Brownians, it is true, tended to be more comparative and
were guided, initially at least, by the hope of achieving synchronic
laws. We have seen, however, that these laws turned out to be state-
ments concerning universal psychosocial tendencies by which cultural
differences and similarities could be “interpreted” but by which they
could not be predicted or retrodicted. In compensation, Malinowski’s
ethnographic contributions were unexcelled. His Trobriand Island
monographs (MALINOWSKI 1922; 1929b; 1935) still constitute the great-
est cthnographic description ever achieved. Although Malinowski’s
concept of function developed along a trajectory, which removed it

546

v—-»

19. British Social Anthropology

further and further from Radcliffe- Brown’s formulation, there initially
was a very strong resemblance between them.

EARLY MALINOWSKI

Malinowski's earliest publication was about the family in
Australia and bore the subtitle, “A Sociological Study.” It contained
a defense of Edward Westermarck’s position on the universality of the
nuclear family. Although the theme of social solidarity is not conspic-
uous, the conclusions pay lip service to Durkheimian functions:

Social institutions should in the first place be defined by their
social functions; if the functions—religious, magical, legal, eco-
nomic, etc.—of the totemic class, the exogamous class, and other
divisions be known and compared with the functions of the indi-
vidual family, each of these institutions will appear as occupying a
definite place in the social organization, and playing a determi-
nate part in the life of the community. And such a knowledge
would afford a firm basis for further speculations.

In the foregoing investigations we have omitted this side of the
problem partly in order to avoid increasing the bulk of the mono-
graph, but above all, that we might develop more clearly the
features of the institution described [1913a:303].

In a footnote to this passage, Malinowski promised to go beyond the
family to study the clans and sections in terms of their “social func-
tions.” It was in fact Radcliffe-Brown (1931) and not Malinowski
who was to achieve the promised analysis. As J. A. Barnes (1963:xvi)
has noted, Radcliffe-Brown’s review of this book already contained the
seeds of their future disagreements:

Radcliffe-Brown reviewed Malinowski’s book in 1914 and after
commenting that “it is by far the best example in English of
scientific method in dealing with the descriptions of the customs
and institutions of a savage people” went on to argue that Mali-
nowski’s statement of the theoretical framework for the study of
kinship (Chapter VI) was “the least successful in the book. The
Australian notions rclating to kinship cannot be studied without
reference to what the author calls ‘group relationships’; in other
words, the relationship systems, classes, and clans. As Mr. Mali-
nowski has confined himself, quite justifiably, to a study of the
individual family relationships, this part of his work remains im-
perfect.”” Here we have the criticism, often repeated, that
Malinowski could not sec a descent system existing save as an
“extension” of relationships within the elementary family.

547



===== PAGE 279 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

SEX, FAMILY, AND THE INDIVIDUAL

Malinowski’s interest in the family provided a major focus for
his work up until the ill-fated switch to problems of Colonial accultur-
ation. It led him quite logically to a confrontation with the theories of
Freud, which he put to the test, guided by books sent to him by C. G.
Seligman (MALINOWSKI 1927a:ix), during his Trobriand fieldwork. The
matrilineal inclinations of this group provided the world with the first
ficld examination of Freud’s theories concerning the universality of
the Oedipus complex, as well as of many other Freudian notions such as
racial conscience and infant sexuality. Barnouw (1963:59ff.) points out
that Malinowski’s conclusions were not unequivocal. But the net im-
pression of Sex and Repression in Savage Society is that of a substantial
blow from which Freud’s original doctrines were never able fully to
recover. It was certain at least that relations between father and son in
a matrilineal and avunculocal descent system were radically different
from what Freud had been able to observe in his Viennese patriarchy.

The influence of Malinowski’s work on sex and the family earned
for him a reputation outside of anthropology which was in no way
matched by Radcliffe- Brown’s arid discussions of the lineage principle.
He had a predilection for juicy titles (The Sexual Life of Savages), and
his flamboyant treatment of the Trobriands as a Rousseauan sexual
paradise is properly emphasized in Leach’s (1965a:36) attempt to ex-
plain Malinowski’s public success. But I do not accept Leach’s sour
conclusion, obviously intended to include Radcliffe-Brown, that “there
are many lesser, more pedantic men who in some ways can be con-
sidered much better anthropologists.” Malinowski’s concern with sex,
family life, and individual psychology is no evidence of his lack of
awareness of the Durkheimian kind of functional relations with which
the structural-functionalists had become obsessed. Malinowski’s func-
tionalism was a bigger, potentially more powerful, and emically more
interesting armamentarium than anything Radcliffe-Brownians could
muster. It both included and surpassed the principles with which the
structural-functionalists operated.

TEMPEST IN A TEAPOT

Malinowski’s explanation of the universality of nuclear family
incest prohibitions is not at variance with a structural-functional ap-
proach. Indeed, his appeal to individual biopsychological givens is a

548

. ol

19. British Social Anthropology

necessary part of any structural-functional “explanation.” Malinowski’s
interpretation of all incest prohibitions is that they originate within the
family and function to preserve the family and thus the rest of social
organization (see p. 198 for earlier precedents):

In any type of civilization in which custom, morals, and law
would allow incest, the family could not continue to exist. At
maturity we would witness the breaking up of the family, hence
complete social chaos and an impossibility of continuing cultural
tradition. Incest would mean the upsetting of age distinctions,
the mixing up of generations, the disorganization of sentiments
and a violent exchange of roles at a time when the family is the
most important educational medium. No society could exist under
such conditions. The alternative type of culture under which in-
cest is excluded, is the only one consistent with the existence of
social organization and culture [MALINOWSKI 1927a:251].

There can be no basis other than scholastic snobbism for setting this
interpretation in opposition to a more “sociological” approach which
would start with extrafamilial group incest prohibition and extend
these to the nuclear family. Many of Radcliffe-Brown’s structural
principles assume the existence of the nuclear family (as in the case of
the “male mother”); in both approaches it is not the survival of the
individual which is at stake but that of the “social organization and
culture.”

MALINOWSKI'S SCHEME

With the gradual formalization of Malinowski’s theory of cul-
ture during the 1930’s, a propagandistic exaggeration of the incompati-
bilities between the two approaches took shape. Malinowski came up
with a list of seven basic individual biopsychological needs for the
satisfaction of which the social organism or culture was a “vast instru-
mental reality.” The latter was made effective by a series of direct and
indirect, primary and secondary collective needs and collective instru-
mentalities in the form of institutions and symbolic projections,
presentations, and defenses. The scheme, as laid out in 1939, is illus-
trated in the table on pp. 550-351.

It is obvious that in a scheme so vast as Malinowski’s, everything has
its place. Thus, the set of “instrumental needs” is very close to the Durk-
heimian notion of social structure. But Malinowski chose the same
occasion to insist that everything rested on the individual needs and
that therefore an unbridgeable gap had opened between on the one

549



===== PAGE 280 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

.l

19. British Social Anthropology

Symbolic and Responses to
Responses to Integrative Symbolic and
Instrumental Needs Needs Integrative Needs

Economics

Social control

Education

Political organization

Knowledge

Magic, religion

Art, sports,

Basic Needs Direct Responses Instrumental Needs
NUTRITION Commissariat Renewal of cultural
apparatus
REPRODUCTION Marriage and
family
BODILY COMFORTS Domicile and Charter of behavior
dress and other sanctions
SAFETY Protection and
defense
RELAXATION System of play Renewal of personnel
and repose
MOVEMENT Activities and system Organization of force
of communication and competition
GROWTH Training and
apprenticeship

hand “pure functionalism” and, on the other, “hyphenated func-
tionalism” (a splendid riposte upon Radcliffe-Brown’s structural-
functionalism—cf. BRADSHAW-MORREN 1966) :

Professor Radcliffe-Brown is, as far as I can see, still developing
and deepening the views of the French sociological school. He
thus has to neglect the individual and disregard biology.
Functionalism differs from other sociological theories more defi-
nitely, perhaps, in its conception and defmition of the individual
than in any other respect. The functionalist includes in his analy-
sis not merely the emotional as well as intellectual side of mental
processes, but also insists that man in his full biological reality
has to be drawn into our analysis of culture. The bodily needs and
environmental influences, and the cultural relation to them, have
thus to be studied side by side [MALINOWSKI 1939:939].

Admittedly, Malinowski’s listing of needs is rather ad hoc—physiol-
ogists and psychologists would certainly want to make substantial
emendations—and the logic connecting the various instrumentalities to
their biopsychological base is never more than arbitrary. Nonetheless,
the “hyphenates” cannot convert the virtue of Malinowski’s vivid con-
cern with the full amplitude of individual and social functions into a

550

games

[MALINOWSKI 1939:942]

vice. It would be a less questionable matter were the hyphenates able
in any consistent fashion to stay away from a larger framework of
their own. But one can easily find statements among Radcliffe-
Brown’s definitions of function which are so broad as obviously to
require an accommodation with Malinowski’s ideas, as for example:
“Function may be defined as the total set of relations that a single
social activity or usage or belief has to the total social system” (RraD-
CLIFFE-BROWN 1048:85, italics added).

MALINOWSKI AND EVOLUTIONISM

As we have seen, Radcliffe-Brown accepted a “sociological”
type of evolutionism, of which he considered Spencer to be an early
representative. In Malinowski’s case, there is an even more positive re-
lationship to evolutionary doctrines. Edward Westermarck, “to whose
personal teaching and to whose work” he acknowledged owing “more
than to any other scientific influence” (FirtH 1957:5), was, of course,
an armchair evolutionist of the classical mold. It was to Westermarck
that Malinowski owed his conception of the diachronic and synchronic
universality of the family, an orientation which pervades cvery aspect
and period of his scholarly work. The second most influential figure

551



===== PAGE 281 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

19. British Social Anthropology

in Malinowski’s background was James Frazer, whose evolutionary
view of magic as a pragmatic instrumentality, the forerunner of science,
is a constant theme in Malinowski’s treatment of both magic and
religion.

The recent attempt by philosopher Karl Popper’s student 1. C.
Jarvie (1964) to set Frazer, the evolutionist, off against Malinowski,
the antievolutionary functionalist, has been properly rebuffed by
Leach (1965a). Jarvie displays a poverty of historicism, which is a dis-
mal science all its own, in failing to apprehend the strength of Mali-
nowski’s evolutionary interests. As Malinowski put it, “The functional
view obviously does not dispose of a sound and limited evolutionary
conception of culture, though it discourages any hope of giving an
exact reconstruction of human development” (1927b:41). Malinow-
ski’s conviction that “savage” cultures in general were inferior to
civilized cultures provides an essential clue to his long-term devotion
to “practical anthropology.” Although I shall discuss this aspect of
Malinowski’s career in a separate section, it should suffice to silence
Jarvie that as Malinowski matured, he displayed increasing permissive-
ness toward evolutionary reconstructions which were anything but
“exact.” During the Second World War, which Malinowski spent in
the United States, he wrote an effulgent pacan on “freedom.” Aside
from its frankly political commitment, the book is remarkable for its
wedding of functional theory to a universalistic variety of evolution-
ism (MALINOWSKI 1944a). Sweeping generalizations about primitive
stages and developmental sequences are tossed about with no notice-
able indications of restraint:

‘We cannot imagine the earliest beginnings of culture without at
least two social groupings, the family and the horde [ibid.:227].

Inequality in wealth, in the distribution of valuables, of privileges
and enjoyments, starts in human evolution with the first advent of
war [ibid.:194].

Only gradually there emerges a centralized authority within the
tribe, such as the council of elders . . . [ibid.:234].

The carliest ways of using wealth as power are related to magic
and religion [ibid.:247].

We can apply in all evolutionary arguments the principle of the

become the monopoly of one or a few lineages, such a culture
would have become wiped out within a few generations

[ibid.:238].

The central animus of Malinowski’s attacks on evolution concern
the use of “survivals” to reconstruct past evolutionary phases. Here,
antievolutionism and antidiffusionism were merged in a loud chorus
of protest against explanations of cultural facts without due attention
to their fullblooded, living context. Just as Radcliffe-Brown argued
that the mother’s brother/sister’s son relationship was not necessarily
a survival of a matrilineal phase, so too did Malinowski repeatedly
substitute functional interpretations for diffusionist or evolutionist
reconstructions. If you want to know the origin of a fork, he would
argue, then pay heed to the service it renders in conveying food
to the mouth. This attitude, however, reflects a concern with a
question of method rather than fact and was perfectly compatible
with evolutionary ideas. Indeed, both men seem rather to have en-
joyed the image of themselves as having remained aloof from the
fashionable disdain which the Boasians were supposed to have
conferred upon evolutionary theories. (But as we have seen, the
Boasians were, in their own intimate circle, fully convinced that
they too were not really antievolutionists.) Obviously both Malinow-
ski and RadcliffeBrown made the most of this opportunity of
distinguishing themselves from the Americans. Said Malinowski:
“Evolutionism is at present rather unfashionable. Nonetheless, its
main assumptions are not only valid, but they are also indispensable
to the field worker as well as to the student of theory” (1944b:16)
Said Radcliffe-Brown:

Back at the beginning of the century I accepted the theory of
social evolution as a useful working hypothesis. In 1931, when I
spoke of social evolution in my lectures in Chicago, one of the
students pointed out to me that “Boas and Lowie have proved
that there is no such thing as social evolution.” I found that this
was a generally accepted view in the United States. But to my
mind the arguments of Boas, Lowie, and other anti-(cultural)-
evolutionists have no bearing at all on the theory of social cvolu-
tion [1947:80].

But the fact remains that, despite their acceptance of more or less

well-defined evolutionary stages, neither Malinowski nor Radcliffe-

survival of the fittest cultural constitution. . . . Were we to imag- Brown can be credited with contributing to the development of
inc a primitive community where the making of fire, the 5‘;131’& evolutionary theory, except in the negative and critical sense in which
ing of stones, the techniques of food collecting (etc.) . . . ha the Boasians can also be said to have made such a contribution.

552

553



===== PAGE 282 =====

*‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 19. British Social Anthropology

PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN GLASS HOUSES

This brings us to the question of whether as an evolutionist,
openly admiring Spencer’s organismic scheme, in which the super-
organic is rclated to “the physical and biological environment and
the physical, emotional, and mental characteristics of social individ-
uals” (spENcEr 1896:8), Radcliffe-Brown’s disdain for Malinowski’s
more earthy functions can be taken seriously. It would scarcely seem
consistent with Radcliffe-Brown’s professed interest in adaptation
(1952b )to insist upon the irrelevance of the parameters with which
Malinowski was concerned. Indeed, Meyer Fortes, clinging to the
functionalist baby which Evans-Pritchard has almost washed out of
existence, berates the latter for not viewing man in evolutionary
perspective and adds:

When we speak of kinship, chiefship, magic, witchcraft, and so
on, we are using abstractions. But it is not true to say that their
meaning is purely symbolic. For we arrive at them by observing
the general features of human relationships and activities in ex-
ploiting the environment, in speech and in work, in bringing up
children and waging wars, in coming to intellectual and emotional
grips with the inexorable facts of birth and death. Concepts
become meaningless in social anthropology if they cannot be
related to such real activities in their full context of human social
life, the artifacts in which knowledge and skill, beliefs and aspira-
tions are given enduring form and without which mankind could
not survive [FORTES 1953a:34].

The cheapest of all the invidious comparisons between Radcliffe-
Brown and Malinowski is that Malinowski’s list of needs, insofar as
they are universals, cannot explain observed cultural differences and
similarities. (PIDDINGTON 1957:39 attempts to refute this argument.)
But this is precisely the main defect and major characteristic of
Radcliffe-Brown’s “laws.” For those of us outside the teacup, the
major difference on this score is that Malinowski more or less starts
out with his major principles as given, accessible to anyone who
wished to erect a heuristic scheme of necessary biocultural conditions
in the manner of Wissler's universal pattern. Radcliffe-Brown’s prin-
ciples, on the other hand, are much narrower and result from an
attempt to interpret specific sociocultural contrasts. But in both
instances, all that happens is that an institution gets “explained”
by a functional requirement which could just as well serve to “ex-
plain” any other institution you might care to name. It is especially

554

distressing to recall how Max Gluckman poked fun at this aspect of
Malinowski’s theories without sceming to be aware that he and the
rest of the structural-functionalists were equally vulnerable:

There is a myth among anthropologists that one of Malinowski’s
students ended a long thesis: “Our survey of the facts has forced
us to conclude that the function of leadership in primitive so-
cieties is to initiate and organize activities.” Is this much more
of: “There’s ne’cr a villain, dwelling in all Denmark but he’s an
arrant knave” than Malinowski’s . . .. “We could state that the
function of the tribe as a political unit is the organization of force
for policing, defence, and aggression . . . the function of age-
groups is the coordinating of physiological and anatomical char-
acteristics as they develop in the process of growth, and their
transformation into cultural categories. In occupational groups we
sce that the carrying out of skills, techniques, and such activities
as education, law, and power, constitute the integral function of
the group.” [GLUCKMAN 1949:24]

Cranted that this is an appropriate point at which to make fun of
Malinowski’s functionalism, is it any less appropriate with respect to
the hyphenated varicty? Consider, for example, Radcliffe-Brown’s
attempt to turn Malinowski’s explanation of magic inside-out by
stressing social rather than individual needs. For Malinowski, the
most dangerous and uncertain occasions were filled with magic, a
pragmatic attempt to cope with the reality of human means and
ends. For Radcliffe-Brown, magic and ritual in general arise out of
requirements imposed by the social system. The individual's per-
ception of what is dangerous is guided at every point by the commu-
nity (RADCLIFFE-BROWN 1952b:149). Thus if an Andaman Islander is
afraid to eat dugong during his wife’s pregnancy, it is because the
social structure has put the fear into him in order to mark the
importance of his social responsibilities toward his wife and offspring:

The primary basis of ritual . . . is the attribution of ritual value
to objects and occasions which are either themselves objects of
important common interest linking together the persons of a com-

munity or are symbolically representative of such objects
[ibid.:151].

The latitude this formula provides is surely no less than that which
Gluckman attributes to Malinowski. If the members of a commu-
nity repeatedly spend a good deal of time and effort on sacrificing
pigs, making canoe magic, or cutting off foreskins, one can be sure
that in some fashion or other thesc rituals relate to important

555



===== PAGE 283 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

common interests linking them together. Or at least it would be a
dull anthropologist who could not come up with a couple of guesses
along these lines. Incidentally, it is symptomatic of the whole interne-
cine fracas that both interpretations of magic are transparently com-
plementary rather than exclusive. In the words of George Homans:

A study of the theories of Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown illus-
trates a common feature of scientific controversies: two distin-
guished persons talking past one another rather than trying to
find a common ground for discussion, presenting their theories as
alternatives when in fact they are complements [HOMANS 1941:

172].

MALINOWSKI'S APPROACH TO
CULTURAL CHANGE

Between 1929 and 1943 Malinowski published about thirteen
articles on culture change. The ideas they embody, together with
sundry unpublished materials, were put together by Phyllis Kaberry
and brought out after Malinowski’s death as The Dynamics of Culture
Change (1945). Although the point of view adopted may have
seemed quite daring at the time of publication, in retrospect it bears
a heavy burden of conservatism, if not of unreality. The essence of
Malinowski’s theory is that Europeans and Africans are involved in a
give-and-take which must balance out through the development of
“common measures” or compromises in “tasks of common interest”
(1945:72). In order to assess the likelihood of such peaceful and
mutually beneficial adjustments, a scientific contribution which the
anthropologist is duty bound to make to colonial administrators, the
full cultural context of the African and European institutions and
alternatives must be examined. The anthropologist should accept
the task of performing this analysis, making a special effort to
withhold no facts concerning the failure of the Europeans to give as
much as they have taken from the African, without, however, suc-
cumbing “to an outburst of pro-native ranting” (ibid.:s8). Moder-
ation, compromise, and civil service decorum are the ethical bases
for the aspiring “practical anthropologist”:

The ethnographer who has studied culture contact and has
assessed its active forces, its potentialities and dangers, has the
right and duty to formulate his conclusions in a manner in which
they can be seriously considered by those who frame policies
and those who carry them out. He also has the duty to speak as
the Natives’ advocate. But he can go no further. Decisions and the
practical handling of affairs are outside his competence. His pri-

556

Y

19. British Social Anthropology

mary duty is to present facts; to develop concepts theoretically
valid and practically useful; to destroy fictions and empty phrases,
and thus to reveal the forces and factors which are relevant and
active. Through comparative study he can discover and define the
common factor of European intentions and of African response.
He can lay bare the sources of maladjustment. These, at times, he
will find are due to real intrinsic conflict of interests; at times
they arise from faulty assessment of African realities; or again,
from almost adventitious misunderstandings. . . . Knowledge
gives foresight, and foresight is indispensable to the statesman
and to the local administrator, to the educationalist, welfare
worker, and missionary alike. This discovery of long-run tenden-
cies; the capacity of foreseeing and forecasting the future in the
light of full knowledge of all the factors involved; competent
advice on specific questions—these are the tasks of the contact-
cthnographer as a practical expert [ibid.:161-62].

INCOMPETENT ADVICE

Much has happened in Africa since Malinowski’s tour in
1934. We have the benefit of hindsight. But it would scarcely seem
accidental that amid all the events which have taken place, the one
thing that has not happened is compromise. Instead, everywhere in
Africa there occurred a polarization of African nationalist versus
white settler and colonial interests, leading to decisive victories for
the Africans in west, central, and east Africa and continuing
struggle or sharp setbacks in the Portuguese and southern sectors.
The judgment of history lies heavy on those anthropologists who
believed themselves free of ethical involvement because they were
advocates of the “Native” cause before the tribunals of the European
racists while at the same time preaching moderation to the exploited
and underprivileged.

Were it constructive in this context to plunge into a discussion
of ethics, T should raise the question, never entertained by Mali-
nowski, of why the Africans who had been invaded, conquered, en-
slaved, and exploited owed the Europeans anything else in return.
The basic premise of Malinowski’s position involved him in the
assumption that the Europeans had a right to be governing the
Africans and that every future adjustment rightfully demanded that
the European intcrests be given their legal and customary due. Despite
the admonitions to the Europeans that they had better be nice to the
natives or the natives would go on misbehaving, there is a sancti-
monious note in Malinowski’s theory which helps to explain why
anthropology is still a dirty word among many African nationalists:

557



===== PAGE 284 =====

R

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

19. British Social Anthropology

I suggest that first and foremost it would be well to unify, coordi-
nate, and harmonize various policies. For we have already noted
the considerable discrepancy between the enthusiasm of good-will
and educational zcal, and the existence of the color bar; between
the requirements of the scttler and the activities of the agricul-
tural department, which may develop economic ambitions be-
yond the legitimate scope of their realization. Whenever
Europeans plan the settlement of large portions of any colony,
segregation and color bar become inevitable. This ought to be
remembered by the enthusiastic minority of good-will, who may
involuntarily raise high hopes through such doctrines as the
Brotherhood of Man, the Gospel of Labor, and the possibilities
of assimilation through education, dress, manners, and morals. If,
from the outset, it were possible to make quite clear in preaching
the gospel of civilization that no full identity can ever be reached;
that what are being given to the Africans are new conditions of
existence, better adapted to their needs but always in harmony
with European requirements, the smaller would be the chances of
a strong reaction and the formation of new, potentially dangerous
nationalisms [ibid.:160].

A LARGE GRAIN OF DISMAL TRUTH

Perhaps Kroeber’s (p. 331) reaction to Gregg and Williams’
link-up of functionalism with a conservative political position was just
a little too self-righteous. It was, after all, Malinowski himself who said
in a context different but not altogether remote from colonialism:
“Functional anthropology is thus an essentially conservative science”
(1930a:168). Ironically enough, Malinowski’s basic errors, with re-
spect to a theory of change, reflect his lingering Frazerian evolutionist
biases. I would say that he never quite achieved the ability to dis-
tinguish between the native as a primitive, and the “Native,” as an
actor-type in a definite Euro-American colonial order. We suffer from
the lack of this distinction even in the Trobriand monographs. Failure
to make it in Africa can lead to disastrous mistakes. We have, at any
rate, a clearcut statement from the very beginning of Malinowski’s
involvement in practical anthropology which it is very difficult to
shrug off:

The practical value of such a theory (functionalism) is that it
teaches us the relative importance of various customs, how they
dovetail into each other, how they have to be handled by mission-
aries, colonial authorities, and those who economically have to
exploit savage trade and savage labor [MALINOWSKI 1927b:40-41].

558

INABILITY TO EXPLAIN CHANGE

But it is not the ethic of one form or another of political
collaboration which constitutes the main subject matter of this
book. Here we must inquire instead into the adequacy of the theory
of cultural change which Malinowski had sought to erect on the
unlikely basis of his previous synchronic functionalist principles. It
must be admitted that at one point Malinowski appears to be on
the verge of proposing an interesting and truly dynamic theory of
culture change. Invoking his own ethnic background, he contrasts
the experience of Polish Americans and Africans in the following
terms:

Successful culture change in Africa demands enormous expendi-
ture. For it is onc of the soundest and most important principles
of social science that people are prepared to pass only from worse
to better. Only such change is encompassed without much friction
and with relative rapidity. This of course is the reason why the na-
tional minorities in the United States changed culturally with
comparatively amazing ease, with little resistance, and with a
rapidity incredible to a European brought up as one of a minority.
.. . The main reason for this, though there are also others, is
that in the United States they are offered all along the line sub-
stantial economic, political, and social advantages, which was by
no means the case under Russian or Prussian rule [MALINOWSKI

1945:56].

This being the case, it then would seem a prime requisite of any
theory of cultural change applicable to Africa to assess the probability
that substantial economic, political, and social advantages were about
“to be offered” to the Africans. Or if one is more ambitious, to
inquire, what in general arc the conditions under which such offers
are likely to be made? Or, even more to the point, under what
conditions have colonial peoples or other minority groups sat around

for tens or even hundreds of years waiting for advantages which
never came?

MAX GLUCKMAN'S CRITIQUE

It is in large measure because Malinowski could not shake
loose from the functionalist emphasis upon equilibrium that his
theory ncver gets off the ground. His system of cultural instru-
mentalities can only explain how tensions and conflicts are reduced

559



===== PAGE 285 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

or climinated, never why or how they originate or why or how they
intensify. Thus, instcad of producing a theory of change, all he suc-
ceeded in doing was to enlarge upon a theory of no-change. Events
in Africa have since rendered his analysis superfluous, since the
situation for which it was intended no longer exists.

I find myself in complete agreement, therefore, with Max Gluck-
man’s appraisal of Malinowski’s attempt at a theory of change.

This is a bad book. . . . His “theory” does not bear examination
from any point of view. It is analytically sterile, and it ends in the
worst kind of practical anthropology: welfare work without moral-
ity, based on naive oversimplification . . . [1949:21].

Morcover, Gluckman’s perception of the source of so much of
what is wrong with this in part at least corresponds to my own:
“He cannot admit ‘conflict’ into his frame of integrated institutions;
that is, conflict as an inherent attribute of social organization” (ibid.:
8). But the ironical rub in this fierce criticism is that Gluckman’s
ability to handle conflict is not that different from Malinowski’s.
Although Gluckman and other social anthropologists have written
extensively of the matter of conflict, and unresolved tension, they
have done so only within the framework of their Durkheimian heri-
tage, in terms of how, despite such conflict, social solidarity is main-
tained. Gluckman, for example, has expended his main theoretical
thrust in attempting to show how conflicts are a normal (even
“healthy”) part of social life not at all incompatible with the main-
tenance of social order. This is because “conflicts in one set of
relationships, over a wider range of society or through a longer period
of time, lead to the re-establishment of social cohesion” (GLuckmMAN
1963:2). Feuds, hostility to chiefs, estrangements within the family,
witchcraft, and even South African apartheid are all grist for his mill.
This is not to say that Gluckman is unaware of structure-breaking
conflict, but rather that he is unprepared to deal with it through a
theory of sociocultural change. We are much in debt to Gluckman
for his honesty on this point. Still referring to The Dynamics of
Cultural Change, he comments:

It is also a humbling book. For if, on the positive side, Mali-
nowski’s thesis remains descriptive, no social anthropologist has
yet put forward an alternative. The Marxists have a theorctical
framework. Among ourselves the Wilsons have tried to formulate
one. But we have still to establish a right to maintain that we are
more than good recorders of contemporary events [ibid.:21].

With this much admitted, the remarks of one of the very few frankly
Marxist British anthropologists deserve special emphasis:

560

i o

19. British Social Anthropology

Malinowski’s basic sociological heritage like that of Radcliffe-
Brown, derived from Durkheim in whose writing conflict was
primarily treated as a form of social pathology, and where atten-
tion was focussed on the normative and integrative elements in so-
cial life. The problem of order was considered to be logically
prior to the problem of change. . . . Neither showed much in-
terest in structural change [WORSELEY 1961:28].

I hasten to express my agreement with Firth (1964), an agreement
which incidentally is shared by Worsley to judge from his treatment
of cargo cults (1957), that an adequate theory of sociocultural
change cannot confine itself to considerations of overt and irreconcil-
able conflict. Even in orthodox Marxism, class struggle is after all
relevant only to the evolution of class-structured society. An anthro-
pological theory of sociocultural change obviously must include more
subtle and covert selective mechanisms, and these must be admitted
as having their effect at the state as well as the pre-state level. But
there is surely a monument to the power of culture that will long
endure in Malinowski’s attempt to analyze colonialism as if the
Furopeans and Africans were about to become part of one big
happy Kula ring.

GLUCKMAN DID NOT GET TO THE
HEART OF THE MATTER

It does not seem to me to get at the heart of the matter to
stress Malinowski’s difficulties with deepening and irreconcilable con-
flict situations at the state level. Even if the functionalists of either
variety had somehow made over their schemes to accept conflict as an
important engine of change, there would yet remain a profound
impotence with respect to the explanation of cultural differences and
similarities in terms of lawful diachronic-synchronic principles. As I
have already indicated, the main defect of both kinds of functionalism
is the attempt to interpret differences and similarities in terms of
constants. In the case of Radcliffe-Brown, the issue of whether one
part of the system is causally more significant than the others was
given an illusory solution by relating everything to social structure. It
is Radcliffe-Brown’s failure to inquire systematically into the causal
relationship between techno-environmental adaptation, productive and
distributive arrangements, and social structure, which should most
disturb my own generation of anthropologists. In Malinowski’s case,
however, given the vastly expanded notion of function with which
he operated, the failure to give special weight to techno-economic

561

1



===== PAGE 286 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

functions is not a case of omission, but a result of deep commitments
to anti-economic determinist dogma. In the chapter which follows,
I describe Malinowski’s strong attachment to the emic option in
the context of the development of the linguistic model, and the
“New Ethnography.” Some advance reference to this matter is re-
quired at this juncture.

ATTACK AGAINST CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

Only by considering Malinowski’s treatment of techno-eco-
nomic factors in connection with the emic/etic distinction can we
appreciate the extent to which his theories participated in and con-
tributed to the downgrading or obstruction of techno-environmental
and techno-ecconomic research options. Superficially it would seem
that no subject was of greater import to Malinowski than that of
primitive economics. Nutrition and reproduction topped his list of
needs, and in all of his work there appears to be an intense concern
for all manner of mundane detail. His first Trobriand monograph,
The Argonauts, was largely devoted to a description of the Kula
ring and contained a Preface by Frazer in which Malinowski was
congratulated for his emphasis upon economics:

Little reflection is needed to convince us of the fundamental im-
portance of economic forces at all stages of man’s career from the
humblest to the highest. After all, the human species is part of
the animal creation, and as such, like the rest of the animals, it
reposes on a material foundation; on which a higher life, intellec-
tual, moral, social, may be built, but without which no such
superstructure is possible. That material foundation, consisting in
the necessity of food and of a certain degree of warmth and
shelter from the elements, forms the economic or industrial
basis and prime condition of human life. If anthropologists have
hitherto unduly neglected it, we may suppose that it was rather
because they were attracted to the higher side of man’s nature
than because they deliberately ignored and under-valued the im-
portance and indeed neccssity of the lower . . . Be that as it
may, Dr. Malinowski has done well to emphasise the great sig-
nificance of primitive economics by singling out the notable ex-
change system of the Trobriand Islanders for special consideration
[FRAZER 1922:viii].

As Frazer goes on he becomes even more enthusiastic, for Dr. Mali-
nowski has not confined himself merely to the surface phenomena

562

f

19. British Social Anthropology

but at every point has searched out the full complexity of human
nature and found the “motives and feelings,” the “emotional as
well as rational basis” of Trobriand life.

But there is a great muddle in all this. If there is any single theme
pervading The Argonauts, it is precisely that the motives and feelings
which arise from noneconomic needs dominate the whole Kula
enterprise. The fact of the matter is that Malinowski deliberately
refrained from carrying out a genuine economic study of the pro-
ductive and distributive system of the Trobriand Islands because
his ethnographic orientation was overwhelmingly opposed to any
such option. Malinowski himself is my authority for this statement,
for he was perfectly aware of what he was doing and of how his
monographs would have looked had he really been concerned to
examine the “material foundation” of Trobriand culture.

The Kula, that splendid example of commerce inscrutable in its
risk of life on long sea voyages all for the sake of a few spondylus and
Conus millepunctatus shells, is to the functionalists what potlatch
is to the Boasians. But economic analysis is properly a matter of a
system of production and distribution: of energy, of time and labor
in-put, of the transformation, transportation, mechanical and chemi-
cal interplay between a human population and their habitat and of
the distribution of the products of this interaction in terms of
energy, especially food energy, and the mechanical and biological
apparata upon which all these processes depend. Malinowski treats
us instead to a vastly elaborate account of the ritual aspects of the
preparations for open-sea expeditions in which the subjective moti-
vations of the actors in terms of prestige and magical aspirations
dominate every aspect of the ethnography. We learn only incidentally,
never in detail, that the whimsical voyagers circulate not only arm
bands and necklaces but coconuts, sago, fish, vegetables, baskets, mats,
sword clubs, green stone (formerly essential for tools), mussel shells
(for knives), and creepers (essential for lashings). Malinowski’s
explanation is as follows:

Both the canoe-building and the ordinary trade have been spoken
of as secondary or subsidiary to the Kula proper. This requires a
comment. I do not, by thus subordinating the two things in im-
portance to the Kula, mean to express a philosophical reflection
or a personal opinion as to the relative value of these pursuits
from the point of view of some social teleology. Indeed, it is
clear that if we look at the acts from the outside, as comparative
sociologists, and gauge their real utility, trade and canoe-building
will appear to us as the really important achievements, whereas

563

|
1
}
|


===== PAGE 287 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

we shall regard the Kula only as an indirect stimulus, impelling
the natives to sail and to trade. Here, however, I am not dealing
in sociological, but in pure ethnographical description, and any
sociological analysis T have given is only what has been absolutely
indispensable to clear away misconceptions and to define terms
[1961:100; orig. 1922].

In this passage, “ethnographic” and “sociological” correspond to
emic and etic, respectively. The result of Malinowski’s option is to
submerge the entire issue of the significance of the techno-economic
subsystem in an irrelevant and obscurantist context. For we next find
that the opposite strategy of giving priority to the techno-economic
factors is attacked on the very grounds which an etic approach to
sociocultural systems is designed to overcome. We are thrown back
upon the ethnosemantic categories and subjective psychological ap-
praisals and reactions of the actors, who constitute those elements
in the whole array least capable of comprehending the sociocultural
system to which they have been conditioned. We are henceforth
denied a picture of the whole system as it moves through time,
related to an island habitat, rich in ecological specialties, fluctuating
in population, variable in annual production, precarious for human
existence during droughts, typhoons, and war, and progressively
subject to European blackbirding, pearl diving, and copra trading.

A TATTERED SCARECROW

In his South Sea Island paradise, experienced through the
eyes, minds, and ears of the “native,” Malinowski attempted to con-
front Marx in much the same way as he had confronted Freud. But
the paradox is evident: emics are essential for psychoanalytical com-
ment; they in no way prepare one to come to grips with the issues
raised by Marx. Thus we see Malinowski’s Trobriand material falling
into place among the long line of anthropological attacks against the
scarecrow called “economic man.” The economic determinists, so the
refrain goes, treat man as motivated by purely rationalistic calcula-
tions of self-interest. But ethnology shows that even the savage has
his ideals, his values, his occasions of self-sacrifice, and his postpone-
ment of gratification. Therefore, the priority given by some to the
economic factors in history is patently false.

All of The Argonauts is in fact harnessed to this non sequitur.
Throughout the book there are numerous outbursts concerning

564

v

19. British Social Anthropology

“economic man,” any one of which would serve to make the point.
But it is in the concluding chapter, during the discussion of “The
Meaning of the Kula” that the climax is reached:

At one or two places in the previous chapters, a somewhat de-
tailed digression was made in order to criticise the view about the
economic nature of primitive man, as it survives in our mental
habits as well as in some text books—the conception of a rational
being who wants nothing but to satisfy his simplest needs and
does it according to the economic principle of least effort. This
economic man always knows exactly where his material interests
lie, and makes for them in a straight line. At the bottom of the
so-called materidlistic conception of history lies a somewhat
analogous idea of a human being, who, in everything he devised
and pursues, has nothing but his material advantage of a purely
utilitarian type at heart. Now I hope that whatever the meaning of
the Kula might be for Ethnology, for the general science of cul-
ture, the meaning of the Kula will consist in being instrumental
to dispell such crude, rationalistic conceptions of primitive man-
kind, and to induce both the speculator and the observer to
deepen the analysis of economic facts [1922:316, italics added].

SO-CALLED MATERIALISTIC
CONCEPTION OF HISTORY

No informed critic of the historical-materialist position could
confuse the utilitarian doctrines of classical economic theory with
the research strategy associated with Marx. For what is more con-
spicuous in Marx’s analysis of capitalism than that millions of people
spend their lives making choices and upholding values which are
not only “irrational,” but positively contradictory to their own “en-
lightened sclf-interest”? The promise of the research strategy which
lies buried under the political debris churned up by the clash of
capitalism and communism is that these irrational ingredients are
nonetheless “functional” features of the particular sociocultural sys-
tems in which they are found.

Whether this means that they are rational in terms of the actors’
short- or long-run “goals” (whatever these are) is a philosophical issue
into which we need not venture. What is vital to a science of
culture is that an attempt be made to relate such apparently in-
scrutable phenomena to the basic techno-economic arrangements by
which the total sociocultural system interacts with its natural and
cultural habitat. Historical materialism as proposed by Marx did not

565



===== PAGE 288 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

consist of attempts to explain particular sociocultural systems by
reference to individual economic motivations. Nothing could be
more contrary to Marx's position. He rather sought to explain the
peculiar conditioned forms of a group’s collective and individual
economic behavior in terms of an adaptive evolutionary sequence. In
a modern anthropological formulation, it is the techno-environmental
and techno-economic conditions in which the human population
finds itself which demand priority of analysis because there exists
overwhelming evidence that these are the parts of the total socio-
cultural system which in the long run and in most cases swing social
structure and ideology into functional conformity.

To take another example from Malinowski: The Trobrianders, like
many other Melanesian groups, apparently produce a temporary
surplus of yams which they display at harvest time on special racks.
Malinowski reached the conclusion that the prestige derived from
the display of this surplus is an adequate account of why it occurs.
Many other anthropologists have emphasized how in Melanesian
villages yams devoured in gluttonous feasts or left to rot in con-
spicuous displays demonstrate that prestige motives will lead people
to produce more than they “need.” As in the case of the potlatch
and the anti-economic food taboos associated with the mismanage-
ment of animal foods (see Chap. 11), the bias against etic interpre-
tations has been overwhelming. In Malinowski’s ethnography,
failure to consider the possibility of a relationship between “over-
production” of yams and certain basic features of the techno-environ-
mental equation, brings to mind his weakness for sensational titles
and his penchant for titillating oddments. It was perhaps important
for Malinowski’s presentation of the Trobrianders as freely fornicating
noble savages (cf. LEACH 1965a:35) that they live in a world of
tropical abundance in which the other basic necessities were also
rather easily taken care of. We learn only in passing and in a separate
context that the Trobrianders not infrequently confront years of
disastrous drought-induced famines (MALINOWSKI 1935:160-61; cf.
HARRIS 1959a:192). But this is enough to raise certain lively alterna-
tives to the prestige interpretations of the rotting yams. Might not
these seemingly superfluous foodstuffs actually represent the innocu-
ous side effect of an adaptive relationship between Trobriand labor
in-put and the conditions of the Trobriand habitat? The extra effort
annually expended to produce a superabundant crop of yams, some
of which will rot in times of abundant rainfall, might be just enough
to ward off starvation in years of scanty rainfall.

566

British Social Anthropology

At any rate, no value system which induces heavy labor in-puts
by pinning “medals” on its Stakhanovite producers can be regarded
as totally anti-economic. It would have been a real coup for the
camp of the antideterminists and culture-by-whimsy school if Mali-
nowski had discovered the Trobriand Ppracticing a custom whereby,

among the commoners, the man who produced the least number of
yams had the biggest house and the most wives.

567



===== PAGE 289 =====

Emics, Etics, and the

New Ethnography 20

S
5000

At mid-century there arose within cultural anthropology a movement
dedicated to the improvement of standards of ethnographic de-
scriptions and analysis, having as its source and inspixation“ the
techniques of linguistics. This movement, for which the name The
New Ethnography” has been proposed (STURTEVANT 1964), origi-
nated at Yale and has spread rapidly throughout the United States.
Known variously as “ethnolinguistics,” “ethnoscience,” or “ethnose-
mantics,” its manifest appeal lies in its promise to achieve the
precise and highly operationalized paradigmatic renderings of 'Cll]tl'llétl
phenomena which have come to be associated with the linguist’s
descriptions of phonology and grammar. Its covert appeal, however,
is that it carries forward the tradition of cultural idealism in anthro-
pology while supplying that tradition with impressive new scien-
tific credentials. These credentials are fully merited within certain
domains and under certain restrictions which I will shortly attempt to
specify. In larger perspective, however, the movement suffers from
the accumulated liabilities of the past two hundred years of cultural-
idealist thought.

568

. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

As we have seen, a convergent, if operationally unsound, movement,
based on the linguistic model, has arisen in France under the leader-
ship of Lévi-Strauss. The primary aim of the present chapter is to
show that the convergence toward the strategy embodied in the new
ethnography derives from an epistemological outlook widely held
among contemporary social scientists of many different theoretical
persuasions. Despite its unique attachment to explicitly linguistic
paradigms, there are certain epistemological assumptions, of ques-
tionable value, which link the new ethnography with schools as
diverse as the Boasians, Culture and Personality, French Structuralism,
and both varieties of British functionalists. In order to demonstrate
this convergence and in order to locate the new ethnography in
relationship to the “old ethnography,” we are obliged to undertake a
discussion of the difference between emic and etic research options.

Recourse to the emic/etic dichotomy, reference to which has
been made at several points throughout the preceding chapters, is
imperative if we seek to identify the prospects of cultural ma-
terialism within the context of modern social science. The concepts
of emics and etics provide an epistemological and operational basis
for distinguishing between cultural idealism and cultural materialism
in an age dedicated to eclectic middle-ground theories. In order to
evaluate the historical significance of these eclectic preferences, cer-
tain epistemological issues must be confronted, at the deepest level
of research design, rather than at the level of sociocultural hypotheses
and theories. We have already pointed to the need for this confronta-
tion in discussing the way in which techno-economic and techno-
environmental data have been “emicized” on behalf of the disproof of
economic-determinist theories. A similar “emicization” of social
structural phenomena is also common. In order for there to be a
fair test of the cultural-materialist strategy, the predominantly emic
corpus of extant ethnography must be supplemented by etic descrip-
tions.

PIKE'S DEFINITIONS

The terms themselves were coined by the missionary linguist
Kenneth Pike (1954:8) on analogy with the “emic” in phonemic and
the “etic” in phonetic. In conformity with this analogy, Pike stressed
“the structural results” obtained by phonemic analysis as opposed to
the “nonstructural” results characteristic of phonetics. From a lin-
guistic point of view, etic analyses cannot achieve structural results,

569

o ————


===== PAGE 290 =====

v

The Risc of Anthropological Theory 20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

since a purely etic system of sound differences is inconceivable. With
all deference to the linguistic origin of the dichotomy, a nonlinguist
must object to Pike’s extrapolation of the correlation between etics
and nonstructural results to nonverbal behavior. What does “structure”
mean in this context? To avoid tautology, it must be taken as suggest-
ing something like the “order in an orderly arrangement.” Structure is
the order in a system. The pairing of structural results with emics
and nonstructural results with etics accords with the history of lin-
guistics. But there is no reason to suppose that this equation must
hold for nonlinguistic phenomena. There are structures in an atom,
a molecule, a cell, and an organism, the description of none of
which depends upon emic operations. Why should we not also as-
sume that there are sociocultural systems whose structure can be
exposed independently of procedures modeled after phonemic analy-
sis? Pike’s failure to make provision for this alternative was rooted
deeply in religious convictions which cannot be ignored if one
wishes to understand his meaning (PIKE 1962). Tt is of course
possible to utilize etic categories which will not contribute to an
understanding of sociocultural systems. But many phonological analy-
ses, because of poor technique, also end up with partial or spurious
structures.

In further defining the consequences of the two approaches, Pike
elaborates a theme which he considers to be secondary, but which
assumes primary importance as soon as we disregard the gratuitous
equivalence between emics and structure. Outlining the operations
for the identification of nonverbal emic units (behavioremes), he
makes it clear that emic structure must correspond to the actor’s
“purpose” during the observed performance. That is, an emic de-
scription must be related to a set of logico-empirical procedures by
which the actor’s meaning and purpose is made known: “In spite of
the problems which are involved, it is absolutely essential if one is
to study behavior as it actually functions, that onc assume that the
analyst can detect the presence and to some degree the nature and
meaning of purpose” [PIKE 1954:80] The behavioreme itself is partially
defined as “an emic segment or component of purposive human ac-
tivity” (ibid.:57). Moreover, the same definitional ingredient is para-
mount in an extensive quote from Edward Sapir (1927) who is re-
garded by Pike as having anticipated the distinction at issue:

It is impossible to say what an individual is doing unless we
have tacitly accepted the essentially arbitrary modes of interpre-
tation that social tradition is constantly suggesting to us from
the very moment of our birth. Let anyone who doubts this try the

570

experiment of making a painstaking report (i.e. an etic one) of the
actions of a group of natives engaged in some activity, say re-
ligious, to which he has not the cultural key (i.c. a know]edée of
the emic system). If he is a skillful writer, he may succeed in giv-
ing a picturesque account of what he sces and hears, or thinks he
sees and hears, but the chances of his being able to give a relation
of what happens, in terms that would be intelligible and accept-
able to the natives themselves, are practically nil. He will be
guilty of all manncr of distortion; his emphasis will be constantly
askew. He will find interesting what the natives take for granted
as a casual kind of behavior worthy of no particular comment,
and he will utterly fail to observe the crucial turning points in the
course of action that give formal significance to the whole in the
minds of those who.do possess the key to its understanding
[quoted in PIKE 1954:9-10].

It is the “formal significance” in the “minds” of the actors which
needs to be stressed. The “created” significances of etic descriptions
are not dependent upon the subjective “meanings” and “purposes”
of the actors. Emic distinctions, on the other hand, require one to
enter the world of purpose, meaning, and attitudes. Emic study
“helps one to appreciate not only the culture or language as an
ordered whole, but it helps one to understand the individual actors
in such a life-drama—their attitudes, motives, interests, responses,
conflicts, and personality development” (ibid.:11).

DEFINITION OF EMIC

In keeping with the broader uses to which the emic/etic
distinction has been put and in the tradition which ties Pike to Sapir,
I propose the following definition:

Emic statements refer to logico-empirical systems whose phenome-
nal distinctions or “things” arc built up out of contrasts and discrimi-
nations significant, meaningful, real, accurate, or in some other fashion
regarded as appropriate by the actors themselves. An emic state-
ment can be falsified if it can be shown that it contradicts the cogni-
tive calculus by which relevant actors judge that entities are similar or

different, real, meaningful, significant, or in some other sense “appro-
priate” or “acceptable.”

EMICS AND PREDICTABILITY

o At least two prominent advocates of the emic approach have
insisted upon establishing unusual and, to my view, unacceptable

571



===== PAGE 291 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

criteria for verifying the truth content of emic statements. According
to Charles Frake (1964a:112):

. an ethnography should be a theory of cultural behavior in a
particular society, the adequacy of which is to be evaluated by the
ability of a stranger to the culture (who may be the ethnographer)
to use the ethnography’s statements as instructions for appropri-
ately anticipating the scenes of the society. I say “appropriately
anticipate” rather than “predict” because a failure of an ethno-
graphic statement to predict correctly does not necessarily imply
descriptive inadequacy as long as the members of the described
society are as surprised by the failure as is the ethnographer. The
test of descriptive adequacy must always refer to informants’ in-
terpretations of events, not simply to the occurrence of events.

A similar position is adopted by Harold Conklin (1964:26) who also
specifies “appropriate anticipation” rather than prediction. Since no
attention has been devoted to the question of how to proceed with
this operation, it cannot be taken at once both literally and seriously.

THE NATIVE'S POINT OF VIEW

The unsatisfactory formulation of emic predictability (to
which of course not all ethnosemanticists would subscribe) need
not deter us from sctting rather clear-cut limits to the logico-empiri-
cal domains embraced by emic studies. It is convenient to begin by
demarcating two broad, overlapping subfields: The first is concerned
with semantic and communication phenomena; the second, with
inner psychological states and feelings. All phonological, grammatical,
and semantic analyses carried out by linguists and ethnographers
constitute emically oriented studies. Regardless of how one chooses
to define phonemes, the range of sounds involved must produce
systematic sound contrasts which are significant to the native speaker.
Similarly, in stating the rules by which grammatical utterances are
generated in a specific language, the “test of adequacy” is the native
speaker’s intuitive knowledge of the grammaticality of the sample
utterances generated according to such rules.

It is a fundamental premise of linguistic analysis that the phone-
mic system or the grammatical rules need not correspond to the
analysis which the native speaker is usually capable of performing.
Indeed, the mnative specaker may emphatically reject the linguist’s
analysis. That analysis does not therefore cease to be the product of
logico-empirical operations in which emic distinctions provide the

572

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

basis for subsequent logical manipulation as well as for the ultimate
tests of logico-empirical adequacy.

“Componential analysis,” an analytic procedure first employed by
Ward Goodenough (1956), fits in here as an activity devoted to
the formulation of the rules by which semantic domains are logico-
empirically ordered. As in the case of phonemic and syntactic rules,
the componential formula need not (one can say, probably never
will) correspond to the rules which the native is capable of €express-
ing. Goodenough’s componential definition of an American’s
grandmother’s second husband goes something like this: a kinsman at
less than two degrees collateral distance; at two units of genealogical
distance; in lineal relationship; in a senior generation; of male sex;
in the presence of a marital tie; senior party involved, senior party
being the first person in the particular relationship to become known
to the junior party (1965a:279). Goodenough appears unconcerned
by the possibility that some natives might not share his convictions
concerning the adequacy of the definition. (Actually, few Americans
can confirm or deny Goodenough'’s analysis from personal experience. )

One test of the adequacy of this account, I have said, is that it
not do violence to my own feel, as informant, for the structure
of what is described. This is the subjective test of adequacy. An
equally important test is that it provide an alien with the knowl-
edge he needs to use my kinship terminology in a way I will ac-
cept as corresponding with the way I use it. This is the objective

test of adequacy. An account is deficient to the extent that it fails
the test [ibid.:261].

OTHER COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

Another kind of ethnography which should be explicitly
associated with the emic point of view is that which Ray Birdwhistell
(}1952) has called “kinesics,” the study of the communication func-
tions of body motions. At least some of the body motions of
interest to Birdwhistell link up with the earlier field of gesture study
and clearly constitute emic entities insofar as they involve the state-
ment of the rules of a public communication system. The study of
other body motions, such as the particular walking gait or sitting
slump of a psychiatric patient, cuts across the second large category
of emically oriented research shortly to be discussed and is not so
easily classified.

It seems obvious that whenever we deal with phenomena that are

573

i



===== PAGE 292 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

part of a communication system, and that when our research program
calls for “cracking” the code which the native communicators em-
ploy, then that program incorporates the strategy of emic studies. In
this enterprise it is of no epistemological importance that the native
users of the system know how to formulate the rules of the code.
Humans share with other organisms the ability to communicate
information without being able to say just how the communication
task gets done. This is a most interesting psychological fact, but it does
not alter the emic nature of the phenomena under consideration.

INNER PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES

The second great domain of emic studies is concerned with
the analysis of the behavior stream in terms of the intentions,
purposes, motives, goals, attitudes, thoughts, and feelings of the
culture carriers. Benjamin Colby (1966:3) has explicitly linked these
phenomena with formal semantics by making them the object of
“ethnographic semantics.” “The ultimate goal is the understanding
of the evaluations, emotions, and beliefs that lie behind word usage.”
Although not touched upon by Colby—he specifically rejects the
suggestion that Morris Opler and Ruth Benedict are relevant (ibid.:
28)—this is a universe regularly studied by psychologists as well as
by social scientists.

Two traditions within psychology diverge with respect to the treat-
ment of these phenomena. The division corresponds roughly to
the emic/etic distinction in the social sciences. On the one hand
there is the approach which emphasizes the validity of introspective
descriptions and verbal reports of inner psychological states. On the
other, there is the approach, represented by the major neobehaviorist
learning theory schools, which systematically avoids dependence upon
states or dispositions which cannot be defined by means of opera-
tions performed on the external parts and conditions of the be-
having organism.

In ethnography, an emic approach to purposes, goals, motivations,
attitudes, etc., is premised on the assumption that between the
actor and the observer, it is the actor who is better able to know his
own inner state. Furthermore, it is assumed that access to informa-
tion concerning the actor’s inner state is essential for an under-
standing of his behavior and for a proper description of the behavior-
stream events in which he participates. In most cases, this assumption
is quite overt, and the postulation of the existence of inner states
is carried out on such a lavish scale that there is no danger of mis-

574

Y—‘

20. Emics, Ftics, and the New Ethnography

taking the emic nature of the research. This is certainly true whenever
the ethnographer takes the familiar Boasian position that if only he
had been brought up as a member of X tribe then his descriptions of
purposes, goals, motives, etc., would be so much richer by virtue of
being able to think and feel like a member of that tribe.

CONFOUNDING THE EMIC/ETIC
DISTINCTION

There are certain options which in their most subtle form
defeat the emic/etic distinction. Thus it is a commonplace of
psychoanalytical research and practice that the actor is regarded as
a poor observer of his own inner state. The analyst’s task is to pene-
trate behind the facades, symbols, and other defenses to the uncon-
scious feelings and thoughts of which the actor is unaware. This much
is etic: the analyst’s statements are not falsified even if it is shown
that the contrasts which he draws are not significant, meaningful,
real, or appropriate from the point of view of the actor. On the
other hand, there also secems to be an assumption that if the actor
accepts the analyst’s description as corresponding to his own “true”
inner state, then verification has occurred. To that extent, psycho-
analytic descriptions are emic. But it should be noted that this
apparent defeat of the emic/ctic distinction suffers a penalty in the
form of a low standard of verifiability and a dubious empirical status.
This penalty is always suffered by those who indiscriminately shift
back and forth from emic to etic strategies.

DEFINITION OF ETICS

Let us now turn to a provisional definition of etics. Etic
statements depend upon phenomenal distinctions judged appropriate
by the community of scientific observers. Etic statements cannot
be falsified if they do not conform to the actor’s notion of what is
significant, rcal, meaningful, or appropriate. Ftic statements are veri-
fied when independent observers using similar operations agree that
a given event has occurred. An ethnography carried out according
to etic principles is thus a corpus of predictions about the behavior
of classes of people. Predictive failures in that corpus require the
reformulation of the probabilities or the description as a whole.

The definitions set forth here will be best clarified by viewing them
in the context of some of the major misconceptions which have at-
tached themselves to the emic/etic distinction.

575



===== PAGE 293 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

EMICS NOT NECESSARILY LESS
EMPIRICAL THAN ETICS

In theory, an emic ethnography need be neither more nor
less empirical, scientific, or intersubjective than an etic ethnography.
Historically, of course, emic imponderables have been more prevalent
than etic ones, if for no other reason than that almost all traditional
ethnography is heavily biased in favor of an emic approach. There is
no reason, however, why emic statements cannot be operationalized
to the point of achieving high standards of intersubjectivity, verifia-
bility, and predictability. Presumably, it is the upgrading of such
standards which animates the current concern with rigorous paradig-
matic treatments of emic phenomena.

INFORMANTS MAY SUPPLY EMIC OR
ETIC INFORMATION

The relationship between an etic perspective and the tradi-
tional dependency upon native informants for ethnographic infor-
mation deserves special comment. An ethnography of etic statements
is not incompatible with operations involving recourse to the informa-
tion to which an informant has access by means of verbal exchanges
with him. The critical issue here is whether the information in
question is etic or emic information. It is emic if the informant’s
native distinctions, significances, and meanings provide the semantic
ground for communication between him and the ethnographer. An
example of the use of an informant to maximize the emic content of
ethnography is Duane Metzger and Gerald Williams™ (1963a; 1963b)
“eliciting heuristic.” This method involves a prolonged educational
exposure during which the ethnographer teaches the informant how
to teach the ethnographer to think in appropriate emic terms. An
equivalent amount of effort can be (and often is) devoted to teach-
ing the informant to think in the ethnographer’s terms, as for
example, when native assistants learn to measure fields, weigh har-
vests, take censuses, and describe past and present events in con-
formity with the categories of significance which the ethnographer
has brought to the task. When an informant is used etically, he joins
the community of observers. He becomes the ethnographer’s as-
sistant, part of a team which can produce more information in less
time than one man working alone. If the behavior-stream events
which he reports are scenes in which he himself is involved, then it

576

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

is expected that his report of his own behavior will be as close as
possible to that which would have been obtained had the scene been
recorded on film and tape.

EMICS CANNOT BE TRANSMUTED INTO
ETICS

One of the categories of etic, “nonstructural” classifications
foreseen by Pike allows for a mixture of emic and etic operations:

The units of behavior, though classified without reference as such
to the individual systems from which they were abstracted, may
nevertheless be classified in reference to the fact that they were in
fact abstracted from purposive human behavior, so that elements
of meaning or purpose constitute one of the sets of criteria for
such etic classification [1954:9].

This type of etic description is an anomaly for which there can be
no epistemological justification. By admitting units which are simul-
taneously emic and etic, we reduce the distinction to the “anemic”
status assigned to it by Gerald Berreman (1966).

It is this misconception which led Sturtevant (1964) to make
the historically misleading claim that Kroeber's 1gog treatment of
the semantic dimensions of kinship was “the basic paper on the etics
of kinship.” But as we have seen, (p. 321ff.), the whole point of Kroe-
ber’s famous article was to replace Morgan’s sociological treatment
of kinship with a linguistic treatment. The eight “principles or
categories of relationship” proposed by Kroeber are categories alleged
to underly “the hundreds or thousands of slightly varying relation-
ships that are or can be expressed by the various languages of man”
(KROEBER 1952:176). If a semantic distinction is found in more than
one culture this does not mean that such distinctions cease to be
semantic in nature. Concepts such as filiation, agnation, territoriality,
9wnership, affinity, religion, unilineal descent group, etc., are applied
in a wide variety of cross-cultural contexts. The test of whether these
are ctic or emic concepts resides in their logico-empirical relationship
to cognitive processes. If the verifiability of an ethnographic state-
ment involves a confrontation with cognitive adequacy or appropri-
ateness, then we are dealing with emic categories, no matter how
many cultures contribute to that confrontation. Identification of
similar emic categories merely establishes such categories as cross-
culturally valid logico-empirical abstractions; it does not transform
them into etically derived phenomena. As we have seen, the data

577



===== PAGE 294 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

language of cultural and social anthropologists derives from a melange
of emic and etic operations which it will undoubtedly take several
generations to unscramble.

KINSHIP AS A MIXED DOMAIN

The domain of kinship has not escaped this confusion be-
tween emic and etic phenomena. Floyd Lounsbury’s (1965:191)
assertion that “kin types” are a composite of the semantic discrimina-
tions made in many societies (cf. HAMMEL 1965:67-68) is historically
inaccurate. Genealogical reckoning was mnot invented by anthro-
pology. The apparent success of a mating, reproduction, and genealogy
frame for eliciting categorizations which arc amenable to contrastive
analysis has an etic basis: mating, reproduction, and genealogical
relationships have a rather precise biological meaning. The ethno-
graphic mating, reproduction, and genealogy frame, however, is a
lethal mixture of emic and etic categories. For a biologist, all fertile
matings are equally relevant for tracing genealogical connections;
for the ethnosemantics of kinship, only those matings and genealogi-
cal connections which occur in and through “marriage” are relevant.
In order to elicit questions about kinship, the ethnographer must
first discover an intercultural gloss for the particular kind of mating
which in English goes by the name of “marriage.” Incidentally, in
the search for the native equivalent, it must be remembered that
the informant, if he has not already fallen victim to a standardized
equivalence, is also straining to find the proper gloss for the ethnog-
rapher’s concept. Murdock (1949:1) defines the family in such a
way as to commit us to a consideration of whether there is a “socially
approved scxual relationship between mated pair.” Having children
and feeding and housing them is an etic phenomenon, but doing it in a
socially approved manner puts the whole matter in an eminently
emic frame.

Lounsbury’s “kin types” are thus etic and emic composites, and
Goodenough’s (1964b:10-11) claim that the analogue of phonetic
notation has already been developed for kinship studies is true only
for the biological frame. It does not apply to the emic aspects of
kinship. How else do we explain the seemingly endless quest for
the meaning of marriage and descent? A recent exchange between
David Schneider (1964; 1965b) and John Beattie (1964b; 1965) rests
on the conviction that there must be a cross-culturally valid emic
definition of kinship distinct from a biological genealogy; but they
are unable to agree on what it might be. Beattic solves the problem in
a highly instructive fashion:

578

e

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

What kinship as an anthropological concern is all about are those
social relationships, whatever their social and cultural content,
which the people who have them think about and talk about in
the idiom of kinship [1965:123].

Aside from the biological reproduction frame, the content of kin-
types is emic and must always remain emic until the observers decide
what bits of behavior (analogous to phones) will constitute the
minimum etic definition of marriage and descent. It is an error of
capital importance to supposc that the scrambling of the etic and
emic components in the study of kinship will convert one into the
other. Indeed, as far as American cultural anthropology is concerned,
there is a strong presumption of cause and effect between this
misconception and the fact that no consistent etic treatment of
marriage and kinship has been attempted.

CAN EMICS BE STUDIED ETICALLY?

An etic approach, by definition, avoids the premises of the
emic approach. From an etic point of view, the universe of meaning,
purposes, goals, motivations, etc., is thus unapproachable. But to
insist upon the separateness of emic and etic phenomena and research
strategies is not to affirm a greater or lesser “reality” or a higher or
lower scientific status for either of them.

BOTH EMIC AND ETIC DATA CAN BE
STUDIED CROSS-CULTURALLY

It should be obvious that emic phenomena can be studied
cross-culturally. The question of whether patrilineal descent rules or
Omaha kinship terminology recurs in different societies has nothing
to do with the emic/ctic distinction per se. Rather what is involved
is the setting of intersubjective standards of similarity and difference.
Both emic and etic phenomena may be defined with an abundance of
detail sufficient to confound an attempt to find replicative instances
anywhere in the behavior stream. The previous chapters demonstrate,
however, that a conscious and overt commitment to the study of
inner meaning and psychic complexities has usually been associated
with a considerable amount of indifference toward the quest for the
scientific explanation of sociocultural differences and similarities. In the
case of the new cthnography, the prevailing research strategy frequently
seems to be unconcerned with whether new insights into diachronic
and synchronic regularities will result from the higher standards of
emic descriptions that are being developed at heavy costs in research

579



===== PAGE 295 =====

v—ﬁ

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and publication resources. Harold Conklin (1964:26), for example,
has listed (1) appropriateness of anticipation, (2z) replicability or
testability, and (3) economy as the criteria by which ethnographic
statements must be evaluated. A number of other ethnosemanticists
have concerned themselves at length with the question of whether
their models represent as closely as possible the way in which the na-
tives actually think (A. F. c. WALLACE 1965; BURLING 1964; HYMES 1964a;
ROMNEY and D'ANDRADE 1964). But few if any of the ethnosemanti-
cists have considered the question of how to distinguish important
from unimportant ethnographic descriptions. With all due regard to
the need for the widest latitude of interests in a common scientific
endeavor, it cannot be said that an important ethnographic descrip-
tion is one which is merely accurate, elegant, and economical. Scientific
ethnographic models pay their way to the extent that they link up
with theories which explain diachronic and synchronic differences
and similarities. Admittedly it is not always possible to know in
advance when and how such a link-up will be achieved; but in the case
of ethnosemantic studies there are a number of historically demon-
strated adverse considerations, of which the practitioners seem un-
aware.

EMICS/ETICS VERSUS IDEAL/ACTUAL

On superficial inspection the contrastive research strategies
suggested by the well-worn phrases “ideal versus actual behavior” or
“ideal versus actual culture” would scem to be aimed at the same
distinction as that which is involved in emics versus etics. But the
two sets of strategies do not share much in common; indeed they
derive from very different epistemological positions. The ideal/
actual distinction is not grounded in the consideration of how one
can know that cultural things are what they are said to be by the
ethnographer. Instead it merely assumes that there is ome set of
patterned regularities consisting of what people say or believe about
what they do or should do and another set of patterned regularities
concerned with what they “actually” do. In the ideal/actual con-
trast, the problem of specifying the operations by which one gets to
know what people “actually do” is not even broached, whereas in the
emic/etic frame this problem is fundamental. The entire weight of
the latter dichotomy rests upon the epistemological significance of
describing cultural things through categories and relations which are
necessarily isomorphic with those appropriate or meaningful to
the actors, as opposed to categories and relations which arise inde-
pendently in the cthnographer’s data language. Thus, actual behavior

580

can be treated in both an emic and an etic fashion. An informant’s
description of what is actually happening at a festival, during a work
scene, or inside a household need not correspond to what the ethnog-
rapher sees or would see in the same situations.

Let us take as an example the ideal behavior by which captains of
certain Bahian fishing boats are said to locate the ocean spots over
which their boats anchor and the fishing lines are dropped. Identifi-
cation of the proper spot, as small as a room, seven or eight miles
out at sea, is supposed to depend upon the lining up of two or
more pairs of landmarks. The memorization and sighting of these
landmarks is the special responsibility of the captain, whose reputa-
tion can be measured by the size of the catch, ability to attract and
hold good crews, and keenness of memory and eyesight. Now it is
quite possible to describe this whole complex as actual behavior in
terms of the emically significant categories of spots, landmarks, eye-
sight, and memory. Indeed, one can actually see and hear the captain
look for the landmarks, mancuver the boat into position, order the
sails down and the anchor dropped; and one can actually watch the
fishing commence over the “spot.” Actual culture here corresponds
to a large degree to ideal accounts of it. But both accounts are emic.
There is another way to look at the performance in question. The
clue to this additional perspective resides in the fact that when the
captain locates the spot and the men start to fish, they not infre-
quently fail to catch a single fish. On such occasions the captain
explains that the fish are not home, that they have gone visiting else-
where, and he orders the boat off to another spot. The etics of the
matter do not commit us to a description of this behavior in terms
of the captain’s emically appreciated skills. One also observes the
constant use of a plumb linc, and there is a widespread knowledge of
the relationship between type of bottom, water depth, and type of
fish likely to be found in broad zones as opposed to “spots.” An etic
account of the fishing complex includes a description of the patterns
of behavior by which the captain maneuvers his craft, but the
activity involved in his peering at the horizon does not carry the
meaning it has in an emic account of actual behavior. Instead of
accepting the emic version of actual culture as an adequate descrip-
tion of what it takes to be a successful captain of a fishing boat, the
ctic categorizations open quitc a different cthnographic trail. An
analysis of the relationship between age of captain, size of catch, and
stability of crew reveals that younger, more active and vigorous
men who do not drink, who work hard, and who manifest a “protes-
tant” kind of behavior (an eminently etic category since they are all
“Catholics”) are the ones who are likely to be successful captains

581



===== PAGE 296 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

around whom the reputation for keen landmark sighting and
good “spot memory” will develop (xorTAK 1966:210 ff.).

Cultural anthropology will not easily overcome its heritage of
ethnographies of actual behavior carried out in a manner which per-
mits slipping back and forth from an emic to an etic frame in an
unconscious and unpredictable fashion. The effect of the lack of at-
tention to the emic/etic distinction has been especially deleterious in
the ethnography of primitive and peasant economic systems where
descriptions of essential economic processes have been obscured and
distorted by emic descriptions of actual behavior. Malinowski’s de-
scription of the Kula (p. 563) is a classic instance, to which we have
already referred.

SHOULD ETICS REPLACE EMICS?

One no sooner suggests that an etic research option de-
serves special emphasis than he is represented as proposing that all
studies of semantic domains, goals, and purposes should cease at
once. Even if some advantage accrued to such a proposal, it is
difficult to imagine a more unlikely development in the context of
the research establishment’s vested interests in emic matters. But no
advantage would accrue to a research strategy concerned exclusively
with etic phenomena. The whole point of insisting upon etic studies
is that one wishes to explain the emic universe to which as actors
in our own culture we are ineluctably bound. Actually, the shoe is on
the other foot. If there is danger of intradisciplinary imperialism
whereby one strategy deliberately denies the validity of alternative
rescarch options, it is the etic approach which has suffered the effects
of sweeping programmatic manifestos. Let it be recalled that Sapir
declared that it was “impossible” to describe behavior-stream events
in an etic data language. The declarations of Frake (1964b) and
Sturtevant (1964), which are discussed below, are simply the latest
in a long series of strategically extreme proposals directing the
attention of cultural anthropologists away from the etic substance of
human behavior. Comparably exclusionist proposals have never been
made against emic studies.

AMBIGUITY AND THE LINGUISTIC
MODEL

The fundamental error of the new cthnography is that it is
based upon a patently false analogy between vernacular codes on
the levels of phoneme, morpheme, and syntax on the one hand,

582

e

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

and on the other, the higher-order codes which are in some way
related to the semantics of everyday speech behavior and the his-
torical unfolding of nonverbal behavior-stream events. In linguistic
analysis, it is assumed in theory and followed in practice that the
phonemic, morphemic, and syntactic descriptions of a language can
be achieved by working with a very small group of informants. This
procedure is justified by the empirically established fact of the uni-
formity of the sound discriminations which constitute the basis for
verbal communication. Whatever clsc a speaker must accomplish, he
must be able to convince his fellows that he has something to say
that they could understand if they wanted to. The actor who speaks
gibberish, who mumbles or garbles his words, who uses deviant
pronunciations or otherwise fails to demonstrate that he is in a
condition to deliver an intelligible message, is seldom accorded a
serious audience (except for ceremonial or ritual performances in
which paralinguistic codes bear the burden of the message). The
lack of tolerance for such deviations emanates from the most pri-
mordial functional conditions underlying the evolution of language,
whereby viable ratios of signal to noise have become established.
These linguistic features evidently enjoy a selective advantage of
the highest magnitude.

The theory and fact of vernacular communication on the level of
pragmatics, however, point to another and opposite set of conditions.
To be sure, many complex messages derive their functional signifi-
cance from their high signal to noise ratio; however, there are also
powerful psychological and sociocultural functions which are fulfilled
by complex messages which are perfectly communicative on the
phonemic, morphemic, and syntactic levels, but ambiguous or quite
unintelligible in other respects. Such messages are demonstrably
characteristic of whole cognitive domains. The semantic ambiguity
characteristic of such activities as poetry, art and literary criticism,
eschatology, traditional philosophy, and theology in our own cultural
experience cannot be dismissed as epiphenomenal or as subcultural
variations. There is no reason to suppose that uniformity of under-
standing in such domains has a functional significance which out-
weighs the obvious benefits of ambiguity, obfuscation, and individual
variation. What our ethnoscientists scem to be unprepared for is
the contingency that in human cultural repertoires there may ac-
tually be more domains which derive their salient semantic order
from ambiguity and variation than there are domains whose orderli-
ness reflects consensus and uniformity.

Brazilian racial categories, of which several hundred have been
discovered, constitute an example of an eminently ambiguous and

583



===== PAGE 297 =====

v‘

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

highly idiosyncratic semantic domain (HARRIS and XOTTAK 1963;
HARRIS 1967). Precision and clarity in this domain would conflict with
the main etic features of Brazilian social structure. A similar func-
tional utility is associated with the emic definition of class in con-
temporary United States stratification hierarchies (cf. vipicH and
BENSMAN 1958). The functional nature of the ambiguity in caste
and kindred in Ceylon has been impressively demonstrated by S. J.
Tambiah (1965). Stanley Freed (1963) has measured the degree of con-
sensus concerning caste ranking in Uttar Pradesh without considering
the possible functional significance of the demonstrated lack of agree-
ment. Yet such an interpretation is clearly warranted by Bernard
Cohn’s (1955) description of caste mobility through litigation and
violence. The structural significance of cognitive ambiguity is also
implicit in Leach’s analysis of the “gumsa” ideology of Kachin social
structure. As Leach (1965b:10) points out, “The ethically correct ac-
tion for a Christian businessman is often equally ambiguous.” Leach’s
conceptualization of matrilateral prescripticn involves a rigid dichoto-
mization of wife-giving and wife-taking groups. According to William
Wilder (1964:1370): “Granted the uniqueness and permanence of the
mayu-dama relationship (the alliance set up by cross-cousin marriage),
the whole kinship terminology falls into place as a consistent whole
.. .; without that assumption the classifications are chaotic. It can be
said with equal emphasis however that without the observed ambiguity
in the mayu-dama ideology, Kachin social structure would be reduced
to chaos.

The vast and acrimonious debate which has centered on the
attempt to distinguish prescriptive from preferential marriage rules
(see Chap. 18) derives its monumental futility from the same error.
Given the fact that 30 percent of the recorded Purum alliances are
contrary to the rule of matrilateral prescription, it seems likely
that the mental state of some of the Purum is not compatible with
Rodney Needham’s splendid certainty regarding how they should
behave.

It is interesting to note that Pike’s (1954:80) advice on how to
handle emic ambiguity has been largely ignored:

A theory of the structure of behavior must leave room for variants
in both form and meaning, but without being able to provide any
absolute measure of just how much alike or just how different
cither form or meaning or the form-meaning composite may be
before one can no longer cquate two items. In our present theory
we state that the indeterminacy lies in the data, within the struc-

584

ture, and that any arbitrary attempt to force a decision one way
or another in certain instances does violence to the structure
rather than clarifying it.

In view of this admonition, the attempt to maximize the order in
emic phenomena by regarding ambiguity as either inconsequential or
as the result of error is a false strategy.

Before a domain is subjected to formal analysis, we must be told
something about the generality of the distinctions and contrasts in
terms of specific historic events and people. It is remarkable how
little attention has been paid to this issue especially when one con-
siders the importance of statistical data-gathering techniques among
the operations of contemporary social psychology. Indeed, much of
the new ethnography appears to be social psychology shorn of its
statistical base. At least one ethnosemanticist, Goodenough (1965b),
appears to have settled down with the data obtained from only one
informant. Although Conklin (1955:340) reports that he obtained
color naming responses from “a large number of informants,” the
relationship between individual responses and the four-way classifica-
tion about which there is said to be “unanimous agreement” (ibid.:
341) is not specified, despite the fact that this agreement exists side
by side with “hundreds of specific color categories, many of which
over-lap and inter-digitate” (ibid.).

Charles Frake (1961:125) reports that “informants rarely disagree
in their verbal descriptions of what makes one disease different from
another.” It would seem important for us to know just what this
“rarely” means. Did Frake’s informants represent all Subanum actor
types? Given the fact that medical expertise is seldom uniformly
distributed in a population, it would not be unexpected that “rare”
disagrecment was frequent disagreement at least in certain sex and
age categories.

PROBLEM OF THE WELL-INFORMED
INFORMANT

Since much of the terminological data which provides the
basis for the ethnosemantics of kinship derives from fieldwork that
can no longer be repeated, there is little hope of correcting for
overagreement in the formal accounts. All too often, the data have
been obtained from a few “wellinformed informants” (Back 1960).
My own encounter with individual variation and ambiguity in the
terminology of the Bathonga of southern Mogambique may serve as
an example. Convinced by my reading of Radcliffe Brown (1950:34)

585



===== PAGE 298 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

that I was dealing with an Omaha system, I shrugged off the re-
sponses of a half dozen informants until I finally found someone
who “really knew” the system. The justification for this was that
the Bathonga were undergoing intensive acculturation, in an area where
a considerable mixture of Zulu, Ronga, and Shangane “tribes” was
taking place. It seemed best to work with someone who remembered
the old system. But Henri Junfod (1913), who had studied the
Bathonga sixty years ago, had already noted four alternate terms for
mother’s brother’s son: makwabu (sibling); nwana (child) (1912:
220); malume (mother’s brother); and kokwana (grandfather)
(ibid.:229). What I encountered in some of my “ill-informed in-
formants” was an even greater measure of confusion. Thus, while
Junod attributed the substitution of the grandfather term (kokwana)
for mother’s brother (malume) as a dialect difference, I kept running
across people who insisted that both malume and kokwana were
appropriate! Now these departures from the Omaha system are of
the precise order of difference which Lounsbury (1964:354) regards
as requiring the establishment of separate subtypes of Crow and
Omaha terminology. It may be that these variations can be handled
as subcultural or dialect differences taking place inside different
heads. On the other hand, it is equally plausible that these variations
take place inside the same head. Indeed, this is true for many Bath-
onga in the modern situation. If that is the case, then an “adequate”
cthnography must express the ambiguity of the system, and it must
do so statistically.

The way in which the emic formalists have handled this problem in
the treatment of American kinship terminology is scarcely reassuring.
Goodenough has referred to his “dialect” as a means of escaping the
fact that his understanding of “correct” kin terminological usage
does not correspond to mine. Several important foci of functionally
important ambiguity in the American cognitive calculus of kinship
probably get swept under the rug by this maneuver. One strongly
doubts, for example, that Goodenough’s (1963a:206) lumping of Pa
Pa Pa Sb Ch and Pa Sb Ch Ch Ch along with Pa Sb Ch as “my first
cousin” is merely a matter of dialect or subcultural variation. Is it a
valid cognitive principle of American kinship that “first cousin” need
not be included in the basic corpus of kinship terms because it is not a
lexeme? Goodenough proposes that he is representative of significant
numbers of Americans in believing that we cannot say “No, he is
my half brother” but that we can say “Yes, he is my half brother”
(ibid.:265) in responsc to the question, “Is he your brother?” Such
convictions mask the fact that many Americans have trouble applying
kinship terms to relatives outside of a small span of kin types with

586

whom they have significant etic transactions. In this connection,
Schneider (1965a), who uses a more generously functional approach
to the question of American kinship, refers to the “fuzzy boundary
and fadeout principles” (ibid.:291) but does not drive home the
consequences of this fuzziness for a strategy which is inherently in-
capable of accommodating ambiguity.

Goodenough'’s assumptions need to be tested against sample popu-
lation responses under standardized conditions. This is especially true
of some of the basic themes which are taken as underlying the
construction of a componential grid. For example, it is claimed that
an American husband cannot disown his wife’s child and keep his
wife (ibid.:287n). Yet it is common knowledge in welfare circles
that such cases frequently show up in adoption courts; it cannot be
left to intuition to decide the rules by which Americans in general
cognize extramarital pregnancies in wedlock.

A potentially important step has been taken by A. K. Romney
and Roy D’'Andrade (1964) in their use of samples of public high
school students to obtain lists of kinship terms and other relevant
responses. Unfortunately, the implications of their findings are not
developed out of deference to the task of finding the correct set of
rules in conformity with the linguistic model. Thus, in one of Romney
and D’Andrade’s samples, modifier terms which occurred with a
frequency of less than 25 percent with a core term (e.g., great uncle)
were excluded from consideration. Then, an additional simplification
was achieved by excluding responses of subjects whose use of modifiers
constituted a pattern found in less than 10 percent of the sample of 105
(ibid.:156). By this sloughing off of “idiosyncratic or variant” answers,
the conclusion is reached that “cousin” in our terminology takes only
one modifier, “second” (ibid.:156, Table II).

None of the attempts to define the basic cognitive features of
American kinship terminology has thus far made concessions to
the possibility that ambiguity is one of the salient characteristics of
this domain. Wallace and Atkins (1960), Romney and D’Andrade
(1964), and Goodenough (19635a) each operate with a different inven-
tory of basic American kinship terms. Variant treatments by David
Schneider (1965a) and Munroe Edmunson (1957) ought also to be
considered in estimating the scope of the problem which has yet to
be met head on. Conklin has suggested that American anthropologists
who do not know their native terminology had better take steps
to learn it. They are urged to consult:

an explanatory note on “The Mathematics of American Cousin-
ship” in a recent issue of the Kroeber Anthropological Socicty
Papers (Roark, 1961). Therc, the purpose in providing such a dc-

587



===== PAGE 299 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

vice is explicitly the resolution of a frequently met ambiguity
and lack of common knowledge among American anthropologists
as to the steps required in reckoning degrees of cousinship in
English [1964:34]!

This advice carries an implicit warning concerning the kinship
terminologics of the natives in other cultures: If you don’t know
your own minds, we'll teach you. In this vein, one is reluctant to
share Dell Hymes's (1964a:34) nostalgic reverie over “The nights of
beer drinking and brain wracking spent in the Rainbow Cafe at the
edge of Warm Springs reservation” with Philip Kahclamet, “the
most knowledgcable and fluent speaker of Wishram.” There is also
the experience reported by Anthony Wallace (1965:237) with a
Japanese informant who brought along a friend “to check the ac-
curacy” of her kinship definitions: “The informant never completely
accepted our view that her task was to give personal usage; she felt
that she was a representative of Japan and should be ‘correct.””

Among the ethnosemanticists, Hymes has cautioned against trans-
ferring data-gathering techniques appropriate to phonemics and gram-
mar to higher-order semantic phenomena. Hymes secs an “ethnogra-
phy of speaking” as providing the antidote for the lack of information
about the settings and variations in speech behavior which derive
from “the implicitly normative stance long characteristic of linguistic
theory in prescribing its object” (mymEs 1964a:41). He goes on to
point out that other functions fulfilled by agreement about referential
meaning are not always the prime function of speech behavior:

(e) From the standpoint of a general theory of language and its
functioning, it is simply the case that some of the functions of
languages in communities do call for approximation to indepen-
dence of context, simple uniformity, and primacy of organization
about the function of reference, three assumptions so common to
descriptive linguistic theory—and some do not [ibid.].

It is to be hoped that Hymes’s suggestions for placing the study of
speech behavior in a more realistic and more ample functional context
will be given the attention they merit. In the meantime, the failure of
American ethnologists to agree on the analysis of their own native
terminology, the evident tendency among ethnosemanticists to ac-
cept the cognitive expertise of the well-informed informant, and the
failure to accommodate the possibility of functional ambiguity sug-
gest that the ethnosemanticists must take a more critical look at
their basic assumptions. The brilliant efforts lavished upon placing
second cousin, half brother, and grand niece in a single paradigmatic
semantic space may actually result in a serious distortion of emic

588

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

facts. At the very least, the difficulties and shortcomings of the treat-
ment of American terminology provide a firm basis for skepticism
regarding the attempt to push the study of major terminological
systems into the numerous refinements which are possible if terms
for kin types representing all shades of ambiguity and psychological
and social significance are jammed into the same frame.

EMICS AND ACTUAL VERBAL BEHAVIOR

Consideration must be given to the prominence of operations
involving artificial eliciting situations in the construction of the formal
analyses of the new ethnography. This has meant that much of the
basic data employed consists of verbal statements in which people say
what they would say under given hypothetical circumstances. As Frake
(1961:63) has put it: “Given a set of contrasting disease names, the
problem remains of determining the rules which govern the assigning of
one name rather than another in a particular diagnostic situation.” This
is the problem of referential as distinct from abstract meaning
(HARRIS 1964a:156). For example, most Brazilians verbally agree on
the contrasts out of which rules for distinguishing between a “preto”
(“black”) and a “branco” (“white”) can be constructed. Yet these
rules are demonstrably inadequate for predicting when a specific
individual will call another “preto” or “branco.” In real life a whole
new set of factors enter which may involve calculi from domains far
removed from “racial” categories. Thus as Hymes implies, there is an
air of scholasticism or of arm chair detachment about much of
the formal analysis of the new ethnography, even when we restrict
ourselves to the question of the rules which govern verbal behavior-
stream events. It is as if a generation of anthropologists had never
observed hesitation, “change of mind,” “groping for the right word,”
argument, lying, puzzlement, and many other ordinary speech phe-
nomena.

EMICS AND NONVERBAL BEHAVIOR

But social and cultural anthropology enjoys a more ample
scientific mandate than the study of what people say they will say.
There remains the question of what they say they will do, and of the
relationship between these sayings and the nonverbal happenings of
history.

Now whatever doubts may exist concerning the appropriateness of
the linguistic model for verbal behavior, the application of that model

589



===== PAGE 300 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

to nonverbal behavior is even more powerfully ill-advised. Evidence of
both a logical and empirical nature from many different quarters and
cultures indicates that emic rules of behavior are a poor guide to histori-
cal events and etic regularities in economic, social, and political sub-
systems. If permitted to develop unchecked, the tendency to write
ethnographies in accord with the emic rules of behavior will result in an
unintentional parody of the human condition. Applied to our own
culture it would conjure up a way of life in which men tip their hats
to ladies; youths defer to old people in public conveyances; unwed
mothers are a rarity; citizens go to the aid of law enforcement officers;
chewing gum is never stuck under tables and never dropped on the
sidewalk; television repairmen fix television sets; children respect
their aged parents; rich and poor get the same medical treatment;
taxes are paid in full; all men are created equal; and our defense
budget is used only for maintaining peace. Elsewhere it would turn
the Chinese family into a Confucian fantasy (FrIED 1953); invent
Hindu farmers who starve in order to avoid harming their sacred
cows (HARRIS 1966a); spread the idea that the Portuguese have no
racial prejudice (HARRIS 1964b; 1966b); and convince a whole genera-
tion of introductory anthropology students that the Zufii never get
drunk (see p. 406). If Jules Henry’s recent study of American
culture is at all accurate, American anthropologists should be es-
pecially skeptical of ethnographies in which the rules of behavior
dominate the rules for breaking rules. Commenting upon the per-
vasiveness of cheating amorg American school children, Henry (1963:
205-6) writes: “An honest adolescent life could be a crippling
preliminary for many phases of contemporary culture.” Granted that
this may be a specialty of industrial civilization, it nonetheless poses
an empirical question which cannot be left unanswered when Pangloss-
ian grammars are attempted for other cultures.

In attempting to demonstrate that the grammar of normative status
and role behavior among the Trukese is not “an exercise in sterile
formalism,” Goodenough (1965b:19-20) presents the case of a father
who struck his married daughter. This act violated five of the six
rules in Goodenough’s emic “Duty Scale”: Trukese fathers should
crouch or crawl if a married daughter is seated; they should avoid
initiating action; honor any request; avoid speaking harshly; and
never assault the daughter “regardless of provocation” (ibid.:11-12).
Instead of being dismayed by the discovery that all of these rules
were flouted right before his eyes, Goodenough takes comfort from
the fact that thc woman in question had in turn been breaking
another series of rules! “Her petulant behavior had been getting on

590

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

her kinsmen’s nerves for some time . . .,” and she had indulged in
“an early morning tirade against her husband whom she suspected of
having just come from an amorous visit to her lineage sister next
door.” Tt was therefore “poetic justice,” remarks Goodenough, for
the woman’s father to hit her: “A good hard jolt was just what she
deserved,” he says. It seems to me that Goodenough derives the
wrong moral from this episode. So blatant a failurc of a set of rules
to predict behavior requires a rewriting of the rules. Just how often
do these good hard jolts get delivered? And do the injured ladies

agree with the anthropologist that a good hard jolt is just what
they need?

EMICS AND THE SCIENCE OF TRIVIA

Referring to the accomplishments of ethnosemantics listed by
Frake (1964b:143), Berreman (1966:351) notes:

None of these descriptions, whatever the virtues, can in them-
selves be called very significant . . . they remind of Mills’ warn-
ing that many sociologists have gotten to the point where they
overlook what is important in their search for what is verifiable

. many have worked so hard on what is trivial that it comes to
appear important. . . .

It is no accident that formal analysis has so often been taken
to task for its involvement with trivia (KEESING 1966:23; SWEET
1966:24-25). It is probably only with respect to statistically insignifi-
cant or scientifically trivial performances that behaviorstream events
can be predicted from a small set of emic rules. The insistence by
Frake, Conklin, and Goodenough that “appropriateness or accepta-
bility” be substituted for predictability among the canons of good
ethnography is nothing so much as a tacit admission of this dilemma.
The problem is not that behavior is not governed by cognitive plans,
maps, rules, themes, ideologies, etc. Since these phenomena take
place inside people’s heads in great abundance and on all sorts of
conscious (WARD 1965), preconscious, and unconscious levels with
all degrees of strength and persistence, and in all manner of logical
or illogical, rational or irrational combination, it would be most un-
likely that at some levels, in some degree, and in some combination,
behavior-stream events were not based on or at least accompanied by
some form of cognitive calculus. In all societies, concrete manifesta-
tions of behavior, verbal or nonverbal, result from complicated inter-
actions of specific personalities whose repertories of rules, especially
when it comes to the rules for interpreting or breaking rules, oftcn
seem to have little in common. Unless the new ethnographers are a

591



===== PAGE 301 =====

s

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

breed apart, they must surely have noted by this time that their lives
have consisted largely of trying to figure out what rules one ought to
live by or, what amounts to the same thing, what rules one ought
to invoke in a particular situation. There is little indication that
the normal condition of social life is one in which conformity to emic
norms predominates. The judgment expressed by Hugo Nutini
(1965:723) that “mechanical models” (i.e. models constructed out of
ideal behavior) “are always superior to statistical models” (i.e. models
constructed out of actual behavior) is dangerously detached from
empirical foundations (see pp. 498-99). There is no evidence which
indicates that under “the proper cultural conditions”—whatever these
may be—“the overlapping of ideal and actual behavior would tend to
the ideal limit” (ibid.). Instead, there is a vast literature in anthro-
pology and related disciplines which indicates that emic norms and
etic events never quite match and that not infrequently the main
function of the norms is to obscure the etic reality. A case in point
is Marshall Sahlins’ suggestion about how to resolve the “E.-P.
(Evans-Pritchard) paradox” wherein, as among the Nuer, there is an
inverted relation between commitment to agnation in principle and
commitment to it in deed: “Then too, the agnatic dogma may only
be strengthened by a deepening contradiction with kin group mem-
bership, as ideology undertakes its Mannheimian function of keeping
people from knowing what’s going on in the world” (saHLINS 1965:
105).

I hasten to acknowledge certain recent attempts to link formal
analysis with social-structural or comparative generalizations. It would
appear on balance, however, that the net contribution to substantive
theory is less than what usually results from equivalent labor in-puts.
For example, Conklin’s conclusion that the Hanunéo’s terminological
specialization in cousin terms reflects payment of fines in accordance
with degree of incest scarcely requires the elaborate descriptive ap-
paratus with which it is juxtaposed (1964:48).

THE CASE OF CROW TERMINOLOGY

Among formal analysts, the most ambitious claim for so-
ciological significance has been set forth by Floyd Lounsbury (1964;
1965). Lounsbury suggests that Crow and Omaha kinship terminolo-
gies and their variants, including Trobriand, are best understood as ex-
pressions of the extension of nuclear family terminological categories
outward to other kin types on the basis of what he calls “status suc-

592

cession.” It is the passing on of statuses such as “head of family, other
positions in the domestic group, headship of lineage or kin-based
corporation, hereditary political office, religious office, etc.” (1965:
383) which accounts for the overriding of generational distinctions
typical of Crow and Omaha terminologies. This principle is set forth
in opposition to that endorsed by Leach (1958), derived from Rad-
cliffe-Brown, subscribed to by Lowie, Murdock, and White, and ulti-
mately traceable to Morgan that Crow and Omaha terminologies
reflect first and foremost the alignment of people into unilinear
groupings.

In the first place, we should note that Lounsbury’s interpretation
at no point contradicts the principle of lineage solidarity; instead
his “status successions” might all be viewed as measures of the
degree of lineage corporateness. But Lounsbury is really not interested
in his analysis as a means of discovering the causal ingredients in the
evolution of kinship systems. What he actually tries to show is that
given the Crow-type terminologics it is possible to write rules for
extending nuclear family kin terms which “account for” the system.
These rules account for dll of the terminology, whereas the principle
of lineage solidarity accounts for only the bulk of the terms, leaving
certain residues which are anomalous (as when certain Crow-types call
ego’s Fa Mo Br by a general grandfather term rather than Fa) (ibid.:
355). The disparity in completeness, however, is not a legitimate test of
theoretical adequacy. Lounsbury is privileged to keep adding trans-
formation rules precisely until the point is reached at which all of
the features of the particular case have been taken care of. In writing
these rules, Lounsbury chose not to employ an extensional principle
which explicitly incorporates or depends upon the principle of lineage
solidarity. Instead he employs such principles as “skewing rules,”
“half-sibling rule,” and “merging rule”” In rejecting the established
lineage principle, Lounsbury makes no sustained attempt to evaluate
the possibility that the terminological phenomena it does not account
for are sociologically or statistically insignificant, or semantically am-
biguous or that the principle could be made to account for them
with minor addenda. As we have scen, the Bathonga’s Omaha termi-
nology involves ambiguities at a number of points. Similar alternate
manifestations are regarded by Lounsbury as having separate socio-
logical significance. Furthermore, although admitting the general
correlation between strong lineage principle and Crow-Omaha termi-
nologies, Lounsbury chooses to emphasize the fact that there are five
deviant cases in which Crow terminologies are associated with patri-

593

|
|
!
|
|



===== PAGE 302 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

lineal descent (ibid.:354-55). He does not elect to study these cases
in the light of the special conditions which, had he done so, would,
for at least three of the instances, permit an interpretation perfectly
compatible with the lincage principle.

THREE ETHNOGRAPIIC CASES

These three cases deserve our attention because they are
indicative of what happens when supersophisticated formal analyses
are reared on a foundation of shoddy primary materials. Lounsbury
(1964:388) cites Murdock (1949:168) as the source of three of his
five cases in which Crow terms occur with patrilineal descent and
patrilocal residence. These are the Bachama of Nigeria, the Koranko
of Sierra Leone, and the Seniang of the Solomon Islands. First of all, it
must be made perfectly plain that Murdock’s definition of a Crow
terminology is scarcely the equivalent of what Lounsbury is interested
in subjecting to formal analysis. For Murdock, the Crow form exists
when cross cousins are distinguished from parallel cousins and siblings,
while the Fa Si Da is classed with Fa Si and/or the Mo Br Da with
Br Da (MURrpOCK 1949:224). This says nothing about the treatment
of the uncle and aunt terms in relationship to each other and to Mo
and Fa, and little about these uncle and aunt terms in relation to the
sibling and cousin terms. Turning to the Bachama in the original
source (MEEK 1931:18-20), we find not only that Fa Si and Mo Si
are terminologically equated, but that Mo Bro, Fa, and Fa Bro are
also terminologically equated. Worse, the terms for both kinds of grand-
mothers and grandfathers are the same as those used for cross uncle
and for father’s elder brother. As for the patrilineality of the Bachama,
Meek (ibid.:15-17) makes it perfectly clear that a form of double
descent is operating; that the sister’s son inherits horses, goats,
clothes, cash, and cattle, and the mother’s brother's widow or her
brideprice, his standing crops, and the contents of his granary; and
that the system was in transition from an earlier form of still greater
emphasis upon “mother right” in which: “The sense of kinship
with the mother’s family was undoubtedly in former times greater
than that with the father’s family” (ibid.:16).

Turning to the Koranko (N. tHOMAS 1916) we find that the Fa Si
Da is not equated with Fa Si although the rest of Murdock’s condi-
tions are met. The system thus barely survives as Crow by virtue of
invoking the and/or in the definition. It is incredible, however, to
discover in the setting of the refined analysis presented by Louns-
bury an appeal to this cthnographic case. The Koranko terminology

594

v

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

appears as part of a foldout in which the terminological systems for
eight Sierra Leone peoples are set forth in tabular fashion. The
only statement specifically concerned with Koranko descent and
locality is herewith reproduced: “Descent is reckoned in the male line,
and there are no clear traces of the existence of matrilocal marriage,
though some of the birth customs seem to suggest it” (ibid.:107).
The ethnographic standard of Thomas’s account is unacceptable
(except in a large sample), and any attempt to hinge an important
theoretical issue on the Koranko is as good as resorting to scapulim-
nancy.

Finally, there is the Seniang division of Malekula, subtitled “A
Vanishing People in the New Hebrides.” Tt is relevant to point out
that not only had the Seniang been afflicted by the worst sort of bio-
cultural collapse at the time of A. B. Deacon’s (1934) visit, but that
the monograph in question was put together from Deacon’s field
notes by Camilla Wedgwood, who comments:

. it must be stressed here that, far from finding a living so-
ciety, Deacon found at South-West Bay only relatively few sur-
vivors of several districts. He was therefore unable here to study
the social, economic, and religious life of a living community,
but had to acquire his knowledge of what that life had once been
by means of the tedious and not wholly reliable method of ques-
tioning the older men [1934:xxxii].

The Seniang satisfy Murdock’s criteria for Crow terminology. Fa Si
Da is classed with Fa Si and Fa Si So with Fa, but there is no infor-
mation concerning the terms for the children of these cross cousins.
Because of this and other gaps it is difficult to assess the strength of
the Crow pattern. There is at least one anomaly: Wedgewood directs
special attention to the fact that Fa Fa Fa Fa is called by the term
for elder brother and that So So So So is probably called by the
term for younger brother. This is not the kind of terminology on
the basis of which one would predict strong matrilineal or matri-
local clans, although admittedly, it also is not at all suggestive of
the reported rather strong patrilineal and patrilocal principles. Addi-
tional reasons for rejecting Malekula as a negative case for the cor-
relation in question arise on all sides. The neighboring Newun with
whom the Seniang intermarry and who recognize descent from each
other’s localized patrisibs classify Fa Si with Fa Si Da but the same
root term is also used for Mo. The classification of Mo, Fa Si, and
Fa Da under the same term is repeated among many of the other
Malekulan groups, including the Lambumbu (pEACON 1934:98); Sen-

595

4


===== PAGE 303 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

barei (ibid.:121); Uripiv (ibid.:124); Nesan, Uerik, Bangasa, and Ni-
viar (ibid.:125). This is a most un-Crow-like feature and is certainly
not provided for by Lounsbury’s sub-types. It should be mentioned
that definite traces of double descent crop up to the north among the
Lambumbu (ibid.:101) and Lagalag (ibid.:110); although nothing
like a reliable description is anywhere available concerning relations
with matrilineal kinsmen. Both Deacon and Wedgewood were con-
vinced that Malekula has been invaded by a succession of different
cultures, the last of which were strongly patrilineal. To what extent
this may have obscured the observation of de facto matrilineal group-
ings among the Seniang is unclear. Similarly in doubt is Deacon’s
ability to have salvaged information of such a nature from the cul-
tural wreckage in which he was working, even if it had occurred to
him that the Crow cousin terminology required special attention in
the light of the heavy patri-bias which he attributed to the entire
island. One point is clear, however, this is not a very convincing case
of anything.

THE QUEST FOR FORMAL ELEGANCE

The critical test of Lounsbury’s thesis concerning the short-
comings of the lineage solidarity principle hinges on the question of
whether a set of emic rules can be written which build upon or in-
corporate the lineage principle and which will be as productive and
parsimonious as Lounsbury’s. Allan Coult (1968) claims to have
done just that. Starting with a set of principles first proposed by Tax
(1955a; orig. 1937), and adding the principle of lincage solidarity,
Coult says that he “accounts for” all of the features which Lounsbury
“accounts for,” and that he does it in a more simple and elegant
fashion. Coult disposes of the anomalies in the relationship between
lineage membership and terminological lumping by applying logical,
as opposed to sociological, principles: “the terms applied to relatives
outside of either own or M’s patriline are determined, given the
terms applied within these two lines, and the operation of the princi-
ples of uniform succession and uniform reciprocals” (court 1968:11).

But the significance of Coult’s achievement is not to be judged by
these purely formalistic criteria. As Coult himself expresses it, “A
good theory should be phrased in such a way that not only can it
predict empirical phenomena, but the reasons why it predicts should
also be apparent” (ibid.:10). That is, as stated carlier, a good cthno-
graphic description must link up with a corpus of explanatory theory.
“Lounsbury in fact has no theory, he has merely a set of empirically
observed relationships . . .” (ibid.:11).

596

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

THE NEW OLD ETHNOGRAPHY

Formal analysis presents itself as a new and revitalizing
movement, whereas, in fact, it is actually the latest in a series of
cultural-idealist proposals for intensifying cultural anthropology’s
commitment to emic rescarch strategies. The “new approach to
ethnography,” what Sturtevant (1964:99) is tempted to call “the
New Ethnography,” has a definite and highly compromised historical
position of which its practitioners seem unaware. In one important
sense, this is not the new ecthnography, but the new old ethnog-
raphy. It is a better operationalized but narrower version of a re-
search strategy which has already proved itself incapable of solving
the major substantive issues of the social sciences.

In evaluating ethnosemantics’ claim to newness, we must bear in
mind the fact that almost every major theoretical school in anthro-
pology has expended the bulk of its research effort in the pursuit of
some form of emic analyses. The main historical lines of influence
have been set forth in the previous chapter. Here it must suffice
merely to recall the heritage of what Lowie (1956b:1007) has called
the Southwest German school of philosophy—Windelband, Dilthey,
Rickert—which transmitted eighteenth-century rationalism and ideal-
ism through its Hegelian culmination into contemporary anthropology
(see Chap. 12). In the twentieth century many prominent spokesmen
representing a nominally wide variety of theoretical positions have
exhorted anthropologists to give priority to emic analysis. Among the
Boasians, Lowie’s opinion as previously quoted, was typical. The field-
worker’s business is to understand the “true inwardness” of the beliefs
and practices of the people he studies. The fieldworker does not simply
record that there is infanticide or cannibalism. If he does not also record
how his informants feel about these practices, “he has failed in his task”
(see p. 365).

Kluckhohn (1949:300) may be taken as representative of another
broad spectrum of American anthropologists: “The first responsibility
of the anthropologist is to set down events as seen by the people he
is studying.” Malinowski, in the Argonauts, wrote of “the final goal, of
which the ethnographer should never lose sight.”

This goal is, bricfly, to grasp the native’s point of view, is relation
to lifc, to realise his vision of his world. To study the institutions,
customs, and codes or to study the behavior and mentality with-
out the subjective desire of fecling by what these people live, of

597



===== PAGE 304 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

realising the substance of their happiness—is, in my opinion, to
miss the greatest reward which we can hope to obtain from the
study of man [MALINOWSKI 1961:25].

Furthermore, although David Schneider (1965¢:38) contrasts Rad-
cliffe-Brown’s position on social structure with that of Needham,
Lévi-Strauss, and Homans, the common heritage which the structural-
ists and the structural-functionalists derive from Durkheim provides
a common emic bias for both groups. The overwhelming commit-
ment among contemporary British anthropologists to the analysis of
descent, affinity, filiation, prescriptive and preferential alliance should
suffice to establish the emic thrust of their research interests. On the
other side, as we have seen, Lévi-Strauss and Needham have carried
Durkheim’s notion of “collective representations” to the purest
pinnacle of mentalism. As Schneider points out, even the question of
social order is for Needham a question of underlying logical and
symbolic congruence. Although Needham writes about “groups prag-
matically distinguished,” “The word pragmatic can only make sense if
it is taken to mean ‘conceptually,’ and this in turn can mean that
some native will talk about it. A figment of a figment of a figment of
a native’s imagination will do” (ibid.:39).

CONVERGENCE TOWARD MENTALISM

It is a fact of salient importance, however, that the emic bias
of the new cthnography derives its vigor from an infusion of a men-
talism which has more recent origins. The new ethnography repre-
sents a confluence of the interests of the older empathetic, humanist,
emic approach with a newer, narrower, and less humanistic mentalism
arising out of linguistics. Hymes has traced this influence in terms
of Sapir, the “Yale School: complementary distribution, and Jakobson-
ian distinctive features, and Chomskyian generative grammar”
(1964a:10). The linguistic model has also been influential among
French and British anthropologists who have been led by a remark-
able convergence toward an emic strategy in which logic and reason
have taken the place of emotional meaning. In Europe, again specifi-
cally influenced by Jakobson, it is Lévi-Strauss who has led the way to
this new form of idealism (mymESs 1963; 1964a:15; 1964b). Although
formal analysis is deeply committed to the image of “hard science,” it
has its precise parallel in the structuralist position of Lévi-Strauss,
whose essence is captured in the inspired phrase, “Zen Marxism”
(see p. 512). For Lévi-Strauss as for the ethnosemanticists, a quasi-
mathcmatical, linguistic model should be the model for all cultural

598

analysis: “language can be said to be a condition of culture because
the material out of which language is built is of the same type out of
which the whole culture is built: logical relations, oppositions, cor-
relations and the like” (LEVESTRAUSS 19632:68-69). Frake’s image of
ethnography precisely parallels this view:

- . . descriptive linguistics is but a special case of ethnography
since its domain of study, speech messages, is an integral part of
a larger domain of socially interpretable acts and artifacts. It is
this total domain of “messages” (including speech) that is the
concern of the ethnographer. The ethnographer, like the linguist,
seeks to describe an infinite set of variable messages as manifesta-
tions of a finite shared code, the code being a set of rules for the
socially appropriate construction and interpretation of messages

[1964b:133].

It will be seen that Lévi-Strauss’ “incredible ingenuity” (samLins
1966) in discovering the hidden mental structures of society is the
French analogue of Frake’s (1964b:133) invocation: “We must get
inside our subjects’ heads.” When one takes into consideration the
objections which have been raised concerning the lack of statistical
validation of the mental structures which ethnosemantics has sought
to discover, the gap between Lévi-Strauss and the new ethnography
narrows still further. Lévi-Strauss’ (1953:528) justification of the so-
called mechanical model parallels the arguments employed by ethno-
semantics to justify a lack of concern with sampling and prediction.
As T have already indicated, the mentalism of Lévi-Strauss and his
American counterparts departs from previous emic approaches in
laying stresses upon the logical functions of mind as opposed to the
emotional and irrational components: “Lévi-Strauss emphatically re-
jects recourse to affectivity or emotion. Emotion is vague, where
structure is precise, merely sentimental where structure is logical”
(saHLINS 1966:136). An implicit disdain for the emotional events
which go on inside people’s heads is also a conspicuous hallmark
of ethnosemantics. Emics for a previous generation of American
anthropologists meant the discovery of the unconscious psychological
complexes which were assumed to underly ideal and actual behavior.
The linguistic model, however, has no means of accommodating the
Freudian conflict between id, ego, and superego. One might as well
try to squeeze blood from a stone as obtain from Hammel’s “algorith-
mic” masterpiece on Comanche kinship, the kinds of emotions the
Comanche experienced in the presence of their sisters and mothers.
It is indeed a new experience for anthropologists to be exposed to

599


===== PAGE 305 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

an analysis which “does not pretend to offer solutions which have
sociological, psychological or historical relevance in any necessary
sense . . .7 (HAMMEL 1965:104).

BACK TO PLATO

Another novel ingredient in the ethnosemantic approach is
the exclusionist insistence that anthropology must be emic if it is to
be anything at all. Although idealism and mentalism have always
dominated our outlook, this was traditionally combined with an eclec-
ticism by which at least one anthropological foot could touch the
ground. In the past, emic commitments have seldom been so bla-
tant, insistent, and parochial. Earlier idealist and mentalist programs
were pragmatically capable of and interested in describing and ex-
plaining techno-economic, social, and political systems on the basis
of concrete historical events. In the new ethnography, however, cul-
ture is a timeless system of logical categories. Hegel’s historicism,
his only redeeming feature, has been dropped in favor of a synchronic
idealist dialectic known as “distinctive feature analysis.” Although
the ethnosemanticists enjoy the illusion that they are deriving nour-
ishment from new springs of wisdom, even as idealists they may
actually have taken a giant step backward. Thus, according to Good-
enough:

The great problem for a science of man is how to get from the
objective world of materiality, with its infinite variability, to the
subjective world of form as it exists in what, for lack of a better
term, we must call the minds of our fellow man. . . . Structural
linguistics has, I think, made us conscious, at last, of their nature,
and has gone on to convert this consciousness into a systematic
method [1964a:39].

The notion that the objective world of materiality represents the
shadowing forth of the forms which exist in the mind takes us all the
way back to Plato’s cave. Goodenough fails to consider that although
materiality is infinitely complex, this is a condition which has not
inhibited the development of generalization in all the other sciences,
none of which have had to search out subjective worlds of form.
Furthermore, as I have already indicated, if the subjective world of
form appears less infinitely variable, it is because the ethnosemanticists
have ignored the variability which each of us knows exists. Good-
enough’s rejection of the material world as too complex reflects an
opinion which is widelv shared (more in conversation than in print)

600

20. Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

that ethnography must be emic, and emic in the new linguistic sense,
if it is to be anything at all. Indeed, there is the insistence by some
of the ethnosemanticists that the cultural field of inquiry is only
definable in emic terms: “Actually, I find it difficult to conceive of
any act, object, or event which can be described as a cultural artifact,
a manifestation of a code, without some reference to the way people
talk about it” (FRAKE 1964b:133).

CULTURES ARE MORE THAN CODES

Are all cultural artifacts—acts, objects, or events—as Frake
puts it, only conceivable as manifestations of a code? Referring to
the earlier discussion of variation and ambiguity, let me rejoin that
acts, objects, or events relevant to the human behavior stream
seldom express one or a few simple code rules. Some examples will
be helpful at this point. Among the Bathonga there is a strong ag-
natic bias with a rule that brothers and sons rear their families
within or immediately adjacent to their father’s compound. Many
additional rules stress the order in which brothers and sons are to
marry, the allocation of lineage brideprice resources, the treatment of
co-wives and of junior sons. There are additional rules which refer to
how to make witchcraft, how to make accusations of witchcraft, and
how to react to such accusations. There are still more rules which
indicate how a man is to become successful in life, the importance of
plural marriage, the importance of having many children. All of these
rules are in turn related to rules of treating the ancestors with proper
respect and attention. Now it is a regular ctic feature of Bathonga
life that the local lineage fissions when population exceeds 100 or
200 people, that the break involves the establishment of new house-
holds with a junior son and his mother at the core, and that the
break is accompanied by all sorts of hostile expressions, including
witcheraft accusations, which violate the rules of lincage solidarity,
but which give the young man a chance to achieve a measure of
success in life and marriage that he could not otherwise hope to
achieve. To regard the fission event as a result of the intersection of
all of the codes that might conceivably have influenced the behavior
of the agnates, elder and younger brothers, junior and senior wives, as
they wrestled each in their own way with the problem of which rule
to invoke, or as the rules themselves intersected on some unconscious
level in an untraceable skein of guilt and anxiety in each of the actors,
is a hopeless task. The fission of the Bathonga homestead is a cultural
event and is not conceivable in any operational sense as a manifesta-

601



===== PAGE 306 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

tion of a code. On the contrary, it is simply and clearly and opera-
tionally conceivable as an etic phenomenon in which the rate of fission
expresses not a mental code, but the density and spacing of the
animal and human population under the techno-environmental condi-
tions of southern Mogambique (HARRIS 1959b).

A similar but highly quantified example is found in Roy Rappa-
port’s (1966) study of the relationship between secondary growth,
sweet potato production, the pig and human populations, warfare,
and major pig-slaughtering festivals among the Maring of New Guinea.
Each of these activities has its emic rules, which cross each other
at numerous points. Thus pigs are to be fed with inferior grades of
sweet potatoes. But as the pig population goes up, the pigs consume
more and more of the labor input that goes into the sweet potato
crop. There is no rule among the Maring that pigs should multiply
to the point of menacing the human calorie ration. Yet without
specifying the cyclical etic regularities in the ratio, between pigs,
people, and garden lands, the ethnography of Maring warfare and
feasting behavior cannot be properly described, ie., it cannot be
linked up with a corpus of diachronic and synchronic theory.

Among the ethnosemanticists, Frake (1962b) has gone so far as to
attempt to treat the interaction between a human group and its
habitat primarily in emic terms. Noting that there is no explicit rule
among the Subanum by which their settlement pattern can be ac-
counted for, Frake proposes to derive the implicit rule from the
intersection of a number of “quite explicit principles about the
desirable relations among houses and fields” (ibid.:56). The analysis
is presented largely as a methodological proposal and hence starts
off with the major features of the agricultural system as given. But we
are assured that these givens, for example, that new swiddens are
started every year, can also be derived from a calculus of emically
informed individual decisions. Three emic rules are offered by which
an emic “accounting” of settlement pattern is to be achieved: mini-
mum number of wild vegetation boundaries; minimum house to
swidden distance; and maximum house to house distance (ibid.:56-
57). These rules, even with the givens of no larger than nuclear
family work groups and an annual shift in locus of the main swidden
input, are obviously incapable of predicting (as distinguished from
“accounting for”) the spatial distribution of Subanum households.
Even if they all invoke the same rules at the same time in Subanum
land, it cannot be that everyone gets the same result in terms of size
of household, size of swidden, and productivity of swidden. Some-
where the emic rules must confront the etic rcality of how much is

602

Y‘

20.

Emics, Etics, and the New Ethnography

produced under the given techno-environmental conditions. Whatever
else must be taken into consideration, it is obvious that the diminish-
ing returns for labor input must figure prominently in the etic
formula governing house site shifts among swidden farmers. It is
symptomatic of the mentalism and formalism of the ethnosemanti-
cists that Frake does not describe the actual pattern of dispersal of
household sites. One description of such a pattern showing long-term
stability or change in relationship to population size and production
factors would be worth a thousand emic rules. Subanum scttlement
pattern, a characteristic distribution of people across a portion of the
earth and through a specific portion of the earth’s history, is a cultural
artifact. It is not necessary, indeed, it is impossible to derive this
pattern solely from the emic principles, explicit or implicit, by which
the Subanum think they conduct their lives.

In northeastern Brazil, peasant fathers accept the pan-Brazilian
rules emphasizing the importance of the kindred and of compadrazco.
Family size, both in terms of the number of kinsmen per household
and total effective kinship network, varies from fifteen to twenty to
several hundred, according to class. Within a given village, the most
economically successful peasant has the largest circle of kinsmen.
Unlike his upper-class metropolitan counterparts, however, the circle
of kinsmen which surrounds him is associated with the siphoning off
of his wealth rather than its consolidation. It is a cultural fact that
the pressure upon the Brazilian peasant to expand his family size
reduces his chances for upward mobility; yet T challenge the ethno-
semanticists to find a mental locus for the rule which links large
families to the maintenance of poverty. This problem may be viewed
on a still broader scale: Is the poverty of the world’s peasant masses a
cultural artifact? If so, and it is hard to imagine a negative answer,
then are we to suppose that this poverty results from a set of emic
rules to which the poor obstinately subscribe?

ETHNOSEMANTICS AND ARCHAEOLOGY

Finally, the relationship between ethnosemantics and the
diachronic approach to sociocultural phenomena through ethnology,
history, archaeology, and the comparative method deserves comment.
Ethnoscmantics may be able to develop valid and, within limits,
useful descriptions of contemporary social systems, but the linguistic
model, even more strongly than the model employed by the British
structuralfunctionalists, is inherently incapable of making discover-
ies about the content of history and the nature of historical pro-

603



===== PAGE 307 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

cesses. If anthropology is to have a diachronic component, that
component cannot consist of an inventory of cognitive rules. The
reason for this is that for most human history we have no operational
basis for getting inside people’s heads in the manner proposed by
Frake. But even if we did, we would still confront an insuperable
difficulty. The archaeologically recoverable portion of most of human
history consists of the environmental modifications which different
varieties and expressions of energy quanta have brought into being.
Binary oppositions, contrastive features, skewing rules, etc., have this
in common: they have no measurable energy cost.

604

s

Statistical Survey and
the Nomothetic
Revival o1

S
SO53

Ihe Boasians themselves would occasionally remark upon the empti-
ness of the anthropoligical landscape. Kroeber's (1920b:380) review
of Lowie’s Primitive Society was one of the earliest expressions of
misgiving:

As long as we continue offering the world only reconstructions of

specific detail, and consistently show a negative attitude toward
broader conclusions, the world will find very little profit in ethnol-

ogy.
Noting that Lowie’s achievement is a great improvement over

Morgan’s “brilliant illusions,” Kroeber nonetheless “sighs regretfully

that the honesty” of Lowie’s method “is not stirred into quicker

pulse by visions of more ultimate enterprise” (ibid.:380-81). Some |

years later, Sapir, elsewhere opposed to Kroeber’s hankering after ulti- ]

mate determinisms, came out with a similar expression of discomfort: h

But anthropology cannot long continue to ignore such stupendous
facts as the independent development of sibs in different parts of
the world, the widespread tendency toward the rise of religious or

605


===== PAGE 308 =====

v

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

ceremonial societies, the rise of occupational castes, the attach-
ment of differentiating symbols to social units, and a host of
others. Such classes of phenomena are too persistent to be with-
out deep significance [SAPIR 1927:204].

But historical particularism continued to exercise its sway over an-
thropological theory well into the middle of the century. If we in-
clude not only those who are historical particularists, but the related
viewpoints represented within culture and personality, the new eth-
nography, and structural-functionalism, we must acknowledge the con-
tinued dominance of idiographic currents right through to the present
moment. Beginning with the mid-1930’s, however, currents of thought
and practice associated with a recommitment to nomothetic inquiry
have steadily gained strength and stature within the anthropological
community. We have already entered a new era of creative theory in
which once again a science of man based upon the comparative
method boldly confronts the great questions of origins and causality.
Although this renaissance has already transformed the research strate-
gies and teaching practices at a number of major university and
museumn departments, the effects seem not yet to have been noticed
in sociology, political science, academic history, philosophy, and re-
lated disciplines. But to paraphrase Sapir, the social sciences cannot
continue to ignore the stupendous innovations of fact and theory
which are associated with the end of the Boasian era.

The mid-century collapse of historical particularism was brought
about by the critique of two very different revivals of the comparative
method. On the one hand, through the efforts of George Peter
Murdock, the statistical form of the comparative approach, which
had been originated by Tylor, reasserted itself, greatly strengthened
by new techniques and enlarged facilities. Although deeply com-
mitted to a physicalist model and nomothetic perspective, this
school, as we shall see in the present chapter, has remained aloof
from, or even antagonistic toward, cultural materialism. The second
line of attack against the Boasians, led by Julian Steward and Leslic
White, explicitly embraces the strategy of techno-environmental and
techno-economic determinism, although it has for the most part either
obfuscated or shied away from an acknowledgment of its debt to
Marx, We shall leave the discussion of this manifestation of the nomo-
thetic revival to the next chapter.

Murdock has not only rejected Boas’ criticism of the comparative
method, but he has gone far beyond any other figure in the nomothetic
revival in utilizing statistical techniques to provide testable generali-

606

zations. Nonetheless, Murdock’s position remains heavily compromised
by particularist residues. If we were to arrange White, Steward, and
Murdock in order of furthest departure from the Boasian strategy,
Murdock would fall closest to the Boasian extreme. The distance be-
tween him and Steward is made up of the issue of relatively long-run
versus relatively short-run evolutionary parallels. Although Murdock
has devoted himself to proving that in the short run, the evolution of
kinship terminologics, postmarital residence, and descent rules are
obliged to follow a highly predictable sequence, he has denied that
anything similar exists over an extended period of time. We find him
offering therefore a strange counterpoint to both Steward and Boas.
Murdock’s position in this respect is actually very similar to that of
the synchronic functionalists for whom the laws of functional relation
were to be expressed independently of long-range diachronic implica-
tions. But in other respects, especially in the manner of treatment of
data with regard to functional context, Murdock and the British
functionalists have little in common.

SPENCER, SUMNER, KELLER

Murdock has long been an outstanding critic of historical
particularism, charging, as we have seen, that Boas was “extravagantly
overrated by his students” (see p. 315). But the sources of Mur-
dock’s nomothetic interests are remote from the experiences of
White and Steward. One set of influences represents, in large measure,
a specialty confined in its effects, practically to Yale and to two men,
William Graham Sumner and his intellectual executor, Albert Keller.
These two figures accounted for a unique prolongation into the
twenticth century of Spencerism. To understand Murdock’s position,
we must revert briefly to Sumner and Keller.

The vast, four-volume masterpiece, The Science of Society (1927),
which Keller completed on the basis of Sumner’s notes, carried forward
Spencer’s grandiose plan for a total picture of world evolution. Al-
though not a typical Spencerian product by virtue of its cautions
concerning the biological transmission of cultural patterns, it is heavily
committed to analogy with bio-evolution. As explained in the “Note
to Index” in the fourth volume, “the text of this treatise is adjustment,
as resulting from the factors of variation, selection, and transmission”
(1927:1269).

It would be impossible in the space available to describe Sumner
and Keller’s vast scheme of cultural evolution. It must suffice merely
to indicate that no attempt to limit their perspective to one of

607



===== PAGE 309 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Steward’s three categories of evolutionism could be justified (see p.
642). Although perfectly well aware of specific adjustments to local
environmental and historical conditions, they experienced no diffi-
culty in stepping back from the canvas for the general view. Pethaps a
partial list of topics drawn from the tables of contents of the first
three volumes may serve to convey some idea of the enormous scope
of this extraordinary work: there are first the “maintenance systems”
under which fall such items as subsistence, division of labor, speciali-
zation and cooperation, the accumulation of capital, and advances in
energy utilization; then the effects of domestication of plants and
animals and of men as slaves, evolution of property ideas, and prop-
erty types, evolution of war, associations, government, fraternities,
classes, types of justice, antecedents of the state; and religion, ani-
mism, “eidolism,” ghost-cult, “daimonism,” fetishism, totemism, sin,
sacrifice, shamanism; also, marriage, endogamy and exogamy, purchase
and dowry, status of women, divorce; and finally evolution of mar-
riage forms, family forms, “transition to patriarchate,” and hundreds
of subtopics.

Volume 4 is wholly given over to cases linked to the other three
volumes by an elaborate index system. This index provides a direct
link between Murdock’s attempt to set up a universal file of ethno-
graphic materials and the great compendia organized by Frazer, West-
ermarck, Tylor, and, most important, by Spencer’s Descriptive Sociol-
ogy. The actual evolutionary sequences in the various branches of
sociocultural life tend toward a consensus drawn from Morgan, Tylor,
and Spencer. Of paramount interest is the avowedly materialistic
determinism upon which the overall argument is hung. Despite a
conservative political position based on their Spencerian support of
competition as the agent of evolutionary improvement, Sumner and
Keller's acceptance of cultural materialism goes far beyond that of
any of their non-Marxian predecessors.

Our contention is briefly this: that if society is to endure, no
considerations whatever can take precedence over success in self-
maintenance, that is, in the food quest and in the provision of
protection of all kinds to life. . . . Unless the earth provides suf-
ficient sustenance, men may fail. They fail in any case if there
are too many of them; they will succeed with a minimum of
effort if they are few in comparison with resources; the sort of
struggle they will be forced to make will vary according with the
proportion of numbers to resources.

What they can do in ranges outside of material self-mainte-
nance cannot but vary, and will be seen to vary, with the type of

608

Y

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

struggle they have to maintain in order to supply basic necessities.
Ways outside of self-maintenance proper must take their general
tone from self-maintenance ways [suMNER and KELLER 1927,

I:42].

MATERIALISM AT YALE

Keller was perfectly aware of the resemblance between this
point of view and that of Marx. If we are moved to wonder how he
managed to survive at Yale, it must be remembered that Sumner’s
and Keller's views were categorically opposed to socialism. They were
convinced of the victory of capitalism on the grounds of superior
maintenance institutions. Class competition would not dissolve into
socialism but rather would lead to a superior form of adaptation. Their
position confounds at once any attempt to equate evolutionism in a
blanket fashion with leftist politics, as in White’s denunciation of the
Boasians.

If this is “economic determinism,” so be it.

[The] objection to that theory seems to inhere in its application
rather than in its own validity. Marx had a therapeutic plan,
based upon his doctrine, for changing the maintenance mores, a
plan of selection from which most men of perception would dis-
sent. Doctrinaire socialists do not study to adjust to verities, but
challenge them in utopian fashion. Their assumption that the
mores must be changed wholesale gives many a student of society
pause. It is possible, however, to believe in the basic nature of the
economic life and then, when it comes to planning action, mod-
estly try to help society adapt to the conditions of life as learned:
it is not necessary to have in view the radical alteration of the
whole social order, rejecting the experience of the race and testily
sctting out to change human nature and other somewhat per-
manent elements, rather than accommodate one’s self, even
though it is not so easy, speedy, or grandiose, to actual life-condi-
tions. Belief in some of the Marxian positions, together with
entire distrust in the plan for their application, does not make
one a socialist or a communist, any more than disbelief in the
doctrine of absolute state power and control renders one an-
archistic, with leanings towards bomb-throwing [KELLER 1931:

249-50]-

Murdock, as we shall see in a moment, has reflected Sumner and
Keller's emphasis upon economic determinism but only in a highly
evasive and cryptic fashion.

609



===== PAGE 310 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

DARWIN AND SPENCER

In Keller's (1931) summary of the evolutionary principles
embodied in The Science of Society, we find an insistence upon the
literal appropriateness of Darwin’s model, with “adjustment” changed
to the more fashionable “adaptation”:

It is clear enough that the idea of taking the issue up, as it is
done here—of exploring the nature of social variation, social selec-
tion, social transmission and social adaptation—was suggested by
the Darwinian system . . . [KELLER 1931:18].

But in The Science of Society the debt to Spencer is expressed no
less emphatically. Speaking of the results which justify the possibility
of such a science, Sumner and Keller accord Spencer the kind of
praise of which he was seldom the object in the twentieth century:

The credit of this demonstration of results belongs, above all,
to Herbert Spencer, and can never be taken from him. It has
worked out, in brief, to a conception of socicty as a unified whole
—as a great entity, self-maintaining and self-perpetuating, some-
thing more and greater than the sum of its parts, whose evolution
and life are susceptible of investigation, whose forms pass from
phase to phase, from the most primitive up to the most sophisti-
cated, remaining yet constantly interdependent in the most inti-
mate and intricate of relations. The local form of society is seen
to be an adaptation to environment, and the phases of institutions
are found to be due to mutual adjustments between them. De-
mocracy did not simply happen, nor was it revealed; it is a char-
acteristic form under certain conditions—and so were and are
communalism, polygyny, fetishism. Property and marriage are
seen to be closely interlocked; likewise property and religion, re-
ligion and government, government and economic organization,
economic organization and property. Fossil forms of institutions
—survivals—exist, as in organic evolution, and afford links with
phases of the evolutionary far past. In short, the conception of the
nature of society and of the rise and decline of societal institu-
tions has come to be a broader one, and it has entered into and
vitally affected all subsequent study and thought along social
lines [1927 I11:2194].

THE SCIENCE OF SOCIETY

One part of Murdock’s historic role appears to center on his
transmission of Sumner and Keller’s interest in a “science of society,”
especially in terms of the emphasis that cultural evolution is “orderly
adaptive change” (MURDOCK 1949:xii). In his most significant book,

610

I

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

Social Structure, Murdock acknowledges that the Sumner-Keller ap-
proach is “perhaps the most influential single intellectual stimulus
behind the present volume” (ibid.:xiii). This book is dominated by
the promise that the study of sociocultural phenomena can be carried
out in conformity with the strictest physicalist model of science:

It scems clear that the clements of social organization, in their
permutations and combinations, conform to natural laws of their
own with an cxactitude scarcely less striking than that which
characterizes the permutation and combination of atoms in chem-
istry or genes in biology [MURDOCK 1949:183].

It is to Sumner and Keller that Murdock owes his confidence on this
issue. Yet he insists that The Science of Society is “permeated with
survivals of nineteenth-century evolutionism which historical anthro-
pologists have long since disproved” (ibid.:xiii).

SCALING DOWN THE SCIENCE OF
SOCIETY

In response to historical-particularist currents, Murdock’s ap-
proach to evolution and causality is heavily compromised by his
adoption of a short timescale and by a failure to combine his
comparative approach with the nomethetically relevant data of pre-
history or, indeed, with any macro-temporal view of the human condi-
tion. Murdock joins White, Steward, and Sumner-Keller in urging
that evolution is the central concept in sociocultural studies. But
the evolutionary model with which he works is so close to the end-
lessly branching tree of life that there is actually little difference on
this score between him and the historical particularists. Indeed, all of
Murdock’s contributions are suffused with a painful paradox: While
arguing persuasively for a nomothetic interpretation of the varieties
of sex-regulating and kinship institutions, he has denied that whole
sociocultural systems also exhibit diachronic regularities and that
long-range parallel and convergent evolution are significant features of
culture change.

In Social Structure, this paradox is manifest in the studied failure
to relate kinship structures and kinship ideologies to the development
of political institutions; by the failure to treat the rise of caste and
class hierarchies as a category of “social structure.” Murdock’s great
predecessors at Yale treated these subjects in ways which deserved to
be improved upon, rather than to be negated or ignored. We shall
return anon to the basis of Murdock’s rejection of macro-evolutionary
sequences.

611



===== PAGE 311 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

THE ORIGIN OF THE HUMAN
RELATIONS AREA FILES

But first, we must credit Murdock with his historic contri-
bution, the triple linking up of modern ethnography, modern statistics,
and the statistical comparative cross-cultural survey method. His great
achievement along this line was the creation of the Human Rela-
tions Area Files (until 1949, the Cross-Cultural Survey), a catalogue
of indexed ethnographic summaries collated under uniform headings.
Begun in 1937, the files in 1967 contained the description of the
relevant portions of more than 240 cultures. These files are the
culmination of an unbroken line of statistically oriented enthusiasts
extending back from Murdock to Tylor (1889), whose essay, “On a
Method of Investigating the Development of Institutions; Applied to
Laws of Marriage and Descent,” was the originating impulse (see
p- 158).

Tlsle)earliest sustained follow-up to Tylor’s suggestion was embarked
upon by the founder of the Dutch School of inductive sociology,
S. R. Steinmetz (1930; orig. 19oo). Like Spencer and other mass
compilers of ethnographic data, Steinmetz set about establishing a
catalogue of world tribes and cultures. He hoped eventually to have
at his disposal coded information on 1000 to 1500 “peoples and
phases” (ibid.:2z09-10n.). Although Steinmetz did not come close to
completing his proposed catalogue, several of his students used
samples and statistical correlations to explore important evolutionary
issues. H. J. Nieboer's (1goc) Slavery as an Industrial System is one
of the most important achievements of this school. Drawing upon
Steinmetz’s tables, Nieboer investigated the distribution of slavery on
an area basis and then attempted to discover the causes of this distri-
bution. Assuming that economic factors are most potent in account-
ing for slavery, he proceeded to a classification of his sample in terms
of economic types (which are carefully distinguished from evolu-
tionary stages). Nieboer’s tables are based on 65 hunting and fishing
societies, 22 pastoral groups, and 219 agricultural groups.

The next great book in this line is The Material Culture and Social
Institutions of the Simpler Peoples by L. T. Hobhouse, G. C. Wheeler,
and M. Ginsberg (1915). Although not students of Steinmetz, the
authors of this “Essay in Correlation” built upon Nieboer’s techno-
economic classification of societies to establish their major rubrics:
lower, higher, and dependent hunters; three grades of agriculturalists;

612

.

21

. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

and two grades of pastoralists. Their main interest was to discover to
what extent varieties of modes of food production were correlated
with the evolution of other aspects of culture. Using an initial sample
of about 640 ethnic units, they carried out simple correlation calcula-
tions on five major categories, namely political and juridical organi-
zation, family, warfare, social stratification, and control over property.
They concluded that “upon the whole the variations accord with
general probability, for the economic development may be taken as a
rough index of the amount of intellect and organizing power available
for the shaping of the life of a society” (ibid.:254).

Hobhouse, Wheeler, and Ginsberg placed considerable empbhasis on
the point that “economic development has no necessary connection
with improvement in the relations between members of society”
(ibid.). This issue of “improvement” loomed large in their overall
approach to sociocultural studies, and its injection into the argument
concerning the extent to which modes of food production influenced
the other categories of cultural phenomena obscured the strong posi-
tive correlation which most of their tables exhibit.

Among several additional studies directly inspired by Steinmetz, we
must mention especially J. H. Ronhaar’s (1931) neglected treatment
of matrilineal societies, Jan Tijm’s (1933) study of the role of women
in North American Indian culture, and T. S. Van Der Bij’s (1929)
study of warfare.

HUMAN RELATIONS AREA FILES

Murdock’s development and utilization of the Human Rela-
tions Area Files surpasses all precedents in several crucial respects.
First, the files have been available on a subscriber basis in Xerox and
microfilm form to large numbers of institutions and scholars, all of
whom thus have or will have access to the same set of primary ma-
terials. Second, the quality, quantity, and depth of information avail-
able in the files go far beyond what had hitherto been possible. Over
450,000 pages of source material already had been filed by 1967 (cf.
MOORE 1961:335). Third, the growth of the files has been accompanied
by a steady improvement in the capacity of anthropologists to make
use of statistical expertise and thus to coax maximum significance
from the techniques of correlation.

Although it can scarcely be maintained that the files have suddenly
made the results of ethnographic inquiry more secure, or more
scientific, we must admit that they have helped to generate a number

613



===== PAGE 312 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of valuable nomothetic essays among which the works of Murdock
(1949), Whiting and Child (1953), and Whiting (1964) may be
taken as representative.

Murdock’s Social Structure, aspects of which we shall discuss in a
moment, would alone probably justify the enterprise. But the creation
of the files must be seen as ushering in a whole new era of the compara-
tive method in which the search for nomothetic regularities has led
to the development of a number of additional world samples. Most
of these take the Human Relations Area Files as their starting point.
Murdock himself (1957) has led the way here with the development
of a “World Ethnographic Sample” and an Ethnographic Atlas of that
sample in which some 6oo societies are described with respect to
several dozen coded features. This atlas is being issued in serial form
in the journal Ethnology, which Murdock founded in 1962.

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FILES

The principle upon which all of this activity has proceeded
seems unassailable and to be representative in large measure of the
future course of ethnology. Ethnological statements which aspire to
nomothetic status must be checked for their degree of correspondence
to the ethnographic reality in as large a number of cases as possible.
This requirement is imposed on us by virtue of our inability to
perform laboratory tests on human history. Dependent as we are on
the unfolding of the natural continuum of events, our generalizations
must be couched in probabilistic terms derived from the observation
of the frequencies with which predicted or retrodicted events occur.
Synchronic and diachronic causal relations, so often hitherto expressed
in terms of approximate trends or tendencies, can only benefit from
more precise statements of operationally defined measures of proba-
bility. Once the practice of stating causal relationships in terms of
probabilities of association becomes firmly established, many problems
which have plagued generations of determinists and antideterminists
will dissolve themselves into a more profitable level of discourse.
Furthermore, it is obvious that the social sciences are about to glut
the conventional library channels of information storage and retrieval
with indigestible quantities of raw data. We must welcome all at-
tempts to enlarge the utility of the data on hand and to maximize
the effectiveness of the yearly crop.

To appreciate these information devices as technical assets implies,
of course, that one is aware of their technical shortcomings. Problems
~xist on many levels and manifest varying degrees of resistance to

614

v

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

improvement. The Files, for example, are dependent upon ethno-
graphic monographs whose scope, quality, and theoretical design are
highly variable. Answers to many ethnographic questions simply can-
not be extracted from the sample as it is now constituted. There is
very little which the Files can do, for instance, by way of compensat-
ing for the relative paucity of reliable quantitative information on all
aspects of primitive economics and social organization (cf. kOBBEN
1967:10). The need to overcome the unevenness of the monographic
resources prevented Murdock from establishing a random sample of
cultures, since cultures were included or rejected partially in accor-
dance with the quality of the available literature. It may very well be
that this factor biases the sample in unknown ways, as would happen,
for example, if the best known and best reported groups were the
most peaceful, or the most acculturated. This in turn places limitations
on the kinds of statistical measures which can legitimately be applied
to the typical correlation analysis end-product.

DIFFUSION AND THE PROBLEM OF
UNITS

The Files and all similar ethnographic samples are plagued by
difficulties in establishing the boundaries of discrete sociocultural
systems. Some cultures in the sample may actually consist of several
such systems, whereas others, counted separately, may actually de-
serve to be lumped together.

In addition, there is the notorious question, first raised by Sir
Francis Galton, of how to distinguish correlations which arise from
nomothetic influence from those which reflect diffusion (e.g., gasoline
and aeroplanes as distinguished from bow ties and aeroplanes). It is
interesting to note that it was this issue which discouraged Boas,
despite an interest in statistics, from adopting Tylor's method, about
which he was initially enthusiastic (LOWIE 1946:227).

Since 1961 Raoul Naroll (1961; 1964) and Naroll and D’Andrade
(1963) have proposed a total of five solutions to the problem which
baffled Galton. These solutions involve the establishment of arcs of
contiguous cultures extending over hundreds and preferably thou-
sands of miles within which various mathematical devices are em-
ployed to sift out the probable effects of contact.

Murdock (1957:193) has argued persuasively on behalf of the point
of view which minimizes the diffusionary effect, in conformity with
the viewpoint generally adopted by Steward and other critics of the
extreme diffusionists and historical particularists:

615



===== PAGE 313 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

The mere fact of historical relatedness does not disturb the au-
thor, for the evidence now seems clear that societies borrow
from one another, much as they invent for themselves, cultural
elements for which they have a need and which are at least rea-
sonably consistent with preexisting usages, and that borrowed like
invented and traditional clements undergo a continual process
of integrative modification leading to the emergence of new in-
dependent configurations. Diffusion negates the independence of
two cultures only if it has occurred too recently for the integrative
process to have run its course.

Additional study of this problem by Harold Driver (1966), J.
Jorgensen (1966), and Driver and Sanday (1966) has failed to sustain
Murdock’s optimism on this point. Analysis both of North American
distributions and of world samples shows that at least one prob-
lem, namely that of the explanation of mother-inlaw/son-in-law
avoidance, cannot be solved by ignoring the possibility of diffu-
sionary influences. (This is especially galling, if I may be permitted
the pun, because it is the first trait which Tylor sought to explain in
the article which provoked Galton’s critique.) The trouble is that
higher correlations of association can be demonstrated for temporal
and spatial propinquity than for any of the variables which are said to
have a nomothetic causal relationship to the avoidance patterns (e.g.,
kinship terminology, residence, descent). Driver’s suggestions for im-
proving the reliability and significance of the statistical cross-cultural
method go beyond Naroll’s solution to Galton’s challenge. In order to
control for diffusion and at the same time to have a permanent sample
adaptable to any number of problems, Driver advocates an initial
group of 1,000 societies (1966:147). Jorgensen goes even further and
suggests that “exhaustiveness of data should be sought” rather than
sampling, implying that perhaps 2,000 cases may have to be con-
sulted in order to overcome Galton’s objections. Jorgensen’s solution
also calls for the collation of data from at least two time periods per
culture (1966:168-69), a requirement which it would seem difficult
to reconcile with the need for exhaustiveness.

THE PROBLEM OF FUNCTIONAL
CONTEXT

One of the most persistent criticisms of Murdock’s strategy
comes from those who are alarmed by the mechanical nature of the
operations by which cross-cultural correlations are established. This is
the point on whose behalf Boas sought to abandon the comparative

616

v——»

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

method: items are wrenched out of context by coders unknown to
the reader or to the original ethnographer. Items which should be
treated separately are lumped together and those which should be
lumped together are counted as examples of different traits. The
British social anthropologists, as might be expected from their func-
tionalist heritage, have been especially disturbed by this aspect of
the comparative survey. A. J. F. Kobben’s (1952:142) critique in the
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute may be taken as
representative:

A consequence of Murdock’s insufficiently functional approach
is that his product often amounts to no more than mere classify-
ing. Where he enters into the minutiae of a problem, as occa-
sionally happens, his argument at once becomes more lively and
interesting. More often, however, he simply formulates rules or
produces columns of figures. A Dutch sociologist once called a
certain book “a work without a heart,” and in reading Murdock’s
Social Structure one is constantly reminded of this description.
Of course, the author may well protest that what he writes has
gained in exactness what it lacks from a functional point of view
and that a functional treatment is hardly compatible with mathe-
matical precision. Now every effort to be exact is welcome in our
discipline, which certainly does not suffer from an overdose of this
tonic, but it must be real and not quasi-exactness. Can quasi-ex-
actness be denied if different phenomena are placed in the same
category and treated as though strictly comparable when in fact
they are not?

The reply to this sort of criticism is best stated in its most general
form. Does one object to the isolation, codification, and cross-cultural
comparison of traits in general? Or is it that one objects to the mis-
takes which are made in the name of this procedure? In the former
instance, carried to its logical conclusion, we reach the impasse of
Ruth Benedict’s Digger Indians, wherein cultures can be compared
only as wholes and as such are really noncomparable. As Murdock
has put it in his critique of cultural relativism:

Benedict held, not only that cultures must be viewed in the con-
text of the situations faced by the societies that bear them—a
position with which few modern social scientists would quarrel
—but also that they must be viewed as wholes. To her, every cul-
ture is a unique configuration and can be understood only in its
totality. She strongly implied that the abstraction of elements
for comparison with those of other cultures is illegitimate. An
element has no mcaning except in its context; in isolation it is
meaningless. I submit that this is nonsense. Specific functions, of

617



===== PAGE 314 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

course, are discoverable only in context. Scientific laws or proposi-
tions, however, can be arrived at, in anthropology, as in any
other science, only by abstracting and comparing features observa-
ble in many phenomena as they occur in nature [1965:146].

This defense of the comparative method, with which all who aspire
to nomothetic expression must concur, does not eliminate the tech-
nical difficulties associated with the statistical survey approach. Until
such time as the method under consideration approaches more closely
to the idcal model, there is one firm conclusion which must be kept
in plain view of those who are working with the considerably less than
perfect ones: Statistical cross-cultural surveys can, indeed must, be
used to supplement other modes of generating and testing hypothe-
ses, but they cannot be used alone or even as the primary sources of
nomothetic statements.

THE PROBLEM OF CAUSALITY

That the technique as it now stands cannot be used in isola-
tion is evident in one glaring defect which is characteristic of all of
the statistical comparative studies carried out since Tylor’s pioneering
essay. None of them have been capable of showing causal relations.
The reason for this is that the samples consulted have all been
synchronic. None of the studies have concerned themselves with time-
structured data and as a result they merely show probabilities of asso-
ciation between eclements which as far as the statistical methods are
concerned may be indifferently regarded as either dependent or
independent. As Jorgensen (1966:162) observed: “Statistics cannot
validate functional hypotheses or hypotheses about origins when the
data are synchronic.”

THE CASE OF THE DETERMINANTS OF
KINSHIP TERMINOLOGY

One of the most illuminating examples of this limitation on
synchronic correlations may be found at the very heart of Murdock’s
Social Structure. In the chapter entitled “Determinants of Kinship
Terminology,” twenty-seven theorems are put to the test of the
statistical comparative method. These theorems are divided into three
sets, each of which is characterized by a particular class of “determi-
nant,” namely, (1) marriage form, (2) descent rule, and (3)
postmarital residence. After validating all twenty-seven theorems by

618

.

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

demonstrating various associations between the “determinants” and
kinship terminology, Murdock turns to the question of the relative
“efficacy” of these “determinants.”

He notes first of all that the coefficients of association found in the
tables used to confirm the theorems involving marriage form are
generally lower than those found in the tables used to confirm de-
scent. He interprets this to mean that marriage forms have less
“efficacy” than descent. The same relative standing is suggested by a
test in which marriage form is pitted against descent rule by enumer-
ating cases in which they both occur in a fashion which theoretically
should tend to produce contradictory results in the relationship
terminology. For example, in societies in which there is patrilineal
descent, bifurcate merging terminologies are very common. On the
other hand, in societies with nonsororal polygyny, bifurcate collateral
terminologies are very common. When both patrilineal descent and
nonsororal polygyny are present, what happens? The descent-pro-
duced tendency toward bifurcate merging terminology takes prece-
dence over the “effect” of the marriage rule; bifurcate merging terms
are more common than bifurcate collateral ones. By similar kinds of
steps, Murdock (1949:182) concludes that “the efficacy of marriage
forms is greater than that of residence rules.” Finally separate proof is
offered that descent is also “a more effective factor” than residence.
This leaves us with residence as the least “effective” of the three
“determinants.”

AND THE LEAST EFFECTIVE SHALL BE
THE MOST POWERFUL

It quickly becomes apparent, however, that the so-called de-
terminants are misnomered and that none of the correlations per se
prove the existence of causal relations. Were this not the case, the
most important assumption in the entire book would be wrong. For
it is central to Murdock’s explanation of varieties of descent and
kinship terminology, as well as of the probable direction of the evolu-
tion of “social structure,” that residence is the most powerful determi-
nant of all the factors considered. “Powerful” here means that “the
rule of residence is normally the first aspect of a social system to
undergo modification in the process of change from one relatively
stable equilibrium to another . . .” (ibid.:183). It means that “it is
in respect to residence that changes in economy, technology, property,
government, or religion first alter the structural relationships of
related individuals to one another, giving an impetus to subsequent

619



===== PAGE 315 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

modifications in forms of the family, in . . . kin groups, and in kin-
ship terminology” (ibid.:202). It means also that “no place is allotted
in this hypothesis for the influence of such factors as preferential
marriage customs” (ibid.:222). That is, one does not ordinarily expect
changes in marriage rules or descent rules to initiate changes in resi-
dence, but one does expect changes in residence to initiate changes in
marriage and descent rules. Some additional indication of the im-
portance of this deterministic order can be gained from Murdock’s
lavish praise of Lowie for having been the first anthropologist to
demonstrate the causal significance of residence (actually Tylor long
preceded Lowie on this point): “This is by far the most important
contribution of any modern anthropologist to our knowledge of the
evolution of social organization” (ibid.:202). It should be noted that
the argument of about half of Social Structure is directly or in-
directly contingent upon the validity of this appraisal. Before pursuing
the question of the method which Murdock employs to validate the
importance of residence, the negative significance of the positive cor-
relations should be stressed.

If residence is the most powerful determinant of kinship termi-
nology, why does an analysis of the coefficients of association show
that descent and marriage forms are more “cffective” in producing
particular varieties of kinship terminologies? The answer is that they
do nothing of the kind. They show nothing about one factor “pro-
ducing” another; all they do is predict the frequency with which two
factors will be found in association. They show nothing about the
causes of kinship terminologies. They are not determinants; they are
merely predictors.

CAUSALITY IS ALIVE AND LIVING
EVERYWHERE

It is fashionable in contemporary social science to ignore the
difference between a causal relationship and an associational one. This
haughty attitude no doubt has its roots in Hume’s famous critique of
the inductive method. When we say that x causes y we merely declare
a regular relationship between the two. Thus, the notion of cause as
a metaphysical property is superfluous. But in a causal statement, the
association of x with y has a temporal component, namely that y
follows x. A nomothetic statement which lacks a causal arrow is a
contradiction in terms; its absence can be tolerated only as a token
of work in progress. If mere statistical associations are offered in licu

620

T

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

of statements of cause and effect, science is defeated, for it is knowl-
edge and not ignorance which deserves to be counted.

The difference between causal factors and mere predictive ones is
not to be taken lightly. It is the difference in knowing whether
wounds cause gunshots or gunshots cause wounds. Bullet holes are
excellent predictors of gunshots. As all devotees of Hercule Poirot
know, there is a high correlation between gunshots and bullet holes,
but no murder has yet admitted of the possibility that it was the
fatal wound which caused the gun to discharge its contents. Along
the same lines, one might note how reliably rain predicts clouds, or
how frequently fire engines are found near burning buildings. If any
additional examples are needed, they are available to anyone who
has a movie projector which can be run in reverse.

I am tempted to elaborate further on the method by which the
time relationship between two variables is utilized to separate cause
from effect, since once again it is obviously not merely a matter of
correlating any two variables which happen regularly to occur in se-
quence (cf. BLALock 1961:19ff.). But it is sufficient for our present
discussion that we realize why additional logico-empirical operations
are necessary before synchronic cross-cultural statistical comparisons
can be made to contribute to the advance of knowledge. Perhaps it is
even more important that we realize that the mere multiplication of
correlation studies, as in Robert Textor's (1967) 20,000 computer-
calculated correlations, may actually be the equivalent of running a
movie backwards and hence a source of ignorance and confusion as
well as of correlations.

THE PRIMARY IMPORTANCE OF
MURDOCK S CAUSAL HYPOTHESES

It would be unfair to attribute to Murdock a lack of interest
in separating causal from predictive variables. Indeed, Murdock’s
theory of the determinants of kinship groups and of kinship termi-
nologies must be acknowledged as the most important nomothetic
advance in the study of social organization since Morgan’s Systems
of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family (1870). But the
methodological structure of Murdock’s achievement has been obscured
by the razzle-dazzle of his statistical tables and by his ritualistic avoid-
ance of the consequences of his own major causal premises.

The manifest structure of Murdock’s presentation would have us
believe that the twenty-seven theorems concerning the “determinants

621



===== PAGE 316 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

of kinship terminology” are set forth in order to validate a single
postulate which is given formal expression in the following terms:

Postulate 1. The relatives of any two kin-types tend to be called
by the same kinship terms, rather than by different terms, in in-
verse proportion to the number and relative efficacy of (a) the in-
herent distinctions between them and (b) the social differentials
affecting them, and in direct proportion to the number and rela-
tive efficacy of the social equalizers affecting them [1949:138].

Although it sounds impressive, this postulate is rather trivial once the
jargon is stripped away. In translation, what Murdock is really saying
is that kinship terminologies are determined by all the factors that
determine them. He himself practically admits as much in the very
next paragraph:

Rephrased in looser language, the postulate states that the exten-
sion and differentiation of kinship terminology is the product of
the joint interplay of all inherent and cultural factors which sig-
nificantly affect the degree of similarity or dissimilarity between
particular categories of relatives [ibid.].

In order to understand the logico-empirical structure of Mur-
dock’s magnum opus, we must go back to an earlier portion of the
same chapter wherein Murdock undertakes to make explicit all as-
sumptions upon which Postulate 1 is based. There are thirteen such
assumptions, most of which are merely definitional and need not
concern us here. There is one, however, namely the twelfth, which
provides the key to Murdock’s theoretical position:

Our twelfth assumption is that the forms of social structure
are not determined by kinship patterns or terminology, or influ-
enced in any major degree by them, but are created by forces
external to social organization, especially by economic factors. It
is assumed hercwith, for cxample, that the available sources of
food and the techniques of procuring it affect the sex division of
labor and the relative statuses of the sexes, predisposing peoples
to particular rules of residence, which can eventuate in the forma-
tion of extended families, clans, and sibs. It is further assumed
that the prevailing types and distribution of property favor partic-
ular rules of inheritance, that wealth or its lack affects marriage
(e.g. encouraging or inhibiting polvgyny), and that these and
other factors external to social structure can strongly influence
rules of residence and marriage and through them the forms of
social organization and kinship structure. This assumption is de-
rived from the analysis by Lowie of the origin of sibs, from our
own supportive cvidence as presented in Chapter 8, and from the

622

hall

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

various theorists from Marx to Keller who have stressed the im-
portance of economic factors in cultural change [ibid.:137].

What is the relationship between this assumption and the 27 theorems
which it is alleged to underly? None. If anything, as we have scen,
the analysis of the theorem leads to contradictory conclusions con-
cerning the “effectiveness” of residence. Indeed Murdock is forced to
go through an extraordinary turnabout in order to make the two
ends of his argument meet without the one destroying the other.

Despite our tentative conclusion that rules of descent and the
kin groups resulting from them rank highest in relative efficacy
among the major groups of kinship determinants, followed by
forms of marriage and the consequent family types, the influence
of residence rules should not be too heavily discounted
[ibid.:182].

Note the remarkable understatement embodied in the phrase “the
influence of residence rules should not be too heavily discounted.”
How can we reconcile this hesitancy with the bold language of as-
sumption 12 or the even bolder: “when any social system which has
attained a comparatively stable equilibrium begins to undergo
change, such change regularly begins with a modification in the rule
of residence” (ibid.:221)?

In terms of the larger theory with which Murdock approaches his
subject, the relatively poor predictive value of residence is easily
explained as a result of a lag in the responsiveness of terminology—
precisely the same argument as that used by Morgan to justify the
use of kinship terminology for the reconstruction of earlier phases of
social organization:

Hence in systems undergoing transition, of which any large and
random sample of human socicties will necessarily include a
considerable number, kinship terms will more often be consistent
with the conservative rule of descent than with the progressive
rule of residence [ibid.:183].

THE LOST STRATEGY OF THE TWELFTH
ASSUMPTION

But what is of interest here is that “the adaptive changes”
in kinship terminology described in the twenty-seven theorems are
explicitly said to take place after the initiation of residence changes.
And yet this supremely important causal statement remains through-
out the book nothing but an “assumption” (ibid.:137, 221). What we

623



===== PAGE 317 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

should like to know at once is why this assumption, upon which
rests Murdock’s entire subsequent treatment of the “evolution of
social organization,” is not the focus of intense inquiry.

As Keller freely acknowledged (see p. 60g), this assumption com-
mits one to the strategy of cultural materialism. Applied to kinship
terminology and residence, it calls for the study of the techno-
economic and techno-environmental causes of residence changes. But
the strategy which Murdock actually pursues is highly ambiguous. On
the one hand he establishes himself as the representative of the hard,
statistical approach and on the other hand, he carefully detaches his
deterministic assumptions from any deterministic theory of history.
Although this would not seem possible in view of assumption 12
and in view of other achievements associated with his study of kin-
ship systems, it is accomplished by what I should like to describe as
the “miracle” of the “principle of limited possibilities.” And it is to
this extraordinary doctrine that we must now turn our attention.

THE PRINCIPLE OF LIMITED
POSSIBILITIES

MurdocK’s first reference to limited possibilities occurs in his
article “The Common Denominator of Cultures” (1945), where it is
used to explain why the universal pattern exists. The nature of
man, the world in which he lives, the physical and chemical properties
of materials, the physical and behavioral characteristics of other ani-
mals, set conditions for successful responses: “These conditions intro-
duce into cultures the principle of limited possibilities, which is of
extreme importance in determining the universal culture patterns”
[1945:139]. In this form, the principle of limited possibilities is
unobjectionable and merely states that cultural similarity is “not a
mere artifact of classificatory ingenuity but rests upon some substan-
tial foundation . . .,” namely, adaptive responses to the condi-
tions of human existence. In this form it is merely a reaffirmation of
Sumner and Keller’s belief in the lawfulness of the domain of history
since it predicts that cultures will not diverge endlessly, but will be
confined to a limited number of adaptations to the conditions of
human life.

Murdock’s next use of the principle, however, introduces a rather
new emphasis. In Social Structure (1949:115) he calls it “the crucial
criterion” for deciding whether a comparative or “sociological” as con-
trasted with a “purely historical” approach is warranted:

624

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

Where there are no practical limits to the variety of responses
which people can make in particular situations, cultural forms can
vary endlessly with little comparability between those of unre-
lated societies, with the result that satisfactory interpretation

must depend very heavily upon historical investigation of local
and regional influences [ibid.].

Murdock here informs us that the principle of limited possibilities
applies to some domains of culture but not to others. The list of
domains to which it allegedly does not apply is staggering: language,
ceremonial, folktales, art, technology, and “other aspects of culture.”
“In all such cases, the overwhelming majority of cross-cultural similari-
ties must necessarily be attributed to diffusion” (ibid.). The only ex-
ceptions which Murdock admits are “kinship terms and their deter-
minants.” He proceeds to demonstrate this by asserting that a
group may either “recognize or ignore sex,” affinity, etc., may either
be monogamous, polyandrous, or polygynous; recognize either levir-
ate, sororate, or cross-cousin marriage; have either bilateral, matrilineal,
or patrilineal rules of descent; practice either patrilocal, matrilocal,
avunculocal, neolocal, or bilocal residence; and so on through family
forms and types of kin groups (ibid.:116).

Two problems which escape Murdock’s attention have now
reached the crisis stage. First, it is obviously false that when parallels
occur in the domains which Murdock singles out as being exempt
from his principle, that they must be attributed to diffusion. He is
wrong even in the best case, namely, linguistics, in which parallelisms
and convergences in phonetics, phonemics, and syntax have been
demonstrated by a long line of linguists, from Zipf (1935) to Green-
berg (1963). But much more distressing is the promulgation of a point
of view which asserts that technology is less subject to limitations
than social structure! It was to explain technological parallels that
the concept was originated.

ONE OAR IS NOT AS GOOD AS ANOTHER

The anthropologist who first introduced and elaborated the
principle of limited possibilities—Alexander Goldenweiser—employed as
his favorite examples sword handles, knives and other tcc]mol'ogical
items. Goldenweiser’'s most cherished case, however, was the technology
of nautical propulsion: )

I? may be observed here incidentally that the operative condi-
tions or use to which an article is to be put, often provide limiting

625



===== PAGE 318 =====

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

conditions which in a sense predetermine the technical solution,
thus leading to comparable results whenever such a solution is
reached. Take, for example, an oar. Abstractly speaking, an oar can
be long or short, light or heavy, circular in cross section or flat,
wide or narrow, of even width throughout its length or otherwise;
it can also be made of more than one material. Now in accordance
with local conditions or chance, most of these shapes and ma-
terials may have been used for oars at one time or another, and a
variety are still being used in a pinch. . . . But if you want a
good oar—and this is what at length you do want—the end result
is limited by conditions of use. . . . These limitations are so
drastic that every oar is—emphatically—an oar, implying numer-
ous points of similarity between all oars [1942:124-25].

Let us translate Goldenweiser’s point about “a good oar” into less
anthropocentric terminology: a good oar is an evolutionarily viable pro-
pulsion device adapted to small boats in which energy is transmitted
from the human arm to the water. And now we perceive the second
crisis in Murdock’s version of nomothetic propriety: It is simply false
that there are only nine possible ways to classify kinsmen, three ways
to get married, three (or four) ways to reckon descent, and five ways
to take up postmarital residence. What Murdock means to say is
that there are only a limited number of ways under certain conditions
(not specified by him) to make “a good oar,” or in less anthropocen-
tric terms, only a limited number of evolutionarily viable terminological
systems, marriage arrangements, descent rules, and residence practices.

Early in the century Lowie (1912:37) had asked the rhetorical
question, “How many ways of fastening a skin membrane to a drum
are conceivable?” He actually thought there were only “limited possi-
bilities.” But with Goldenweiser as a guide, it is clear that what Lowie
had in mind was not how many kinds of drums are conceivable, but
rather, how many kinds could be expected to survive the selective
tests (durability, loudness, cost, etc.) to which drums are exposed
under specific biocultural conditions.

It is easy to imagine kinship terminologies which Murdock has
not considered. (Actually, since his major types of “kinship organiza-
tion” are based only on cousin terms, hundreds of variants are known
from fact and not fancy.) Why, for example, is it a nonpossibility for
a terminological system to recognize not two, but three or four sexes;
for new marriages to take place after each pregnancy, the first monog-
amous, the second polyandrous, the third polygynous; or why not
descent which is patrilincal in the morning, matrilineal in the after-
noon, bilateral in the evening, and double on Sundays? Shall we not
ask, in other words, why elephants do not have two heads, why cab-

626

bages do not grow on clouds, and why the moon is not made of Swiss
cheese? The limited possibilities of nature are none other than the
forms which evolution has produced. The task of scicnce is to explain
why they were produced. They cannot be explained by saying the other
possibilities are illogical.

EVOLUTION IS FORTUITOUS AND
UNPREDICTABLE

During a discussion commemorating the one hundredth an-
niversary of the publication of Origin of Species, Murdock explicitly
opposed the doctrine of limited possibilities to a nomothetic view of
history. Objecting to Whitc’s version of evolutionism, he insisted
that the true model of cultural evolution was, as in biology, an end-
lessly diverging “tree.” He proposed:

1. That evolution is an actual process of change, not a classifica-
tory characterization of sequences.

2. That evolution consists of real events, not of abstractions from
events, so that evolutionary development is historical in the
strictest and most literal sense.

3. That the course of evolution is fundamentally divergent or
multilinear. When parallel development occurs in more than
one evolutionary line, the sequences and results are similar
onlly in a typological sense, and are never in any respect identi-
cal.

4. That evolution operates by a purely fortuitous mechanism,
and is neither predictable, predetermined, nor purposive

[1959b:129].

Murdock next proceeds to identify this model with Steward’s concept
of multilinear evolution: “Unless I completely misread him,” he
says of Steward, “he considers all cultural evolution to be basically
multilinear and regards cases of parallel development as exceptions
demanding special investigation” (ibid.:130-31). Murdock then con-
cludes that multilinear evolution is really nothing but what anthro-
pologists have all along been calling “cultural change”:

The group of processes usually designated collectively as those
of culture change, and on which we possess an immense literature,
corresponds closely in practically every respect to the processes of
organic change known to the biologist as evolution. Culture change
meets exactly the criteria embedded in our four statements. It
refers to actual processes of change, not to abstracted typological
sequences. Its events are historical in the most literal sense, and
in their totality constitute culture history. Its course or direction

627


===== PAGE 319 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

is fundamentally multilinear. And it operates in a fortuitous, not
in a predictable or predetermined manner. Moreover, it is adapt-
ive, producing cultural adjustments to the geographical environ-
ment and to the other basic conditions of life [ibid.:131].

But if cultural evolution is “fundamentally multilinear,” “not pre-
dictable” and “fortuitous,” how do we account for the fact that, as
Murdock himself assures us, only “five major kinship systems” are
found in “an analysis of 447 societies drawn from all parts of the
world and from all levels of culture” (ibid.:135)? Murdock’s explana-
tion is as follows:
The resemblances are typological, not historical or necessarily
even functional. They occur because only a certain limited num-
ber of combinations of rules of descent, residence patterns, forms
of family organization, and methods of classifying kinsmen con-
stitute configurations whose elements are genuinely consistent
with each other, so that they represent states of equilibrium to-
ward which other combinations tend to gravitate over time [ibid.].

Were it not for the stipulation in the first sentence that the con-
sistency and equilibrium in question are not necessarily functional,
but may merely be typological, the second sentence might pass
muster as an assertion of evolutionary determinism in the realm of so-
cial organization. But the two together constitute a classic case of
eating cake and having it.

Ordinarily one might suppose that the principle of limited possi-
bilities was nothing more than an improvisation, like the “ether” or
“phlogiston,” for dignifying a lack of knowledge about causal pro-
cesses. But Murdock’s cryptic commitment to cultural materialism
profoundly complicates the issue. This is not the usual case of theo-
retical bafflement, but rather a highly original form of retrenchment:
the causal theory is abandoned, not because it fails to give results, but
because it shows signs of becoming too successful. That only five
major kinship systems emerge from a study of a representative sample
of 447 societies drawn, according to Murdock, “from all parts of the
world and from all levels of culture,” suggests the existence of extraor-
dinarily powerful, selective, deterministic, evolutionary forces.

THE EVIDENCE FOR EVOLUTIONARY
UNPREDICTABILITY

To conclude in the face of his own lifework that evolution
operates in a “fortuitous, not in a predictable or predetermined
manner” (1959b:131) surely must imply an overpowering mass of

628

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

evidence in support of the historical-particularist view. And this is
just what Murdock asserts in Social Structure: “The forms of social
organization, indeed, appear to show a striking lack of correlation
with levels or types of technology, cconomy, property rights, class
structure, or political integration” [1949:187]. What kind of evidence
is presented to justify this extravagant statement, so clearly refuted by
Sumner and Keller; by Hobhouse, Wheeler, and Ginsberg; by Nie-
boer; by Spencer, Tylor, Morgan, Marx, and Engels; not to mention
White, Childe, Steward and Wittfogel?

Since the methodological strength of Social Structure lies in the
statistical cross-cultural survey technique, one might suppose that
“the striking lack of correlation” refers to a set of relevant tables. But
there are no such tables in the book. Not only are tables correlating
technology, economy, property rights, class structure, and political
organization absent from Social Structure, but the book lacks alto-
gether anything remotely resembling a systematic treatment of these
subjects. “Technology” does not even appear in the index! The
“evidence” consists rather of the following taxonomic decision:

As will appear below, an objective classification of societies in
terms of their similarities in social structure results in grouping
together under the same specific type and sub-type such dissimi.
lar peoples as the New England Yankees and the forest-dwelling
Negritoes of the Andaman Islands, the imperialistic Incas and the
Vanimo Papuans of New Guinea, the Mayan Tzeltal of Yucatin
and the backward Miwok of California, the civilized Nayars of
India and the primitive nomadic Veddas of the interior of Cey-
lon. Nowhere does even a revised evolutionism find a shred of
support [ibid.].

DO NEW ENGLANDERS AND
ANDAMANESE HAVE THE SAME TYPE
OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE?

) The only reasonable conclusion which can be drawn from a
classification which lumps the social structures of the New England
Yankees with that of the Andaman Islanders is that the originator of
th.e glassiﬁcation has made a singularly poor choice of taxonomic
criteria. Let us examine the criteria employed by Murdock for bringing
together into one category such unlikely bedfellows. There are nine
traits which the Yankees and Andamanese share in common: (1) Bi-
lateral descent, (2) Eskimo cousin terms, (3) Neolocal residence,
(4) Absence of clans, (5) Incest prohibitions extended to ﬁrs';
cousins, (6) Monogamy, (7) Nuclear family, (8) Lineal aunt

629



===== PAGE 320 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

terms, and (9) Lincal niece terms (ibid.:228). Since three of these
nine (2, 8, 9) refer to kinship terminology, we might very well argue
that there are really only seven traits in common. But there is no
need for pressing in this direction. Let us quickly mention some of
the items of social structure which are present among the Yankees,
absent among the Andamanese, and ignored by Murdock. Such a list
might be expected to contain towns and cities, social classes, endoga-
mous minorities, religious congregations, political partics, benevolent
associations, universities, manufacturing companies, jails, state legisla-
tures, municipal councils, law courts, and street corner groups. The
Andamanese, for their part, have a few items which Murdock has not
managed to squeeze into his check list: the levirate (RADCLIFFE-BROWN
1933:73), infant betrothal (ibid.), communal ownership of land
(ibid.:41), gerontocracy (ibid.:44), and the corporate hunting and
gathering band. Especially interesting is their highly elaborated adop-
tion system (ibid.:77). This institution reduces to a shambles Mur-
dock’s claim that the forms of family organization among the Yankees
and Andamanese are of the same nuclear family type:

It is said to be of rare occurence to find any child above six
or seven years of age residing with its parents, and this because it
is considered a compliment and also a mark of friendship for a
married man, after paying a visit, to ask his hosts to allow him to
adopt one of their children. The request is usually complied with,
and thenceforth the child’s home is with his (or her) foster-
father; though the parents in their turn adopt the children of
other friends, they nevertheless pay continual visits to their own
child, and occasionally ask permission (!) to take him (or her)
away with them for a few days [ibid.].

Is this a way to run a Yankee household?

THE CASE OF THE CHINESE CLAN

The lumping together of Yankee and Andaman social struc-
ture fulfills Boas' worst apprehensions concerning the comparative
method. Murdock is betrayed into this error by his expectation (is it a
hope?) that the blessings of the principle of limited possibilities are
reserved only for residence, descent, and terminology. His conclusion
strongly suggests the need for a revision of the categories upon which
it is based. At the very least, one would expect that it not be paraded

to and fro as a wholesome product of superior scientism.
One additional example of violence to context must suffice for
our rejoinder to Murdock’s denial of evolutionary regularities. Among

630

21. Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

the allegedly false correlations of the discredited “evolutionists” is the
belief_tha.t the sib and clan tend to disappear at the state level of
organization. “That the sib disappears with the development of the
state,” writes Murdock, “is negated by the Chinese and the Manchus.”
(1949:187). This case has been taken up by Morton Fried (1957)
whp has demonstrated the capricious nature of a taxonomic priuc)il/)le,
which would lamp together the egalitarian, land-owning Iroquois or
Tungus sib with the highly stratified Chinese descent groups:

(;hinese social organization includes units which are clearly rccog-
nizable as unilincal descent groups. These groups, houcvér, have
a number of featurcs which distinguish them from apparently
qnalogous groups. In China therc is rclative emphasis on familial
independence, marked differences between the wealth and au-
thority of the family units, and a formal emphasis on written
genealogies. There is also a highly developed ancestor cult which
stresses the importance of direct descent from influential pro-
genitors [ibid.:16].
) It is clear that Murdock can justify the inclusion of his state-level
instances of sibs under the same rubric as that under which egalitar-
1au‘51bs are placed only by ignoring the profound functional differences
which pertain in the two classes of instances (cf. FREEDMAN 1958:
138fF.). But even were he to insist on the residual similarities which
characterize “sibs” under all conditions, he would yet remain very
far fr(_)m sustaining his point about lack of correlation between state
organization and the disappearance of the sib. To begin to make any
headway in this enterprise, one would have to show correlation—
use a sample—and that he has not done. Why do some theories require
a I}undrcd statistical runs to be proven partially true, while others re-
quire no statistics whatsoever to be proven entirely false?

This issue is further complicated by Murdock’s admission that a
statistical treatment of the sib-state relationship would confirm the
generally accepted nineteenth-century position: “Political evolution
from a gentile to a territorial state, for example, has frequently been
followed in Africa, Asia, and Europe, by the disintegration of clans

and the weakening of unilinear ties” (ibid.:203). But why are there
no tables on this subject? ’

TOWARD A BETTER KIND OF SAMPLE

) Pulrt of the answer lies in the nature of the sample which is
contained in the Human Relations Area Files. Murdock’s basic pre-

occupation has always been to achieve representativity of world regions

631



===== PAGE 321 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and of culture areas within these regions. Although this concern is
important and should be maintained, it leaves the question of the
representativity of the sample with respect to major types of social
structure entirely at the mercy of chance. It thus ignores Steward’s
critique of the traditional culture area classification. As a result one
can not approach the Files with questions involving the frequency
with which state-level societies are associated with unilinear descent
groups, nor can one inquire how frequently chiefdoms lack such
groups, or how frequently band-organized societies practice polygyny.

Nonetheless, it should be pointed out that in the construction of
the World Ethnographic Sample, Murdock (1957) has made provi-
sions- for overcoming this kind of problem by including at least one
example of each basic type of economy represented in each of sixty
culture areas. It may be taken as a further sign of Murdock’s retreat
from the exposed position of Social Structure that his contribution to
the Festschrift for Steward (Process and Pattern in Culture) contains
the admission that “Levels of political integration, as many studies
have shown, tend to be correlated with complexity in subsistence
economy and technology and with demographic factors” (murpock
1964:405). With the inclusion of column 38 in the World Ethno-
graphic Sample (MURDPOCK 1962), it is now possible to choose a
sample which will be approximately representative of different levels
of sociocultural integration.

THROW THE WALL AND

SEE IF

IT AGAINST
IT STICKS

A closer look at Social Structure thus reveals why the
statistical cross-cultural survey method should never be the lone or
primary instrument of nomothetic research. The correlations achieved
by what has been called “the-throw-it-against-the-wall-and-see-if-it-
sticks” technique are unlikely to build on their own toward macro-
theory. Let us admit that positive correlations established in the face
of the hazards of coding and the unreliability of the sources may
nonetheless, barring systematic bias, merit our confidence (cf. . camp-
BELL 1961; 1964; 1965). There remains, however, the problem of the
noncorrelations which arise from poor ethnography, biased analysis,
faulty coding, and improperly phrased hypotheses. It is quite pos-
sible by the throw-it-against-the-wall method to write a hundred
trivial equations none of which relate to the others, or all of which
relate to each other indiscriminately, and at the same time to get a
negative result on the theory which subsumes them all. If we wish to

632

e

21.

Statistical Survey and the Nomothetic Revival

achieve an orderly picture of history, we must begin by assuming
that there are certain orderly principles which are at work. And
we must use these principles to order and classify the data. We
cannot simply throw our data against the wall to see if it sticks
according to the predicted pattern. Rather, we must process the
data, question it, classify it, and code it, in relation to the expectations
of our major premises. Then and only then can we accept a failure
to stick to the wall as evidence against the major premise. At the same
time, it is only from such a procedure that the particular correlation
on each trial may be seen as connected and governed by the general
principles of sociocultural evolution.

A close look at Murdock’s Social Structure in other words reveals
that there is no substitute for macro-theory founded on detailed dia-
chronic and synchronic causal-functional analysis of specific cases. It
is out of such studies, imperfect as they may have been, that a view
of the macro-evolutionary tendencies of sociocultural systems was
gradually built up during the past two centuries. The general frame-
work of sociopolitical evolution from paleolithic bands to several
different varieties of tribes, chiefdoms, and states is firmly established
(cf. FrIED 1967). The relative fruitfulness of the techno-economic
and techno-environmental explanations is also well established. Classi-
fications which ignore the broad levels of sociocultural evolution
and which evade the consequences of cultural materialist causality in
the name of inductive purity pursue a false image of science. On the
other hand, the utility of the statistical cross-cultural survey is beyond
dispute and Tylor’s belief that “in statistical investigation the future
of anthropology lies” still holds true when statistical investigation is
used as a method for revealing unsuspected connections among
institutions, for identifying exceptions to regularities, as a measure of
probability, and as an indicator for research needs. But it holds true
only if we accept the larger theoretical frame within which Tylor
sought to encourage the use of his method of “adhesions.” It remains
true only if we also acknowledge that the major “institutions of man
are as distinctly stratified as the earth on which he lives” (1889:269).

633



===== PAGE 322 =====

Cultural Materialism:

General Evolution ’)

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

S
5003

It is a misfortune, some of whose consequences have already been
described, that the return to diachronic and synchronic generalization
has acquired the name “neoevolutionism.” This label confounds our
understanding of the developmental continuities within anthropology
by its suggestion of a revival of a doctrine which is associated with
the struggle to establish the fact of speciation. Historical particularism,
culture and personality, and synchronic functionalism are all perfectly
compatible with both biological transformism and cultural trans-
formism. Even the Kulturkreis school, in which religious doctrine
played a definite supporting role, experienced no difficulty in accepting
the fact that cultures evolve and that an explanation for such trans-
formations could be achieved independently of hypothesis of sus-
tained animistic interference. It scarcely strains the canons of scientific
respectability of emic and idealist schools to associate their researclh
with causal and evolutionary relations. Mead has made this clear in
her recent expression of interest in evolutionary problems. She is per-
fectly correct in her obscrvation that “most of the interests of cultural
anthropologists are embraced by this concept” (MEAD 1964:327). And

634

when she traces the causes of change in Manus society to an eclectic
mixture of personalitics and cultural setting, she evidently intends more
than a local lesson in evolutionary causality. Yet Mead’s theoretical
position remains largely uninfluenced by the specific kind of causal and
evolutionary formulations which are distinctive of the post-Boasian
period.

No one has ever denied that cultures evolve in the sense that
sociocultural systems undergo cumulative changes roughly analogous
to those which eventuate in speciation or stellar and galactic trans-
formations. The point at issue has always been the nature of the
process of cultural change. And this dispute has two principal facets:
how much parallelism and convergence has there been in sociocultural
evolution and what has caused both the observed differences and ob-
served similarities in the evolutionary careers of sociocultural systems?

Neither of the two most important figures associated with the no-
mothetic revival, namely Leslie White and Julian Steward, has ade-
quately described the shared, novel, and strategically decisive ingredi-
ent in their approach. Although White has on occasion (e.g., 1949b)
discussed the main issues in anthropological theory in terms of
“spiritualistic, vitalistic, or idealistic” versus “mechanistic, materialis-
tic” views, he has given much greater emphasis to, and has become
almost exclusively identified with, the defense of evolution. An even
more conspicuous avoidance of the discussion of the materialist and
idealist options has been characteristic of Steward’s treatment of
evolution and causality. Yet by objective standards it is the application
of the cultural-materialist strategy to the understanding of history
which distinguishes their point of view from that of their predecessors
and contemporaries.

THE INFLUENCE OF SPENCERISM ON
LESLIE WHITE

In order to evaluate the debate between Steward and White,
it is necessary first of all to recall our previous discussion concerning
the miniscule role of cultural materialism in the works of Tylor and
Morgan, by whom White alleges himself to be directly inspired (see
Chap. 5). Indeed, White has so adamantly insisted on the continuity
of his theories with those of Morgan and Tylor that he has refused
to accept the label “ncoevolutionist” on the grounds that his own
role extends only to the resurrection and not to the remodeling of
nineteenth-century anthropological evolutionary theory:

635



===== PAGE 323 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

But let it be said, and with emphasis, that the theory set forth
here cannot properly be called “neoevolutionism,” a term pro-
posed by Lowie, Goldenweiser, Bennett, Nunomura (in Japan),
and others. Neoevolutionism is a misleading term: it has been
used to imply that the theory of evolution today is somehow dif-
ferent from the theory of cighty years ago. We reject any such no-
tion. The theory of evolution set forth in this work does not
differ one whit in principle from that expressed in Tylor's An-
thropology in 1881, although of course the development, expres-
sion, and demonstration of the theory may—and does—differ at
some points. “Neo-Lamarckism,” “neoplatonism,” etc. are valid
terms, but “neoevolutionism,” “neogravitationism,” “neoerosion-
ism,” etc., are not [WHITE 1959b:ix].

Although White has repeatedly stressed his indebtedness to Tylor,
Morgan, and Darwin, there are two fundamental discrepancies in
this picture. First, insofar as materialism figures in the outlook of
these founding fathers, it is the materialism of Spencerism—the expla-
nation of sociocultural differences in terms of biological selection.
White, on the other hand, has devoted a massive effort to the
criticism of both psychological and biological reductionism. His
refrain, “Culture must be explained in terms of culture” (1949a:141),
is opposed not only to Steward’s admission of the importance of
environmental factors but to the theories of Morgan and Tylor as
well. Second, White’s “Basic Law of Evolution” has no precedent
among the nineteenth-century evolutionists with whom he seeks to
align his work. This law reads as follows:

Other factors remaining constant, culture evolves as the amount
of encrgy harncssed per capita per year is increased, or as the
efficiency of the means of putting the energy to work is increased
[ibid.:368-69; orig. 1943].
White’s “law” sounds like a definition more than a statement of co-
variance. From the actual context, however, it is clear that it is neither
alaw nor a definition but rather a statement of research strategy.

WHITE 'S BASIC STRATEGY

This strategy is the strategy of cultural materialism, phrased
in energy terms. It is employed by White as the point of departure
for the analysis of major trends with respect to both local and world-
wide evolutionary modifications. The linkage with cultural materialism
and with Marx (and not with Morgan, Tylor, and Spencer) is made
clear during the course of the application of the “law of evolution” to
the explanation of the major outlines of world history. For White

636

proposes to regard sociocultural systems as consisting of three parts:
techno-economic, social, and ideological; and he states the causal
relationships among these divisions in unmistakable terms:

Culture thus becomes primarily a mechanism for harnessing
energy and of putting it to work in the service of man, and, scc-
ondarily, of channelling and regulating his behavior not directly
concerned with subsistence and offense and defense. Social sys-
tems are therefore determined by technological systems, and
philosophies and the arts express experience as it is defined by
technology and refracted by social systems [ibid.:3g0-g1].

UN-AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL
ACTIVITIES

In her contribution to the Festschrift for White (Essays in
the Science of Culture), Betty Meggers (1960:302-3) wrote:

The law of energy and cultural evolution was first set forth by
White in 1943. . . . This law is based on the recognition that all
cultures are composed of three general classes of phenomena:
technology, social organization, and philosophy. Of these, tech-
nology is primary and determines the content and form of the
other two components.

This provided the occasion for an illuminating exchange between
Meggers and Morris Opler, one of the relatively few figures in anthro-
pology who may be reckoned as well-acquainted with Marxist theory.
Opler’s point was that it was Marx and the Marxists, especially Nikolai
Bukharin (1925), who were the true authors of “White’s Law,” de-
spite the failure of White and his followers to cite these sources.
Opler was intent on making this point because he apparently sought
to damage the scientific status of the cultural-materialist position by
emphasizing its incorporation into Communist dogma: “Apparently
the ‘practical tool kit" Dr. Meggers urges upon the field anthropolo-
gists is not quite so new as she represents, and its main contents seem
to be a somewhat shopworn hammer and sickle” (1961:13). The
impropriety of this remark is made all the more noteworthy by
Opler’s failure to point out the reasons why White’s ideas could not
conceivably be embraced by Communist doctrine. With his knowledge
of Marxist literature, Opler is in no need of being reminded that
it takes more than cultural materialism to qualify for Communist
approval. One must also accept the dialectic nature of evolutionary
process, cspecially as related to the primacy of conflict in structural
change. One must at least be a dialectical materialist, accepting the

637



===== PAGE 324 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Hegelian clement in Marx, in order to put the “hammer and sickle”
in one’s tool kit. White, who has never indicated the slightest interest
in dialectics, qualifies therefore for one of the worst epithets in the
Communist arsenal of antiheretical verbiage: he is what Engels was
the fisst to call a “mechanical materialist.”

It would be pointless to claborate the aspects of White's views
which falsify Opler’s innuendo. The question of whether or not
cultural materialism is a sound strategy for social science cannot be
left to depend on whether those who espouse it would or would not
be acceptable to the House Un-American Activities Committee. Scien-
tific facts and theories cannot be tested by loyalty oaths. That the
Russian geneticists were ultimatcly triumphant over their govern-
ment’s attempt to purge them of “bourgeois” Mendclian principles
is an encouraging sign for all of the sciences. Although the pressure to
purge Western social science of theories of cultural materialism
has not been as direct (barring the McCarthy interlude), its palpable
cffects are ubiquitous: Western social scientists confront a situation
strictly analogous to the former plight of the Soviet Mendelian geneti-
cists. It is as if merely by virtue of the fact that Communists have
politicized the meaning of cultural materialism that it must therefore
be rejected as a valid strategy for nomothetic inquiry. But we cannot
permit ourselves to be cut off from the valid contributions of Marx
simply because our national ideology is deeply committed to the sup-
pression of Marxist thought in total. Just as our physicists, chemists,
physiologists, and mathematicians have established for themselves the
right to use the products of scientific discovery regardless of the politi-
cal milieu in which these have originated, so, too, must cultural anthro-
pology feel free to use the discoveries of social scientists wherever and
whenever they help to answer the questions in which we are interested

THE ANTHROPOLOGIST IS NOT FOR
BURNING

Opler expressed amazement that anyone discussing White’s
variety of techno-economic determinism could have attributed its
beginnings to the early 1940's (actually, all that Meggers intended to
do was to give the date of White’s statement, not the origin of the
law).

It seems incredible that anyone sccking to place in time and in
the history of theory a point of view which systematically subor-
dinates the social and idcological to the technological should com-
pletcly overlook Marx and Engels and their heirs. It is curious

638

'y

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

that our neo-cvolutionists constantly acknowledge their debt to
Darwin, Tylor, and Morgan and never have a word to say about
the relation of their ideas to those of Marx, Engels, Bukharin,
Plekhanov, Labriola, Suvorov, Lenin, Stalin, et al. Yet it is patent
that their formulations are a great deal closer to those of Bu-
kharin and, indeed, to thosc of any thoroughgoing historical ma-
terialist than they can ever be to those of Tylor or Morgan. What
they share with Tylor and Morgan is a conviction that cultural
evolution has taken place. With Marx, Engels, Bukharin, Ple-
khanov, Labriola, and the others they share, in addition, convic-
tions concerning the elements and mechanisms through which
the process occurs. This close correspondence may be an instance
of parallelism. It may be the result of stimulus diffusion. There is
the possibility of lincal or collateral descent. Tt could reflect still
other dynamic forces. It might be helpful to know what is in-
volved. At any rate, before it becomes a matter of total assimila-
tion, anthropologists might well take a closer look at recent

intellectual history and at some recent trends in American ethnol-
ogy [ibid.:18).

Yet Opler’s incredulity is misplaced; what is hard to believe is that
Opler does not know from firsthand experience the real reason for
the avoidance of Marxist references by anthropologists who have
discovered, or rediscovered, Marx’s contribution to the strategy of
cultural materialism. It is incredible, since Opler himself, with his
political innuendo, reveals himself fully prepared to expose and jeopar-
dize his colleagues before the political passions of the times.

WHITE S CONVERSION

Despite the almost complete lack of reference to Marx and
the Marxist literature in White’s books and articles, White's involve-
ment with cultural materialism need not be ferreted out by lengthy
citations of Bukharin's treatment of energy and technology. In Harry
E. Barnes’s “Foreword” to Whitc's Festschrift, the same volume in
which Meggers provoked Opler's attack, there appears a clear-cut
statement of the relationship between White’s conversion to evolu-
tionism and his exposure to Marxist theories. During his graduate
studies, White had acquired a strong Boasian outlook. At the New
School in New York, he was taught by Alexander Goldenweiser;
and at the University of Chicago, where he obtained his degree in
1927, he was influenced by the Boasians, Fay-Cooper Cole and Edward
Sapir. His first anthropological article (1925) was a typically Boasian
plea for the importance of the cultural factor in the determination of

639



===== PAGE 325 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

personality and was in many ways parallel to the program upon which
Margaret Mead was about to embark. The beginning of White’s shift
to an implacably anti-Boasian position took place during the two
years that he taught at the University of Buffalo. Since this was Iro-
quois territory, he was obliged to read Morgan for the first time. And
he was shocked as anyone must be who had accepted Morgan as a
worthless example of speculative philosophy on the basis of second-
hand opinion. It was at this point that he discovered that Morgan was
a “remarkable scholar, savant, and personality.” The step from Morgan
to Marx via Engels was inevitable, and in 1929 White was deeply
enough involved in Marxist matters to take time out for a trip to
the Soviet Union.

The final step in Dr. White’s conversion to enthusiastic evolu-
tionism was a tour through Russia and Georgia in 1929, during
which he first made his acquaintance in any thorough manner
with the literature of Marx and Engels, particularly those portions
dealing with the nature and development of civilization. In his
treatment of the origins of the family, Engels had made especially
wide use of the views of Morgan on social evolution and thus
tended to impress Dr. White still further with the validity and
importance of the evolutionary approach. The writings of Marx
and Engels also helped to reveal the reasons that Morgan’s theory
of the role of property in cultural development was so vigorously
attacked by Catholic scholars and by capitalist historians and
economists [H. E. BARNES 1960:Xxvi].

There is no need to repeat here the arguments against White’s equa-
tion of antievolutionism with the central theoretical and factual
errors of the historical-particularist school. We may take this whole
issue as evidence of the extraordinary trauma which social science in
the United States had experienced as a result of its isolation from
Marxist viewpoints. White returned from the Soviet Union to take
up a teaching position at the University of Michigan, where he ulti-
mately succeeded in building one of the country’s major centers of
anthropology. Although White was uncompromisingly and outspok-
enly hostile to historical particularism, to psychological reductionism,
to doctrines of free will and theological teleology, and to almost every
other shibboleth of the Midwestern milieu in which he operated, he
managed to avoid placing his critique within the arena of Marxist
disputation. Perhaps this was made possible because the level of
anthropological theory had slipped back so far toward a prescientific
condition that there was enough to do merely by way of recapturing
the ground upon which Marx had built without going beyond or even

640

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

equaling Marx’s own contributions. Nonetheless, many themes in
Whites publications were fully anticipated by Marx and Engels. This
should be understood to include Marx and Engels’s reworking of Mor-
gan, for when White speaks of himself as an evolutionist following in
Morgan’s footsteps, it is the Morgan as reinterpreted by Engels in
the Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State of whom
we must think.

WHITE'S DEFENSE OF MORGAN AND
TYLOR

White’s crusade on behalf of the defeat of the “antievolu-
tionists” in order to restore the theory of evolution to its former
prominence has produced irrelevant polemics. Kroeber (1948c), Lowie
(1946; 1957), and Steward (1955) joined with him in discussions
which have obscured the basic simplicity of White’s point. The
theory of evolution for White is “the old and simple concept so well
expressed by Tylor: . . . the great principle that every scholar must
lay firm hold of, if he intends to understand either the world he lives
in or the history of the past” (WmiTE 1959b:125). Returning to the
full context of this “great principle,” we find:

On the whole, it appears that wherever there are found elabo-
rate arts, abstruse knowledge, complex institutions, these are re-
sults of gradual development from an earlier, simpler, and ruder
state of life. No stage of civilization comes into existence spon-
taneously, but grows or is developed out of the stage before it.
This is the great principle which every scholar must lay firm hold
of . . . [rYLOR 1881:20].

The perfect acceptability of this kind of evolutionism to the Boasian
stalwarts has already been discussed.

As long as there is no claim to the effect that all cultures must
pass through a specific set of stages, no Boasian would ever deny that
a series of worldwide evolutionary stages can be identified. Yet White
has insisted over and over again in his defense of his nineteenth-
century evolutionist heroes that they never proposed that all cultures
necessarily passed through the same set of stages, e.g., Savagery, Bar-
lbansm, Civilization. To speak of the position of Morgan and Tylor
in terms of such an impoverished antinomy is misleading. It was not
an all or nothing question for them nor is it one for us. As Sahlins
and Service (1960:12) have observed, Tylor “laid out the study of
cultural evolution both stage by stage as well as along its many lines.”
The only issue worth discussing is the frequency of convergence and

641



===== PAGE 326 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

parallelism; not whether there are exceptions to the regularitics of
history, but rather how frequently these occur.

In the perspective of Tylor and Morgan, there is no doubt that the
parallclism and convergence were often assumed to be far more fre-
quent than the facts have subsequently justified. For example, it was
because of Morgan’s faith in the uniformity of the historical exper-
iences of widely separated cultures that he was led to argue, on the
basis of fragmentary evidence, that the Aztec were in a stage of culture
which was not significantly different from that of the Iroquois. It
was a similar faith in the uniformity of history which led Morgan to
suppose that his fragmentary data on archaic Greece was adequate for
identifying the matrilineal stage.

When Tylor spoke of the tendency of the experience of mankind to
move through uniform channels, it was not to say that mankind in
general as distinct from mankind in particular cultures shared these
channels. Such a distinction is a refinement for which White’s heroes
had no need. Tylor meant that most (not all) cultures unfolded
along similar lines (see p. 171). The exceptions, recognized by both
Tylor and Morgan, were explicable in terms of race, diffusion, and
environmental specialties.

White has used this recognition of diffusion and local perturbations
in the evolutionary sequence to distort the theories of the nineteenth-
century evolutionists into a shape convenient for the maintenance of
“evolutionism” as the center of twentieth-century controversy. He
has argued that their evolutionism was not one of particular times
and places but rather of the world as a whole. It is clear, however,
that their interests encompassed both levels of generalization.

UNILINEAR, UNIVERSAL, AND
MULTILINEAR EVOLUTION

In an attempt to formalize the differences between himself
and White on the issue of evolutionism, Steward (1955) has proposed
a threefold classification of evolutionary approaches: unilinear, uni-
versal, and multilinear. The unilinear, says Steward, was characteristic
of the “classical” evolutionists who “dealt with particular cultures,
placing them in stages of a universal sequence” (1955:14). Morgan
and Tylor fit in this category. But every one of the “classical” evolu-
tionists also fit in Steward’s second (“universal”) category: “a rather
arbitrary label” to designate Whitc’s “revamping of unilinear evolu-
tion” and which “is concerned with culture rather than cultures.”
Steward’s third brand of evolutionism is called “multilinear evolu-
tion.” This is dcfined as follows:

642

A

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

. it is interested in particular cultures, but instead of finding
local variations and diversity troublesome facts which force the
frame of reference from the particular to the general, it deals
only with those limited parallels of form, function, and sequence
which have empirical validity [ibid.:19].

The inadequacy of this classification is shown by the fact that
the two anthropologists whom Steward nominates for universal
evolutionism, namcly White and V. Gordon Childe, are equally
good contenders for at least one of the other categories. White, as
much as the classical evolutionists, has attempted to locate specific
cultures in relationship to universal schemes (ie., unilinear evolu-
tionism). And in his most sustained substantive treatment of evolu-
tion, The Evolution of Culture (1959b), White not only attempts to
trace the whole course of cultural development, from the transition of
anthropoid to human society to the beginnings of the iron age, but
he also reconstructs specific cultural sequences in the light of the
general trends manifest in the universal sequence. In Australia, for
example, the Arunta system of marriage classes is said to have
evolved from the Kariera type of relationship to “a higher stage of
cultural development and social evolution” when “the maximum
effectiveness of the cooperative group formed by marriage could not
be achieved by union between first cousins” (19359b:173). More
con.imon}y, it is White’s practice to interpret the significance of
vatious institutions in particular socicties on the assumption that
the culture has reached a certain level of evolution. Thus, his treat-
ment of social stratification in Polynesia and the Northwest Coast
draws heavily on the universalistic generalization (first advanced by
the Edinburgh School in the eighteenth century) that “it is not until
kinship has ccased to be the basis of social systems and society has
become organized on the basis of property relations and territorial
distinctions that true classes of subordination and superordination
come into being” (ibid.:203)

WHITE AND CHILDE AS MULTILINEAR
EVOLUTIONISTS

In every respect, White’'s The Evolution of Culture is the
modern equivalent of Morgan’s Ancient Society, the only difference
being the updating of some of the cthnography and the greater
consistency of the cultural-materialist thread. White has explicitly
rejected Steward’s attempt to make the “house of evolutionism” . . .
“falsely divided against itself” (1959a:125). Programmatically, at least,

643



===== PAGE 327 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

he has embraced all of the varietics of evolution set forth by
Steward:

It follows from the foregoing that culture may be regarded as
a one or as a many, as an all-inclusive system—the culture of man-
kind as a whole—or as an indefinite number of subsystems of
two different kinds: (1) the cultures of peoples or regions, and
(2) subdivisions such as writing, mathematics, currency, nlle.ta]-
lurgy, social organization, etc. Mathematics, lzmguagc,. writing,
architecture, social organization, etc. may each be considered as
a one or a many, also; one may work out the evolution of mathe-
matics as a whole, or a number of lines of development may be
distinguished. Evolutionist interpretations of culture will th(-:‘re»
fore be both unilinear and multilinear. One type of interpretation
is as valid as the other; each implies the other [wHITE 1959b:

30-31].

As for the universal evolutionism of V. Gordon Childe, there must
be taken into consideration not only Childe’s adherence to Morgan’s
universal stages of Savagery, Barbarism, and Civilization in the presen-
tation of the Middle Eastern archaeological sequences, but also
Childe’s highly particularistic treatment of the emergence of a fiis—
tinctly European culture area (CHILDE 1946; 1958). In actual practice,
Childe is even more inclined toward multilinear evolution than is
Steward:

So on the whole archaeology does not hold out much prospect of
correlating social institutions with stages of cultural development
as defined in economic terms. But, after all, we have seen that
such stages, apart from the three main status, are themselves
hard, if not impossible to define. For within the status of bar-
barianism at least, the observable cultural sequences do not follow
parallel lines [cHILDE 1951a:165-66].

As a matter of fact, Childe goes on to compare the diversity of
cultural evolution with the Darwinian model of a tree “with branches
all up the trunk and each branch bristling with twigs” (ibid.:166),
and this is none other than the extreme limiting case of multilinear
evolution.

EVOLUTIONARY MODES AND
EPISTEMOLOGY

It is evident that the three evolutionary modes defined b}/
Steward are not mutually exclusive. It is also evident that the logic

644

22.

Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

of Steward’s categories rests on a continuum involving degrees of
abstraction away from the description of specific cases.

At one end of this continuum there is the evolutionary transforma-
tion which is characterized by or known through one case. For
example, onc might want to consider the development of a four-
caste apartheid system (Africans, Europeans, Coloreds, and Asians)
as an cvolutionary product peculiar to South Africa. Similarly, the
Natchez system of exogamous castes is not reported elsewhere, yet it
is obviously resultant of a process of transformation (whose stages are
as yet unknown).

On a slightly higher level of generality, we may note the evolutionary
products characteristic of several societies within a single culture area.
The peculiar Australian speciality involving eight marriage sections is
an evolutionary product of the transformation of two- and four-
section systems. Parallelisms involving one or two cultures in several
different culture areas also occur, as in the case of matrisibs in the
Eastern Woodlands, West Africa, and Melanesia.

Finally, there are the universal evolutionary products such as the
nuclear family incest taboos or the belief in animism.

All of these categories can be expanded or contracted indefinitely
in accordance with the amount of ethnographic detail which is re-
quired before we are willing to grant that two instances are the
“same” or different. Universal evolutionism merely represents an
extreme expansion of the tolerated degree of abstraction. Distinctions
otherwise relevant between patrilateral and matrilateral marriage
exchange system are canceled out and the remainder scooped up
under the rubric “kinship regulation of marriage”; or endogamous
hierarchies in India, the United States, and South Africa are treated
as “caste system.” By ignoring millions of trivial differences, in
order to emphasize a few significant similarities, we arrive at such
theoretically vital notions as cgalitarian societies, state organization,
feudalism, capitalism, or oricntal despotism. Conversely, with a suffi-
ciently intense historical-particularist mandate, we may prove to our
satisfaction that the state of affairs in eleventh century France had no
parallel anywhere else in Europe, much less in Japan or West Africa.
The mutual failure of both White and Steward to grasp the epistemo-
logical issues which underly our judgments concerning evolutionarily
significant similarities and differences goes a long way toward explain-
ing the prolongation of their controversy beyond useful limits. This
failure is especially acute in relationship to White’s refusal to admit
that certain transformations studied by Steward qualify as “evolu-
tionary” phenomena.

645



===== PAGE 328 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

WHEN IS CHANGE EVOLUTION?

My intent here is not to arbitrate the controversy over what
is or is not evolutionary. Nothing could be more fruitless. The point
at which the accumulation of changes in an old form results in the
identification of a new form—in a “temporal sequence of forms’—is
not a matter for research. The predictable end result of the further
discussion of this theme is that differences of opinion will be resolved
by introducing a few new terms (how about “minor,” “major,” and
“mega” cvolution?). The matter for research as distinct from philo-
sophical disputation is: What causes the observed changes, be they
small or large, “systems” or “mere aggregates”? Whatever causes small-
scale changes must be important for an understanding of large-scale
changes; conversely, whatever causes large-scale changes must be im-
portant for an understanding of the small-scale ones. Thus we have
the mutual relevance of genetics and natural selection in the theory of
bio-evolution; and of the physical chemistry of stars and the evolution
of galactic forms.

WHITE'S CRITERIA OF EVOLUTION

Phrasing the nomothetic revival in terms of evolutionism has
meant that the search for the underlying causal processes responsible
for cultural differences and similarities has become mired in scholastic
dichotomies. White has attacked Steward for studying nonevolution-
ary changes on the model of historical particularism, and Steward has
attacked White for his grandiose generalizations. In reviewing Stew-
ard’s Theory of Culture Change, White (1957:541) declares:

Steward falls between the two poles of idiographic and nomo-
thetic interpretation, between the particular and the general. He
is not content with mere particulars, but he cannot go the whole
hog of generalizations. He wants generalizations but, as he says re-
peatedly, they must be of limited scope (Theory, p. 22 et passim).
Try to imagine a law of falling bodies, or of gravitation, of limited
scope. Steward resembles one who discovers that this river and
that flow down hill but is unwilling to go so far as to assert that
“rivers flow down hill.”

The particular transformation which White rejects as an example
of evolution concerns two American Indian groups, the horticultural
Brazilian Mundurucu Indians and the Algonquin hunters and gath
erers of Canada. In a convergent fashion these tribes responded to

646

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

Luropean contact by shifting to dependence upon the production of
trade goods—furs in one case and rubber in the other. One group
became “tappers,” the other, “trappers.” But the involvement with
the trading post through debt obligations followed a similar line of
development despite the different tcchno-environmental relationship
(syurpHY and STEWARD 1955). For Steward these transformations
represent convergent evolutionary sequences. White (1959a:122),
however, demands to know, “What justification is there for calling
them lines of evolution?”

In other studies by Steward, such as the comparison of the de-
velopment of civilization in Mesopotamia and Peru, White is willing

to grant that we have examples of “true evolutionary processes.” But
this

- Is a fundamentally different kind of process than the simple
like cause, like effect occurrences in Steward’s tappers and trap-
pers example. Thus some, or at least one, of the “lines of evolu-
tion” he describes (Steward, 1956) turns out to be a genuine
evolutionary process; others are not evolutionist at all [ihid.}.

But if evolution is “a temporal sequence of forms” (warTE 1959b:30),
how is it possible to deny that the Mundurucu have undergone evolu-
tionary change during their transformation from horticultural tribes-
men to debt-bound rubber collectors? Perhaps an answer could be
built around White’s declaration that “only systems can evolve; a
mere aggregation of things without organic unity cannot undergo
evolution” (ibid.). But he would have great difficulty in convincing
the majority of anthropologists that the Mundurucu’s subsistence
patterns are a “mere aggregation.” Or perhaps, in order for White to
accept a cultural change as evolutionary, it must have produced a
transformation on a certain scale, measured perhaps in energy quanta.
If so, White has nowhere proposed what quantitative operations would
be required.

STEWARD' S CRITIQUE OF WHITE

Steward, on his part, has condemned the universal evolu-
tionist approach of White and Childe for its inability to come to
grips with the question of specific cultural differences and similarities
as distinct from the vague and unilluminating generalities of universal
laws. Steward’s comments hark back to the Boasian response to
highly generalized evolutionism:

647



===== PAGE 329 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

The postulated cultural sequences are so general that they are
neither very arguable nor very useful. No one disputes that hun'E—
ing and gathering, which is Childc’s diagnostic of “savagery,'
preceded plant and animal domestication which is his criterion of
“barbarism,” and that the latter was a precondition of large popu-
lations, cities, internal social differentiation and specialization,
and the development of writing and mathematics, which are
characteristics of “civilization.” . . . It is certainly a worthy ob-
jective to seek universal laws of cultural change. It must be
stressed, however, that all universal laws thus far postulated are
concerned with the fact that culture changes—that any culture
changes—and thus cannot explain particular features of particular
cultures [STEWARD 1955:17-18].

In Steward’s (1960:146) review of White’s Evolution of Culture the
same point is directed specifically at White’s own evolutionary formu-
lations:

Regarding the causal chain that begins with technology and con-
trol of energy and runs through society to religion, there can be
little disagrecment with the self-evident proposition that “as the
amount of energy harnessed by sociocultural systems increases per
capita per year, the systems not only increase in size, but become
more highly evolved, ie. . .. morc differentiated structurally
and more specialized functionally” (pp. 39-40). But this does not
at all explain what kinds of social structures arise from the utili-
zation of technologies in particular environments. White concedes
(p. 41) that “technological and cnvironmental factors both oper-
ate to produce cultural differences quite apart from the source
and magnitude of energy harnessed,” but he is not interested in
these differences and states (p. 51) that “if one . . . wishes to
discover how cultural systems are structured and how they func-
tion . . . then one does not need to consider the natural habit
at dll,” for he is really concerned with “how and why the culture
of mankind as a whole has grown” [italics Steward’s].

WHITE'S DEFENSE

White’s response to such criticism is singularly unconvincing.
He argues that general laws are not supposed to explain particular
events. The kinds of problems which Steward wishes to handle under
multilinear evolution really belong in the historical-particularist tradi-
tion. It is Steward’s training in the “atomistic, idiographic, there-is-
no-thyme-or-reason-to-cultural-phenomena tradition of the Boas school”
which is at fault:

648

The predicament in which we find Steward, suspended  be-
tween the particular on the one hand and the general on the
other, may also be illustrated by citing his objection to broad
generalizations or “universal laws,” as he calls them: they “can-
not explain particular features of particular cultures” (Theory,
p- 18). Of course they cannot! This is precisely the characteristic
of a generalization or law; particulars are subsumed under the
universal. The law of gravitation cannot tell us whether the falling
body is a rock or a feather, much less whether the one is sand-
stone or the other a heron plume. And this is precisely why the
law of gravitation—or any other scientific law—has value: because
it is a universal, i.c., tells us nothing about particulars as particu-
lars [WHITE 1957:541].

Does the law of gravitation tell us nothing about particulars? When
one predicts a particular eclipse on a particular planct of a particular
sun by a particular moon, has this no relation to the general law?
White undoubtedly means to say something else, to wit: no general
law tells us everything about particulars. Hence our lack of information
about whether falling bodies are rocks or feathers. But if a generaliza-
tion tells us nothing about particulars, it can scarcely enjoy the status
of an empirical proposition.

THE NEED FOR STATEMENTS OF
COVARIANCE

A closer look at what White means by cultural “laws” or
generalizations will help us overcome the muddle of evolutionism
and antievolutionism. Two very different kinds of propositions are
offered by White, only one of which might conceivably qualify for
the status of lawful generalization. The kind which definitely does not

qualify is that which sums up universal cultural evolution with obser
vations like:

As society evolved under the impetus of increased technological
control over nature, the processes of exogamy and endogamy
operated to increase the size of the cooperative group of kindred
while at the same time maintaining its solidarity and effective-
ness. The radius of kinship was extended until the boundaries of
the community were reached; eventually the whole tribe became a
unified, integrated group of kindred living togcther on terms of
mutual aid.

Custom in general and special codes of ctiquette and cthics
served to integrate and regulate socictics. Classes were defined

649



===== PAGE 330 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

and kept intact by rules of etiquette; the general welfare was
fostered by ethical rules. Division of labor and specialization of
function marked the course of social evolution [WHITE 1959b:275].

If we take White’s separation of the particular from the general at
face value, these statements all reduce to the form: in the history of
hominid culture on planet carth, cultural form x was followed by
cultural form y at unknown times and places. It is of absolutely no
significance in the logico-empirical structure of these statements
whether each stage in the alleged sequence occurred often, some-
times, or only once. These are not, in other words, statements of
covariance.

In order to achieve nomothetic status these summaries of world
history must be rephrased into the form of propositions about co-
variance, from which probabilistic predictions and retrodictions about
specific cultures can be made. Thus: At a certain level of technological
control (to be more precisely defined), we expect to find kinship
extended to the boundaries of the community with a probability
greater than chance. Of course, as soon as we phrase White’s generali-
zation in this form, we sce at once that the disdain for the particular
case cannot be reconciled with the quest for generality. The generality
is nothing but the sum or average of the particular case.

Of greater interest in the context of our discussion concerning
cultural materialism is the task of converting White’s alleged “law” of
evolution to genuine nomothetic status. A statement of covariance of
a sort implicit in White’s techno-economic determinism (“culture
evolves as the energy in the system increases”) might take the form:
When the ratio of technological efficiency in food production (calorie
output per calorie input per total man hours of production) exceeds
20:1, the probability that stratified endogamous descent groups will be
found is greater than chance (cf. HaRRIS 1950a). As we shall see in a
moment, not only does this reformulation oblige us to become con-
cerned with particular measurements of particular culture systems, but
it also obliges us to calculate the effect of specific environments on
technologically mediated productive processes.

CULTURAL MATERIALISM AND THE
EXPLANATION OF SPECIFIC CASES

There is another kind of interpretation of White’s energy
“law” which possesses utility as a kind of meta-generalization rather

than as a statement of covariance. It is this reformulation which ac-
tually deserves our greatest attention, because it amounts to nothing

650

. g

22, Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

less than a statement of the research strategy through which one
proposes to arrive at the formulation of the most productive state-
ments of diachronic and synchronic regularities. This is the strategy
which often reluctantly acknowledges its debt to Marx: The most
powerful generalizations about history are to be found by studying
the relationship between the qualitative and quantitative aspects of
culture energy systems as the independent variables and the quantita-
tive and qualitative aspects of the other domains of sociocultural
phenomena as the dependent ones. It needs to be emphasized in
this context that the meta-generalization embodied in the cultural-
materialist research strategy is fully analogous to and at least as well
vindicated by specific cases as the vaunted “principle of natural se-
lection” in biology.

The implication in White’s proposals concerning nomothetic expla-
nations to which we must take vigorous exception is that cultural
materialism as a general strategy leads only to highly abstract evolu-
tionary sequences. It must be affirmed that this strategy nced not
limit itself to the vapid generalizations with which White has some-
times tried the patience of his colleagues. It leads as well to the
understanding of particular cases in all their detail in so far as such an
understanding can be achieved with reference to nomothetic, as
distinct from strictly historical, relations. We may credit White
therefore with the formulation of this strategy (under the pseudonym
of evolutionism), but we must also note his failure to apply it to
specific cases.

SPECIFIC AND GENERAL EVOLUTION

Recently, an attempt has been made to reconcile Steward’s
and White’s views through the recognition of two different varieties
of evolution, “specific” and “general.” The authors of this proposal,
Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service, have been students and col-
leagues of both White and Steward, a circumstance which accounts in
part for their mission of reconciliation. The failure to keep in mind
the dual character of evolution, a concept well expressed by Tylor
and upheld by the biologist Julian Huxley, is alleged to be “at the
very heart of the confusion and polemical controversy about such
terms as ‘unilinear,” ‘multilinear,’ and ‘universal evolution’ as well as
about the differences between ‘history’ and ‘evolution’ ” (sAHLINS
and SERVICE 1960:12). According to Sahlins and Service:

. evolution moves simultancously in two dircctions. On the
one side, it creates diversity through adaptive modification: new

651



===== PAGE 331 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

forms differentiate from old. On the other side, evolution gener-

ates progress: higher forms arise from, and suppress, lower
[ibid.:12-13].

Specific evolution thus seems to be equated with divergence and
adaptation to local natural and cultural habitats; general evolution,
with stages of progress.

It cannot be said that this formulation achieves the desired rec-
onciliation of Steward'’s cultural ecology with White’s universal evolu-
tionism. Neither specific nor general evolution is readily applicable
to the facts of cultural transformations. By seeming to equate adapta-
tion with divergence, Sahlins and Service appear to overlook a salient
characteristic of both cultural and biological evolution: convergence
and parallelism. That is, adaptation produces both divergence and
convergence.

These impressions are reinforced when they further insist that the
study of specific evolution requires a “phylogenetic” approach to tax-
onomy as opposed to the taxonomy of general evolution which
requires “stages” or “levels” (ibid.). It is a capital error to employ
the concept of phylogeny (even as analogy) in relation to cultural
forms, since (as Sahlins and Service very well know) there is no re-
semblance between the mechanisms responsible for cultural continuity
and those responsible for biological reproduction. Phylogeny is an
expression of the capacity of bioforms to differentiate to the point
where gene exchange no longer takes place. Phylogeny implies specia-
tion, and there is no concept less applicable to cultural evolution
than that of biological “species.” The adaptive significance of culture in
the evolution of the biosphere is precisely its exploitation of a non-
genetic feedback circuit which permits adaptation without speciation.
All sociocultural systems can exchange parts with each other, a situa-
tion whose startling effects in biology would be appreciated were
pigeons and elephants to mate and reproduce whenever they enjoyed
each other’s company for any length of time.

That the difference between Steward and White cannot be com-
posed by equating Steward’s approach with specific evolution is im-
mediately apparent if we consider Steward’s interest in limited parallels.
The taxonomy which results from, or is appropriate to, such a
study can scarcely be called phylogenetic (even after making due
allowances for the inappropriateness of the term for any cultural
process), since it is avowedly concerned with regularities which occur
in widely scattered parts of the world. Yet Steward calls the pro-
cess “adaptation.” Obviously this “adaptation” is concerned not with

652

22. Cultural Materialism: General Evolution

specific cultures in specific environments but with a class of cultures in
a class of environments, mediated by a class of technological invento-
ries. Indeed, it can be argued that in both biological and cultural
evolution, the only practical method for identifying “adaptive” traits
is to employ the comparative method, which, of course, is nothing
but the search for nonphylogenetic regularities under conditions of
controlled comparison. The only way to compose the difference be-
tween Steward and White is to realize that the problem is quantita-
tive, not qualitative. As we have already seen, if Steward’s regularities
occur with sufficient frequency and embrace sufficiently broad cate-

gorics of transformations, White experiences no difficulty in admitting
the process as evolutionary.

PROGRESS AGAIN

Sahlins and Service’s concept of “general evolution” suffers
from an additional grave defect. Insofar as Sahlins and Service
follow White’s lead and emphasize the importance of energy quanta as
a measure of general evolution, their discussion conforms to the
cultural-materialist strategy and is unobjectionable, if highly program-
matic. It is regrettable, however, that these same criteria are offered as
measures not only of successively better adapted sociocultural systems
but also as a measure of evolutionary “progress.”

In the former case, we merely predict that adapted systems tend to
be replaced by other adapted systems, the later ones in the series being
thermodynamically larger and more efficient than the carlier ones.
There is no doubt that this generalization is broadly true of both
biological and cultural evolution. It is quite another matter, however,
to affix the term “progress” to the observed trend. This seems like a
deliberate re-exposure of all the raw nerves associated with nineteenth-
century Euro-American ethnocentrism and with the discredited
attempt to read a moral lesson out of the facts of biological evolu-
tionary processes. It is obvious that no matter how certain it is that
thermodynamically smaller and less efficient cultures will be replaced
by larger and more efficient ones, we are under no obligation to like it
or to believe it to be morally good and proper. Calling negative
entropy “progress” does not enhance our understanding of the condi-

tions under which culture energy systems evolve to higher levels of
productivity and efficiency.

653



===== PAGE 332 =====

Cultural Materialism:

Cultural Ecology 773

23.

Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

S
B3

’]:1:: attempt to reconcile Steward with White does not require
further elaborations of a typology of evolutionism. The central
question is to what extent the strategy employed by Steward cor-
responds to the cultural-materialist formulation which underlies
White’s evolutionary and energetistic pronouncements. It can be
shown that Steward has led his contemporaries in actually applying
cultural-materialist principles to the solution of concrete questions
concerning cultural differences and similarities. Unlike White, Steward
has sought to identify the material condition of sociocultural life in
terms of the articulation between production processes and habitat.
His cultural materialism resides in this pragmatic venture to which he
himself gives the title “the mcthod of cultural ecology.”

It will obviously not be possible to review any significant propor-
tion of the anthropological research which has been undertaken in
conformity with ecological versions of cultural materialism. Even
to give summary treatment to the work carried out by those who have
been directly influenced by Steward—Sidney Mintz (1956), Eric
Wolf (1957; 1966), Morton Fried (1952; 1967), Elman Service

654

(1955; 1962), René Millon (1967), Andrew Vayda (1956; 1961c),
Robert Manners (1956), F. Lehman (1963)—could prove an ex-
hausting task.

The list of anthropologists who have benefited indirectly from
Steward’s treatment of techno-environmental and techno-economic
interactions is proportionally larger and includes, at this date, many
younger figures who take their cultural ecology for granted, and who
acknowledge Steward’s contribution only by means of criticism
aimed at disproving some of his specific ecological explanations on
the basis of new data.

Nothing would be more contrary to the general frame of reference
advocated in this book than to explain the recent prominence of
ecological studies as a result of Steward’s personal influence. The
mounting interest in techno-environmental and techno-economic re-
lationships reflects a broad movement aimed at strengthening the
scientific credentials of cultural anthropology within the prestigious
and well-funded natural sciences. Cultural ecology, precisely because it
links emic phenomena with the etic conditions of “nature,” strengthens
the association between social science and the “harder” disciplines. In
a synchronic mode it thus promotes research involving cooperation
with the general medical sciences, biology, nutrition, demography, and
agronomy, all of which enjoy high levels of economic support. Ap-
plied diachronically, the ecological approach establishes a similar set
of ties between archacology and numerous specialties within geology
and paleontology. The contemporary premium upon scientism thus
makes the expansion of cultural ecological research almost inevitable.
Predictably, however, the movement to take up the cultural-materialist
option in the guise of cultural ecology has failed to link itself with the
historical precedent of Marx’s proposals. Indeed, one of the most
fascinating aspects of Steward’s contribution to the revival of nomo-
thetic inquiry is the slow but unacknowledged rediscovery or reinven-
tion of principles long ago made explicit in Marx’s “Preface” to The
Critique of Political Economy (see p. 229).

MULTILINEAR EVOLUTIONISM NOT A
METHODOLOGY

The link between cultural ecology and cultural materialism
has been obscured by the spurious issue of evolutionism. This has
provided Steward with the impetus to think of cultural ecology as a
kind of evolutionism rather than as a kind of determinism. Indeed, he
would have us believe that “Cultural evolution may be regarded as a

655



===== PAGE 333 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

special type of historical reconstruction or as a particular methodology
or approach” (1955:27). “Multilinear evolution is essentially a meth-
odology based on the assumption that significant regularities in cultural
change occur, and it is concerned with the determination of cultural
laws” (ibid.). Now, the establishment of the lines of cultural evolu-
tion might be an important result of research oriented by the assump-
tion that there are regularities in cultural change. Such regularities
would presumably eventuate in certain lines occurring repeatedly in
separate regions of the world in which similar conditions obtain. But
to call multilinear evolutionism the method by which this assumption
is brought to the research phase is a malapropism which has the un-
fortunate consequence of distracting us from the true nature of
Steward’s methodological contribution. In contrast to that method
and its brilliant concrete results, to which we shall turn in a moment,
Steward’s concept of multilinear evolution is all the more regrettable.

HOW MANY IS MULTI-?

Multilinear evolution, Steward says, “deals only with those
limited parallels of form, function, and sequence which have empirical
reality” (ibid.:19). This is equivalent to the statement that other forms
of evolutionism have not been rigorously empirical and have as a result
discovered too many parallels. Where have we heard it before? Is this

not precisely the message which Boas delivered from Morningside
Heights?

Multilinear evolution, therefore, has no a priori scheme or laws.
It recognizes that the cultural traditions of different areas may
be wholly or partly distinctive, and it simply poses the question
of whether any genuine or meaningful similarities between certain
cultures exist and whether these lend themselves to formulation

[ibid.].
This misnomered “methodology” is scarcely a decisive invention. It is

encumbered by a lingering acceptance of the possibility that endless
diversity may still turn out to be the best model of cultural evolution.

A taxonomic scheme designed to facilitate the determination of
parallels and regularitics in terms of concrete characteristics
and developmental processes will have to distinguish innumerable

culture types, many of which have not as vet been recognized
[ibid.:24].

If the “innumerable” tends toward the infinity side, we have historical
particularism. Moving in the other direction, we have multilinear

656

o

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

evolutionism. But it must be remembered that even in the biological
model of the tree of life, “innumerable” convergences and parallelisms
have their place. Furthermore, the so-called unilinear evolutionists,
despite their emphasis upon parallelism, certainly did not deny “in-
numerable” divergences. Finally, Steward himself questioned the
utility and not the validity of White’s universal sequence.

The question of how much parallelism has existed during the
course of culture history is a logico-empirical matter which cannot be
settled by adhering to one or another brand of evolutionism. The
most important considerations here are the operations by which judg-
ments of similarity or difference are rendered. It should be possible to
demonstrate the similarities of band organization among the Arunta
and Bushmen regardless of the type of evolutionism adhered to by
the community of observers. This of course is not to say that the
identification of parallel sequences is equally possible under all re-
search options. In the case of historical particularism, differences are
deliberately enumerated until they overwhelm similarities, and we
should not expect the discovery of many parallels. I must repeat,
however, that the issue here is not evolutionism, but rather the
triumph of the nomothetic mode over the idiographic. In this respect,
both Steward and White stand opposed to the Boasian school, regard-
less of their differences of opinion concerning the kind of evolutionism
one ought to “practice.” They both believe that causal explanations
of cultural phenomena are within our grasp.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF PARALLEL AND
CONVERGENT CASES

One of the most unfortunate consequences of the subordi-
nation of the question of causality to that of “evolution” is that it
has deflected our attention away from an understanding of the central
importance of parallel cases in the social sciences. To look for and
collect parallel sequences is not a methodology; the methodology
comes in when one looks for parallel cases in order to establish the
causal principles which account for both parallel and divergent evc_lu—
tion. If the evolutionary trajectory consequent upon the introduction
of irrigation agriculture were associated with the development of
“oriental despotism” in Egypt and nowhere else, it would be difficult
to establish any kind of causal relation between the two phenomena.
It is the fact that a similar sequence is repeated in several different
cases that makes it possible for us to talk about nomothetic causal
relationships. The special significance of parallel developmental se-

657

—————ee e ———————————— et ettt


===== PAGE 334 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

quences therefore is that they provide the natural history analogues
to laboratory controls in the experimental sciences. In this respect
they potentially offer a highly satisfactory form of cross-cultural
correlation analysis since actual chronological sequence may be invoked
to determine the direction of causality.

Although Steward has not participated in the development of
statistically oriented cross-cultural theories, his understanding of the
methodological function of parallelisms actually assumes both dia-
chronic and synchronic forms of correlation:

. it is our basic premise that the crucial methodological
feature of evolution is the determination of recurrent causal re-
lationships in independent cultural traditions. . . . Whether it
requires ten, twenty, or scveral hundred years for the relation-
ship to become established, development through time must al-
ways take place. Therefore parallel developments which require
only a few years and involve only a limited number of features
are no less evolutionary from a scientific point of view than
sequences involving whole cultures and covering millennia
[ibid.:27].

Removing the emphasis from the sterile question of whether a
phenomenon is or is not evolution, we may rephrase Steward’s point
to read as follows: cross-culturally valid correlations indicate that
causality is operative. As we shall see in a moment, one of Steward’s
most important contributions, namely the ecological analysis of hunt-
ing and gathering bands, actually follows the ‘paradigm of synchronic
correlation analysis, rather than a diachronic model.

STEWARD AS CULTURAL MATERIALIST

In order to show that cultural ecology is a subcase of cultural
materialism, two points must be established: (1) in the cultural-
ccological strategy, techno-environmental and techno-economic varia-
bles are accorded research priority; (2) this is done in conformity with
the hypothesis that social organization and ideology tend to be the
dependent variables in any large diachronic sample of sociocultural
systems.

It is clear that Steward is the author of many statements which
conform to the definition of cultural materialism. One of the most suc-
cinct is embedded in the discussion which led him to revise the culture
area classification in the Handbook of the South American Indians.
In explaining why a diffusionist interpretation of South American
culture is unsatisfactory, he states that the acceptance or rejection

658

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

of diffused items “was always contingent upon local potentialities.”
These “potentialities” are

. a function of the local ecology, that is, the interaction of
environment, exploitative devices, and socioeconomic habits. In
cach case, the exigencies of making a living in a given environ-
ment with a specific set of devices and methods for obtaining,
transporting, and preparing food and other essential goods set
limits to the dispersal or grouping of the people and to the com-
position of settlements, and it strongly influenced many of their
modes of behavior [STEWARD 1949a, V:674].

There will be critics of this interpretation who will fix upon the
phrase “strongly influenced many of their modes of behavior” to prove
that Steward’s position is not that of “cultural materialism.” But if
provision for “accident,” “historical factors,” and short-run and rela-
tively rare reversals of causality from superstructure to base remove
one from the heritage of cultural-materialist theory, then Marx as
well as Steward must be so removed.

Dogmatic and otherwise degraded versions of historical materialism
may insist on a one-to-one absolute correlation between material base
and the rest of the social system. But our interest does not encompass
such aberrations. Any rejection of cultural materialism on the grounds
that it represents a less empirical, less skeptical, less operational or, in
brief, an inferior scientific method is unworthy of serious considera-
tion./Empiricism, skepticism, operationalism are scarcely the exclusive
property of any particular anthropological school or theoretical orien-
tation. These are the minimum conditions of science in general. If
they are not met, as is fmquently enough the case, it is a disaster
regardless of the theoretical orientation in whose name the lapse has
occurred.

The essence of cultural materialism is that it directs attention to
the interaction between behavior and environment as mediated by
the human organism and its cultural apparatus. It does so as an order
of priority in conformity with the prediction that group structure
and ideology are responsive to these classes of material conditions.
Turning to Steward’s statement of the research strategy of cultural
ecology, we find all of these attributes of cultural materialism clearly

delineated. He states that there are three fundamental procedures of
cultural ecology:

First, the interrclationship of exploitative or productive tech-
nology and cnvironment must be analyzed. . . . Second, the be-
havior patterns involved in the exploitation of a particular area by

659

}
i



===== PAGE 335 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

means of a particular technology must be analyzed. . . . The
third procedure is to ascertain the extent to which the behavior
patterns entailed in exploiting the environment affect other as-
pects of culture [STEWARD 1955:40-41].

This is Steward’s research strategy. It is the procedure actually fol-
lowed in his substantive work to which we turn in a moment.

CORE, BASE, SUPERSTRUCTURE

In connection with his misnomered “method of multilinear
evolution,” Steward attempts to set up a taxonomy of the empirically
identified instances of parallel lines of development. By what con-
geries of traits shall we identify these sequences? Steward’s answer is
that they should be classified in accordance with the kinds of “cultural
cores” which they manifest. Such cores he defines as “the constellation
of features which are most closely related to subsistence activities and
economic arrangements” (ibid.:37). It is inevitable that this definition
of “cultural core” should summon up comparison with Marx’s dis-
tinction between base and superstructure. One thinks immediately
that the core is that part of the sociocultural system which in the long
run determines all the other parts. Steward’s explication, however,
leads to other conclusions:

cultural core—the constellation of features which are most
closely related to subsistence activities and economic arrange-
ments. The core includes such social, political, and religious
patterns as are empirically determined to be closely connected
with these arrangements. Innumerable other features may have
great potential variability because they are less strongly tied to
the core. These latter, or secondary features, are determined to a
greater extent by purely cultural-historical factors—by random
innovations or by diffusion—and they give the appearance of
outward distinctiveness to cultures with similar cores. Cultural
ecology pays primary attention to those features which empirical
analysis shows to be most closely involved in the utilization of
environment in culturally prescribed ways [ibid.].

If we proceed on the assumption that “core” is analogous to “base,”
we shall find on closer inspection that the logic of the above statement
leaves much to be desired.

On this assumption, the core would be essential to the under-
standing of the causality responsible for a type, yet it would not
determine the type’s secondary features. These are determined by

660

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

purely chance cultural-historical factors, that is, by variables which
cannot be put into nomothetic generalizations. What about the sub-
sistence activities, economic arrangements, the social, political, and
religious patterns, all of which are to be included in the core? Is
there any indication that we are to regard some of these factors as
causally more significant than the others? None at all. Why then, we
may very well wonder, should certain types tend to occur frequently
enough to produce the parallel sequences which constitute the sub-
ject matter of multilinear evolution? How can we speak of “causality”
when it appears to be a matter of indifference whether it is one,
several, or all of the respective subsistence, economic, political, or
religious variables which can summon into existence the whole pat-

tern -of the cultural-ecological type? But this quandary has not
exhausted itself.

Obviously, the diagnostic features of any given era—the cultural
core—will depend in part upon particular research interest, upon
what is considered important; and there is still a healthy if some-
what confusing disagreement regarding these matters. Tt should
be noted, however, that functionally interrelated economic, social,
political, religious, and military patterns as well as technological
and esthetic features have become the basis for developmental
taxonomies. These features do not constitute total cultures. They
form culture cores, which are defined according to the empirical
facts of cross-cultural type and level [ibid.:g3].

Not only must we now admit military and aesthetic features into the
culture core, thus rounding out the entire universal pattern, but the
reasons for including some and excluding others may depend upon what
each anthropologist appears to consider important!

THE CORE OF CONFUSION

It is clear that the interests of coherent and systematic theory
cannot be served by the interpretation of Steward’s “cultural core” as
a statement of causal relations. The concept of cultural core makes
sense only in relation to the misguided polemic surrounding the
multilinearity of cultural evolution. It cannot be reconciled with
Steward’s cultural-ecological method. Steward has confused the causal
implications of the cultural-ecological strategy with the typological
requirements of multilinear sequences. The stress on multilinearity,
in turn, is intelligible only as a counterweight to dogmatized versions
of Marxism, as a means of dissociating cultural ecology from the

661



===== PAGE 336 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecologz

political stigma attached to historical materialism. We do not other-
wise require to be told over and over again that cultural ecology
cannot explain everything, that there are exceptions, that not all
cultures conform to the same type, and that there is divergence as
well as convergence and parallelism in human history. What anthro-
pologists can deny these challenges to nomothetic understanding?

But that is not the issue. Rather, the issue is what kinds of results
have been achieved by following historical particularism, culture and
personality, and the other emic and idealist alternatives? Let those who
know how to explain what the cultural-materialist strategy has thus
far failed to explain step forward with their nomothetic alternatives.
We do not demean a theory by its failures to explain everything,
but rather by its failure to explain as much as its nearest rivals. In
this frame of reference, the alternatives to cultural materialism have
failed and have as often obscured as enlightened our understanding of
sociocultural evolution.

EARLY INFLUENCES ON STEWARD

When we turn to the substantive applications of Steward’s
cultural-ecological method, the confusion associated with his concept
of cultural core is somewhat attenuated. In each of his major under-
takings he has stressed the techno-economic and techno-environmental
parameters as the first order of business and has demonstrated the
advantages of such a strategy by rendering intelligible cultural phe-
nomena which are otherwise inscrutable. It will obviously not be
possible to recount all of Steward’s achievements; only those of the
highest theoretical significance can be touched upon.

Steward was trained at Berkeley, where he received his Ph.D. in 1931,
and his earlier work was dominated by particularist influences emanat-
ing from Kroeber and Lowie. One must also reckon with the influence
of Carl Sauer, whose interest in human geography helped to strengthen
Kroeber's awareness of environmental factors (see pp. 339ff.).

Steward’s own interest in environmental factors was first con-
solidated by fieldwork among the FEastern Mono and Paiute of
Owens Valley, California, in 19277 and 1928. Up to the publication of
his “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands,” however,
Steward’s position corresponded essentially to that of a rather large
number of anthropologists who regarded the natural environment as
a vaguely limiting or enabling factor in culture history. Let us pause
for a moment to consider the background.

662

EARLIER TREATMENTS OF THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CULTURE
AND ENVIRONMENT: WISSLER

The salient feature of the anthropological discussions of the
influence of environment on culture prior to Steward’s essay was that
they were carried out within the particularist frame of culture area
classifications, and hence did not rise to nomothetic status. Both
Kroeber and Clark Wissler for example, basing themselves on the
still earlier formulations of Otis Mason (1895a), were convinced that
there was a correspondence between cultural and natural areas over
the entire New World (sce Chap. 14). Wissler in particular indicated
that some kind of determinist influence had to be operating from
environment to culture. He was especially impressed by the fact that
when a map of North American “ecological” areas was placed over a
map of the cultural areas, not only did the two line up, but the centers
of the respective areas were the same for both the cultural and natural
features. He was baffled, however, as to why this should be so.

‘We have, then, made progress in our search for the environ-
mental factor, since it appears the rule that, wherever in aboriginal
America, a well marked ccological area can be delineated, there
one will find a culture area and that the centers of distribution for
the constituent traits will fall in the heart of the ecological
arca. There must then be some determining condition that pro-
duces this uniformity, some ecological relation here, and no doubt
a mechanism involved, which when laid bare, will give an ade-
quate scientific cxplanation of the phenomenon. This discussion
has at least set us on the trail of this mechanism, for its place of
function is the ecological area, and it is most in evidence at the
center [WISSLER 1926:216-17].

Wissler was further convinced that in so far as the environment in-

fluenced the formation of cultural areas, it was through effects of
food production.

In a large measure the particular economic type followed by the
community shapes the entire mode of life. . . . As we have
stated repeatedly, the most basic of all economic conditions are
those related to food, and the specific food habits of a people
arc among the most resistant to change [wissLEr 1929:79].

But Wissler was also capable of such statements as: “The influence of
the environment thus appears as a passive limiting agency rather

663

|
$



===== PAGE 337 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

than as a causal factor in tribal life” (ibid.:339), and his notion of
determinism becomes utterly befuddled when he tries to explain
the uniformity of subsistence practices within a cultural area. This he
attributed not to the adaptive advantages of a particular mode of
subsistence but rather to the alleged advantage which accrues to the
tribes of a region when they all exploit the same resources:

The environment really holds together the tribes occupying a
region, and develops a community of interest and concentrates
leadership within itself. The tendency for a bison-hunting tribe
is, first, to confine its wanderings to the bison range; secondly,
to observe and to fraternize with other bison-hunting tribes. Under
such circumstances, it seems inevitable that the tribes within a
region should follow much the same round of life [ibid.:338-39].

Wissler was thus unable to formulate the essential ingredients in a
nomothetic approach to the culture-cnvironment relationship. Such
an approach can be stated only in terms of relationships that are
found in different culture areas—indeed, on different continents—as
a result of recurrent ecological exigencies. Furthermore, Wissler
had no idea how, in general, the techno-environmental conditions
could be nomothetically related to social organization and idcology.
All in all, Wissler’s approach represented only a slight advance over
the work of Ratzel, to whom he himself attributed many of his ideas.

CULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT :
C. DARYLL FORDE

One additional approach to the culture-environment prob-
lem must be mentioned, namely that of C. Daryll Forde. Like
Wissler, Forde was convinced that the environment was important,
but he was also incapable of and disinclined toward expressing the
relationship in nomothetic terms. In effect, his main contribution
was to warn geographers that they could not hope to understand
cultures as mere reflexes of environment since each culture had the
power to take out of the environment or to stress those aspects of
it which historical (ie., cultural) events inclined it to take into
consideration:

Physical conditions enter intimatcly into every cultural develop-
ment and pattern, not excluding the most abstract and non-
material; they enter not as determinants, however, but as one
category of the raw material of cultural elaboration. The study of

664

f

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

the relations between cultural patterns and physical conditions
is of the greatest importance for an understanding of human
society, but it cannot be undertaken in terms of simple geo-
graphical controls alleged to be identifiable on sight. It must pro-
ceed inductively from the minute analysis of each actual society.
The culture must in the first place be studied as an entity, and as
an historical development; there can be no other effective ap-
proach to interrelations of such complexity. The most meticulous
knowledge of physical geography, whether of great regions or of
small areas, will not serve to clucidate these problems unless the
nature of cultural development is grasped. The geographer who
is unversed in the culture of the people of the land he studies, or
in the lessons which ethnology as a whole has to teach, will, as
soon as he begins to consider the mainsprings of human ac-
tivity, find himself groping uncertainly for geographical factors
whose significance he cannot truly assess [FORDE 1934:464-65].

What we have here is merely a restatement of the historical-par-
ticularist position with an emphasis upon accumulating techno-en-
vironmental data instead of folktales. The failure to reach a
nomothetic point of view is yet more evident when Forde goes on
to say that even if we could discover determinist principles by
which techno-economic patterns could be related to the environment,
we should still confront an impasse in trying to relate these patterns
to the rest of the culture. One more citation is required at this
point in order that the full measure of Steward’s achievement may be
taken:

But if geographical determinism fails to account for the existence
and distribution of economies, economic determinism is equally
inadequate in accounting for the social and political organizations,
the religious beliefs and the psychological attitudes, which may
be found in cultures based on those economies. . . . The tenure
and transmission of land and other property, the development
and relations of social classes, the nature of government, the re-
ligious and ceremonial life—all these are parts of a social super-
structure, the development of which is conditioned not only by
the foundations of habitat and economy, but by complex interac-
tions within its own fabric and by external contacts, often largely
indiffcrent to both the physical background and to the basic econ-
omy alike [ibid.].

The phrase “complex interactions within its own fabric” is a note-
worthy example of how an admission of ignorance, properly celebrated,
can convey a sense of wisdom.

665



===== PAGE 338 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL BASIS OF
PRIMITIVE BANDS

Against this background, Steward’s “The Economic and Social
Basis of Primitive Bands” must be reckoned among the important
achievements of modern anthropology. It constitutes the first coher-
ent statement of how the interaction between culture and environ-
ment could be studied in causal terms without reverting to a simple
geographical determinism or without lapsing into historical particular-
ism. This achievement has a double focus: first, the identification of
a cross-culturally valid form of social organization, the “primitive
band”; second, its explanation. The band occurs among widely
separated hunting and gathering peoples in many different parts of
the world. It is a type of social organization distinguished in its most
general form by political autonomy and a small population, in that it
consists of several nuclear families whose access to land is controlled
by ownership privileges vested in the larger group. Incidentally, in
defining this unit Steward had to cut through the issue of family
and individual land ownership which Boas™ student Speck (1928)
had succeeded in bringing to a point of almost complete confusion
(see pp. 357ff.) by his failure to separate acculturation effects from
aboriginal patterns. Having established the existence of the major
type by reference to several dozen recorded cases, Steward classi-
fied them into three subtypes: patrilineal, composite, and ma-
trilineal. He then proceeded to supply causal explanations for the
existence of the major type and its threc subtypes. These explana-
tions involve a consideration of the relationship between the pro-
ductive capacity of low-level technologies applied to various types of
habitats. Where Steward triumphed over the earlier expressions of
determinism  linking habitat and social organization going back
as far as Turgot (see p. 28) was in being able to explain how,
despite the diversity of environments and technologies associated
with band-organized societies, there remained underlying ecological
commonalities which gave rise to the general type and other com-
monalities which gave rise to the subtypes. Where the older tradition
of geographical determinism was baffled by the fact that similar
organizations occurred among the desert-dwelling Arunta, the Negritoes
of the Congo rain forest, and the California Miwok, Steward’s analy-
sis focused attention on the structural similarities which resulted
from the interaction of habitats and cultures whose specific content
masked a fundamentally similar ecologic adjustment.

666

Y’

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

The nature of this adjustment may be summed up in reference to
the low productivity of hunting and gathering techniques in adverse
environments with a consequent limitation of population density to
less than one person per square mile. Social aggregates are therefore
necessarily small (averaging thirty to fifty persons per band) yet they
are larger than the nuclear family because of the greater efficiency of
the larger group in “subsistence insurance” and “security in war-
fare and feuds” (STEWARD 1936:332-33). According to Steward, the
patrilineal type results from patrilocal residence which in turn is associ-
ated with the subsistence and defense advantages stemming from or-
ganizing the local group around a core of resident males. Composite
forms of the band result from the intrusion of factors which reduce
the advantages of patrilocality, as when subsistence depends on migra-
tory animals.

Not only did this formulation surpass crude environmental
determinism, which makes no provision for cultural variables, but it
also surpassed that form of human geography known as “possibilism,”
in which the recognition of the cultural factor ends in a morass of
indeterminacy. Steward was not merely saying that a particular
combination of technology and environment made it possible for
man to create a particular type of social organization; the whole
weight of his argument was in the direction of insisting that a similar
techno-environmental relationship regularly caused a similar effect
(ie., made it highly probable) regardless of whether the people
involved were “creatively inclined” or not. Despite subsequent critical
evaluations of certain aspects of Steward’s data (cf. sERvICE 1962;
MEGGITT 1962), the strategy of Steward’s explanation continues to
warrant approval.

SOME SUPERFLUOUS LIMITATIONS

It should not be concluded, however, that Steward had in
one stroke severed his ties to particularism. In the actual listing of
causal factors responsible for the band and its subtypes, Steward in-
cluded a number of fortuitous and quixotic ingredients which, if taken
as integral to the argument, greatly reduce its novelty. Thus in his sum-
mary of the factors responsible for the patrilineal band, Steward noted
that band size is sometimes restricted not by ecological relations but
rather by “some social factor which nevertheless has brought about
occupation of small parcels of territory by correspondingly small
groups” (ibid.: 343). Similarly in the explanation of the conditions re-
sponsible for composite bands he included such intrusive factors as

667

!
|
|



===== PAGE 339 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

“adoption of children between bands” and legitimacy of parallel cousin
marriages; for matrilocal bands he listed: “Desire to securc the assist-
ance of the wife’s mother in child rearing”; and “strength of borrowed
matrilineal institutions” (ibid.). Despite these lapses, there is no doubt
that Steward intended to produce a statement of nomothetic causality
based upon techno-environmental regularities. In his own words:

Underlying this paper is the assumption that cvery cultural
phenomenon is the product of some definite cause or causes. This
is a necessary presupposition if anthropology is considered a sci-
ence. The method of this paper has been first to ascertain the
causes of primitive bands through analysis of the inner func-
tional or organic connection of the components of a culture and
their environmental basis. Next, through comparisons, it cn-
deavored to discover what degree of generalization is possible. It
is not assumed, of course, that generalizations may be made con-
cerning all culture traits. On the contrary, it is entirely possible
that the very multiplicity of antecedents of many traits or com-
plexes will preclude satisfactory generalization and that the con-
clusion with respect to some things will be that “history never
repeats itself.” The extent, however, to which generalizations can
be made may be ascertained by further application of the meth-
ods followed here [ibid.}.

‘What Steward failed to realize is that the idiosyncratic, social, and
ideational factors included among the detcrminants of band organiza-
tion preclude “satisfactory generalization” and thus should have been
removed from the statement of the lawful conditions.

CONSEQUENCES OF NONSTATISTICAL
GENERALIZATION

It is regrettable that Steward operates with a nonstatistical
concept of causality: “The method will be to analyze functional or
necessary relationships. It will not undertake statistics or correlations”
(ibid.:331). Had he approached the statement of ecological causality
in terms of statistical probabilities, then we might have been spared
a long series of curiously self-defeating theoretical forays, each of
which undermines an important substantive nomothetic achieve-
ment by putting back into the ecological formula the indeterminacy
which it was designed to overcome.

The significance of Steward’s analysis of bands is that it showed
how the interaction between tcchnology and environment could
explain most of the important structural and idcological features

668

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

of low-energy hunters and gatherers in most of the known ex-
amples without utilizing historical or other idiographic modes of
explanation. If we do not clearly state that the issue is a matter of
probabilities, then before long we find oursclves retreating to the
cupboard of eclecticism in order to achieve an explanation of all of
the important structural and ideational features in all of the known
cases. But such explanation ceases to be nomothetically viable. We
already know beforchand that if we could be given an account of all
of the events in the history of each of the peoples who have band
organization, we should be able to offer an explanation which would
be more “complete” than that which can be obtained through the
nomothetic option. But such a program is the antithesis of science,
and we do not improve our nomothetic formulations by tacking on
the additional bit of advice that the exceptions to our rules can be
understood by dragging in other factors, unless these additional con-
siderations are couched in nomothetic terms.

ECOLOGY OF THE SOUTHWEST

In his analysis of the development of multi-matrisib villages
among the Pueblos and multi-patrisib villages among the Yuman tribes
of the Colorado River, Steward repeated the performance which
made his treatment of the origin of bands a landmark. Rejecting the
prevailing theories which derived the Yuman sib organization from
the Pueblos, he emphasized instead the effect which the introduction
of agriculture had upon the population density of the Colorado
groups. This combined with pressure of warfare produced the evolu-
tion of the Yuman groups from patrilincal bands to multi-patrisib
villages. Similar processes account for the gradual conversion of the
semisedentary seed gatherers of Basket Maker times into the multi-
matrisib villages of the late Basket Maker and Pueblo times.

It is noteworthy for an assessment of Steward’s total impact upon
anthropological theory during the last three decades that his utilization
of archacological data for the reconstruction of the Pueblo sequence
helped to usher in a new era of archacological interpretations, one
whose influence continues to expand exponentially at the moment
of writing. But I shall return to the interrelationship between
cultural ecology and archaeology in a moment.

First we must record Steward’s reiteration of the importance of
the cultural-ecological approach:

The present analysis of Southwestern socicty assumes that cul-
tural process, and therefore sound historical reconstruction, can be

669



===== PAGE 340 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

understood only if due attention is paid to the economic and
ecological factors that shape society. This requires analysis of the
degree and manner in which economic factors have combined
with kinship, ceremonialism, inheritance, and other factors to pro-
duce observed social patterns [1955:155]

Once again, however, we confront not only the nomothetic factors
but the peculiar idiographic ones which negate the entire cffort if we
accord them their literal significance. In explaining the concentration
of formerly localized and independent units in Pueblo III times, for
example, Steward asserts that the change was “made possible but
not caused by ecological factors” (ibid.:166-67).

Village concentration must, therefore, have been produced by
a factor of a nonecological order. Many causcs are conceivable but
in this instance it does not seem imperative to scek beyond the
need for defense; for, whatever the danger, increasinging pains
taken to choose impregnable dwelling sites attest an important
motive for banding together. This tendency to concentrate in
large villages, aided by the development of multistoried archi-
tecture and probably stimulated by some threat, began to spread.
But at this time the total Pueblo area also began to shrink. The
communal dwelling has persisted to the present, but now that the
motives for constructing it have vanished, the reverse tendency
has set in, houses becoming more widely scattered. The unilat-
eral organization presumed to have been created during the
original concentration of the Pucblo population continues in ef-
fect to the present day [ibid.:167].

A slight amount of reflection should suffice for establishing the point
that an increase in warfare in the Pueblo area could easily have re-
sulted from factors consistent with Steward’s notion of ecology,
namely from population increase. Once again, it should be empha-
sized that the peculiarly hesitant formulation would be rendered
redundant by rephrasing the determinism to accord with statistical
notions of causality. What Steward was really saying in this paper on
the formation of multisib communities is that given a certain set of
environmental and technological conditions, the transition from band
to sib is highly predictable in a sufficicntly large sample. But this is all
we can ask of nomothetic statements in any realm of science.

CULTURAL LAW AND CAUSALITY

We turn now to an historically decisive paper, Steward’s “Cul-
tural Causality and Law; A Trial Formulation of Farly Civilization.”
This article elaborated on Steward’s contribution to the 1947 Viking

670

hdl

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

Fund Conference on Peruvian Archaeology at which the first strati-
graphically based syntheses of the independent evolution of civilization
in the New World had been set forth (see p. 337). Juxtaposing the New
World sequences as known from northern Peru and central Mexico with
available summaries of events in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and North China,
Steward demonstrated a degree of developmental parallelism which
dwarfed all of the “stupendous” phenomena referred to by Sapir (sce p-
605). In all five regions Steward identified a sequence which involved a
roughly parallel development through the following stages: Hunting
and Gathering; Incipient Agriculture; Formative; Regional Flores-
cent; Cyclical Conquests. The importance of this synthesis will
emerge from the following discussion of the background of Steward’s
theory. We shall have to consider first the relationship of Steward’s
formulation to the “hydraulic hypothesis” as proposed by the com-
parative historian and sinologist Karl Wittfogel. Second, the relation-
ship between Wittfogel, Steward, and Marxist theory must also be
considered. And finally we shall have to assess the relationship between
archaeological research and the rise of cultural-materialist theorics.

WITTFOGEL AND THE HYDRAULIC
THEORY

Steward’s trial formulation of the developmental sequence
in the five centers of ancient civilization was not intended to exhaust
all of the possible routes which cultures have followed toward com-
plex state-organizations. Rather, the trajectories he outlined were
those assumed to be the characteristic sequences of one particular
type, namely, irrigation, or “hydraulic civilizations.”

The formulation here offered excludes all areas except the arid
and semiarid centers of ancient civilizations. In the irrigation
areas, environment, production, and social patterns had similar
functional and developmental interrelationships [STEWARD 1949b:

17].

Steward’s ideas at this point converged with the theories of Karl
Wittfogel.

As early as 1926 Wittfogel had begun to apply a cultural-ecological
approach to the explanation of the peculiarities of Chinese and other
“Asiatic” socicties. In Wittfogel's carly formulation these systems
were characterized as “mighty hydraulic bureaucracies” whose despotic
control over the densely populated ancient states in China, India, and
Egypt arose from the techno-environmental exigencies of large-scale

671



===== PAGE 341 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

irrigation and other forms of water control in regions of scant rain-
fall. Although inspired by Max Weber, this analysis owed its central
thrust, its clarity, and its success to Marx. The realization that the
evolution of Oriental socicties had followed a path substantially dif-
ferent from those of Europe was quite common among the scholars of
the Enlightenment. Marx accepted this difference and postulated an
Oriental mode of production.

As Wittfogel tells us, he employed “Marx’s concept,” in conformity
with what he understood to be Marx’s own conclusions (WITTFOGEL
1957:5-6). Wittfogel’s analysis of the functional interdependence of
the main features of the social organization and techno-economic
patterns of irrigation civilization led him to stress the general im-
portance of environmental parameters in the application of historical
materialism to the understanding of social systems. His proposal to
emphasize the interplay between economics and environment to ac-
count for phenomena which had baffled Marx was published in the
Marxist journal Unter dem Banner der Marxismus (1929), and was
clearly conceived as an expansion of the scope and effectiveness of the
historical-materialist strategy.

WITTFOGEL ABANDONS CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

Wittfogel's views on hydraulic society clashed with several
cardinal items of dogma in the Stalinist version of world history.
Marx’s notion of an Asiatic mode of production indicated a degree
of divergence in sociopolitical evolution which the international
Communist parties were unwilling to accept. The Asiatic mode
of production with its despotic centralized bureaucratic state was
the very opposite of European feudal society. If there could be no
feudalism in the evolutionary careers of the hydraulic civilizations,
how could they develop capitalism? And without capitalism, how
could they develop communism? As a result of the communist ex-
puigation of Marx’s ideas on the multilinearity of sociocultural evolu-
tion, Wittfogel's research and writing gradually took on the coloration
of a crusade against communism and totalitarianism in general.
Initially this crusade was closely linked with a defense of the cultural-
materialist strategy and was inspired by “Marx’s insistence on an
unbiased pursuit of truth” (1957:6). Gradually, however, Wittfogel
came to see the phenomena of Oriental despotism as capable of
surviving in, and diffusing to, societies whose techno-economic relation-

672

R

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

ships bore little resemblance to the conditions underlying the pristine
state. Oriental society, he has recently declared, “cannot be explained
in purely ecological or economic terms; and the spread of Oriental
despotism to areas lacking a hydraulic agriculture underlines the
limitations of such an explanation” (WITTFOGEL 1964:46).

Disturbed by a vision of the Soviet Union and Communist China
as new installments in an age-old pattern, Wittfogel permitted himself
to serve as a government witness in the McCarran committee’s
investigation of the Institute of Pacific Studies. Tragedies resulting
from this episode have illserved the cause of scholarship and have
contributed to the suppression of the cultural-materialist strategy
in American social science. Wittfogel's crusade to prove the multi-
linearity of evolution has centered more and more on the alleged
moral implications of closed and open models of history:

Marx and Engels’ acceptance of Asiatic society as a separate and
stationary conformation shows the doctrinal insincerity of those
who, in the name of Marx, peddle the unilinear construct. And
the comparative study of societal conformations demonstrates the
empirical untenability of their position. Such a study brings to
light a complex sociohistorical pattern, which includes stagnation
as well as progress. By revealing the opportunities, and the pit-
falls, of open historical situations, this concept assigns to man a
profound moral responsibility, for which the unilinear scheme,
with its ultimate fatalism, has no place [1957:7-8].

THE POLITICS OF HYDRAULICS

Although Wittfogel's model of history is more correct than
anything proposed in the name of Stalinist orthodoxy, it is regrettable
that the issue of moral responsibility should be employed in support
of multilinear evolutionism. One could arguc that there is not the
slichtest evidence that a world view in which human behavior is
determined by material processes leads to any greater or lesser amount
of “fatalism” than is to be found among peoples who believe in the
determinism of an omnipotent God. Under cither alternative mature
individuals learn to accept responsibility for their actions. But T shall
not elaborate on this aspect of the issue, because we have before us
not a question of morality but one of scientific fact and theory. If we
want to know to what extent human history is determined along
parallel and convergent lines, we must turn to our measuring instru-
ments and to our evidence and not to the moral premises of theolo-
gians, philosophers, and politicians.

673



===== PAGE 342 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Wittfogel's concern with the need to defeat the Stalinist world
view has led him away from the cultural-materialist strategy—the
strategy which was responsible for the formulation of his original
theory of Oriental despotism. The irony of this situation is that in
the meantime the evidence in favor of his theory has accumulated far
beyond that which was available in the 1920’s. Wittfogel’s emigra-
tion to the United States corresponded to the period during which
the revival of interest in large-scale nomothetic formulations was
just getting under way. And by the end of the 1930’s, this interest
could for the first time in history avail itself of an abundance of
archaceological facts adequate to the scientific solution of some of
the most formidable riddles of human life.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE STRATEGY OF CULTURAL
MATERIALISM

As we shall see, the central hypothesis in Steward’s “Cultural
Causality and Law” was taken over bodily from Wittfogel. It would
appear that knowingly or unknowingly, Steward had thus succeeded
in wedding anthropology to the materialist strategy of which Marx
had been the pioncer. But “Cultural Causality and Law” also repre-
sents the coming together of a number of distinctively anthropological
achievements, whose substance and nature must now be set forth.

There was first of all the heritage of research carried out among
non-European and precivilized groups with all its advantages in
terms of the relative simplicity of the techno-environmental and
techno-economic feedbacks. Field techniques applied to living people
in their natural habitat gave anthropologists an advantage over the
scholars who like Marx and his orthodox followers depended upon
documents and historiography as their principal source of information
about the structure and dynamics of sociocultural systems. Steward
himself was an important contributor to this heritage, having carried
out additional field studies in 1934-36 among the Great Basin
Shoshone seed gatherers.

Secondly, anthropology was rapidly expanding the scope of its
ethnographic studies over areas which provided maximum contrast
with the cases most familiar to the European historians and even to
scholars such as Wittfogel, whose great knowledge of Chincse
history freed him from the typical Eurocentric parochialism of West-
ern historiography.

674

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

logical perspective as editor of the six-volume Handbook of the South
American Indians (1946-30). This monumental collection immersed
him in ethnographic material covering an entire continent with an
extraordinary varicty of environments and sociopolitical types.

In his struggle to organize the contributions of some ninety col-
laborators from a dozen different countries, Steward had at first
accepted the historical-particularist trait-inventory frame of culture
areas. In the fifth volume, however, he expressed his dissatisfaction
with the definition of the four culture areas which provided the
typological basis for one of each of the preceding volumes: Marginal,
Tropical Forest, Circum-Caribbean/Sub-Andean, and Andean. In
retrospect, he announced, “it is evident that many tribes were
improperly classified” (1949a:670-71), and he called for and carried
out a reclassification in accordance with patterns “which integrate
the institutions of the sociopolitical unit” (ibid.:672).

The resulting reclassification corresponded roughly to the levels
of sociocultural development which Elman Service (1962) later came
to designate as band, tribe, chiefdom, and state. Steward himself was
obliged to continue to speak of the culture types in question in
terms of the continental-specific rubrics in the titles of the first four
volumes, Within the Handbook, Steward (1949a:674) refrained from
pressing “the developmental implications” of his classification, pre-
ferring instead, in a work so clearly a product of many different
collaborators, to offer a more conventional historical reconstruction of
diffusionist routes within South America. “Cultural Causality and
Law,” however, was a direct outgrowth of this revised classification
since it answers the question of the origin of the Andean civilization
in nomothetic rather than historical terms.

Steward, for example, enjoyed an especially advantageous ethno-

THE LINK WITH ARCHAEOLOGY

The third great anthropological contribution to the cultural-
materialist approach was perhaps the most important. It was largely
through cultural-ecological reconstructions, first of the Southwest and
then in regard to the hydraulic hypothesis, that a link was established
between cultural materialism and the discoveries of New World
archaeologists. This relationship was beneficial in two directions;
that is, it played a key role both in bringing the results of archaeology
to bear upon nomothetic issues as well as in bringing the benefits of

cultural-materialist strategy to the conduct and interpretation of
archaeological rescarch.

675



===== PAGE 343 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

To appreciate the scope of this contribution and to Endcrstand
the strategic significance of “Cultural Causality ar}d Law,' we must
digress for a moment and consider the condition into which archae-
ology had lapsed during the Boasian period.

ARCHAEOLOGY DURING THE REIGN OF
PARTICULARISM

If the hand of historical particularism rested heavily upon
the study of cultural regularities among ethnologists, its weight was
even more deadening among the archacologists. If each ethnolog}st
had his tribe, each archaeologist had his “site.” If the ethnologist
described his tribe in terms peculiar to and literally borrowed from
the lexicon of the people he was studying, the archaeologist concen-
trated upon the pattern of rim sherd incisions found at his site and
possibly at one or two adjacent localities. If culture was a thing .Of
shreds and patches to Lowie, te the majority of his contemporaries
working in archaeology it was a thing of sherds and scrapers and
little else. )

Speaking of the period from 1910 to 1936, the archaeologist Alfred
Kidder lamented the particularism into which archaeology had
lapsed as a result of what he called “pre-1910 speculations about the
vast antiquity of the American Indians” with its consequent lossvof
“historical perspective” and its “taboo” on questions concerning
origins:

Archaeology accordingly became preponderantly descriptive; ef-

fort was directed toward identification of ancient sites with mod-

ern tribes; research upon American prehistory, striking forward
rather than back, upward rather than downward, was left without
foundations . . . many of us merely dodged the issue of origins
and comforted ourselves by working in the satisfactorily clear
atmosphere of the late periods [KIDDER 1936:146].

THE PROBLEM OF NEW WORLD
ORIGINS

What kind of attitude prevailed concerning the \miversallly
accepted belief (ushered in with the defeat of the Morgan-Bandelier
reconstruction of Aztec “democracy”) that highly elaborate state-
organized societics existed in the New World as well as thg Old?
We have already scen that the Boasians tended to adopt an ambivalent

676

I

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

position on this question. On the one hand almost all of the Boasians
were convinced that the attempts by the diffusionists to explain
the native American civilizations exclusively by migrations and con-
tact processes across either the Atlantic or Pacific were without foun-
dation in fact. On the other hand, the Boasians were willing to admit
that it was by no means unlikely that transoceanic influences had
occurred. The task of separating the diffused from the independently
invented items was regarded as an empirical question, the unraveling
of which might require many years of research for each item in the
list of parallels. There was certainly slight expectation that when the
final balance was reckoned, any of the major tenets of the Boasian
position would require restatement.

In the reiterated assurance that no one doubted that certain
technological events would have to precede others and that civiliza-
tion could result only from an increasingly more stable food supply
and enlarged population, the Boasians thought that they had already
exhausted the entire inventory of generalizations which the further
study of the origin of New World civilizations could make possible.
From their eclectic and particularist viewpoint they were willing to
concede that states and empires had to have a basis in “surplus”
production and “leisure time” made available by intensive agri-
culture. But since cultural evolution was conceived of as a hodge-
podge of independent inventions and capricious diffusions, it was of
no special importance that similar traits such as supreme god-priest
rulers, monumental architecture, standing armies, state corvee, urbani-
zation, astronomical and mathematical specialists, writing and calen-
dars, and hundreds of other traits and institutions should appear in
a number of different places throughout the world.

Kroeber, it will be recalled, explicitly warned against any expectation
that any but the vaguest resemblance of sequence could be expected.
The discussion of the theoretical significance of the New World
civilizations thus remained in a state of suspended animation (sce

P- 336).

NEW TECHNIQUES, NEW DATA

The foundation of this murky mixture of diffusion and inven-
tion, however, rested upon a precarious situation in the archaeological
realm. Here vast uncertainties of chronology and seriation fed the
prevailing fashions of particularism. In this connection, it must be
recalled that techniques of excavation adequate to an understanding

677



===== PAGE 344 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory 23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

of nongeologically stratified sites were not perfected and certainly were
not widely used until the mid-twentics. The new techniques and their
consequences have been outlined by the archacologist Gordon Willey:

The method was applicable to refuse deposits which had grown
by occupational accretion. Marked physical stratification of de-
posits was not necessary. The technique consisted of removing
detritus and artifacts from arbitrary depth levels. In studying
artifact change by levels, percentage fluctuations of types were
noted from level to level, so that rising or declining percentage
frequencies of types were correlated with time. Deriving in large
part from the mechanical nature of the operation, “continuous
stratigraphy” of this kind had important theoretical repercussions
on the nature of culture continuity and change. With the con-
tinuous depositional record of a site occupation before his eyes,
the archaeologist could not help being impressed with the evi-
dence for culture dynamics [WILLEY 1953:365].

During the twenties and early thirties, the impact of the numerous
but farflung applications of these new techniques on both simple
and complex societies was obscured by an inability to establish a
coordinated chronology for the entrance of man into the New World
and his subsequent dispersal to the southernmost limits of the
hemisphere. Although, as J. A. Mason (1966) has pointed out,
many archaeologists accepted a Pleistocene date for the migration
from Siberia, providing for some 10,000 years of cvolution, diffusion,
and migration, it was not until 1926, with the discovery of a point
embedded between the ribs of an extinct form of bison at Folsom,
New Mexico, that really convincing evidence could be brought forth
to buttress the logical arguments for the time span in question.

TIME AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
NEW WORLD CIVILIZATIONS

Few archaeologists appreciated the theorctical significance
of the possibility of an independent origin for New World civiliza-
tions. An cxception was Herbert Spinden, who, during the course
of his arguments with the doctrinaire diffusionists, remained alert to
the theoretical import of the independent inventionist position. If
America “was the home of a family of civilizations independent of
the family of civilizations in the Old World,” observed Spinden, this
fact would “. . . have a tremendous bearing on the innate potcn-
tialitics of mankind, and thus, in turn, on the future course of political
and social cvolution” (SPINDEN 1927:60-61). In very general terms,

678

Spinden’s view of evolution in the New World appears to have antici-
pated Steward’s treatment of the subject:

The American record indicates in very complete fashion the nat-
ural history of civilizations, from the family hunting band type
of association up through the farmer’s and fisherman’s villages to
nationalitics, including all the members of a language group and
even to empires based on conquest and tribute [ibid.:62].

Spinden, however, was far from having achieved a clear under-
standing of the scope and pattern of the evolution of New World
culture. This is shown by his curious change of heart about the
antiquity of the Palco-Indian migration. In his 1936 presidential
address to the American Anthropological Association he insisted that
the Amerindian migration from the Old to the New World could
not have occurred before 2500 B.c. Few anthropologists were willing
to compress the entire sequence from the first appearance of
Folsom-type hunters, their dispersal over the hemisphere, and the
appearance of the first civilizations into such a short time period.
Spinden’s theory nonetheless reveals how doubtful the whole chro-
nology of the New World continued to be as late as the mid-thirties.
Clark Wissler, writing in 1933, summed up the situation in the
following words:

While it is true that the great number of living tribal units and
their various cultures suggest a fair lapse of time, no satisfactory
way has been found to express this interval in years or even in the
relative terms of Old World chronology [wisSLER 1933:216].

The picture was especially unclear precisely in those areas such as
the Valley of Mexico and the Central Andean highlands in which
the best known of the New World civilizations had flourished at the
time of conquest. Thus, the archacologist Alfred Kidder observed in
1936 that “Kroeber and Vaillant believe that the oldest remains so far
discovered in Peru and Mexico are not older than the time of Christ”
(1936:146). Indeed, even in 1949, the entire Incipient Agricultural
phase in Steward’s chart was supported by nothing more than a
question mark.

DISCOVERY OF THF ENERGY BASIS OF
THE NEW WORLD CIVILIZATIONS

The turning point in the relationship between archaeological
data and cultural materialism came in the late thirties and ecarly
forties with the excavations in Peru carried out by W. D. Strong,

679



===== PAGE 345 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

Steward’s classmate at Berkeley, and Gordon Willey, one of Strong’s
students at Columbia. In the Viru Valley, a complex of domesticated
beans, squash, and cotton was identified at the base of a large
mound with an estimated date of 2500 B.c. A continuous evolutionary
sequence was obtained in the mound and in adjacent sites leading
from Incipient Agriculture through several stages of village life up
to the lowland irrigation states which were ultimately absorbed by
the Inca Empire. Of special interest in this sequence was the phase
identified by Steward as the Formative, when maize was introduced
and irrigation techniques took over the main subsistence load. The
entire sequence is wholly intelligible as a product of endogenous
forces; increasing productivity, increasing population density, multi-
plication of village sites, warfare, intervillage and later intervalley
coordination of productive processes, increasing social stratification
and bureaucratic control of production and distribution, centralization
of power, feedback to greater productivity, and population density.
If contacts with the Old World had occurred during the 2500 to
3000 years which were required for the shift from autonomous village
to state organization, nothing vital to the dynamic of the process
seems to have resulted therefrom.

The only possible exception was maize, which obviously had not
been domesticated on the Peruvian coast. At the time of Steward’s
analysis of the New World irrigation sequence the wild ancestors of the
plant had yet to be identified. A few die-hard diffusionists continued
to insist that it was not a native American cultigen, despite the fact
that it was grown nowhere outside of the New World prior to the
European conquest. In recent years not only have the wild ancestors
of corn been identified in highland Mexico, but radiocarbon 14 dates
have confirmed a period of gradual experimentation with domesti-
cated varieties extending back to 7000 B.c. in the Tehuacdn Valley
of Central Mexico and in southern Tamaulipas (MANGELSDORF, MAC-
NEISH, and GALINAT 1964; MAC NEISH 1964a; 1964b)! Proof that the
Amerindians domesticated corn is tantamount to proof that they were
capable of achieving every other technological innovation associated
with the New World sequence independently of diffusion from the
Old. Given the combination Homo sapiens, a nutritive and hardy
grain, semiarid valleys, ample sources of water, terrain adaptable
to irrigation, it was highly probable that irrigation civilizations would
evolve, not once, but again and again.

Steward’s provisional comparison of the main evolutionary se-
quences in the Old and New World was thus an epochal event be-
cause it marked the beginning of the use of the New World

680

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

archaeological evidence to support a cultural-materialist interpreta-
tion of the origin of civilization. Hitherto, few archaeologists had
accepted cultural materialism as a valid strategy. There were, of
course, a number of exceptions, one of whom, V. Gordon Childe,
must now be considered.

V. GORDON CHILDE AND THE STRATEGY
OF CULTURAL MATERIALISM

A key figure in English archaeology, Childe was a Marxist
who, like Leslie White, staunchly supported the validity of Morgan’s
stages of Savagery, Barbarism, and Civilization. But when it came to
the specific sequences of the Middle Fast and of Europe, Childe
actually seems closer to historical particularism than to historical
materialism. As previously discussed (p. 644), Childe’s working
model of evolution was that of the divergent Darwinian tree of life.
Despite his explicit Marxist leanings, Childe was unsuccessful in
achieving a reconciliation between the abstract overall transition from
savagery to civilization and his superb knowledge of the specific
developmental sequences in the Middle East and Europe. He did of
course recognize certain parallels in the end product, but he saw
these as resulting more from diffusion than from parallel evolution.
“The intervening steps in development did not exhibit even abstract
parallelism” (1951a:161).

So the observed developments in rural economy do not run paral-
lel; they cannot therefore be used to define stages common to all
the sequences examined. . . . In fine, the development of bar-
barians’ rural economies in the regions surveyed exhibits not
parallelism but divergence and convergence [ibid.:162].

CHILDE'S POSITION ON THE
IRRIGATION QUESTION

Childe was not unfamiliar with the importance of irrigation
in Mesopotamia and Egypt both from the perspective of productivity
and organizational exigencies and controls:

Conditions of life in a river valley or other oasis place in the
hands of society an exceptional power for coercing its members;
the community can refuse a recalcitrant access to water and can
close the channels that irrigate his ficlds. Rain falleth upon the

681



===== PAGE 346 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

just and the unjust alike, but irrigating waters reach the fields by
channels that the community has constructed. And what society
has provided, society can also withdraw from the unjust and con-
fine to the just alonc. The social solidarity needed by irrigators
can thus be imposed owing to the very circumstances that de-
mand it. And young men cannot escapc the restraint of their
elders by founding fresh villages when all beyond the oasis is
waterless desert. So when the social will comes to be expressed
through a chief or a king, he is invested not merely with moral
authority, but with coercive force too; he can apply sanctions
against the disobedient [cHILDE 1946:90].

Childe’s views on irrigation were transmitted by Pedro Armillas
(1948) to the Conference on Peruvian Archaeology sponsored by
the Viking Fund. It was at the same conference that Steward
read a paper entitled “A Functional-Developmental Classification of
American High Cultures” (1948), which provided an outline of the
sequence that was incorporated, one year later, in “Cultural Causality
and Law.” However, Steward at this point made no mention of the
hydraulic hypothesis. Armillas, on the other hand, citing Childe,
gave extensive attention to the possible role of irrigation in the
Formative and Regional Florescent, but he rather tended to postpone
and limit its influence to the later Classic and post-Classic periods.
That he was far from postulating a hydraulic base for the Formative
as Steward was to do after adapting Wittfogel's theories to the Meso-
American sequence may be seen from the following passage:

In considering the role which irrigation works may have played
in the social development of Meso-America it is necessary to note
that water for irrigation was obtained from many local sources
—various rivers and arroyos, springs and also wells—making un-
necessary the constitution of large political entities. In fact, irri-
gation in Meso-America may have favored cantonalism, making
each valley selfsufficient in nearly all of its basic economic prod-
ucts [ARMILLAS 1948:107].

We shall turn to the question of irrigation in Mcso-America in just a
moment.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF
EARTH

THE SECOND

Childe’s most scrious shortcoming was his lack of interest in
the civilizational sequences outside of the Middle East and Europe.
Having concluded correctly at an early point in his career that there

682

Y’

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

was little rescmblance between the specific steps involved in the
development of civilization in Europe, on the one hand, and in

Mesopotamia and Igypt on the other, he was unprepared to look
for parallels in Mexico or Peru.

Childc’s views are extremely instructive with respect to our under-
standing of Steward’s relationship to Marxism and historical ma-
terialism. Obscrve the irony: Both Steward and Wittfogel appear
embarrassed by the relationship between Marxism and cultural ma-
terialism. Childe, on the other hand, openly pleads for the importance
of a cultural-materialist strategy. Yet it is Childe who argues that
environmental differences are too great in the earliest centers of
civilization to expect parallel sequences, while it is Steward and
Wittfogel—the cultural ecologists and doctrinaire multilinear evolu-
tionists—who propose that hydraulic types, wherever they occur, tend
to evolve through a similar series of stages.

Thus it was in Steward’s trial formulation that for the first time
archaeological evidence from the New World was harnessed to the
task of providing a cultural-materialist interpretation of cultural
evolution on a global scale. At last, it could be seen through ar-
chaeological data that American Indian populations, starting with
palcolithic tool kits and restricted to a life of hunting and gathering,
had slowly advanced through various degrees of complexity in a
direction fundamentally similar to that taken by racially and culturally
separate populations in the Old World. There was no longer any
possibility that either areca had depended on the other for any of
the vital steps in the sequence. The New World in other words had
finally emerged as the equivalent of a second earth; and on that
second earth, due to the fact that in the psychocultural realm, as in
all others, similar causes under similar conditions lead to similar
results, hominid cultures tended to evolve along essentially similar

paths when they were confronted with similar techno-cnvironmental
situations.

THE NEW ARCHAEOLOGY

We have alrcady seen that the analysis of the devclopment of the
sibs in the Southwest and California integrated a knowledge of both
ethnographic and archaeological facts. We also should note in this
connection that Steward himself had been trained in seriational
stratigraphy by Kroeber and that he had worked with William Duncan
Strong in a project at The Dalles on the Columbia River in 1926
(sTRONG, sciENCK, and STEWARD 1930). Firsthand familiarity with the

683

|
i


===== PAGE 347 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

techniques of modern archaeological research gave Steward both the
authority and the motivation for criticizing the failure of his colleagues
to articulate their findings with significant nomothetic issues:

When complexes have been identified and history in the nar-
row sensc reconstructed, what task remains for archacology? Some-
day world culture history will be known as far as archacological
materials and human intelligence permit. Every possible element
of culture will be placed in time and space. . . . When tax-
onomy and history are thus complete, shall we cease our labors
and hope that the future Darwin of anthropology will interpret
the great historical scheme that will have been erected? There
has been a marked tendency to avoid these questions on the as-
sumption that they are unimportant at present. It is held that the
urgent need of the moment is to record data which are rapidly

vanishing. . . . We believe that it is unfortunate that attempts
to state broad objectives which are basic to all cultural anthro-
pology . . . should be relegated to a future time of greater

leisure and fullness of data.

One wonders whether the frequent limitations of interest to
measurements and tabulations of data and refinement of tech-
nique is an unwillingness to grapple with the problem of objec-
tives. And it is by no means improbable that in spite of our
refined techniques of excavation, ceramic studies, and classifica-
tion, we are actually overlooking important data, even when do-
ing field work.

Often ten pages are devoted to the minutiae of pottery types

. while one page or less describes subsistence and the rela-
tionship of the culture to the geographical environment. . . .
Even less space is usually accorded data concerning social groups
and population distribution and concentration which are indi-
cated by such clements as house remains and village locations

[sTEWARD and SELTZER 1938:5-7].

To a marked degree, Steward’s image of what archaeology should
have been doing in the 1930’s has become true in the fifties and sixties.
The dominant orientation in contemporary American anthropological
archaeology now conforms to Steward’s understanding of cultural
ecology. Whether it be shell middens on Long Island, ancient burial
grounds in Peru, or pyramids in Mexico, the questions now being
asked and the theories being framed to answer them reflect a growing
convergence toward the strategy of cultural materialism.

Mere dating and classification have ceased to guarantee respectability
in archaeological circles. The demands of the moment are to be met
by data on population size, density, minima and maxima in short-

684

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

and long-time runs; seasonal and climatic cycles; response of settle-
ment pattern; rate of population increase; food production tech-
niques; total exploited habitat; short- and long-run changes in natural
biota; techno-environmental effects; size of food producing and non-
food producing groups; incidence of warfare; contribution of disease
vectors to mortality; nature of social organization defined in terms
of house groups, village or town units; and intercommunity organi-
zation (BINFORD 1962; 1967; STEWARD 1967). These interests link
archaeology to ethnology in a powerful new symbiosis, providing the
two disciplines with a common set of assumptions emphasizing ctic
events and a joint stratcgy which has already begun to yield a better
understanding of evolutionary processes.

TESTING OF THE HYDRAULIC
HYPOTHESIS

One of the most interesting manifestations of the new strat-
egy of archacological rescarch is the attempt to test the hydraulic
hypothesis. Research has centered on the role of irrigation in the
evolution of Classic period Meso-American urban civilizations. The
case of the Valley of Teotihuacan, a short distance to the north of the
Valley of Mexico, is a good example of recent efforts along these lines.
It was in this valley that one of the largest man-made structures in
the world, the great Pyramid of the Sun, was erccted a thousand years
before Columbus’ voyage. In 1948, when Steward formulated his de-
velopmental typology, very little was known about the circumstances
which had led to the construction of this great pyramid, or of any of
the other monuments which were part of the total Teotihuacin
complex. Very little was known, either, about the role of irrigation in
the formation of Meso-American civilizations. Although there was no
doubt that the Aztecs had carried out extensive hydraulic projects in
connection with chinampa cultivation (misnomered “floating gar-
fiCns”) and the drainage of Lake Texcoco, the date at which these
installations were introduced and their causal significance remained
uncertain.

I_n the case of Teotihuacin, nothing at all was known about the
agricultural practices which had provided the energy for building the
great monuments. Excavations carried out under the direction of
René Millon (1967) of the University of Rochester have now es-
tablished the fact that Teotihuacdn was the site of one of the New
World’s largest aboriginal cities. Its estimated population of 70,000 to
100,000 people could only have been surpassed, if at all, by Tenochtitlan,

685

|
%
|


===== PAGE 348 =====

The Rise of Anthropological Theory

capital of the Aztecs. Like Tenochtitlin, Teotihuacdn was the center
of an empire that covered a large part of Central Mexico. The
question of whether it was based on hydraulic modes of production
appears now to have been settled. Studies carried out by William
Sanders of Pennsylvania State University show that the change from
rainfall farming to irrigation was correlated with rapid population
growth, nucleation, monument construction, intense social stratifica-
tion, and expansionist warfare. “The water for the permanent irriga-
tion systems derives from 8o springs, all located within a single very
small area (20 hectares). This was the most significant single ecologi-
cal resource” (SANDERS 1965:201). Sanders and Price (1968) have
gone on to interpret the difference between Maya civilizations and
the Highland Mexican hydraulic empires. The former were based
not on irrigation agriculture but on slash-and-burn (swidden) farm-
ing. These were true civilizations, but they lacked the nucleated set-
tlements of urban civilization. The hierarchical divisions within the
lowland Maya states appear to have been much less severe than those
in Teotihuacan.

MEXICO AND MESOPOTAMIA

It would be unreasonable to suppose that substantial criti-
cisms of the details of Steward’s irrigation sequence would not have
been forthcoming from archaeologists and historians with specialized
knowledge of the arcas in question. Nor should the impression be
conveyed that Wittfogel's hydraulic hypothesis has everywhere re-
ceived support from our rapidly expanding knowledge of prehistory.
It is not possible to review all the negative and positive bits of
information and favorable and unfavorable interpretations which are
accumulating around this vital question. I shall mention only the
most recent attempt by Robert Adams (1966) to compare the
evolution of Meso-American and Mesopotamian urban civilizations.

Although Adams acknowledges the existence of irrigation agricul-
ture in Early Dynastic times in Mesopotamia, he does not believe
that its scale was large enough to account for the concentration of
political power which is characteristic of the later or Classic phases.
He is also skeptical of the organizational role of irrigation in Meso-
America although his argument is based more on the Aztec than on
the Teotihuacén situation. A major difficulty appears to be the lack
of coordinating measures of the irrigation works and size of polity in
the two regions through successive periods of growth and expan-
sion. Adams’ position is weakened when we consider that there is, in
the long run, a step-by-step increase in the size of the Mesopotamian

686

23. Cultural Materialism: Cultural Ecology

waterworks and the size and power of the ruling bureaucracy.
Thus, even if Adams is correct in maintaining that the first consoli-
dation of political power was achieved independently of the organiza-
tional requisites of the hydraulic system, the achievement of Witt-
fogel’s Oricntal despotic type remains closely associated with maxi-
mum hydraulic dependency.

But the most interesting aspect of Adams’ critique lies elsewhere.
Despite his rejection of the hydraulic theory, his entire perspective
on the Mesopotamian data bears the imprint of the nomothetic
revival, and everywhere implicitly acknowledges the inspiration of
the search for law and causality. Indeed, in the final reckoning, Adams
reaches conclusions that vindicate Steward’s method to a remarkable
extent if we reflect how fragmentary were the data upon which Steward
was obliged to base his “trial formulation”:

What seems overwhelmingly most important about these dif-
ferences is how small they bulk even in aggregate, when consid-
ered against the mass of similarities in form and process. In short,
the parallels in the Mesopotamian and Mexican “carcers to
statehood,” in the forms that institutions ultimately assumed as
well as in the processes leading to them, suggest that both in-
stances are most significantly characterized by a common core of
regularly occurring features. We discover anew that social behavior
conforms not merely to laws but to a limited number of such laws,
which perhaps has always been taken for granted in the case of
cultural subsystems (e.g., kinship) and among “primitives” (e.g.,
hunting bands). Not merely as an abstract article of faith but as
a valid starting point for detailed, empirical analysis, it applies
equally well to some of the most complex and creative of human
societies [apAMS 1966:174-75].

We may note that Adams, who deals with time scales on the order of
millennia, appears to have misunderstood recent anthropological his-
tory in suggesting that elements of the nomothetic revival were always
“taken for granted.” It has been a long hard struggle all the way. In
concluding our review of this centuries-old struggle to achieve a science
of history, it cannot be overemphasized that the vindication of the
strategy of cultural materialism does not depend on the verification
of the hydraulic hypothesis or of any other particular techno-environ-
mental, techno-economic theory. Rather, it lies in the capacity of the
approach to generate major explanatory hypotheses which can be sub-
jected to the tests of ethnographic and archacological research, modi-
fied if necessary, and made part of a corpus of theory equally capable’
of explaining the most generalized features of universal history and
the most exotic specialties of particular cultures.

687



===== PAGE 349 =====

Bibliography

Bibliography

s
53

Original dates of publication are given only when they are important
to the historical discussion in text.

ABERLE, D. o 4
1961a “Matrilineal Descent in Cross-cultural Perspective.” D. Schgcx er
and K. Gough, eds., Matrilineal Kinship. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 655-727. )
1961b “Culture and Socialization.” F. Hsu, ed., P;ychologzcal Anthro-
pology: Approaches to Culture and Personality. Homewood, IIl.:
Dorsey Press, 381-99.
ACHELIS, T. ) ] )
1889 Die Entwicklung der modernen Ethnologie. Berlin: E. S. Mittler
und Sohn.
ACKERKNECHT, E. H. .
1954 “On the Comparative Method in Anthropology.” R. F. Spencef,
ed., Method and Perspective in Anthropology. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 117-25.
ACKERMAN, C. . ) !
1964 “Structure and Statistics: The Purum Case.” American Anthro
pologist, 66:53-65.

688

1965 “Structure and Process: The Purum Case. American Anthropolo-
gist, 67:83-91.
ADAMS, R. MC C.

1966 The Evolution of Urban Society. Chicago: Aldine.
ADELUNG, J. C.

1782 Versuch einer Geschichte der Cultur des menschlichen Ge-
schlechts. Leipzig: C. G. Hertel.
ACASSI, J.
1960 “Methodological Individualism.” British Journal of Sociology,
11:244-70.
ALIOTTA, A.
1914 The Idedlistic Reaction against Science. Agnes McCaskill, trans.
London: Macmillan and Co.
ANKERMANN, B.
1905 “Kulturkreise und Kulturschichten in Ozeanien und Afrika.” Zeit-
schrift fiir Ethnologie, 37:54-84.
ARBUTHNOT, J.
1751 (orig. 1733) An Essay Concerning the FEffects of the Air on
Human Bodies. London: J. and R. Tonson, and S. Drap.
ARGYLE, M.

1957 The Scientific Study of Social Behavior. London: Methuen.
ARMILLAS, P.
1948 “A Sequence of Cultural Development in Meso-America.”” W. J.
Bennett, ed., A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology. Memoirs of
the Society for American Archaeology, 4:105-11.
BACHMAN, J.
1850 The Doctrine of the Unity of the Human Race Examined on the
Principles of Science. Charleston: C. Canning.
BACHOFEN, J. J.
1861 Das Mutterrecht. Basel: Benno Schwabe.

1966 (orig. 1880) “Antiquarische Briefe.” J. Dormam, W. Strasser, and
H. Lommel, eds., Johann Jacob Bachofen's gesammelte Werke,
VIIL. Basel: Schwabe and Co.

BACK, K.

1960 “The Well-informed Informant.” R. Adams and J. J. Priss, eds.,
Human Organization Research. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press,
179-88.

BAGBY, P.

1953 “Culture and the Causes of Culture.” American Anthropologist,

55:535-54-
BAGEHOT, W.
1872 Physics and Politics, or Thoughts on the Application of the Prin-

ciple of Natural Selection and Inheritance to Political Society.
New York: D. Applcton.

689

|
|
!
i
E
?

IO e - eoeee s oo ee e e st £ e e SE—* A ——ce et


===== PAGE 350 =====

Bibliography

BANCROFT, H. H. )

1883 The Early American Chronicles. San Francisco: A. L. Bancroft.

BANDELIER, A.

1879 On the Social Organization and Mode of Government of the
Ancient Mexicans. Reports of the Peabody Museum, 12:;7z—699.

1885 The Romantic School in American Archaeology. New York: Trow
and Co.

BARKER, R. and L. BARKER ) .

1961 “Behavior Units for the Comparative Study of Culture.” B. Kap-
lan, ed., Studying Persondlity Cross-Culturdlly. Evanston: Row,
Peterson, 456-76.

BARKER, R. C. - .

1963 “The Stream of Behavior as an Empirical Problem.” R. G. Barker,
ed., The Stream of Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1-21. . .

1965 “Explorations in Ecological Psychology.” American Psychologist,
20!1-14.

BARNES, H. E.

1948 Historical Sociology: Its Origins and Development. New York:
Philosophical Library. . .

1960 “Foreword.” G. Dole and R. Carneiro, eds., Essayzs in the Science of
Culture. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, xi-xlvi.

1965 An Intellectual and Cultural History of the Western World.
New York: Dover.

BARNES, J. A. o

1954 Politics in a Changing Society. Cape Town: Oxford University
Press. . .

1960 “Anthropology in Britain before and after Darwin.” Mankind,

:369-85. . .

1961 “I%hysical and Social Kinship.” Philosophy of Science, 28:196-98.

1963 “Introduction.” B. Malinowski, The Family among the Australian
Aborigines. New York: Schocken, xi-xxx.

BARNOUW, V. . o

1949 “Ruth Benedict: Apollonian and Dionysian.” University of To-
ronto Quarterly, 3:241-53. . )

1957 “The Amiable Style of Patterns of Culture.” American Anthro-
pologist, 59:532-36.

1963 Culture and Personality. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press.

BARRY, H. ) ! ) .

1957 “Relationships between Child Training and the Pictorial Arts.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 54:380-83.

BARRY, H., M. K. BACON, and I. L. CHILD ) o

1957 “A Cross-Cultural Survey of Some Sex Differences in Socialization.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 55:327-32.

690

Bibliography

1959 “Relation of Child Training to Subsistence Fconomy.” American
Anthropologist, 61:51-63.
BARTLET, F.C. et al. (eds.)

1939 The Study of Society. New York: Macmillan.
BARZUN, J.

1937 Race: A Study in Modern Superstition. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
BASTIAN, A.

1860 Der Mensch in der Geschichte. Leipzig: O. Wigand.
1895 Ethnische Flementargedanken in der Lehre vom Menschen. Ber-
lin: Weidmann’sche Buchhandlung.
BATESON, G.
1949 “Bali: The Value System of a Steady State.” M. Fortes, ed., Social
Structure: Essays Presented to A. R. Radcliffe-Brown. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

1958 (orig. 1936) Naven. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
BATESON, G. and M. MEAD
1942 Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis. Special Publications
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 2. New York: New York
Academy of Sciences.
BAUMHOFF, M.

1963 “Ecological Determinant of Aboriginal California Population.”
University of California Publications in American Archaeology
and Ethnology, 49:155-236.
BEALS, R.
1960 “Current Trends in the Development of American Anthropology.”
A. Wallace, ed., Selected Papers of the Fifth International Con-
gress of Anthropological and Ethnological Science, 11-18.
BEATTIE, J. H. M.
1955 “Contemporary Trends in British Social Anthropology.” Sociologus,
531'1 .
1964a Othe:f Cultures: Aims, Methods and Achievements in Social An-
thropology. New York: Free Press.
1964b “Kinship and Social Anthropology.” Man, 64:101-3.
1965 “Reply to Schneider.” Man, 108:123.
BECKER, H. and H. BARNES

1961 Social Thought from Lore to Science. New York: Dover.
BENDER, D.

1965 “The Development of French Anthropology.” Journal of the History
of the Behaviorial Sciences, 1:1 39-51.
BENDYSHE, T.

1865 “The History of Anthropology.” Memoirs Kead before the

Anthropological Society of London, 1 :335-60.
BENEDICT, R.

1922 “The Vision in Plains Culture.” American Anthropologist, 24:1-25.

691



===== PAGE 351 =====

Bibliography

1923 The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America. Memoirs
of the American Anthropological Association, 29. . .
1928 “Psychological Types in the Cultures of the Southwest. P.roce'e -
? ings of the Twenty-Third International Congress of Americanists,
95
2-81. . . !
1932 “é;onﬁgumtions of Culture in North America.” American Anthro
ologist, 34:1-27. -
1934 Ieatterns of Culture. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
1943 “Obituary of F'ranz Boas.” Science, 97:60«_6.2.
1945 Race: Science and Politics. New York: Viking Press. .
1946 The Chrysanthemum and the Sword. Bostoq: Houghton Mlﬂl_m.
1948 “Anthropology and the Humanists.” American Anthropologist,
0:585-93. ) )
1959 ?orfg. 51(;;4) Patterns of Culture. New York: New American Li-
brary, Mentor Books.

BENNETT, W. J. ) )
1943 “i{sccllt Developments in the Functional Interpretations of Archae-

ological Data.” American Antiquity, 9:208-19.

ENNETT, W. J. and M. NAGAL L
? 1953 “The Japanese Critique of the Methodology of Bcnc_dlct s Chrysan-
themum and the Sword.” American Anthropologist, 55:404-11.

BERGER, P. . i -
1963 " Invitation to Sociology: A Humanistic Perspective. Garden City,

N. Y.: Doubleday.

BERGMANN, C. ) . ‘ ‘
1848 “Uber die Verhiltnisse der Wirmedkonomie der Thiere zu ihrer

Grosse.” Gaottingen Studien, No. 8.

BERNARD, J. o ) .
1945 “Observation and ~ Gencralization  in Cultural Anthropology.

American Journal of Sociology, 50:284-91.

BERNDT, R. M. . ) ,
1952 “A Cargo Movement in the Eastern Central Highlands of New

Guinea.” Oceania, 23:40-05; 137-58; 202-34.
BERREMAN, G. » . .
1966 “Anemic and Emetic Analysis in Social Anthropology.” American
Anthropologist, 68:346-54.

BIDNEY, D. ) . ) )
1044 y“C()ncept of Culture and Some Cultural Fallacies.” American An

thropologist, 46:30-44. ) y
J(H()“'I']w’J Concept of Cultural Crisis.” American Anthropologist,
8:534-51. . ) !
1963 “%hc> )\i;\n'ctics of Human TFreedom.” D. Bidney, ed., The Con:
’ cept of Freedom in Anthropology. The Hague: Mouton, 11-34.

BIGO, P. ) o e,
1953 Marxisme et Humanisme. Paris: Presses Universitaires de I'raj

692

*’

Bibliography

BINFORD, L. R.

1962 “Archacology as Anthropology.” American Antiquity, 28:217-235.
1967 “Comment on K. C. Chang, ‘Major Aspects of the Interrelation-
ship of Archaeology and Ethnology.” ” Current Anthropology,
8:234-35.
BIRDWHISTELL, R.
1952 Introduction to Kinesics. Louisville: University of Louisville Press.
BIRNBAUM, N.
1953 “Conflicting Interpretations of the Rise of Capitalism: Marx and
Weber.” British Journal of Sociology, 4:125-41.
BLACK, M.
1949 Language and Philosophy: Studies in Method. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
BLALOCK, H.

1961 Causal Inferences in Non-Ixperimental Research. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
BLUMENBACH, J. F.

1865 (orig. 1775) The Anthropological Treatises of Johann Friedrich
Blumenbach. Thomas Bendyshe, trans. and ed. London: Long-
man, Green, Longman, Roberts and Green.

BOAS, F.

1884 “A Journcy in Cumberland Sound and on the West Shore of
Davis Strait in 1883 and 1884.” Journal of the American Geo-
graphical Society, 16:242-72.

1885 “Baffin-Land: Geographische Frgebnisse einer in den Jahren 1883
und 1884 ausgefiihrten Forschungsreise.” Erginzungsheft No. 8o
zu Petermanns Mitteilungen, Gotha: Justus Perthes.

1887a “The Study of Geography.” Race, Language and Culture. New
York: Macmillan, 639-47.

1887b “Museums  of Ethnology and Their Classification.” Science,
9:587-89.

1888 The Central Eskimo. Report of the Burcau of Ethnology 1884-

1885. Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 399-669.
1891a “The Indians of British Columbia.” Sixth Report of the Com-
mittee on the North-Western Tribes of Canada. Report of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science 1890, 801-93.
1891b “The Dissemination of Tales among the Natives of North Amer-
ica.” Race, Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 437-45.
1894 “Human Faculty as Determined by Race.” Proceedings of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 43:301-27.
1896a “The Growth of Indian Mythologies.” Race, Language and Cul-
ture. New York: Macmilian, 425-36.
1896b “The Limitations of the Comparative Method of Anthropology.”
Race, Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 271-304.
1897 The Social Organization and the Secret Socicties of the Kwakiutl

693



===== PAGE 352 =====

Bibliography

Indians. Report of the U.S. National Museum, 1895. Washington.
1899a “Some Recent Criticism of Physical Anthropology.” American
Anthropologist, 1:98-106.
1899b “Review of Frobenius’ Die Weltanschauung der Naturvolker.”
American Anthropologist, 1:755.
1902 “Rudolph Virchow’s Anthropological Work.” Science, 16:441-45.
1904 “The History of Anthropology.” Science, 20:513-24.
1907 “Anthropology.” A lecture delivered at Columbia University in the
series on Science, Philosophy and Art. Dec. 18, 1907.
1909 “The Mind of Primitive Man.” W. Thomas, ed., Source Book for
Social Origins, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 143-55.
1910 “Fthnological Problems in Canada.” Journdl of the Royal Anthro-
pological Institute, 13:529-39.
1911 The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: Macmillan.
1912 “Changes in the Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants.”
Race, Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 60-75.
1916 “The Origin of Totemism.” American Anthropologist, 18:319-26.
1920a “The Methods of Ethnology.” Race, Language and Culture. New
York: Macmillan, 281-89.
1920b “The Social Organization of the Kwakiutl.” Race, Language and
Culture. New York: Macmillan, 356-69.

1924 “Social Organization of the Tribes of the North Pacific Coast.”
Race, Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 375-76.

1928 Anthropology and Modern Life. New York: Norton.

1930 “Some Problems of Methodology in the Social Sciences.” Race,
Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 260-69.

1932 “The Aims of Anthropological Research.” Race, Language and
Culture. New York: Macmillan, 243-59.

1936 “History and Science in Anthropology: A reply.” Race, Language
and Culture. New York: Macmillan, 305-11.

1938a (ed.) General Anthropology. New York: Heath.

1938b “An Anthropologist’s Credo.” The Nation, 147:201-4.

1938¢ (orig. 1911) The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: Macmillan.

1943 “Recent Anthropology.” Science, 98:311-14; 334-37-

1948 Race, Language and Culture. New York: Macmillan. The essays
in this volume are individually noted above in the chronological
order of their original publication.

1967 Kwakiutl Ethnography. Helen Codcre, ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

BOBER, M. M.

1927 Karl Marx’s Interpretation of History. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-

versity Press.

BOCHNER, S.
1965 “Defining  Intolerance of Ambiguity.” Psychological Record,

15:393-400-

694

T

Bibliography

BOCK, K. E.

1956 The Acceptance of Histories: Toward a Perspective for Social Sci-

ence. Berkeley: University of California Press.
BOGARDUS, E. S.

1960 The Development of Social Thought. New York: Longman:

Green. ° ) gmans
BOPP, F.

1816 t]l_zef das Conjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache in Vergleichung
mit jenem der griechischen, lateinischen, persischen und germani-
schen Sprache. Frankfurt-am-Main: K. J. Windischmann

BOSSUET, J. B. )

1748 Discours sur I'Histoire Universelle. Paris: David.
BOTTOMORE, T. B.
1956 J\lm:x’s Social Theory. London: Watts.
1962 Sociology: A Guide to Problems and Literature. London: Allen &
Unwin. .
1965 “Karl Marx: Sociologist or Marxist.” Science and Society, 30:11-2.
BOUCHER DE PERTHES, J. e
1860 De I'Homme Antédiluvien et de Ses Ocuvres. Paris
BOYD, W. C. '
1958 “Has S‘tatistics Retarded the Progress of Physical Anthropology?”
American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 16:481-84. ’
BRADSHAW-MORREN, G. E.
1966 “A Catalogue of Hyphenated Anthropologists.” Ameri
poloit, S rona s pologists.” American Anthro-
BRAND, J.
1905 (orig. 1855) Popular Antiquities. London: Reeves and Turner
BRANDON, §. G. F. )
1951 Time and Mankind, an Historical and Philosophical Stud
ime ! 5 y of Man-
kind’s Attitude to the Phenomena of Change. London: Hutchin-
son.
BRINTON, D. G.
1896 “The Aims qf Anthropology.” Proceedings of the 44th Meeting
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1-17
BROCA, P. P. o

1863 “Re\jie’v‘v of the Proceedings of the Anthropological Socicty of
Paris.” Anthropological Review, 1:274-312. ’
BROWN, I. C.
1960 “Rcvic“:’ of The Testing of Negro Intelligence by Audrey M.
Shuey.” American Anthropologist, 62:544. ’ ’
BROWN, R.

1964 Explanation in Social Science. Tllinois: Aldine.
BROWNE, P.

1856 Tri_chologia Mammalium, or a Treatise on the Organization, Prop-
erties, and Uses of Hair and Wool. Philadelphia: Hart.

695



===== PAGE 353 =====

Bibliography

BRYSON, G.
1945 Man and Society: The Scottish Inquiry of the Eighteenth Century.

Princeton: Princeton University Press.
BUCKLAND, W.
1823 Reliquiae Diluvianae. London: J. Murray.
BUCKLE, H. T.
1857 History of Civilization in England. London: J. W. Parker and Sons.
BUETTNER-JANUSCH, J.
1957 “Boas and Mason: Particularism vs. Generalization.” American
Anthropologist, 59:318-24.
BUFFON, G. L. L. DE

:;ng} Histoire Naturelle. Paris: De I'lmprimerie Royale.

BUKHARIN, N.
1925 (orig. 1921) Historical Materialism: A System of Sociology. New
York: International Publishers.
BUNZEL, R.
1929 The Pueblo Potter. New York: Columbia University Press.
1933 Zuiii Texts. Publications of the American Ethnological Society,
vol. 15. New York: G. E. Stechert.
1938 “The Economic Organization of Primitive Peoples.” F. Boas, ed.,
General Anthropology. New York: Heath, 327-408.
1952 Chichicastenango, A Guatemalan Village. Monographs of the
American Ethnological Society, vol. 22. New York: J. J. Augustin.
BURCKHARDT, J. C.
1943 Force and Freedom: Reflections on History. New York: Pantheon.
BURLING, R.
1964 “Cognition and Componential Analysis: God’s Truth or Hocus-
Pocus?”” American Anthropologist, 66:20-28.
BURROW, J. W.
1966 Evolution and Society: A Study in Victorian Social Theory. Lon-
don: Cambridge University Press.
BURY, J. B.
1909 The Ancient Greek Historians. New York: Macmillan.
1932 The Idea of Progress. New York: Macmillan.
BUTTEKOFER
1893 “Note.” American Anthropologist, Old Series 6:337.
BUTTERFIELD, H.
1960a The Origins of Modern Science. New York: Macmillan.
196cb Man on His Past. The Study of Historical Scholarship. Bos-
ton: Beacon Press.
CAMPBELL, D.
1961 “The Mutual Methodological Relevance of Anthropology and Psy-
chology.” Francis Hsu, ed., Psychological Anthropology: Ap-

696

48

'y

Bibliography

proaches to Culture and Personality. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press,
33352

1964 “Distinguishing Differences of Perception from Failures of Com-
munication in Cross-cultural Studies.” F. S. C. Northrop and H.
Livingston, eds., Cross-Cultural Understanding: Epistemology in
Anthropology. New York: Harper and Row, 308-36.

1965 “Pattern Matching as an Essential in Distal Knowing.” K. R. Ham-
mond, ed., The Psychology of Egan Brunswik. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, 81-106.

CAMPBELL, J.

1851 Negro Mania: Being an Examination of the Falsely Assumed
Equdlity of the Various Races of Man. Philadelphia: Campbell
and Power

CAMPER, P.
1791 Sur les Différences que Présente le Visage dans les Races Hu-
maines. Utrecht: B. Wild and J. Altheer.
CAREY, H. C.
1858 Principles of Social Science. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
CARLYLE, T.

1849 “Occasional Discourse on the Nigger Question.” Fraser's Magazine,

London, 40:670-79.
CARNEIRO, ROBERT (ed.)

1967 “Introduction.” The Evolution of Society: Selections from H.
Spencer’s Principles of Sociology. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, ix-lvii.

CARROLL, J. B.
1959 “An Operational Model for Language Behavior.” Anthropological
Linguistics, 1:37-54.
CASSIRER, E
1944 An Essay on Man. New Haven: Yale University Press.
CHACNON, N.
1966 “Yanomané Social Organization.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Michigan.

CHAMBERLAIN, C. L.

1963 “The Man Marx Made.” Science and Society, 27:302-20.
CHAMBERS, R.

1844 Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation. London: J. Churchill.
CHAMBLISS, R.

1954 Social Thought. New York: Dryden.
CHARDIN, J.

1927 Sir John Chardin’s Travels in Persia. London: Argonaut.
CHESNEAUX, J.

1966 “Ou En Est la Discussion sur le Mode de Production Asiatique?”
La Pensée, 129:33-46.

CHILD, I. L., T. STORM, and J. VEROFF
1958 “Achievement Themes in Folk Tales Related to Socialization Prac-

697



===== PAGE 354 =====

Bibliography

tice.” ]. W. Atkinson, ed., Motives in Fantasy, Action and Society.
Princeton: Van Nostrand, 479-92.
CHILDE, V. G.

1925 The Dawn of Western Civilization. New York: Knopf.

1935 “Changing Methods and Aims in Prehistory.” Proceedings of the
Prehistoric Society, vol. 1. Cambridge. 1-15.

1944 “Archacological Ages as Technological Stages.” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institutes, 74:1-19.

1946 What Happened in History. New York: Pelican.

1951a Social Evolution. New York: Henry Schuman.

1951b Man Makes Himself. New York: New American Library, Mentor.

1953 What Is History? New York: Henry Schuman.

1958 The Dawn of European Civilization. New York: Knopf.

CHURCHILL, A. and J. (comps.)
1732 Collection of Voyages and Travels. London: J. Walthoe.
CODERE, H.

1950 Fighting with Property. Monographs of the American Ethno-
logical Society, vol. 18. New York: J. J. Augustin.

1956 “The Amiable Side of Kwakiutl Life.” American Anthropologist,
58:334-51.

1957 “Kwakiutl Society: Rank without Class.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 59:473-85.

1959 “The Understanding of the Kwakiutl.” W. Goldschmidt, ed., The
Anthropology of Franz Boas. Memoir 89. American Anthropo-
logical Association, 61-75.

COHEN, M. R.
1925 “The Insurgence against Reason.” Journdl of Philosophy, 22:120-23.
COHN, B.

1955 “The Changing Status of a Depressed Caste.” McKim Marriott,
ed., Village India: Studies in the Little Community. Memoir 83.
American Anthropological Association, 53-78.

COLBY, B. N.

1966 “Ethnographic Semantics: A Preliminary Survey.” Current An-

thropology, 7:3-32.
COLDEN, C.

1902 (orig. 1727) The History of the Five Indian Nations of Canada.

New York: Barnes.
COLE, G. D. H.
1964 The Meaning of Marxism. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.
COLLINGWOOD, R. G.
1046 The Idea of History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
COLLINGWOOD, R. G., A. E. TAYLOR and F. C. S. SCHILLER

1922 “Are History and Science Different Kinds of Knowledge?” Mind,

31:442-66.

698

Bibliography

COLLINS, P.
1965 “Functional Analyses in the Symposium on Man, Culture, and
Animals.” A. Leeds and A. Vayda, eds., Man, Culture and Ani-
mals. Washington: American Association for the Advancement of
Science, 271-82.
COLSON, E. and M. GLUCKMAN (eds.)
1951 Seven Tribes of British Central Africa. London: Oxford University
Press for Rhodes-Livingstone Institute.
COMAS, J.
1961 “ ‘Scientific Racism Again?” Current Anthropology, 2:303-40.
COMBE, G.
1819 Essays on Phrenology. London.
COMTE, A.
1830-
1842
;gg;} Systéme de Politique Positive. Paris: E. Thunot.
187;—} System of Positive Polity, or A Treatise on Sociology. London:
1877 § Longmans, Green.

1896 The Positive Philosophy. Trans. and condensed by Harriet Mar-
tineau. London: G. Bell.
CONDILLAG, E. B. DE
1746 Origine des Connaissances Humaines. Amsterdam.
CONDORCET, MARQUIS DE
1822 (orig. 1795) Esquisse d'un Tableau Historique des Progrés de
PEsprit Humain. Paris: Masson.
1955 Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind.
June Barraclough, trans. New York: Noonday Press.
CONKLIN, H. C.
1955 “Hanunéo Color Categories.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropol-
08y, 11:339-44.
1964 “Ethnogenealogical Method.” Ward H. Goodenough, ed., Explora-
tions in Cultural Anthropology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 25-55.
COOK, M.
1936 “Jean Jacques Rousseau and the Negro.” Journal of Negro His-
tory, 21:294-303.
COON, . s.
1962 The Origin of Races. New York: Knopf.
COULBOURN, R.
1952 “Causes in Culture.” American Anthropologist, 54:112-16.
COULT, A. D.
1962 “An Analysis of Needham’s Critique of the Homans and Schneider
Theory.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 18:317-35.
1966a “On the Justification of Untested Componential Analyses.” Ameri-
can Anthropologist, 68:1014-15.

}Caurs de Philosophie Positive. Paris: Bachelier.

699

i
i
i

i
|
|



===== PAGE 355 =====

Bibliography

1966b “A Simplified Method for the Transformational Analysis of Kin-
ship Terms.” American Anthropologist, 68:1476-83.
1968 “Lineage Solidarity, Transformational Analysis, and the Meaning
of Kinship Terms.” Man, in press.
COULT, A. and R. W. HABENSTEIN
1965 Cross-tabulation of Murdock’s World Ethnographic Sample. Co-
lumbia: University of Missouri Press.
COUNT, E. (ed.)
1950 This Is Race. New York: Henry Schuman.
COWCILL, G.
1664 “Statistics and Sense: More on the Purum Case.” American An-
thropologist, 66:1358-65.
COX, 0.
1948 Caste, Class, and Race, A Study in Social Dynamics. Garden City,
N. Y.: Doubleday.
CRAWLEY, A. E.
1902 The Mystic Rose: A Study of Primitive Marriage. London: Mac-
millan.
CROCE, B.
1923 History—Its Theory and Practice. D. Ainslie, trans. New York:
Harcourt, Brace.
CULL, R.
1852 “Recent Progress of Ethnology.” Journal of the Ethnological So-
ciety of London, 3:165-77.
CUNNINGHAM, D. J.
1908 “Anthropology in the 18th Century.” Journal of the Royal An-
thropological Institute, 38:10-35.
CURTIN, P.
1964 The Image of Africa: British Ideas and Action, 1780-1850. Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press.
1967 Africa Remembered. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
CURTIS, E.
1915 The North American Indian. Vol. X, The Kwakiutl. Norwood,
Mass.: Plimpton Press.

CUVIER, G.
1812 Recherches sur les Ossements Fossiles de Quadrupédes. Paris:
Déterville.

DAMPIER, W.
1729 A Collection of Voyages. London: J. J. Krapton.
D’ANDRADE, R. G.

1961 “Anthropological Studies of Dreams.” Frances Hsu, ed., Psycho-
logical Anthropology: Approaches to Culture and Persondlity.
Homewood, II1.: Dorsey Press, 296-332.

DANIEL, G. E.

1943 The Three Ages: An Essay on Archaeological Method. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

700

hdl

Bibliography

1950 A Hundred Years of Archaeology. London: Duckworth.
1964 The Idea of Prehistory. London: Watts.
DAPPER, O.

1686 Description de I'Afrique. Amsterdam: Wolfgang, Waesberge,
Boom and van Someren.
DARGUN, L.
1883 Mutterrecht und Raubehe und ihre Reste im germanischen Recht
und Leben. Breslau: W. Koebner.
DARWIN, C.
1871 The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. New York:
D. Appleton.
1903 More Letters of Charles Darwin. Francis Darwin, ed. London:
J. Murray. 2 vols.
1958 (orig. 1859) Origin of Species. New York: New American
Library, Mentor.
DARWIN, C. and A. R. WALLACE
1859 “On the Tendency of Species to Form Varieties; and on the Per-
petuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection.”
Journal of the Linnaean Society, 3:45-63.
DAS, T. C.

1945 The Purum: An Old Kuki Tribe of Manipur. Calcutta: University
of Calcutta Press.

DAVENPORT, W,
1959 “Nonunilinear Descent and Descent Groups.” American Anthro-
pologist, 61:557-73.
DAVIS, K.
1959 “The Myth of Functional Analysis as a Special Method in Sociol-
ogy and Anthropology.” American Sociological Review, 24:757-73.
DAWES, B.
1952 A Hundred Years of Biology. London: G. Duckworth and Co.
DEACON, A. B.
1934 Malekula: A Vanishing People in the New Hebrides. London:
George Routledge.
DE BONALD, L.

1826 Sur les Premiers Objets des Connaissances Morales. Paris: D'Adrien
Le Clere.

DE MAISTRE, J. C.

1959 (orig. 1810) On God and Society. Essay on the Generative Prin-

ciple of Political Constitutions. Chicago: H. Regnery.
DEMEUNIER, J. N.

1776 L’Esprit des Usages et des Coutumes des Différents Peuples.
London: Chez Pissot.
DENNIS, W.

1940 “Does Culture Appreciably Affect Patterns of Infant Behavior?”
Journal of Social Psychology, 12:305-17.

701



===== PAGE 356 =====

Bibliography

DE SOLLA PRICE, D. J.

1962 Science Since Babylon. New Haven: Yale University Press.

1963 Little Science Big Science. New York: Columbia University Press.

DEVEREUX, C.

1945 “The Logical Foundations of Culture and Personality Studies.”
Transactions of The New York Academy of Science. Series 11,
7:110-30.

1956 “I/\'ormal and Abnormal: The Key Problem of Psychiatric Anthro-
pology.” Some Uses of Anthropology: Theoretical and Applied.
Washington: Anthropological Society of Washington, 23-48.

DEXTER, R

1966 “Putnam’s Problems Popularizing Anthropology.” American Sci-

entist, 54:315-32.
D’HOLBACH, P. H. T.

1770 Systéme de la Nature. London: M. Mirabaud.

1774 Systéme Social, ou Principes Naturelles de la Mordle et de la
Politique. London.

DIAMOND, S. and M. SCHEIN

1966 “The Waste Collectors.” Unpublished Master’s thesis, Columbia

University.
DICKMAN, H. R.

1963 “The Perception of Behavioral Units.”” Roger G. Barker, ed., The

Stream of Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 23-41.
DIDEROT, D

1772 (orig. 1754) Pensées sur I'Interprétation de la Nature. Ocuvres
Philosophiques de M. Diderot. Amsterdam: Chez Marc-Michel
Ray.

1875

1879
1943 Interpreter of Nature. ]. Stewart and J. Kemp, trans. New York:

International Publishers.
DIETERLEN, G.

1957 Introduction to Marcel Griaule’s Méthode de I'Ethnographie.

Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
DILLON, W. S.

1961 “Giving, Receiving, and Repaying: An Examination of the Ideas of
Marcel Mauss in the Context of International Technical Assistance.”
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Teachers College, Columbia Uni-
versity.

DILTHEY, W.

1883 Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften. Leipzig: Duncker and
Humbolt.

1954 (orig. 1907) The Essence of Philosophy. S. Emery and W. Emery,
trans. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

1959 “The Understanding of Other Persons and Their Life-Expressions.”
P. Gardiner, ed., Theories of History. New York: Free Press,
213-26.

}Oeuwes Complétes. Paris: Garrier.

702

28

Bibliography

1961 Meaning in History. H. P. Richman, ed. London: Allen & Unwin.
DIXON, R.
1963a Linguistic Science and Logic. The Hague: Mouton.
1963b “A Trend in Semantics.” Linguistics, 1:30-57.
1964 “A Trend in Semantics: Rejoinder.” Linguistics, 3:14-18.
DOBB, M.
1966 “Marx on Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations.” Science and So-
ciety, 30:319-25.
DOBRIZHOFFER, M.
1822 (orig. 1784) An Account of the Abipones. London: J. Murray.
DOBZHANSKY, T.
1960 “Individuality, Gene Recombination and Non-Repeatability of
Evolution.” Australian Journal of Science, 23:71-74.
1962 Mankind Evolving: The Evolution of the Human Species. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
DOBZHANSKY, T. and M. F. ASHLEY MONTAGU
1963 “Two Views of Coon’s Origin of Races with Comments and Re-
plies.” Current Anthropology, 4:360-68.
DREGER, R. M. and K. S. MILLER
1960 “Comparative Psychological Studies of Negroes and Whites in the
United States.” Psychology Bulletin, 57:361-402.
DRIESCH, H.

1908 The Science and Philosophy of the Organism. London: A. C.
Black.

DRIVER, H. E.

1956 An Integration of Functional, Evolutionary, and Historical Theory
by Means of Correlations. Indiana University Publications in An-
thropology and Linguistics. Memoir 12.

1964 Indians of North America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

1965 “Survey of Numerical Classification in Anthropology.” Dell Hymes,
ed., The Use of Computers in Anthropology. The Hague: Mouton,
304-44-

1966 “Geographical versus Pyscho-functional Explanations of Kin Avoid-
ances.” Current Anthropology, 7:131-82.

DRIVER, H. E. and A. KROEBER

1932 “Quantitative Expression of Cultural Relationships.” University of
Cadlifornia Publications in American Archacology and Ethnology,
31:211-56.

DRIVER, H. E. and P. SANDAY

1966 “Addendum: Factors and Clusters of Kin Avoidances and Related

Variables.” Current Anthropology, 7:169-82.
DRUCKER, P.

1939 “Rank, Wealth and Kinship in Northwest Coast Society.” Ameri-

can Anthropologist, 41:55-65.

703



===== PAGE 357 =====

Bibliography

1955 Indians of the Northwest Coast. New York: McGraw-Hill.
DU BOIS, C.

1944 The People of Alor: A Social-Psychological Study of an East-
Indian Island. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

1960 (ed.) Lowie’s Selected Papers in Anthropology. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.

DUIJKER, J. C. J. and N. H. FRIJDA

1961 National Character and National Stereotypes: A Trend Report
for the International Union of Scientific Philosophy. New York:
Humanities Press.

DUNCAN, D.
1908 Life and Letters of Herbert Spencer. London: Methuen.
DUNDES, A. (ed.)

1966 The Complete Bibliography of Robert Lowie. Berkeley: Robert

H. Lowie Museum.
DUNN, R

1865 “Some Observations on the Psychological Differences Which Exist
among the Typical Races of Man.” Transactions of the Ethno-
logical Society of London, 3:9-25.

1866 “Civilization and Cerebral Development.” Transactions of the
Ethnological Society of London, 4:1-33.

DUNNING, W. A.
1926 A History of Political Theory from Rousseau to Spencer. New
York: Macmillan.
DUPUIS, C. F.
1834 (orig. 1795) Origine de Tous les Cultes. Paris: Rosier.
DURKHEIM, £.

1897 “Review of A. Labriola, Essai sur le Conception Matérialiste de
T'Histoire.” Revue Philosophique de la France et de U'Etranger,
44:645-51. o

1915 (orig. 1912) The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. J. W.
Swain, trans. London: Allen & Unwin.

1933 (orig. 1893) Division of Labor in Society. G. Simpson, trans.
New York: Macmillan.

1938 (orig. 1895) The Rules of Sociological Method. S. Solovay and
J. Mueller, trans. New York: Free Press.

1951 (orig. 1897) Suicide. ]. Spaulding and G. Simpson, trans. New
York: Free Press.

1960  (orig. 18¢2) Montesquieu and Rousseau: Forerunners of Sociology.
Ralph Manheim, trans. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

1962 (orig. 1896) Socialism. C. Sattler, trans. New York: Collier Books.
EDMUNSON, M.

1957 “Kinship Terms and Kinship Concepts.” American Anthropologist,
59:393-433.

704

*’

Bibliography

EDWARDS, W. F.
1841 “Des Caracteres Physiologiques des Races Humaines, Considérés
dans Leur Rapport avec I'Histoire.” Mémoires de la Société Ethno-
logique, 1:1-108. Paris.
EGGAN, D.

1943 “The General Problem of Hopi Adjustment.” American Anthro-

pologist, 45:357-73.
EGGAN, F.

1937 “Historical Changes in the Choctaw Kinship System.” American
Anthropologist, 39:34-52.

1950 Social Organization of the Western Pueblos. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

1954 “Social Anthropology and the Method of Controlled Comparison.”
American Anthropologist, 56:743-63.

19552 “The Cheyenne and Arapaho Kinship System.” F. Eggan, ed., So-
cial Anthropology of North American Tribes. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 35-93.

1955b “Social Anthropology: Methods and Results.” F. Eggan, ed., Social
Anthropology of North American Tribes. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 485-551.

1966 The American Indian: Perspectives for the Study of Social Change.

Chicago: Aldine.
EINSTEIN, A.
1936 “Physics and Reality.” Journal of the Franklin Institute, 221 :1349-82.
EISENSON, J. (ed.)

1963 Psychology of Communication. New York: Appleton-Century-

Crofts.
EISELEY, L.

1958 Darwin’s Century: Evolution and the Men Who Discovered It.

Garden City, N. Y.: Doubleday.
ELLEGARD, A.

1958 Darwin and the General Reader: The Reception of Darwin’s The-
ory of Evolution in the British Periodical Press, 1859-1872. Gothen-
burg Studies in English, 8. Goteborg: Elanders Boktryckeri Ak-
ticbolag.

ENGELS, F.

1933 Revolution and Counter Revolution. London: Lawrence.

1947 (orig. 1888) Herr Eugen Diihring’s Revolution in Science. Mos-
cow: Foreign Languages Publishing House.

1954a (orig. 1884) Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State.
Emest Untermann, trans. Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing
House.

1954b  (orig. 1876) Didlectics of Nature. Moscow: Foreign Languages
Publishing House.

705



===== PAGE 358 =====

Bibliography

1963 (orig. 1890) “Letter to Joseph Bloch.” H. Selsam and H. Martel,
eds., Reader in Marxist Philosophy. New York: International
Publishers, 204-6.

ERASMUS, C.

1953 Las Dimensiones de la Cultura: Historia de la Ethnologia en los
Estados Unidos entre 1900 y 1950. Bogota: Editorial Iqueirna.

1962 “Review of The Achieving Socicty by D. C. McClelland.” Ameri-
can Anthropologist, 64:622-25.

ERASMUS, C. and W. SMITH
1967 “Cultural Anthropology in the United States since 1goo: A Quanti-
tative Analysis.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 23:111-40.
ERIKSON, E.
1950 Childhood and Society. New York: Norton.
ETKIN, W.

1964 “Theory of Socialization and Communication.” W. Etkin, ed.,
Social Behavior and Organization among Vertebrates. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 167-206.

EVANS-PRITCHARD, E. E.
1949 The Sanusi of Cyrenaica. London: Oxford University Press.
1951 Social Anthropology. New York: Free Press.
EVANS-PRITCHARD, E. E. and M. FORTES

1940 African Political Systems. International African Institute. London:

Oxford University Press.

EWING, A. C.
1934 Idedlism: A Critical Survey. London: Methuen.
FABER, M.
1955 “The Study of National Character.” Journal of Social Issues, 11:52-
56.

FAIRCHILD, H. N.
1928 The Noble Savage: A Study in Romantic Idedlism. New York:
Columbia University Press.
FANFANI, A.
1935 Catholicism, Protestantism and Capitalism. New York: Sheed
and Ward.
FEBVRE, L. and L. BATAILLON
1925 A Geographical Introduction to History. New York: Knopf.
FERGUSON, A.
1819 (orig. 1767) An Essay on the History of Civil Society. Philadel-
phia: A. Finley.
FINOT, J.
1906 Race Prejudice. Florence Wade-Evena, trans. New York: Dutton.
FIRTH, R.

1929 Primitive Economics of the New Zealand Maori. London: George
Routledge.

706

Bibliography

1951 “Contemporary British Social Anthropology.” American Anthro-
pologist, 53:474-90.
1954 “Social Organization and Social Change.” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute, 84:1-20.
1957 Man and Culture: An Evaluation of the Work of Bronislaw Mali-
nowski. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
1961 Elements of Social Organization, 2d ed. Boston: Beacon Press.
1963 (orig. 1936) We, the Tikopia. Boston: Beacon Press.
1964 Essays on Social Organization and Values. London: Athlone Press.
FIRTH, R. and B. S. YAMEY
1964 Capital, Savings and Credit in Peasant Societies. Chicago: Aldine.
FISON, L. and A. W. HOWITT
1880 Kamilaroi and Kurnai, Group Marriage and Relationship, and
Marriage by Elopement. Melbourne: George Robertson.
FLINT, R. F.
1894 History of the Philosophy of History. New York: Scribner.
FLORENCE, P. S.
1927 Economics and Human Behavior. New York: Norton.
FORD, C.
1966 “On the Analysis of Behavior for Cross-cultural Comparisons.”
Behavior Science Notes, 1:79-97.
FORDE, C. D.
1934 Habitat, Economy and Society. London: Methuen.
1953 “Applied Anthropology in Government: British Africa.” A. L.
Kroeber, ed., Anthropology Today. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 841-65.
1965 “Social Anthropology in African Studies.” African Affairs. Spring,
1965, 15-28.
FORDE, C. D. and A. R. RADCLIFFE-BROWN
1950 African Systems of Kinship and Marriage. London: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
FORTES, M.
1936 “Culture Contact as a Dynamic Process.” Africa, 9:24-55.
1945 The Dynamics of Clanship among the Tallensi. London: Oxford
University Press.
1949a “Preface.”” Social Structure: Studies Presented to Radcliffe-Brown.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, v-xiv.
1949b The Web of Kinship among the Tallensi. London: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
1953a Social Anthropology at Cambridge since 1goo: An Inaugural Lec-
ture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1953b “The Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups.” American Anthro-
pologist, 55:17-41.
1953¢ “Analysis and Description in Social Anthropology.” The Advance-
ment of Science, 10:190-201.

707



===== PAGE 359 =====

Bibliography

1955 “Radcliffe-Brown’s Contribution to the Study of Social Organiza-
tion.” British Journal of Sociology, 6:16-30.
1957 “Malinowski and the Study of Kinship.” R. Firth, ed., Man and
Culture. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 157-88.
1959a Ocdipus and Job in West African Religion. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
1959b “Descent, Filiation and Affinity: A Rejoinder to Dr. Leach.” Man,
59:193-97; 206-12.
1962 (ed.) Marriage in Tribal Socicties. Cambridge Papers in Social
Anthropology, No. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
FORTES, M. and E. E. EVANS-PRITCHARD (eds.)
1940 African Political Systems. London: Oxford University Press.
FORTUNE, R.
1932 The Sorcerers of Dobu. New York: Dutton.
FOTHERGILL, P.
1952 Historical Aspects of Organic Evolution. London: Hollis and
Carter.
FRAKE, C.
1961 “The Diagnosis of Disease among the Subanum of Mindanao.”
American Anthropologist, 63:113-32.
1962a “The Ethnographic Study of Cognitive Systems.” T. Gladwin and
W. G. Sturtevant, eds., Anthropology and Human Behavior.
Washington: Anthropological Society of Washington, 72-85.
1962b “Cultural Ecology and Ethnography.” American Anthropologist,
64:53-59- )
1964a “A Structural Description of Subanum ‘Religious Behavior.”” W.
Goodenough, ed., Explorations in Cultural Anthropology. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 111-29.
1964b “Notes on Queries in Anthropology.” American Anthropologist, 66,
part 2:132-45.
FRANK, A. G.
1967 “Sociology of Development and Underdevelopment of Sociology.”
Catalyst, Summer:20-73.
FRANK, L. K.
1950 Society as the Patient: Essays on Culture and Persondlity. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
FRAZER, J. G.
1887 T'otemism. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black.

121;% (orig. 1890) The Golden Bough, 3d ed. London: Macmillan.
1922 “Preface.” B. Malinowski, Argonauts of the Western Pacific. New
York: Dutton, vii-xiv.
1958 The Golden Bough. New York: Macmillan.
FREED, S.
1963 “An Objective Method for Determining the Collective Caste Hier-

708

*

Bibliography

archy of an Indian Village.” American Anthropologist, 65:879-91.
FREEDMAN, M.
1950 “Colonial Law and Chinese Society.” Journal of the Royal Anthro-
pological Institute, 80:97-126.
1958 Lineage Organization in Southeastern China. London: Athlone
Press.
FRERE, J.
1800 “Account of Flint Weapons Discovered at Hoxne in Suffolk.”
Archaeologia, 13:204-5.
FREUD, §.
1918 Totem and Taboo. A. A. Brill, trans. New York: Moffat, Yard.
1928 The Future of an Illusion. W. D. Robson-Scott., trans. London:
Institute of Psychoanalysis.
1930 Civilization and Its Discontents. New York: Jonathan Cape and
Harrison Smith.
1938 (orig. 1913) Totem and Taboo. London: Penguin Books.
FRIED, M.
1952 “Land Tenure, Geography and Ecology in the Contact of Cul-
tures.” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 11:1.
1953 The Fabric of Chinese Society. New York: Praeger.
1957 “The Classification of Corporate Unilineal Descent Groups.” Jour-
nal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 87:1-29.
1967 The Evolution of Political Society. New York: Random House
FROBENIUS, L.
1898 Die Weltanschauung der Naturvilker. Weimar: E. Felber.
GAGE, W.
1863 Geographical Studies. Boston: Gould and Lincoln.
CALL, F. J.
1825 Sur les Foncions du Cerveau et sur Celles de Chacune de Ses
Parties. Paris: Bailliere.
GARCILASO DE LA VEGA
1609 Primera parte de los comentarios reales que tratan del origen de
los Yncas. Lisbon: En la officina de Pedro Crasbeeck.
GARDIN, J.
1965 “On a Possible Interpretation of Componential Analysis in Ar-
chaeology.” American Anthropologist, 67, part 2:9-22.
GARDINER, P.
1959 Theories of History. New York: Free Press.
GARN, S.
1957 “Race and Evolution.” American Anthropologist, 59:218-24.
1961 Human Races. Springfield: Thomas.
GAY, P.
1964 The Party of Humanity. New York: Knopf.
1966 The Enlightenment: An Interpretation. The Rise of Modern Pa-
ganism. New York: Knopf.

709


===== PAGE 360 =====

Bibliography

GEERTZ, C.
1963 Agricultural Involution. Berkeley: University of California Press.
GEHLKE, C. E.
1915 “Emile Durkheim’s Contribution to Sociological Theory.” Un-
published Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University.
GELLNER, E.
1957 “Ideal Language and Kinship Structure.” Philosophy of Science,
241235743
1958 “Time and Theory in Social Anthropology.” Mind, 67:182-202.
GEOGHECAN, W. and P. KAY
1964 “More Structure and Statistics: A Critique of C. Ackerman’s
Analysis of the Purum.” American Anthropologist, 66:1351-55.
GEORGE, K.
1958 “The Civilized West Looks at Primitive Africa: 1400-1800. A
Study in Ethnocentrism.” Isis, 40:62-72.
GERARD, R. W.
1957 “Units and Concepts of Biology.” Science, 125:429-33.
GIANTURCO, E.
1937 “Joseph de Maistre and Giambattista Vico.” Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Columbia University.
GIBBON, E.
1804-) (orig. 1776-88) The History of the Decline and Fall of the Ro-
1805 }nmn Empire. Philadelphia: W. Birch and A. Small. 8 vols.
GIBSON, A. and J. H. ROWE
1961 “A Bibliography of the Publications of Alfred Louis Kroeber.”
American Anthropologist, 63:1060-87.
GILLISPIE, C.
1951 Genesis and Geology. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
1960 The Edge of Objectivity. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
GILSON, E. and T. LANGAN
1963 Modern Philosophy: Descartes to Kant. New York: Random House.
GINSBERG, M.
1932 Studies in Sociology. L.ondon: Methuen.
GLADWIN, T.
1961 “Oceania.” F. Hsu, ed., Psychological Anthropology: Approaches to
Culture and Persondlity. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press, 135-71.
GLUCKMAN, M.
1949 Malinowski’s Sociological Theories. Rhodes Livingstone Papers 16.
New York: Oxford University Press.
19552 Custom and Conflict in Africa. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
1955b  Judicial Process among the Barotse of Northern Nigeria. Man-
chester: Manchester University Press.
1962 Essays on the Ritual of Social Relations. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
1963 Order and Rebellion in Tribal Africa. New York: Free Press.

710

I o

Bibliography

GOBINEAU, J. A. DE

1856 (orig. 1853) The Mordl and Intellectual Diversity of Races.
Philadelphia: Lippincott.

GOLDENWEISER, A.

1914 “The Social Organization of the Indians of North America.”
Journal of American Folk-Lore, 27:411-36.

1925 “Diffusionism and Historical Ethnology.’
Sociology, 31:19-38.

1933 History, Psychology and Culture. New York: Knopf. |

1937 Anthropology: An Introduction to Primitive Culture. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.

1940 “Leading Contributions of Anthropology to Social Theory.” H. E.
Barnes et al., eds., Contemporary Social Theory. New York: Apple-
ton-Century, 433-9o.

1941 “Recent Trends in American Anthropology.” American Anthro-
pologist, 43:151-63.

1942 Anthropology: An Introduction to Primitive Culture. New York:
F. S. Crofts. |

GOLDFRANK, E.

1945 “Socialization, Personality, and the Structure of Pueblo Society.”

American Anthropologist, 47:516-39.
GOLDMAN, I.

1950 “Psychiatric Interpretations of Russian History: A Reply to Geof-

frey Gorer.” American and Slavic East European Review, 9:155-61.
GOLDSTEIN, L.

1967 “Theory in Anthropology: Developmental or Causal.” L. Gross, ed.,
Sociological Theory: Inquiries and Paradigms. New York: Harper
and Row.

GOODENOUGH, W.

1949 “Premarital Freedom on Truk: Theory and Practice.” American
Anthropologist, 51:615-20.

1956 “Componential Analysis and the Study of Meaning.” Language,
32:195-216.

1964a “Cultural Anthropology and Linguistics.” D. Hymes, ed., Language
in Culture and Society. New York: Harper and Row, 36-39.

1964b “Introduction.” W. Goodenough, ed., Explorations in Culturdl
Anthropology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1-24.

1965a “Yankee Kinship Terminology: A Problem in Componential Analy-
sis.”” American Anthropologist 67, part 2:259-87.

1965b “Rethinking ‘Status’ and ‘Role’: Toward a General Model of the
Cultural Organization of Social Relationships.” The Relevance
of Models for Social Anthropology. New York: Praeger, 1-22.

1967 “Componential Analysis.” Science, 156:1203-9.

GOODY, J.

1959 “The Mother’s Brother and Sister's Son in West Africa.” Journal
of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 89:61-88.

American Journal of |

711


===== PAGE 361 =====

Bibliography

GORER, G,
1943 “Themes in Japanese Culture.” Transactions of the New York
Academy of Sciences. Series 11, vol. 5:106-24.
1948 The American People. New York: Norton.
1955 Exploring English Character. London: Cresset.
GORER, G. and M. MEAD
1942 Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis. Special Publication
of New York Academy of Sciences.
GORER, G. and J. RICKMAN
1949 The People of Great Russia. London: Cresset.
GOSSETT, T. F.
1963 Race: The History of an Idea in America. Dallas: Southern Meth-
odist University Press.
GOTTSCHALLS, L. (ed.)
1963 Generalization in the Writing of History. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
GOUGH, E. K.
1959 “The Nayars and the Definition of Marriage.” Journal of the
Roydl Anthropological Institute, 89:23-34.
GOULDNER, A. W.
1962 “Introduction.” E. Durkheim, Socialism. New York: Crowell-Col-
lier, 7-31.
GOULDNER, A. W. and R. PETERSON
1962 Technology and the Moral Order. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
GRAEBNER, F.
1903 “Kulturkreise und Kulturschichten in Ozeanien.” Zeitschrift fiir
Ethnologie, 37:28-53.
1911 Die Methode der Ethnologie. Heidelberg.
GREENBERG, J.
1963 Universals of Language. Cambridge: M.LT. Press.
GREENE, J.
1959 The Death of Adam. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press.
1961 Darwin and the Modern World View. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press.
GREGG, D. and E. WILLIAMS
1948 “The Dismal Science of Functionalism.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 50:594-611.
GRIMM, J.
1822-
1840
GRINNELL, G. B.
1897 “Review of Mooney’s Ghost-Dance Religion.” American Anthro-
pologist, 10:230.
GROSSE, E.
1896 Die Formen der Familie und dic Formen der Wirtschaft. Freiburg:
J. C. B. Mohr.

}(ong. 1819) Deutsche Grammatik. Gottingen.

712

*‘

Bibliography

GROSSMAN, M.

1926 The Philosophy of Helvetius. New York: Bureau of Publications,
Teachers College, Columbia University.

GURVICH, G. and w. E. MOORE (eds.)
1945 Twentieth Century Sociology. New York: Philosophical Library.
cuy, B.

1963 “The French Image of China before and after Voltaire.” Theo-
dore Besterman, ed., Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Cen-
tury, Geneve: Institut et musée Voltaire, 21.

HABER, F. C.

1959 The Age of the World—Moses to Darwin. Baltimore: Johns

Hopkins Press.
HADDON, A. C.

1895 Evolution in Art. London: W. Scott.

1908 The Study of Man. London: J. Murray.

1910 A History of Anthropology. New York: Putnam.

1927 The Wanderings of Peoples. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

1934 History of Anthropology. London: Watts.

HAHN, E.

1905 Das Alter der wirtschaftlichen Kultur der Menschheit. Heidel-

berg: Winter.
HAIMSON, L. H.
1955 The Russian Marxists and the Origins of Bolshevism. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
HALE, M.
1677 The Primitive Origination of Mankind. London.
HALI.O\VEI]., A. L.

1955 Culture and Experience. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.

1959 “Behavioral Evolution and the Emergence of the Self.” B. Meg-
gers, ed., Evolution and Anthropology: A Centennial Appraisal.
Washington: Anthropological Society of Washington, 36-6o.

1960 “The Beginnings of Anthropology in America.” Frederica deLa-
guna, ed., Selected Papers from the American Anthropologist 1888-
1920. Evanston: Row, Peterson, 1-96.

1965 “The History of Anthropology as an Anthropological Problem.”
Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 1:24-38.

HAMMEL, E.

1965 “A Transformational Analysis of Comanche Kinship Terminol-

ogy.” American Anthropologist 67, part 2:65-105.
HANKE, L

1959 The Spanish Struggle for Justice in the Conquest of America.

Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

713



===== PAGE 362 =====

Bibliography

HANKIN, F. H.

1908 “Adolphe Quételet as Statistician.” New York: Longmans, Green.

HARDING, T. and E. LEACOCK

1964 “Morgan and Materialism; A Reply to Professor Opler.” Current

Anthropology, 5:109-10.
HARING, D.

1956 “Japanese National Character: Cultural Anthropology, Psychoan-
alysis, and History.” D. Haring, cd., Personal Character and Cul-
tural Milieu. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 424-37.

HARRIS, M.

1959a “The Economy Has No Surplus?” American Anthropologist,
61:185-99.

1959b “Labour Migration among the Mogambique Thonga: Cultural
and Political Factors.” Africd, 21:50-64.

19642 The Nature of Cultural Things. New York: Random House.

1964b  Patterns of Race in the Americas. New York: Walker.

1966a “The Cultural Ecology of India’s Sacred Cattle.” Current Anthro-
pology, 7:51-66.

1966b “Race, Conflict, and Reform in Mogambique.” S. Diamond and
F. Burke, eds., The Transformation of East Africa. New York:
Basic Books, 157-84.

1967 “The Cognitive Calculus of Brazilian Racial Categories.” Unpub-
lished manuscript.

HARRIS, M. and C. KOTTAK

1963 “The Structural Significance of Brazilian Racial Categories.” So-

ciologia, 25:203-8.
HARRIS, M. and G. MORREN

1966 “The Limitations of the Principle of Limited Possibilities.” Ameri-

can Anthropologist, 68:122-27.
HART, C. W. M.

1938 “Social Evolution and Modern Anthropology.” H. A. Innes, ed.,
Essays in Political Economy in Honour of E. . Urwick. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 9g-116.

1954 “The Sons of Turimpi.” American Anthropologist, 54:242-61.

HART, J.

1964 Political Writers of Eighteenth Century England. New York:

Knopf.
HARTLAND, S.

1917 Matrilineal Kinship and the Question of Its Priority. Memoir 4.

American Anthropological Association.
HAYS, H. R.
1958 From Ape to Angel. New York: Knopf.

HAZARD, T.
1960 “On the Nature of the Numaym and its Counterparts Elsewhere
on the Northwest Coast.” Unpublished paper read at the 127th

714

. 28

Bibliography

Annual Meccting of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science.
HECKER, J. F.
1934 Russian Sociology. New York: Wiley.
HEEREN, A.

1817 Ideen iiber die Politik, den Verkehr, und den Handel der vor-

nehmsten Volker der alten Welt. Wien: Harter.
HEGEL, G. W. F.

1910 The Phenomenology of Mind. ]. ]. B. Baillie, trans. London: Allen
& Unwin.

1956 (orig. 1832) The Philosophy of History. J. Sibree, trans. New
York: Dover.

HEINE-GELDERN, R.

1960 “Recent Developments in Ethnological Theory in Europe.” A.
Wallace, ed., Selected Papers of the Fifth International Congress
of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences. Philadelphia: Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press, 49-53.

HEIZER, R.

1962 “The Background of Thomsen’s Three-age System.” Technology

and Culture, 3:259-66.
HELM, J.

1962 “The Ecological Approach in Anthropology.” American Journal
of Sociology, 67:630-39.

1966 (ed.) Pioneers of American Anthropology. Seattle: University of
Washington Press.

HELVETIUS, C. A.

1810 (orig. 1758) De I'Esprit or Essays on the Mind and Its Several
Faculties. London: Albion Press.

1818 (orig. 1772) De 'Homme. Paris: Mme. Ve Lepetit.

1946 A Treatise on Man. Introduction to Contemporary Civilization
in the West, I. New York: Columbia University Press, 1004-24.

HENRY, J.

1959 “Culture, Personality, and Evolution.” American Anthropologist,
61:221-26.

1963 Culture against Man. New York: Random House.

HERDER, J. G. VON

1803 (orig. 1784) Outlines of a Philosophy of the History of Man.

T. Churchill, trans. London: Luke Hansard.
HERSKOVITS, M.

1948 Man and His Works. New York: Knopf.

1953 Franz Boas. New York: Scribner.

1957 “Some Further Notes on Franz Boas’ Arctic Expedition.” American
Anthropologist, 59:112-16.

HERTZ, R.

1960 (orig. 1909) Death and the Right Hand. R. Needham and C.

Needham, trans. New York: Free Press.

715



===== PAGE 363 =====

Bibliography

HIELD, W.
1954 “The Study of Change in Social Science.” British Journal of
Sociology, 1-12.
HIMMELFARB, G.
1959 Darwin and the Darwinian Revolution. London: Chatto and
Windus.
HIPPOCRATES
1881 On Airs, Waters, and Places. London: Wyman and Sons.
HOAGLAND, H. and R. W. BURHOE (eds.)
1962 Evolution and Man’s Progress. New York: Columbia University
Press.
HOBBES, T.
1958  (orig. 1651) Leviathan. New York: Liberal Arts Press.
HOBHOUSE, L. T., G. C. WHEELER, and M. GINSBERG
1915 The Material Culture and Social Institutions of the Simpler Peo-
ples: An Essay in Correlation. London: Chapman-Hall.
HOBSBAWM, E. (ed.)
1965 Introduction to Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations: Karl Marx.
New York: International Publishers, 9-65.
HOBSON, J. A. and M. GINSBERG
1931 Hobhouse, His Life and Work. London: W. H. Allen.
HOCKETT, C. and R. ASCHER
1964 “The Human Revolution.” Current Anthropology, 5:135-68.
HODGE, F. W. (ed.)
1907 Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. Washington:
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. 30.
HODGEN, M.
1936 The Doctrine of Survivals. London: Allenson.
1964 Early Anthropology in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
HODGES, H. A.
1944 Wilhelm Dilthey: An Introduction. London: Kegan Paul, Trench,
Trubner.
1952 The Philosophy of Wilhelin Dilthey. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
HODGKIN, T.
1848 “Progress of Ethnology.” Journdl of the Ethnological Society of
London, 1:27-45.
HODSON, T. C.
1925 “Notes on the Marriage of Cousins in India.” Man in India,
5:163-75.
HOEBEL, E. A.
1949 Man in the Primitive World. New York: McGraw-Hill.
1960 “William Robertson: An 18th Century Anthropologist-Historian.”
American Anthropologist, 62:648-55.

716

Bibliography

HOERNLE, A. W.

1933 “New Aims and Methods in Social Anthropology.” South African
Journal of Science, 30:74-92.

HOFSTADTER, R.
1944 Social Darwinism in American Thought, 1860-1915. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
HOGBEN, L.
1960 Man, Race and Darwin. London: Oxford University Press.
HOGBIN, H. I.

1939 Experiment in Civilization: The Effects of European Culture on a
Native Community of the Solomon Islands. London: George Rout-
ledge.

1963 Kinship and Marriage in a New Guinea Village. London: Athlone.

HOLMES, G.

1914 “Areas of American Culture Characterization Tentatively Outlined
as an Aid in the Study of Antiquities.” American Anthropologist,
16:413-16.

HOLMES, L.

1957 “The Restudy of Manu’an Culture: A Problem in Methodology.”

Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Northwestern University.
HOMANS, G.
1941 “Anxiety and Ritual: The Theories of Malinowski and Radcliffe-
Brown.” American Anthropologist, 43:164-72.
HOMANS, G. and D. M. SCHNEIDER
1955 Marriage, Authority and Final Causes. New York: Free Press.
HONIGMANN, J. J.

1954 Culture and Persondlity. New York: Harper and Row.

1961 “North America.” F. Hsu, ed., Psychological Anthropology: Ap-
proaches to Culture and Personality. Homewood, IlI.: Dorsey Press.
93-134.

1963  Understanding Culture. New York: Harper and Row.

HOOTON, E. A.
1946 Up from the Ape. New York: Macmillan.

HORKHEIMER, M.
1939 “The Relation between Psychology and Sociology in the Work of
Wilhelm Dilthey.” Zeitschrift fiir Sozialforschung, 8:430-43.
HOROWITZ, I. L.
1954 Claude Helvetius: Philosopher of Democracy and Enlightenment.
New York: Pane-Whitman.

HOUSE, F. N.
1936 The Development of Sociology. New York: McGraw-Hill.

717



===== PAGE 364 =====

Bibliography

HOWARD, G. E.
1904 A History of Matrimonial Institutions Chiefly in England and the
United States, with an Introductory Andlysis of the Literature and
the Theories of Primitive Marriage and the Family. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
HOWELL, F. C. and F. BOURLIERE
1964 African Ecology and Human Evolution. Chicago: Aldine.
HOWITT, W.

1838 Colonization and Christianity: A Popular History of the Treat-
ment of the Natives by Europeans in All Their Colonies. London:
Longman, Orme, Brown, Green, & Longmans.

HSU, F

1961 “Kinship and Ways of Life.” F. Hsu, ed., Psychological Anthro-
pology: Approaches to Culture and Persondlity. Homewood, IlL.:
Dorsey Press, 400-56.

HULSE, F.

1948 “Convention and Reality in Japanese Culture.” Southwestern Jour-

nal of Anthropology, 4:345-55.
HUME, D.

1822 (orig. 1742) The Rise and the Progress of the Arts and Sciences.
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects, Containing Essays, Moral,
Political, and Literary. London: |. Jones.

1898 (orig. 1748) “Of National Characters.” The Philosophical Works
of David Hume, 111. London.

1953 David Hume'’s Political Essays. C. W. Hendel, ed. New York:
Liberal Arts Press.

HUNT, J.

1863 “Introductory Address on the Study of Anthropology.” Anthropo-

logical Review, 1:1-20.

1866a “Race in Legislation and Political Economy.” Anthropological Re-
view, 4:113-35.

1866b “On the Application of the Principle of Natural Selection to An-
thropology.” Anthropological Review, 4:320-40.

HUNTER, J.

1865 (orig. 1775) “Inaugural Disputation on the Varicties of Man.”
T. Bendyshe, cd. and trans., The Anthropological Treatises of
Johann Friedrich Blumenbach. London: Longman, Green, Long-
man, Roberts, & Green, 357-94.

HUNTER, M.

1936 Reaction to Conquest: Effects of Contact with Luropeans on the
Pondo of South Africa. London: Oxford University Press for In-
ternational Institute of African Languages and Cultures.

HUTTON, J.
1788 “Theory of the Earth; or an Investigation of the Laws Observable

718

. 28

Bibliography

in the Composition, Dissolution, and Restoration of Land upon
the Globe.” Transactions of the Roval Society of Edinburgh,
1:209-304.
1899 (orig. 1795) Theory of the Earth, with Proofs and llustrations.
London: Geological Socicty.
HUXLEY, J.S.
1942 Evolution: The Modern Synthesis. London: Allen & Unwin.
HYMIES, D.
1963 “Toward a History of Linguistic Anthropology.” Anthropological
Linguistics, 5:59-103.

1964a “Directions in (Ethno-) Linguistic Theory.” American Anthropolo-
gist 66, part 2:6-56.

1964b “A Perspective for Linguistic Anthropology.” Sol Tax, ed., Hori-
zons of Anthropology. Chicago: Aldine, g2-107.

IDRISI, AL
1836-) (orig. 1154) Géographie d'Edrisi. P. A. Jaubert, trans. Paris: La
1840 { Société de Géographie, Recucil de Vovages et de Mémoires, vols.
5 and 6.
IMANISHI, K.
1963 “Social Behavior in Japanese Monkevs.” C. H. Southw ick, ed.,
Primate Social Behavior. Princeton: Van Nostrand, 68-81.
INGRAM, J. K.
1894 A History of Political Economy. New York: Macmillan.
INKELES, A., E. HAUFAAN and H. BEIER

1961 “Modal Personality and Adjustment to the Soviet Socio-political
System.” B. Kaplan, ed., Studying Personality Cross-Culturally.
Evanston: Row, Peterson, 201-24.

INKELES, A. and D. J. LEVINSON

1954 “National Character: The Study of Modal Personality and Socio-
cultural Systems.” G. Lindzey, ed.. Handbook of Social Psychology.
Cambridge: Addison-Wesley, g77-1020.

JABLOW, A.

1963 “The Development of the Image of Africa in British Popular Litera-
ture, 1530-1910.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia Uni-
versity. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms.

JACOBS, M.

1964 Pattern in Culturdl Anthropology. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press.

1966 “A Look Ahead in Oral Literature Research.” Journal of American
Folklore, 79:41 3-27.

JARVIE, I. C.

1964 The Revolution in Anthropology. London: Routledge & Kegan

Paul.
JEFFERSON, T.

1801 (orig. 1785) Notes on the State of Virginia. Newark, N.J.: Pen-

nington and Gould.

719


===== PAGE 365 =====

Bibliography

JENNESS, D.

1932 “The Indians of Canada.” Canada Department of Mines. National
Museum Bulletin, 65.

JOACHIM OF FLORIS

1928 (orig. 12654) L’Evangile Eternel; Premiére Traduction Frangaise.

Paris: Rieder.
JORGENSEN, J.

1966 “Addendum: Geographical Clusterings and Functional Explanations
of InJaw Avoidances: An Analysis of Comparative Method.” Cur-
rent Anthropology, 7:161-82.

JOSSELIN DE JONG, J. P. B.

1952 Lévi-Strauss’s Theory on Kinship and Marriage. London: E. J.
Brill.

1962 “A New Approach to Kinship Studies.” Bijdragen. Tot de Tadl-,
Land En Volkenkunde, 118:42-67.

JUDD, N.

1967 The Bureau of American Ethnology: A Partial History. Norman:

University of Oklahoma Press.
JUNOD, H.

1913 The Life of a South African Tribe. Neuchitel: Imprimerie At-

tinger Freres, 2 vols.
KABERRY, P.

1957 “Malinowski’s Contribution to Fieldwork Methods and the Writ-
ing of Ethnography.” R. Firth, ed., Man and Culture: An Evalua-
tion of the Work of Bronislaw Malinowski. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 71-91.

KAMES, H. H., LORD

1774 Sketches of the History of Man, I and II. Edinburgh: W. Creech;

London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell.
RANT, I.

1798 Anthropologic in pragmatischer Hinsicht abgefasst von Immanuel
Kant. Kénigsberg: F. Nicolovius.

1946 (orig. 1784) What Is Enlightenment? Introduction to Contem-
porary Civilization in the West, 1. New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 1069-76.

1951 (orig. 1790) A Critique of Judgment. J. H. Bernard, trans. New
York: Hafner.

KAPLAN, A.

1964 The Conduct of Inquiry. Methodology for Behavioral Science. San

Francisco: Chandler.
KAPLAN, B.

1954 A Study of Rorschach Responses in Four Cultures. Harvard Uni-
versity. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archacology
and Ethnology, vol. 42.

19612 (ed.) Studying Personadlity Cross-Culturally. Evanston: Row, Peter-
son.

720

v

Bibliography

1961b “Cross-Cultural Use of Projective Technique.” F. Hsu, ed., Psycho-
logical Anthropology: Approaches to Culture and Persondlity.
Homewood, IIl.: Dorsey Press, 235-54.

KARDINER, A.
1939 (ed.) The Individual and His Society. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.
1959 “Psychosocial Studies.” Science, 130:1728.
KARDINER, A., R. LINTON, J. WEST, ¢t al.
1945 The Psychological Frontiers of Society. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press.
KARDINER, A. and E. PREBLE
1961 They Studied Man. Cleveland: World Publishing Co.
KATZ, J.and J. FODOR
1962 “The Structure of Semantic Theory.” Unpublished manuscript.
KEANE, A. H.
1896 Ethnology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
KEESING, R. M.
1966 “Comment on B. N. Colby (1966).” Current Anthropology, 7:23.
KELLER, A. G.
1915 Societal Evolution. New York: Macmillan.
1931 Societal Evolution: A Study of the Evolutionary Basis of the Science
of Society, rev. ed. New York: Macmillan.
KERLINCER, F. N.
1953 “Behavior and Personality in Japan: A Critique of Three Studies
of Japanese Personality.” Social Forces, 250-58.
KIDDER, A. V.
1936 “Speculations on New World Prehistory.” R. Lowie, ed., Essays in
Anthropology. Berkeley: University of California, 143-51.
KILZER, E. and E. J. ROSS
1954 Western Social Thought. Milwaukee: Bruce.
KLEIN, H.
1967 Slavery in the Americas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
KLEMM, G.
1843 Allgemeine Cultur—Geschichte der Menschheit. Leipzig: Leub-
ner.
KLINEBERG, 0.
1935 Race Differences. New York: Harper.
1944 “A Science of National Character.” Journal of Social Psychology,
19:147-62.
1951 Race and Psychology. Paris: UNESCO.
1963 “Negro-White Differences in Intelligence Test Performance: A New
Look at an Old Problem.” American Psychologist, 18:198-203.
KLOOSTERBOER, W.

1960 Involuntary Labor since the Abolition of Slavery. Leiden: E. J.
Brill.

721

|
|
|



===== PAGE 366 =====

Bibliography

KLUBACK, W.

1956 Wilhelm Dilthey’s Philosophy of History. New York: Columbia

University Press.
KLUCKHOHN, C.

1936 “Some Reflections on the Method and Theory of the Kulturkreis
Lehre.” American Anthropologist, 38:157-96.

1938 “Participation in Ceremonials in a Navaho Community.” American
Anthropologist, 40:359-69.

1939 “The Place of Theory in Anthropological Studies.” The Philosophy
of Science, 6:328-44.

1940 The Conceptudl Structure in Middle American Studies. The Maya
and Their Neighbors. New York: Appleton-Century, 41-51.

1943 “Bronislaw Malinowski, 1884-1942.” Journal of American Folklore,
56:208-19.

1944 “The Influence of Psychiatry on Anthropology in America during
the Last 100 Years.” J. K. Hall, G. Zilboorg, and H. A. Bunker,
eds., One Hundred Years of American Psychiatry. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, 589-617.

1947 Some Aspects of Navaho Infancy and Early Childhood. Psycho-
analysis and the Social Sciences, I. New York: International Uni-
versities Press, 37-86

1949 Mirror for Man. New York: McGraw-Hill.

1954 “Southwestern Studies of Culture and Personality.” American An-
thropologist, 56:685-97.

1958 “The Evolution of Contemporary American Values.” Daedalus,
Spring edition: 78-109.

1961 Anthropology and the Classics. Providence: Brown University Press.

KLUCKHOHN, C., H. A. MURRAY and D. M. SCHNEIDER (eds.)

1953 Persondlity in Nature, Society and Culture, 2d ed. New York:
Knopf.

KLUCKHOHN, C. and 0. PRUFER

1959 “Influences during the Formative Years.” The Anthropology of
Franz Boas. Memoir 89. American Anthropological Association,
4-28.

RNIGHT, R.

1965 “A Re-examination of Hunting, Trapping and Territoriality among
the Northeastern Algonkian Indians.” A. Leeds and A. Vayda, eds.,
The Role of Animals in Human Ecological Adjustments. Wash-
ington: The American Association for the Advancement of Science,
27-42.

KNOX, R.

1850 Races of Men: A Fragment. Philadelphia: Lea and Blanchard.
KOBBEN, A. J. F.

1952 “New ‘Ways of Presenting an Old Idea: The Statistical Method in

722

I 238

Bibliography

Social Anthropology.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological In-
stitute, 82:129-45.

1966 “Structuralism versus Comparative Functionalism; Some Com-
ments.” Bijdragen. Tot de Tadl-, Land En Volkenkunde, 122:145-

50.
1967 “The Logic of Cross-cultural Analysis.” Current Anthropology,
8:3-34.

KOMAROV, V. L.

1935 “Marx and Engels on Biology.” N. S. Bukharin, ed., Marxism in
Modern Thought. New York: Harcourt, 190-234.
KOTTAK, C.
1966 “The Structure of Equality in a Brazilian Fishing Community.”

Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University.
KROEBER, A.

1901 “Decorative Symbolism of the Arapaho.” American Anthropologist,
3:308-36.

1909 “Classificatory Systems of Relationship.” Journal of the Royal An-
thropological Institute, 39:77-84.

1915 “The Eighteen Professions.” American Anthropologist, 17:283-89.

1917a “The Superorganic.” American Anthropologist, 19:163-213.

1917b  Cdlifornia Kinship Systems. University of California Publications
in American Archaeology and Ethnology, 12:339-96.

1917¢ “Zuiii Kin and Clan.” American Museum of Natural History. An-
thropological Papers, 18: 39-204.

19192 “On the Principle of Order in Civilization as Exemplified by
Changes of Fashion.” American Anthropologist, 21:253-63.

1919b “Kinship in the Philippines.” American Museum of Natural His-
tory. Anthropological Papers, 19:69-84.

1920a “Totem and Taboo: An Ethnologic Psychoanalysis.” American An-
thropologist, 22:48-55.

1920b “Review of Primitive Society.” American Anthropologist, 22:377-81.

1923 Anthropology. New York: Harcourt, Brace.

1925 (ed.) Handbook of the Indians of California. Washington: Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bull. 78.

1931 “The Culture-area and Age-area Concepts of Clark Wissler.” S.
Rice, ed., Methods in Social Science. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 248-65.

1934 Yurok and Neighboring Kin Term Systems. University of Cali-
fornia Publications in Amecrican Archaeology and Ethnology, 35:15-
22.

1935 “History and Science in Anthropology.” American Anthropologist,
37:539-69.

1938 “Basic and Secondary Patterns of Social Structure.” Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute, 68:299-310.

1939 Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University

723



===== PAGE 367 =====

Bibliography

of California Publications in American Archacology and Eth-
nology, vol. 38.
1944 Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press.
1947 “My Faith.” The American Weekly, April 6, vol. 33.
1948a Anthropology. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
1948b “Summary and Interpretations.” W. Bennett, ed., A Reappraisal of
Peruvian Archaeology. Memoirs of the Society for American Ar-
chaeology, 4:113-21.
1948¢ “White’s View of Culture.” American Anthropologist, 50:405-
15.
1949 “A?‘l Authoritarian Panacea.” American Anthropologist, 51:318-20.
1952 The Nature of Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1954 “Critical Summary and Commentary.” R. F. Spencer, ed., Method
and Perspective in Anthropology. Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 273-99.
1956 “The Place of Boas in Anthropology.” American Anthropologist,
58:151-59.
1957 Style and Civilizations. Tthaca: Comell University Press.
1963 An Anthropologist Looks at History. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press.
KROEBER, A. and H. DRIVER
1932 “Quantitative Expression of Cultural Relationships.” University of
California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology,
29:253-423-
KROEBER, A. and C. KLUCKHOHN
1952 “Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions.” Harvard
University. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeol-
ogy and Ethnology, vol. 47.
KROEBER, A. and J. RICHARDSON
1940 “Three Centuries of Women's Dress Fashions: A Quantitative
Analysis.”  University of California Anthropological Records,
5:111-54.
KROEBER, T.
1963 “Introduction.” A. Krocber, An Anthropologist Looks at History.

Berkeley: University of California Press, xvi-xix.

KRONICH, D. A.
1962 A History of Scientific and Technical Periodicals. New York:

Scarecrow Press.
LA BARRE, W.
1945 “Some Observations on Character Structure in the Orient: The
Japanese.” Psychiatry, 8:326-42.
1954 The Human Animal. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1958 “The Influence of Freud on Anthropology.” American Imago,

15:275-328.
724

v

Bibliography

LABRIOLA, A.

1904 Essays on the Materidlistic Conceptions of History. C. H.
trans. Chicago: C. H. Kerr. b f ry. C. H. Kerr,
LAFITAU, J. F.

1724 MOEL{TS des Sauvages Amériquains, Comparées aux Moeurs des
Premiers Temps. Paris: Saugrain I'ainé.
LAGUNA, F. DE (ed.)

1960 Selected Papers from the American Anthropologist. Evanston:
Row, Peterson.
LAMARCK, J. B.

1964 (orig. 1802) Hydrogeology. A. V. Carozzi, trans. Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press.
LAMB, D. s.

1906 “The Story of the Anthropological Society of Washington.” Ameri-
can Anthropologist, 8:564-79.
LAMBERT, W. W., L. TRIANDIS, and M. WOLF
1959 “Some Correlates of Beliefs in the Malevolence and Benevolence
of Supernatural Beings: A Cross-cultural Study.” Journal of Ab-
normal and Social Psychology, 58:162-6.
LAMENNAIS, H. F. R.
1817-
1824
LA METTRIE, J. O. DE

1912 (CorigA 1748) Man a Machine. G. Bussey, ed. Chicago: The Open
ourt.

}Essai sur lindifférence en Mati¢re de Religion. Paris.

LANG, A.
1893 (orig. 1884) Custom and Myth. London: Longmans, Green.
1898 The Making of Religion. London: Longmans, Green.

LANGE, F. A.

1925 The History of Materialism. E. C. Thomas, trans. London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trubner.

LANHAM, B.

1956 “Aspects of Child Care in Japan: Preliminary Report.” D. Haring,
ed.,» Personal Character and Cultural Milieu. Syracuse: Syracuse
University Press, 565-83.

LANTIS, M. (ed.)

1955 “The U.S.A. as Anthropologists See It.” American Anthropologist,

57:1113-1295.
LA PEYRERE, 1. DE

1656 (orig. 1655) Men before Adam. London.
LASKI, H. J.

1920 Political Thought from Locke to Bentham. New York: Holt.
LATHAM, R. G.

1859 Descriptive Ethnography. London: J. Van Voorst.

725

i



===== PAGE 368 =====

Bibliography

LAUFER, B.

1918 “Review of R. H. Lowie’s Culture and Ethnology.” American An-
thropologist, 20:87-91.

LAWRENCE, SIR W.

1823 (orig. 1819) Lectures on Physiology, Zoology and the Natural

History of Man. London: James Smith.
LEACH, E.

1950 “Review of Murdock’s Social Structure.” Man, 50:107-8.

1954 Political Systems of Highland Burma. Boston: Beacon Press.

1957 “The Epistemological Background to Malinowski’s Empiricism.”
R. Firth (ed.), Man and Culture: An Evaluation of the Work
of Bronislaw Malinowski. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1 lg- .

1958 "ConzZming Trobriand Clans and the Kinship Category Tabu.”
J. Goody, ed., The Developmental Cycle of Domestic Groups.
Cambridge Papers in Social Anthropology, No. 1. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 120-46.

1961a  Rethinking Anthropology. London: Athlone Press.

1961b  Pul Eliya, A Village in Ceylon. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

1961¢ “Lévi-Strauss in the Garden of Eden.” Transactions of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 23:386-6.

1964 “Anthropological Aspects of Language: Animal Categories and
Verbal Abuse.” E. H. Lenneberg, ed., New Directions in the Study
of Language. Cambridge: M.IT. Press, 23-63.

1965a “On the ‘Founding Fathers.” ” Encounter, 25:24-36.

1965b  Political Systems of Highland Burma. Boston: Beacon Press.

1966 “On the ‘Founding Fathers.”” Current Anthropology, 7:560-67.

LEACOCK, E

1954 The Montagnais Hunting Territory and the Fur Trade. Memoir
78. American Anthropological Association.

1963 “Introduction.” L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society. New York: Merid-
ian Books, World, i-xx.

LEACOCK, S.

1954 “The Ethnological Theory of Marcel Mauss.” American Anthro-

pologist, 56:58-73.
LE BON, G.
1914 (orig. 1895) The Crowd, A Study of the Popular Mind. London:
T. Fisher Unwin.
LE CAT, C.N.
1765 Traité de la Couleur de la Peau Humaine. Amsterdam.
LEE, D.
1959 Freedom and Culture. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
LEEDS, A. and A. VAYDA (eds.)
1965 Man, Culture and Animals: The Role of Animals in Human Eco-

726

*‘

Bibliography

logical Adjustments. Washington: American Association for the
Advancement of Science, Pub. No. 78.
LEHMAN, F.
1963 The Structure of Chin Society. Illinois Studies in Anthropology,
No. 3. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
LEHMANN, W. C.
1960 John Millar of Glasgow. Canterbury: Canterbury University Press.
LENIN, N.
1934 Selected Works. New York: International Publishers.
LENNEBERG, E.
1953 “Cognition in Ethnolinguistics.” Language, 29:463-71.
1960 “Language, Evolution, and Purposive Behavior.” S. Diamond, ed.,
Culture in History. New York: Columbia University Press, 869-93.
LE PLAY, F.

ig%‘} (orig. 1855) Les Ouvriers Européens. Tours: A. Mame et fils.

LEROY, O.
1925 Essai d'Introduction Critique & I'Etude de I'Economie Primitive.
Paris: Paul Guenther.
LESSER, A.
1935 “Functionalism in Social Anthropology.” American Anthropologist,
37:386-03.
1968 “Franz Boas.” Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences. In press.
LETOURNEAU, C.
1888 L’Evolution du Mariage et de la Famille. Paris: A. Delahaye and
E. Lecrosnier.
1903 La Condition de la Femme dans les Diverses Races et Civilisations.
Paris: V. Giard and E. Briére.
LEVI-STRAUSS, C.
1945a “French Sociology.” G. Gurvitch and W. Moore, eds., Twentieth
Century Sociology. New York: Philosophical Library, 503-37.
1945b “L’Analyse Structurale en Linguistique et en Anthropologie.”
Word, 1:1-21.
1949 Les Structures Elémentaires de la Parenté. Paris: Presses Universi-
taires de France.
1950 “Introduction 4 I'Ocuvre de Mauss.” Sociologie et Anthropologie.
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, ix-lii.
1953 “Social Structure.” A. Kroeber, ed., Anthropology Today. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 524-53.
1958 Anthropologie Structurale. Paris: Plon.
1960a “On Manipulated Sociological Models.” Bijdragen. Tot de Tadl-,
Land En Volkenkunde, 116:45-54.
1960b Ce Que I'Ethnologie Doit @ Durkheim. Annales de I'Université
de Paris. Vol. 1.

727

|
i



===== PAGE 369 =====

Bibliography

1961 Tristes Tropiques. J. Russel, trans. New York: Criterion Books.
1963a Structural Anthropology. C. Jacobson, trans. New York: Basic
Books.
1963b Totemism. R. Needham, trans. Boston: Beacon Press.
1964 Mythologiques: Le Cru et le Cuit. Paris: Plon.
LEVY-BRUHL, L.
1910 Les Fonctions Mentales dans les Sociétés Inférieures. Paris: I,
Alcan.
1966 The ‘Soul’ of the Primitive. L. Clare, trans. New York: Praeger.
LEWIS, I. M.
1965 “Problems in the Comparative Study of Unilineal Descent.” The
Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology. A.S.A. Monographs,
No. 1. London: Tavistock, 87-112.
LEWIS, O.
1951 Life in a Mexican Village. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
1961 The Children of Sanchez. New York: Random House.
1966a “The Culture of Poverty.” Scientific American, 215:19-25.
1966b La Vida. New York: Random House.

LI AN-CHE
1937 “Zuiii: Some Observations and Queries.”” American Anthropologist,
39:02-77.

LICHTENBERGER, J-P.
1923 Development of Social Theory. New York: Century.
LICHTHEIM, G.
1963 “Marx and the ‘Asiatic’ Mode of Production.” St. Anthony’s Papers,
No. 14, 86-112.
LIENHARDT, G.
1964 Social Anthropology. London: Oxford University Press.
LINDESMITH, A. R.and A. L. STRAUSS
1950 “Critique of Culture-Personality Writings.” American Sociological
Review, 15:587-600.
LINGUET, S. N. H.
1767 Théorie des Loix Civiles ou Principes Fondamentaux de la So-
ciété. Paris.
LINTON, R.
1936 The Study of Man. New York: Appleton-Century.
1937 “The Tanala of Madagascar.” A. Kardincr, ed., The Individual and
His Society. New York: Columbia University Press, 251-go.
1945 The Cultural Background of Personality. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
1950 “An Anthropologist Views Point IV.” American Perspective, Spring:
11 3'21 .
1951 “The Concept of National Character.” A. H. Stanton and S. E.
Perry, eds., Personality and Political Crisis. New York: Free Press,

133-50.
728

f

Bibliography

1953 “An Anthropological View of Economics.” A. Dudley Ward, ed.,

Godls of Economic Life. New York: Harper, 305-44.
LIPPERT, J.

1884 Die Geschichte der Familie. Stuttgart: Enke.

1931 (orig. 1886-87) The Evolution of Culture. G. P. Murdock, trans.
New York: Macmillan.

LIPS, J.

1935 “Fritz Graebner.” American Anthropologist, 37:320-26.

1937 The Savage Hits Back. New Haven: Yale University Press.
LITTLE, K

1965 Social Anthropology in Modern Life. Edinburgh: University of
Edinburgh Press.

LIVINGSTONE, F. B.

1959 “A Formal Analysis of Prescriptive Marriage Systems among the
Australian Aborigines.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology,
15:361-72.

1962 “On the Non-Existence of Human Races.” Current Anthropology,
3:279-81.

LOCKE, J.
1894 (orig. 1690) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press.
1947 (orig. 1690) Two Treatises of Government. New York: Hafner.
LONG, E.

1774 History of Jamaica. London.
LORIA, A.

1899 Economic Foundations of Society. New York: Scribner’s.
LOUNSBURY, F.

1955 The Varieties of Meaning. Institute of Languages and Linguistics
Monograph No. 8. Washington: Georgetown University Press.

1956 “Semantic Analysis of the Pawnee Kinship Usage.” Language,
32:158-94.

1964 “A Formal Account of the Crow and Omaha-Type Kinship Termi-
nologies.” W. Goodenough, ed., Explorations in Cultural Anthro-
pology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 351-93.

1965 “Another View of the Trobriand Kinship Categories.” American
Anthropologist, 67, part 2:142-85.

LOVEJOY, A.

1923 “The Supposed Primitivism of Rousseau’s Discourse on Inequality.”
Modern Philology, 21:165-86.

1933 “Monboddo and Rousseau.” Modern Philology, 30:275-96.

1960 (orig. 1936) The Great Chain of Being. New York: Harper
Torchbooks.

LOWETH, K.
1949 Meaning in History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

729

%
|



===== PAGE 370 =====

Bibliography

LOWIE, R.
19112 “A New Conception of Totemism?” American Anthropologist,
13:189-207. Reprinted in C. DuBois, ed., Lowic’s Selected Papers
in Anthropology. Berkeley: University of California Press, 283-311.
1911b “A Forgotten Pragmatist: Ludwig IFeuerbach.” Journdl of Philoso-
phy, 8:138-39.
1912 “Dr. Radosavljevich’s ‘Critique’ of Professor Boas.” Science, 35:537-
o.
1915 “4Exogamy and the Classificatory Systems of Relationship.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1:346-49.
1916a “Ernst Mach.” The New Republic, 6:335-37.
1916b “Historical and Sociological Interpretations of Kinship Terminolo-
gies.” Anthropological Essays Presented to William Henry Holmes.
‘Washington, 293-300.
1917a “Edward B. Tylor.” American Anthropologist, 19:262-68.
1917b Culture and Ethnology. New York: D. C. McMurtrie.
1920 Primitive Society. New York: Boni and Liveright.
1927 The Origin of the State. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
1929 Are We Civilized? New York: Harcourt, Brace.
1933a “Land Tenure, Primitive Socicties.” Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, :76-77.
1933b “Queries.” American Anthropologist, 35:288-96.
1936 “Lewis H. Morgan in Historical Perspective.” Essays in Anthropol-
ogy Presented to A. L. Kroeber. Berkeley: University of California
Press: 169-81.
1937 History of Ethnological Theory. New York: Farrar and Rinehart.
1938 “Subsistence.” F. Boas, ed., General Anthropology. New York:
Heath, 282-326.
1942 “The Transition of Civilizations in Primitive Society.” American
Journdl of Sociology, 47:527-43.
1944 “Franz Boas.” Journal of American Folklore, 57:59-64.
1946 “Evolution in Cultural Anthropology: A Reply to Lesliec White.”
American Anthropologist, 48:223-33.
1947 “Letters from Emst Mach to Robert Lowie.” Isis, 37:65-68.
1948a Social Organization. New York: Rinehart.
1948b “Some Facts about Boas.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology,
:69-70.
1953 "?ﬂthnography, Cultural and Social Anthropology.” American An-
thropologist, 55:527-34.
1954 Toward Understanding Germany. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
1955 “Contemporary Trends in American Cultural Anthropology.” So-
ciologus, 5:113-21.
1956a “Boas Once More.” American Anthropologist, 58:159-63.
1956b “Reminiscences of Anthropological Currents in America Half a Cen-
tury Ago.” American Anthropologist, 58:995-1016.

730

f

Bibliography

1957 “Generalizations, Field Work, and Materialism.” American Anthro-
pologist, 59:884-85.

1959 Robert H. Lowie, Ethnologist. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

1960 Lowie’s Selected Papers in Anthropology. C. DuBois, ed. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

1963 “Religion in Human Life.” American Anthropologist, 65:532-42.

1966 (orig. 1917) Culture and Ethnology. S. Diamond, ed. New York:
Basic Books.

LUBBOCK, J.

1865 Pre-Historic Times, as Illustrated by Ancient Remains and the
Manners and Customs of Modern Savages. London: Williams
and Norgate.

1870 The Origin of Civilization and the Primitive Condition of Man;
Mental and Social Condition of Savages. London: Longmans,
Green.

1872 Prehistoric Times as Illustrated by Ancient Remains and the Man-
ners and Customs of Savages. New York: D. Appleton.

LUCRETIUS

1910 On the Nature of Things. C. Bailey, trans. London: Oxford Uni-

versity Press.
LUTZ, B. F.

1927 “The Sumerians and Anthropology.” American Anthropologist,

29:202-9. 3
LYELL, C. |

1850 (orig. 1830) Principles of Geology, 8th ed. London: J. Murray.

1863 The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man. Philadelphia:
G. W. Childs.

MC CLELLAND, D. C.
1961 The Achieving Society. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
MC EWEN, W.

1963 “Forms and Problems of Validation in Social Anthropology.” Cur-

rent Anthropology, 4:155-83.
MC GEE, W. J.
1894 “The Citizen.” Second Prize Essay. American Anthropologist,
7:352°57

1895a “Some Principles of Nomenclature.
8:279-86.

1895b “The Beginning of Agriculture.”” American Anthropologist, 8:350-

»

American Anthropologist,

75.
1896a “Review of Giddings’ The Principles of Sociology.” American An- !
thropologist, 10:19-24.
1896b “The Beginning of Marriage.” American Anthropologist, 9:371-83.
1901 “Man’s Place in Nature.” American Anthropologist, 3:1-13.
MACHIAVELLI, N.
1948 The Prince. W. K. Marriott, trans. New York: Dutton.

731


===== PAGE 371 =====

Bibliography

MACKINTOSH, SIR J.
1799 A Discourse on the Study of the Law of Nature and of Nations.
London: T. Cadell, Jr., W. Davies, ]. Debrett, and W. Clarke.
MC LENNAN, J. F.
1865 Primitive Marriage. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black.
1876 Studies in Ancient History. London: Macmillan.
MAC NEISH, R.
1964a “Ancient Mesoamerican Civilization.” Science, 143:531-37.
1964b “The Origins of New World Civilization.” Scientific American,
211:5, 29-37.
MAC PHERSON, C. B.
1962 The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
MAC RAE, D. G.
1958 “Darwinism and the Social Sciences.” S. A. Barnett, ed., A Century
of Darwin. London: Heinemann, 296-312.
1960 “Race and Sociology in History and Theory.” P. Mason, ed., Man,
Race, and Darwin. London: Oxford University Press, 76-86.
1961 Ideology and Society. London: Heinemann.
MAINE, H. S.
1861 Ancient Law. London: J. Murray.
1873 (orig. 1861) Ancient Law: Its Connection with the Early History
of Society and Its Relations to Modern Ideas. New York: Holt.
1883 Dissertations on Early Law and Custom. London: J. Murray.

1887 (orig. 1871) Village Communities in the East and West. London:
J. Murray.

1888 (orig. 1875) Lectures on the Early History of Institutions. New
York: Holt.
MAIR, L.
1938 The Place of History in the Study of Culture Change: Methods
of Study of Culture Contact. Africa Memoirs, vol. 15. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
MALINOWSKI, B.

1913a The Family among the Australian Aborigines: A Sociological Study.
London: University of London Press.
1913b “Review of Durkheim’s Les Formes Elémentaires de la Vie Re-
ligieuse.” Folklore, 24:525-31.
1920 “Kula: The Circulating Exchanges of Valuables in the Archipelagos
of Fastern New Guinea.” Man, 20:97-105.
1922 Argonauts of the Western Pacific. New York: Dutton.
1923 “Psycho-analysis and Anthropology.” Psyche, 4:293-322.
1926 Crime and Custom in Savage Society. London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trubner.

19272 Sex and Repression in Savage Society. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.

732

v

Bibliography

1927b “The Life of Culture.” G. E. Smith, et dl., eds., The Diffusion Con-
troversy. New York: Norton, 26-46.
19292 The Sexudl Life of Savages in Northwestern Melanesia. London:
George Routledge.
1929b “Social Anthropology.” Encyclopaedia Britannica, 14th ed., 862:70.
1930a “Parenthood the Basis of Social Structure.” V. F. Calverton and
S. D. Schmalhauser, eds., The New Generation, 113-68.
1930b “Race and Labour.” The Listener. Suppl. No. 8.
1931 “Culture.” Encyclopedia of the Socidl Sciences, 621-46.
1935 Coral Gardens and Their Magic. London: Allen & Unwin, 2 vols.
1939 “The Group and the Individual in Functional Analysis.” American
Journal of Sociology, 44:938-64.
1944a Freedom and Civilization. New York: Roy Publisher.
1944b A Scientific Theory of Culture. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.
1945 The Dynamics of Culture Change: An Inquiry into Race Relations
in Africa. P. Kaberry, ed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
1961 (orig. 1922) Argonauts of the Western Pacific. New York: Dutton.
1962 Sex, Culture and Myth. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
1967 A Diary in the Strict Sense of the Term. New York: Harcourt,
Brace and World.
MALTHUS, T. R.
1803 (orig. 1798) An Essay on the Principle of Population. London:
J. Johnson.
1817 An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: . Murray.
MANDELBAUM, D. G. (ed.)
1949 Selected Writings of Edward Sapir in Language, Culture, and
Personality. Berkeley: University of California Press.
MANGELSDORF, P., R. MAC NEISH, and W. C. GALINAT
1964 “Domestication of Corn.” Science, 143:538-45.
MANNERS, R.
1956 “Tabara: Subculture of a Tobacco and Mixed Crop Municipality.”
Julian Steward, ed., The People of Puerto Rico. Urbana: University
of IMinois Press, 93-170.
1964 (ed.) Process and Pattern in Culture: Essays in Honor of Julian H.
Steward. Chicago: Aldine.
1965 “Reply to Morris Opler.” Current Anthropology, 6:319-20.
MANUEL, F. E.
1959 The Eighteenth Century Confronts the Gods. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
MARCHANT, J.
1916 Alfred Russel Wallace; Letters and Reminiscences. London: Cas-
sell.
MARCUSE, H.
1960 (orig. 1941) Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the Rise of So-
cial Theory. Boston: Beacon Press.

733

i


===== PAGE 372 =====

Bibliography

MARETT, R. R.
1914 (orig. 1909) The Threshold of Religion. London: Methuen.
1927 The Diffusion of Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MARKHAM, F. M. A.
1952 Claude Henri Comte de Saint-Simon: Selected Writings. Oxford:
Blackwell.
MARTINDALE, D. A.
1960 The Nature and Types of Sociological Theory. Boston: Houghton
Mifftin.
MARTINEAU, H.
1896 The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte. London: G. Bell.
MARKX, K.
1859 Zur Kritik der Politischen (Skonomie. Berlin: Franz Dunker.
1888 (orig. 1848) The Communist Manifesto. London: W. Reeves.
1904 (orig. 1859) The Critique of Political Economy. 1. N. Stone,
trans. Chicago: International Library Publication Co.
1909 (orig. 1867) Capital. E. Unterman, trans. Chicago: C. H. Kerr.
1941 (orig. ms. 1845) “Theses on Feuerbach.” ¥. Engels, ed., Ludwig
Feuerbach and the Outcome of Classical German Philosophy.
New York: International Publishers, 82-84.
1960 (orig. 1853) The British Rule in India. Moscow: Foreign Lan-
guage Publishers.
1963 (orig. 1847) The Poverty of Philosophy. New York: International
Publishers.
1965 (orig. ms. 1857-58) “Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations.” E.
Hobsbawm, ed., Pre-capitalist FEconomic Formations: Karl Marx.
J. Cohen, trans. New York: International Publishers, 67-120.
MARY, K. and F. ENGELS
1942 The Selected Correspondence: 1846-1895. New York: Interna-
tional Publishers.
1956 (orig. 1845) The Holy Family. Moscow: Foreign Languages Pub-
lishers.
1957 Marx and Engels on Religion. Moscow: Foreign Languages Pub-
lishers.
1965 (orig. ms. 1846) “The German Ideology.” E. Hobsbawm, ed., Pre-
capitalist Economic Formations: Karl Marx. J. Cohen, trans. New
York: International Publishers, 121-39.
MASON, J. A.
1966 “Pre-Folsom Estimates of the Ages of Man in America.” American
Anthropologist, 68:193-96.
MASON, 0.
1894a “Migmtion and the Food Quest: A Study in the Peopling of Amer-
ica.” American Anthropologist, 7:275.
1894b “TECh“Ogeogmphy, or the Relation of the Farth to the Industries
of Mankind.” American Anthropologist, 7:137-61.

734

w

Bibliography

18g5a “Influence of Environment upon Human Industries or Arts.” An-
nual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 639-65.
1895b “Similarities in Culture.” American Anthropologist, 8:101-17.
1899 “Aboriginal American Zootechny.” American Anthropologist,
1:45-81.
1907 "E:vsimnmcnt.” Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico,
Part I. Washington: Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. 3o,
427-30-
MAUS, H.
1962 A Short History of Sociology. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
MAUSS, M.
1913 “L’'Ethnographie en France et A I'Etranger.” La Revue de Paris.
September, October: 537-60; 815-937.
1920 “L’Extcension du Potlatch en Melanésie.” Anthropologie 30:396-97.
1924 “Rapports Réels et Pratiques de la Psychologie et de la Sociologie.”
Journal de Psychologie Normale et Pathologique, 31:892-922.
1954 (orig. 1924) The Gift. 1. Cunnison, trans. New York: Free Press.
1950 Sociologie et Anthropologie. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
1962 “Introduction.” E. Durkheim, Socialism, 1st ed. New York: Collier
Books, 32-36.
MAUSS, M. and H. BEUCHAT
1906 “Iissai sur les Variations Saisonnicres des Sociétés FEskimos.”
L’Année Sociologique, neuvieme année (1904-1905), 39-132.
MAUSS, M. and H. HUBERT
1899 “Essai sur la Nature et la Fonction du Sacrifice.” L’Année Sociolo-
gique, deuxiéme année (1897-1898), 29-138.
1904 “Esquisse d’une Théorie de la Magie.” L’Année Sociologique, sep-
tiéme année (1902-1903), 1-146.
MAYBURY-LEWIS, D.
1965 “Prescriptive Marriage Systems.” Southwestern Journal of Anthro-
pology, 21:207-30.
MAZLISH, B.
1955 “Burke, Bonald, and de Maistre: A Study in Conservatism.” Un-
published Ph.D. dissertation. Columbia University.
MEAD, G. H.
1936 Movements of Thought in the Nineteenth Century. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
MEAD, M.
1928 Coming of Age in Samoa. New York: Morrow.
1930a  Growing Up in New Guinea. New York: Blue Ribbon.
1930b “An Ethnologist’s Footnote to Totem and Taboo.” The Psycho-
analytic Review, 17:297-301.
1933 “More Comprehensive Field Methods.” American Anthropologist,
:1-15.
1935a gjx ansd Temperament in Three Primitive Socicties. New York:
Morrow.

735

|
J
|
|
|
i
|
|
i


===== PAGE 373 =====

Bibliography

1935b“Review of The Riddle of the Sphinx, by Géza Réheim.” Charac-
ter and Personality, 4:85-go.

19372 “A Reply to a Review of Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive
Societies.” American Anthropologist, 39:558-61.

1937b  Cooperation and Competition among Primitive Peoples. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

1939 From the South Seas. New York: Morrow.

1941 “Review of The Individual and His Society, by Abram Kardiner.”
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 11 :603-5.

1942 And Keep Your Powder Dry: An Anthropologist Looks at America.
New York: Morrow.

19492 Male and Female. New York: Morrow.

1949b“Character Formation and Diachronic Theory.” M. Fortes, ed.,
Social Structure: Studies Presented to A. R. Radcliffe-Brown. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 18-34.

1949¢  (orig. 1928) Coming of Age in Samoa. New York: New American
Library, Mentor Books.

1950 Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies. New York:

New American Library, Mentor Books.

1951a “The Study of National Character.” D. Lerner, and H. D. Haswell,
eds., The Policy Sciences. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
70-85.

1953 “National Character.” A. L. Kroeber, ed., Anthropology Today.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 642-67.

1954 “The Swaddling Hypothesis: Its Reception.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 56:395-409.

1955 Cultural Patterns and Technical Changes. New York: New Ameri-
can Library, Mentor Books.

1958 “Cultural Determinants of Behavior.” A. Roe and G. G. Simpson,
eds., Behavior and Evolution. New Haven: Yale University Press,
480-503. \

19592 An Anthropologist at Work: Writings of Ruth Benedict. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.

1959b “Apprenticeship under Boas.” W. Goldschmidt, ed., The Anthro-
pology of Franz Boas. Memoir 89. American Anthropological As-
sociation, 29-45.

1959¢ “Reply to Kardiner.” Science, 130:1728, 1732.

1961a “National Character and the Science of Anthropology.” S. M. Lip-
set and L. Lowenthal, eds., Culture and Social Character: The
Work of David Riesman Reviewed. New York: Free Press, 1 5-26.

1961b  Cooperation and Competition among Primitive Peoples. Boston:
Beacon Press.

1962a “Retrospects and Prospects.” T. Gladwin and W. C. Sturtevant,
eds., Anthropology and Human Behavior. Washington: Anthropo-
logical Society of Washington.

736

I 28

Bibliography

1962b “Review of National Character and National Stereotypes: A Trend
Report Prepared for the International Union of Scientific Philoso-
phy, by H. C. J. Duiker and N. H. Frijda.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 64:688-go.
1964 Continuities in Cultural Evolution. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
MEAD, M. and R. BUNZEL (eds.)
1960 The Golden Age of Anthropology. New York: George Braziller.
MEAD, M. and E. CALAS
1955 “Child-training Ideals in a Post-revolutionary Context: Soviet Rus-
sia.” M. Mead and M. Wolfenstein, eds. Childhood in Contem-
porary Cultures. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 179-203.
MEAD, M. and F. M. C. MAC GREGOR
1951 Growth and Culture: A Photographic Study of Balinese Child-
hood. New York: Putnam.
MEAD, M. and R. METRAUX (eds.)
1953 The Study of Culture at a Distance. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.
MEEK, C. K.
1931 Tribal Studies in Northern Nigeria. Vol. 1. London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trubner.
MEGGERS, B.
1946 “Recent Trends in American Ethnology.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 48:176-214.
1960 “The Law of Cultural Evolution as a Practical Research Tool.”
G. Dole and R. Carneiro, eds., Essays in the Science of Culture.
New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 302-16.
1961 “Field Testing of Cultural Law, a Reply to Morris Opler.” South-
western Journal of Anthropology, 17:352-54.
MEGGITT, M. J.
1962 Desert People; A Study of the Walbiri Aborigines of Central
Australia. Sydney: Angus and Robertson.
1965 The Lineage System of the Mae-Enga of New Guinea. Edinburgh:
Oliver and Boyd.
MEHRING, F.
1935 Karl Marx, The Story of His Life. E. Fitzgerald, trans. New York:
Covici Friede.
MEINERS, C.
1785 Grundriss der Geschichte der Menscheit. Lemgo: im Verlage
der Meyerschen Buchhandlung.
MERCIER, P.
1966 Histoire de I Anthropologie. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
MERZ, J. T.
1965 (orig. 1896-1914) A History of European Thought in the Nine-
teenth Century. New York: Dover.

737



===== PAGE 374 =====

I gl

Bibliography
Bibliography _

METZGER, D. ) )
1965 “Review of The Nature of Cultural Things,” by Marvin Harris.
American Anthropologist, 67:1293-97.
METZGER, D. and G. WILLIAMS
1963a “Tenejapa Medicine: The Curer.” Southwestern Journal of Anthro-
pology 19:216-34. ) o
1963b “A Formal Ethnographic Analysis of Tenejapa Ladino Weddings.
American Anthropologist, 65:1076-1101. )
1966 “Some Procedures and Results in the Study of Native Categories,
Tzeltal ‘Firewood.”” American Anthropologist, 68:389-407.
METZGER, W.
1965 “The Historical Background for National Trends in Psychology:
German Psychology.” Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sci-
ences, 1:109-14.
MEYER, A. C. ) )
1954 Marxism, The Unity of Theory and Practice. Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press.
MILL, J.S.
1923 (orig. 1848) Principles of Political Economy. London: Longmans
Green.
MILLAR, J. ) )
1771 Observations Concerning the Distinction of Ranks in Society.
London: J. Murray.
MILLON, R.
1967 “Teotihuacan.” Scientific American, 2 16:38-48.
MILLS, C. W.
1962 The Marxists. New York: Dell.
MINS, H. »
1965 “Marxists and Non-Marxists: Theoretical Schemes and Political
Creeds.” Science and Society, 30:25-31.
MINTZ, S. )
1956 “Canamclar, the Sub-culture of a Rural Sugar .Plantatlon Prule'-
tariat.” J. Steward, ed., The People of Puerto Rico. Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 314-17.
MIVART, ST. G.
1871 Genesis of Species. London: Macmillan.
MONBODDO, J. B., LORD )
1774 Of the Origin and Progress of Language, vol. 1. Edinburgh:
]- Balfour and T. Cadell.
MONTAGU, A. (M. F. ASHLEY MONTAGU )
1945 Man’s Most Dangerous Myth: The Fallacy of Race. New York:
Columbia University Press.
1952 Darwin, Competition and Cooperation. New York: Henry Schu-
man.
1964 The Concept of Race. New York: Free Press.

738

MITRA, PANCHANAN

1933 A History of American Anthropology. Calcutta: The University

of Calcutta Press.
MONTESQUIEU

1949 (orig. 1748) The Spirit of Laws. T. Nugent, trans. New York:

Hafner.
MOONEY, J.

1896 The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890. Four-
teenth Annual Report. Washington: Bureau of American Eth-
nology.

MOORE, F. (ed.)

1961 Readings in Cross-Cultural Methodology. New Haven: Human

Relations Area Files.
MORET, A. and G. pAvY

1926 From Tribe to Empire. V. Gordon Childe, trans. New York:

Knopf.
MORGAN, L. H.

1851 League of the Ho-de-no-sau-nee, or Iroquois. Rochester: Sage.

1868 The American Beaver and His Works. Philadelphia: Lippincott.

1870 Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family.
Washington: Smithsonian Institution.

1876 “Montezuma’s Dinner.” North American Review, 122:265-308.

1877 Ancient Society. New York: Holt.

1881 Houses and House Life of the American Aborigines. Washington:
U.S. Geological Survey. Contributions to North American Eth-
nology, 1V,

1963 (orig. 1877) Ancient Society. E. Leacock, ed. New York: Meridian
Books. World Publishing.

MORTON, §. G.

1839 Crania Americana. Philadelphia: J. Dobson.

1844 Crania Aegyptica; or Observations on Egyptian Ethnography, De-
rived from Anatomy, History and the Monuments. Transactions
of the American Philosophical Society, 1X.

MURDOCK, G. P.

1932 “The Science of Culture.” American Anthropologist, 34:200-15.

1937 Statistical Correlations in the Science of Society. New Haven:
Yale University Press.

1943 “Bronislaw Malinowski.” American Anthropologist, 45:444-51.

1945 “The Common Denominator of Cultures.” R. Linton, ed., The Sci-
ence of Man in the World Crisis. New York: Columbia University
Press, 123-42.

1949 Social Structure. New York: Macmillan.

1951 “British Social Anthropology.” American Anthropologist, 53:465-73.

1957 “World  Ethnographic ~ Sample.”  American Anthropologist,
59:664-87.

739



===== PAGE 375 =====

Bibliography

19592 Africa—lts Peoples and Their Culture History. New York: Mc-
Graw-Hill.

1959b “Evolution in Social Organization.” B. Meggers, ed.. Evolution and
Anthropology. Washington: Anthropological Society of Washing-
ton, 126-45.

1963 Outline of World Cultures. New Haven: Human Relations Area
Files.

1964 “Cultural Correlates of the Regulation of Premarital Sex Behavior.”
R. Manners, ed., Process and Pattern in Culture. Chicago: Aldine,
399-410.

1965 Culture and Society. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

1967 Ethnographic Atlas. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

MURPHREE, 1.
1961 “The Evolutionary Anthropologists: The Progress of Mankind.”
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 105:265-300.
MURPHY, R.
1963 “On Zen Marxism: Filiation and Alliance.” Man, 63:17-19.
MURPHY, R. and J. STEWARD

1955 “T'appers and Trappers: Parallel Processes in Acculturation.” Eco-

nomic Development and Culture Change, 4:335-55.
MYRES, J. L.

1908 “Herodotus and Anthropology.” Anthropology and the Classics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

1916 “The Influence of Anthropology on the Course of Political Science.”
University of California Publications in History, 4:1-81.

NADEL, S. F.
1951 The Foundations of Social Anthropology. New York: Free Press.
1957 The Theory of Social Structure. New York: Free Press.

NAGEL, E.

1948 “The Development of Modern Science.” J. L. Blau, J. Buchler, and
G. T. Mathews, eds., Chapters in Western Civilization. New York:
Columbia University Press, 241-84.

1953 “Teleological Explanation and Telcological System.” H. Feigl and
M. Brodbeck, eds., Readings in the Philosophy of Science. New
York: Appleton-Century, 537-58.

1961 The Structure of Science. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.

NAROLL, R.

1961 “Two Solutions to Galton’s Problem.” Philosophy of Science,
28:15-39.

1964 “A F1f5t1319$olutnon to Galton’s Problem.” American Anthropologist,
66:863-67.

NAROLL, R. and R. G. D’ANDRADE

1963 “Two Turther Solutions to Galton’s Problem.” American Anthro-

pologist, 65:1053-67.
NEEDHAM, R.
1962 Structure and Sentiment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

740

. 2

Bibliography

1964 “Explanatory Notes on Prescriptive Alliance and the Purum.”
American Anthropologist, 66:1377-85.

1966 “Comments on the Analysis of Purum Society.” American Anthro-
pologist, 68:171-77.

NIEBOER, H. J.

1900 Slavery as an Industrial System: Ethnological Researcher. The

Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
NILSSON, S.

1868 (orig. 1838) The Primitive Inhabitants of Scandinavia. J. Lub-

bock, trans. London: Longmans, Green.
NORBECK, E. and NORBECK, M.

1956 “Child Training in a Japanese Fishing Community.” D. Haring, ed.,
Personal Character and Cultural Milieu. Syracuse: Syracuse Uni-
versity Press, 651-73.

NOTT, J. C.and G. R. GLIDDON
1854 Types of Mankind. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Grambo.
1857 Indigenous Races of the Earth. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
NUTINI, H.

1965 “Some Considerations on the Nature of Social Structure and Model
Building: A Critique of Claude Lévi-Strauss and Edmund Leach.”
American Anthropologist, 67:707-31.

OGBURN, W. F. and A. GOLDENWEISER (eds.)
1927 Social Sciences and Their Interrelation. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
1950 Social Change. New York: Viking Press.

OLIVER, D.

1955 A Solomon Island Society, Kinship and Leadership among the
Siuai of Bougainville. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

OPLER, M.

1943 “On the Method of Writing Anthropological Monographs.” Ameri-
can Anthropologist, 45:329-32.

1947 “Rule and Practice in the Behavior Pattern between Jicarilla Apache
Affinal Relatives.” American Anthropologist, 49:452-62.

1961 “Cultural Evolution, Southern Athapaskans, and Chronology in
Theory.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 17:1-20.

1962 “Integration, Evolution, and Morgan.” Current Anthropology,
3:478-79-

1964a “Cause, Process, and Dynamics in the Evolution of E. B. Tylor.”
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 20:123-45.

1964b “Reply to T. G. Harding and E. Leacock.” Current Anthropology,
5:110-14.

1965 “The History of Ethnological Thought.” Current Anthropology,

6:319.
ORLANSKY, H.
1949 “Infant Care and Personality.” Psychological Bulletin, 46:1-48.
OSBORN, H. F.
1929 From the Greceks to Darwin. 2d cd. New York: Scribner’s.

741



===== PAGE 376 =====

Bibliography

PALEY, W.

1963 (orig. 1802) Natural Theology. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.

PARSONS, E. C.
1939 Pueblo Indian Religion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
PARSONS, T.

1949 (orig. 1937) The Structure of Social Action. New York: Free Press.

1957 “Malinowski and the Theory of Social Systems.” R. Firth, ed., Man
and Culture: An Evaluation of the Work of Bronislaw Malinow-
ski. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 53-70.

PEARCE, R. H.

1953 The Savages of America. A Study of the Indian and the Idea of

Civilization. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
PEARSON, K

1901 National Life from the Standpoint of Science. London: A. & C.
Black.

1949 (orig. 1892) The Grammar of Science. London: J. M. Dent.

PEDERSEN, H.
1931 Linguistic Science in the Nineteenth Century. J. W. Spargo, trans.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
PESCHEL, O.
1876 (orig. 1874) The Races of Man. London: H. S. King.
PELTO, P.
1966 “Cognitive Aspects of American Kin Terms.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 68:198-202.
PENNIMAN, T. K.
1965 A Hundred Years of Anthropology. London: Gerald Duckworth.
PERRY, W. J.
1923 The Children of the Sun. London: Methuen.
PIDDINGTON, R.

1957 “Malinowski’s Theory of Needs.” R. Firth, ed., Man and Culture:
An Evaluation of the Work of Bronislaw Malinowski. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 33-51.

PIDDOCKE, §S.

1965 “The Potlatch System of the South Kwakiutl: A New Perspective.”

Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 21:244-64.
PIKE, K.

1954 Language in Relation to a Unified Theory of the Structure of
Human Bcehavior, vol. 1. Glendale: Summer Institute of Lin-
guistics.

1962 With Heart and Mind, A Personal Synthesis of Scholarship and
Devotion. Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Pub-
lication.

PITT-RIVERS, A. L.-T.

1906 The Evolution of Culture and Other Essays. J. L. Myres, ed.

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

742

Y‘

—

Bibliography

PLEKHANOV, G.
1934 Essays in the History of Materialism. R. Fox, trans. London: John
Lane.
1940 (orig. 1898) The Role of the Individual in History. New York:
International Publishers.
POCOCK, D. F.

1961 Social Anthropology. London: Sheed and Ward.
POPPER, K. R.
1946 The Open Society and Its Enemies. London: George Routledge.
1957 The Poverty of Historicism. Boston: Beacon Press.
PORTEUS, §. D.
1937 Primitive Intelligence and Environment. New York: Macmillan.
POTT, A. F.
1 8;;-} Etymologische Forschungen auf dem Gebdude der indogermanisch-
1836 {en Sprachen. Lemgo.
POUWER, J.

1966 “Referential and Inferential Reality: A Rejoinder.” Bijdragen. Tot
De Taal-, Land En Volkenkunde, 122:151-57.

POWELL, J. W.

1899 “Sociology or the Science of Institutions.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 1:695-733.

PRENANT, M.

1943 Biology and Marxism. C. D. Greaves, trans. London: Lawrence
and Wishart.

PRICHARD, J. C.

1826 (orig. 1813) Rescarches into the Physical History of Mankind.
London: J. and A. Arch.

1836-] Researches into the Physical History of Mankind. London: Sher-

1847 %wood, Gilbert and Piper.

1855 (orig. 1843) The Natural History of Man. London: Bailliere.

PROUDHON, P. |

1849 De la Création de I'Ordre dans I'Humanité. Paris: Garnier.
PUTNAM, C.
1961 Race and Reason, A Yankee View. Washington: Public Affairs
Press.
QUATREFAGES, A. DE
1867 Rapport sur les Progres de I'Anthropologic. Paris: Imprimerie
Impériale.

ET, A.

1832 Recherches sur la Loi de la Croissance de I'Homme. Nouveaux
Mémoires de I'Academic Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres.
Brussels: M. Haycz, Imprimeur de I’Académic de Bruxelles, 1-32.

1842 A Treatise on Man and the Development of His Faculties. Edin-
burgh: Wm. and Rbt. Chambers.

743

i



===== PAGE 377 =====

Bibliography

1848 Du Systéme Sociale et des Lois qui le Régissent. Paris: Guillaumin.
1871 Anthropométrie, ou Mesure des Différentes Facultés de I'Homme.
Bruxelles: C. Muquardt.
RADCLIFFE-BROWN, A. R.
1914 “Review of Malinowski’s The Family among the Australian Abo-
rigines.”” Man, 14:31-32.
1924 “The Mother’s Brother in South Africa.” South African Journal of
Science, 21:542-55.
1931 “The Social Organization of Australian Tribes.” Oceania, 1:426-56.
1933 (orig. 1922) The Andaman Islanders. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
1935 “On the Concept of "unction in Social Science.” American Anthro-
pologist, 37: 394-402.
1947 “Evolution, Social or Cultural. American Anthropologist, 49:78-83.
1948 A Natural Science of Society. New York: Free Press.
1949a Socidl Structure, Studies Presented to A. R. Radcliffe-Brown. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press.
1949b “Functionalism: A Protest.” American Anthropologist, 51:320-23.
1949¢ “White’s View of a Science of Culture.” American Anthropologist,
51 : SQ ;-1 2.
1950 “Introduction.” A. R. Radcliffe-Brown and C. D. Forde, eds., Afri-
can Systems of Kinship and Marriage. London: Oxford University
Press, 1-85.
1952a “Historical Note on British Social Anthropology.” American An-
thropologist, 54:275-77.
1952b Structure and Function in Primitive Society. London: Oxford
University Press.
1958 Method in Social Anthropology. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
RADIN, P
1913 “Personal Remimscence of a Winnebago Indian.” Journal of Ameri-
can Folklore, 26:293-318.
1926 Crashing Thunder: The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian.
New York: D. Appleton.
1929 “History of Ethnological Theories.” American Anthropologist,
31:9-33.
1933 Theg ;lcthorl and Theory of Ethnology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
1939 “The Mind of Primitive Man.” The New Republic, 98:300-3.
1958 “Robert Lowie.”” American Anthropologist, 60:359-61.
RADL, E
1930 The History of Biological Theories. E. J. Hatficld, trans. London:
Oxford University Press.
RAMSAY, J.
1784 Essay on the Treatment and Conversion of African Slaves in the
British Sugar Colonies. London: J. Phillips.

744

Bibliography

RANDALL, J.

1965 The Career of Philosophy: From the German Enlightenment to

the Age of Darwin. New York: Columbia University Press.
RANKING, J.

1827 Historical Researches on the Conquest of Peru, Mexico, Bogotd,
Natchez and Talomeco in the Thirteenth Century by the Mongols,
Accompanied with Elephants. London: Longmans, Green.

RAPPAPORT, R.

1966 “Ritual in the Fcology of a New Guinca People: An Anthropologi-
cal Study of the Tsembaga Maring.” Unpublished Ph.D. disserta-
tion. Columbia University. Ann Arbor: University Microfilm.

RASK, R. K.

1818 Investigation on the Origin of the Old Norse or Icelandic Lan-

guage. Copenhagen: Gyldendal.
RATZEL, F.

1896 (orig. 1885-88) The History of Mankind. A. J. Butler, trans.
London: Macmillan.

1899 (orig. 1882) Anthropogeographie. Stuttgart: ]. Engelhorn.

RAY, V.

1955 “Review of Franz Boas: The Science of Man in the Making, by M.
Herskovitz.” American Anthropologist, 57:138-41.

1956 “Rejoinder.” American Anthropologist, 58:164-70.

RAYNAL, G. T. F.

1788 A Philosophical and Political History of the Settlements and Trade
of the Europeans in the East and West Indies. London: Printed
for W. Strahan, ctc.

READ, M.
1942 “Migrant Labour in Africa and Its Effects on Tribal Life.” Inter-
national Labour Review, 45:605-31.
RECLUS, E.
1876-)The Earth and Its Inhabitants. E. G. Ravenstein, ed. London:
1894 }] S. Virtue and Co.
REDFIELD, R.

1947 “The Folk Society.” American Journal of Sociology, 52:293-308.

1955 “Introduction.” F. Eggan, ed., Social Anthropology of North Ameri-
can Tribes. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ix-xiv.

REDFIELD, R., R. LINTON, and M. HERSKOVITS

1936 “Memorandum on the Study of Acculturation.” American Anthro-

pologist, 38:149-52.
REED, E.

1957 “Anthropology Today.” International Socialist Review, Spring,

18:54-6o.
REICHARD, C.

1938 “Social Life.” F. Boas, ed., General Anthropology. New York:

Heath, 409-86.

745


===== PAGE 378 =====

Bibliography

RESEK, C.
1960 Lewis Henry Morgan: American Scholar. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
RETZIUS, A.
1864 Ethnologische Schriften, nach dem Tode des Verfassers gesammelt.
Stockholm.
RICHARDS, A. I.
1932 “Anthropological Problems in Northeastern Rhodesia.” Africa,
1121-44.
1939 “'%hc Dzjclopmcnt of Field Work Methods in Social Anthropology.”
F. C. Bartlett, et al., eds., The Study of Society. New York: Mac-
millan, 272-316.
1950 “Some Types of Family Structure amongst the Central Bantu.”
A. R. Raddliffe-Brown and D. Forde, eds., African Systems of Kin-
ship and Marriage. London: Oxford University Press, 207-51.
1954 Economic Development and Tribal Change. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
RICKERT, H.
1896 | Die Grenzen der naturwissenschaftlichen Begriffshildung. Tubin-
1902 }gcm
1924 Die Probleme der Geschichtsphilosophie. Heidelberg.
RIESMIAN, D.
1950 The Lonely Crowd: A Study of Changing American Character.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
RITTER, K.
1863 (orig. 1859) Geographical Studies. W. Gage, trans. Boston:
Gould and Lincoln.
RITTERBUSH, P.
1964 Overtures to Biology. New Haven: Yale University Press.
RIVERS, W. H. R.
1go1 “On the Functions of the Maternal Uncle in Torres Strait.”” Man,
1:171-72.
1906 The Todas. New York: Macmillan.
1911 “The Fthnological Analyses of Culture.” Presidential address to Sec-
tion H of the British Association for the Advancement of Science.
Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,
81:490-99.
1912 “The Disappearance of Uscful Arts.” Festskift tillignad Edvard
Westermarck: Helsingford, 1go-230.
19142 The History of Melanesian Socicty. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
1914b Kinship and Social Organization. London: Constable.
1920a Instinct and the Unconscious: A Contribution to a Biological

Theory of the Psycho-Neuroses. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

746

Bibliography

1920b “Review of Primitive Society,” by Robert Lowie. American Anthro-
pologist, 22:278-83.
1922 History and Ethnology. New York: Macmillan.
1923 Conflict and Dream. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
RIVET, P. (ed.)
1957 Les Origines de I'Homme Américain. Paris: Gallimard.
ROARK, R.

1961 “The Mathematics of American Cousinship.” The Kroeber Anthro-

pological Society Papers, 24:17-18.
ROBERTS, J. M.

1951 “Three Navaho Households: A Comparative Study in Small Group
Culture.” Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeol-
ogy and Ethnology, vol. 40, no. 3. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

ROBERTSON, J. M.

1929 A History of Free Thought in the Nineteenth Century. London:

Watts.
ROBERTSON, W.

1812 (orig. 1777) The History of America. Philadelphia: J. Broien and

T. L. Plowman.
ROHEIM, G.

1925 Australian Totemism: A Psychoandlytical Study in Anthropology.
London: Allen & Unwin.

1934 The Riddle of the Sphinx. London: Hogarth.

1947 “Psychoanalysis and Anthropology.” Psychoanalysis and the Social
Sciences, 1:9-33.

1950 Psychoanalysis and Anthropology. New York: International Uni-
versity Press.

ROHNER, R.

1966 “Franz Boas, Ethnographer on the Northwest Coast.” J. Helm, ed.,
Pioneers of American Anthropology. Seattle: University of Wash-
ington Press, 151-222.

ROMNEY, A. K. and R. G. D’ANDRADE

1964 “Cognitive Aspects of English Kin Terms.” American Anthro-

pologist, 66:146-70.
RONHAAR, J. H.

1931 Women in Primitive Motherright Societies. The Hague: J. B.

Walters Groningen.

ROSE, F. G. G.

1960a “The Australian Aboriginal Family: Some Theoretical Considera-
tions.” Forschen und Wirken: Festschrift zur 150-Jahr-Feier der
Humboldt-Universitit zu Berlin. Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag
der Wissenschaften, 3:415-37.

1960b Classification of Kin, Age Structure and Marriage amongst the
Groote Eylandt Aborigines: A Study in Method and a Theory of

747

|
i
|
}



===== PAGE 379 =====

Bibliography

Australian Kinship. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. Deutsche Akademie
der Wissenschaften zu Berlin 3: Scktion fiir Vilkerkundliche For-
schungen.

ROTH, W. E. )

1905 Notes on Government, Moradls, and Crime. Brisbane: Department
of Home Secretary.

ROUSSEAU, J. J. ]

1964 (orig. 1751 and 1755) The First and Second Discourses. R. and .
Masters, trans. New York: St Martin’s Press.

1938 (orig. 1762) The Social Contract. G. D. H. Cole, trans. New York:
Dutton.

ROWE, J. H.

1961 “Stratigraphy and Seriation.” American Antiquity, 26:324-30.

1965 “The Renaissance Foundations of Anthropology.” American Anthro-
pologist, 67:1-20.

RUMNEY, J. -
1934 Herbert Spencer’s Sociology. London: Williams and Norgate.
RUSH, B.

1797 “Observations Intended to Favor a Supposition That the Black Coloy{
(as it is called) of the Negroes Is Derived from the Leprosy.
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, 4:289-97.

SAGARD-THEODAT, G.
1936 Le Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons. Paris: Chez Denys Moreau.
SAHLINS, M. D.

1958 Socidl Stratification in Polynesia. Seattle: University of Washing-
ton Press. )

1965 “On the Ideology and Composition of Descent Groups.” Man,
65:104-7.

1966 “Osn th?z z)elphic Writings of Claude Lévi-Strauss.” Scientific Amer-
ican, 214:131-36.

SAHLINS, M. and E. SERVICE
1960 Evolution and Culture. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
SANDERS, W.

1965 The Cultural Ecology of the Teotihuacdn Valley. Unpublished

manuscript.
SANDERS, W. and B. PRICE

1968 Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization. New York: Ran-

dom House.
SANDOW, A.

1938 “Social Factors in the Origins of Darwinism.” Quarterly Review of

Biology, 13:315-26.
SAPIR, E.

1917 “Do We Need a Superorganic?” American Anthropologist, 19:441-
47-

1921 Language. New York: Harcourt, Brace.

748

T

Bibliography

1924 “Culture, Genuine and Spurious.” American Journal of Sociology,
29:401-29.

1927 “Anthropology and Sociology.” W. F. Ogburn and A. Goldenweiser,
eds., The Social Sciences and Their Interrelation. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin, g7-113.

1932 “Cultural Anthropology and Psychiatry.” Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 27:229-42.

1937 “The Contribution of Psychiatry to an Understanding of Behavior
in Society.” American Journal of Sociology, 42:862-70.

1949 (orig. 1921) “Review of W. H. R. Rivers’ Instinct and the Un-
conscious: A Contribution to a Biological Theory of Psycho-Neuro-
sis.”” D. G. Mandelbaum, ed., Selected Writings of Edward Sapir.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 528-29.

1951 “Sound Patterns in Language.” D. G. Mandelbaum, ed., Selected
Writings of Edward Sapir. Berkeley: University of California Press,

33-45-
SARGENT, S. 8. and M. w. sMITH (eds.)
1949 Culture and Personality. New York: Viking Fund.
SCHAPERA, 1.

1947 Migrant Labour and Tribal Life. London: Oxford University Press.

1953 “Some Comments on Comparative Method in Social Anthropol-
ogy.” American Anthropologist, 55:353-62.

SCHAPIRO, J. S.

1934 Condorcet and the Rise of Liberalism. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
SCHEFFLER, 1.

1963 The Anatomy of Inquiry. New York: Knopf.
SCHEIN, M. and S. DIAMOND

1966 “The Waste Collectors.” Unpublished Master’s thesis. Columbia

University.

SCHER, J. (ed.)

1962 Theories of the Mind. New York: Free Press.
SCHLEGEL, F. VON

1808 Uber die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier. Heidelberg.
SCHMIDT, W.

:gfg'EDcr Ursprung der Gottesidee. 12 vols. Miinster i.W.: Ascherdorff.

5

1933 High Gods in North America. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

1934 “Primitive Man.” E. Eyre, ed., European Civilization. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.

1935 “The Position of Women with Regard to Property in Primitive
Society.” American Anthropologist, 37:244-56.

1939 The Culture Historical Method of Ethnology. S.A. Sieber, trans.
New York: Fortuny’s.

749


===== PAGE 380 =====

e

Bibliography Bibliography
SCHNEIDER, D. SELLNOW, L. ) B .
1964 “The Nature of Kinship.” Man, 64:180-81. 1961 Grundprinzipien einer Periodisierung der Urgeschichte. Berlin: }
1965a “American Kin Terms and Terms for Kinsmen: A Critique of Akademie-Verlag. t
i

Goodenough’s Componential Analysis of Yankee Kinship Termi-
nology.” American Anthropologist 67, part 2:288-308.
1965b “The Content of Kinship.” Man, 65:122-23.
1965¢ “Some Muddles in the Models. The Relevance of Models for Social
Anthropology.” A. S. A. Monographs 1. London: Tavistock, 25-85.
1965d “Kinship and Biology.” A. J. Coale et dl., Aspects of Family Struc-
ture. Princeton: Princcton University Press.
SCHNEIDER, H. K.
1957 “The Subsistence Role of Cattle among the Pakot and in East
Africa.”” American Anthropologist, 59:278-301.
SCHOOLCRAFT, H. R.
1851 Personal Memoirs of a Residence of Thirty Years with the
Indian Tribes. Philadclphia: Lippincott.
1851-) Historical and Statistical Information Respecting the History, Con-
1857 fdition, and Prospects of the Indian Tribes of the United States.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Grambo.
SCHRADER, O.
1890 Primitive Antiquities of the Aryan Peoples. F. Jevons, trans.
London: C. Griffin.
SCHUMPETER, J. A.
1954 History of Economic Analysis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SCHURTZ, H.
1902 Altersklassen und Mannerbunde. Berlin: Reimer.
SCOTT, J. P.
1963 “The Process of Primary Socialization in Canine and Human
Infants.” Child Development Monograph, 28:1-47.
SEGERSTEDT, T. T.
1966 The Nature of Social Redlity. Stockholm: Svenska bokforlaget
Bonniers. Scandinavian University Books.
SELIGMAN, C. C.
1924 “Anthropology and Psychology: A Study of Some Points of Con-
tact.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 54:13-46.
1932 “Anthropological Perspective and Psychological Theory.” Journal
of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 62:193-228.
SELIGMAN, C. G. and B. SELIGMAN
1911 The Veddas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
SELICMAN, E.
1961 (orig. 19o2) The Economic Interpretation of History. New York:
Columbia University Press.
SELLARS, R. (ed.)
1949 Philosophy for the Future: The Quest of Modern Materialism.
New York: Macmillan.

750

SELSAM, H. and H. MARTEL =~
1963 Reader in Marxist Philosophy. New York: International Publishers.
SEMPLE, E. C.
1911 Influences of Geographic Environment: On the Basis of Ratzel’s
System of Anthropogeography. New York: Holt.
SERVICE, E.
1955 “Indian-Furopean Relations in Colonial Latin America.” American
Anthropologist, 57:411-25.
1962 Primitive Social Organization. New York: Random House.
SHAPIRO, H. L.
1964 “Anthropology and the Age of Discovery.” R. A. Manners, ed.,
Process and Pattern in Culture. Chicago: Aldine, 337-48.
SHELDEN, W. H.
1919 “Dr. Goldenweiser and Historical Indeterminism.” Journal of Phi-
losophy, Psychology and Scientific Method, 16:327-30.
SHMELEYV, N. P.
1964 “Critique of Bourgeois Theories of Economic Development.” The
Journal of Development Studies, 1:71-92.
SHOTWELL, J. T.
1922 An Introduction to the History of History. New York: Columbia
University Press.
1939 The History of History. New York: Columbia University Press.
SHRYOCK, R. H.
1944 “The Strange Case of the Wells’ Theory of Natural Selection.”
M. F. Ashley Montagu, ed., Studies and Essays in the History of
Science and Learning in Honor of George Sarton. New York:
Henry Schuman, 195-207.
SHUB, B.
1950 “Soviets Expose American Baby.” The New Leader, June 17, 11-12.
SIEGEL, B. J. (ed.)
1963 Bicnnial Review of Anthropology, 1963. Stanford: Stanford Uni-
versity Press.
SIMMONS, L. w. (ed.)
1942 Sun Chief, The Autobiography of a Hopi Indian. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
SIMONDE DE SISMONDI, J. C. L.
1827 Nouveaux Principes d'Economie Politique. Paris: Delaunay.
SIMPSON, G. G.
1964 This View of Life. The World of an Evolutionist. New York:
Harcourt, Brace and World.
SINGER, M.
1961 “A Survey of Culturc and Personality Theory and Research.” B.

751

i
i



===== PAGE 381 =====

Bibliography

Kaplan, ed., Studying Persondlity Cross-Culturally. Evanston: Row,
Peterson: g-go. ) )
1963 “Foreword.” A. Kroeber, An Anthropologist Looks at History.
Berkeley: University of California Press, v-xiv.
SKINNER, E. o
1964 The Mossi of the Upper Volta. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
SLOTKIN, J.S. ) )
1965 Readings in Early Anthropology. Chicago: Aldine.
SMALL, A. o )
1924 Origins of Sociology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
SMITH, G. E. o
1928 In the Beginning: The Origin of Civilization. New York: Morrow.
1933 The Diffusion of Culture. London: Watts.
SMITH, M. i )
1959 “Boas’ ‘Natural History’ Approach to Field Method.” W. Gold-
schmidt, ed., The Anthropology of Franz Boas. Memoir 89. Ameri-
can Anthropological Association, 46-60.
SMITH, M. G. o
1960 Government in Zazzau: 1800-1950. London: Oxford University
Press.
SMITH, S. S. )
1965 (orig. 1787; 2d ed. 1810) An Essay on the Causes of the Variety
of Complexion and Figure in the Human Species. Harvard: The
Belknap Press.
SMITH, W. R. ) ]
1903 (orig. 1885) Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia. London:
Charles and Black. o
1956 (orig. 1889) The Religion of the Semites. New York: Meridian
Books, World Publishing.
SNYDER, L. ) )
1962 The Idea of Racialism: Its Meaning and History. Princeton: Van
Nostrand.
SONTAG, S. » .
1963 “Review of Structural Anthropology, by Claude Lévi-Strauss.” New
York Review of Books, 1, No. 7, 6-8.
SOROKIN, P.
1928 Contemporary Sociological Theories. New York: Harper.
1950 Social Philosophies of an Age of Crisis. Boston: Beacon Press.
SPECK, F. C. ) )
1915 “The Family Hunting Band as the Basis of Algonkian Social Organ-
ization.” American Anthropologist, 13:289-305. o
1928 “Land Ownership among Hunting Peoples in Primitive America
and the World’s Marginal Arcas.” Rome: Proceedings of the 22d
International Congress of Americanists, 2:323-32.

752

T

Bibliography

1936 “Inland Eskimo Bands of Labrador.” R. Lowie, ed., Essays in

Anthropology. Berkeley: University of California Press, 313-30.
SPELLER, G. (ed.)

1911 Papers on Inter-Racial Problems. London: P. S. King and Son.
SPENCER, H.
18522 “A Theory of Population, Deduced from the General Laws of
Animal Fertility.” Westminster Review, 57:468-501.
1852b “The Development Hypothesis.” The Leader, vol. 3.
1857 “Progress: Its Laws and Causes.” Westminster Review, 67:445-85.
1859 “What Knowledge Is of Most Worth?” Westminster Review, 72:1-
41.
1860 “The Social Organism.” Westminster Review, 17:90-121.
1866 (orig. 1864) Principles of Biology. New York: D. Appleton.
1871 (orig. 1855) Synthetic Philosophy; Principles of Psychology. New
York: D. Appleton.

1873 The Study of Sociology. New York: D. Appleton.

;zz;} Descriptive Sociology. New York: D. Appleton.
bl

1883 (orig. 1850) Social Statics. New York: D. Appleton.

1896 (orig. 1876) Principles of Sociology. New York: D. Appleton.

1912 (orig. 1864) First Principles. 6th ed. New York: D. Appleton.
1926 An Autobiography. London: Watts.

SPINDEN, H. J.
1927 “The Prosaic vs. the Romantic School in Anthropology.” E. Smith,
ed., Culture: The Diffusion Controversy. New York: Norton, 47-98.
1937 “First Peopling of America as a Chronological Problem.” G. G.
MacCurdy, ed., Early Man. London: Lippincott, 105-14.
SPINOZA, B.
1934 (orig. 1632) Ethics. A. Boyle, trans. New York: Dutton.
SPIRO, M. (ed.)

1965 IC)Zontext and Meaning in Cultural Anthropology. New York: Free
ress.

SPOEHR, A.
1947 Changing Kinship Systems. Anthropological Series. Chicago Natu-
ral History Museum, 33.
STANTON, W.

1960 The Leopard’s Spots. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
STARCKE, C. N.

1901 (orig. 1889) The Primitive Family in Its Origins and Development.
New York: D. Appleton.

STEINMET?, S. R.

1894 Ethnologische Studien zur ersten Entwicklung der Strafe. Leiden:
S. C. Van Doesburgh.

1930 Classification des Types Sociaux et Catalogue des Peuples. Gesam-

753

i
|
i


===== PAGE 382 =====

Bibliography

melte kleinere Schriften zur Ethnologie und Soziologie, vol. II.
Groningen: P. Noordhoff, g6-210.
STENNING, D.
1959 Savannah Nomads. London: Oxford University Press.
STERN, B. J.
1931 Lewis Henry Morgan. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1948 “Engels on the Family.” Science and Society, 12:42-64.
STERN, F. (ed.)

1956 The Varieties of History, Voltaire to the Present. New York:

Meridian Books, World Publishing.
STEVENSON, R. F.

1965 “Population Density and State Formation in Sub-Saharan Africa.”

Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Columbia University.
STEWARD, J.

1929 “Diffusion and Independent Invention: A Critique of Logic.”
American Anthropologist, 31:491-95.

1936 “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands.” R. Lowie,
ed., Essays in Anthropology Presented to A. L. Kroeber. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 331-45.

1937 “Ecological Aspects of Southwestern Society.” Anthropos, 32:87-
104.

1938 Baﬁin—Pldtcau Aboriginal - Sociopolitical Groups. Washington:
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. 120.

1946-] Handbook of the South American Indians. Washington: Bureau

1950 }of American Ethnology, Bull. 143. 6 vols.

1948 “A Functional Developmental Classification of American High Cul-
tures.” W. Bennett, ed., A Reappraisal of Peruvian Archaeology.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, 103-4.

1949a “The Native Populations of South America.” J. Steward, ed., Hand-
book of the South American Indians. Washington: Bureau of
American Ethnology. Bull. 143. Vol. 5:655-88.

1949b “Cultural Causality and Law; A Trial Formulation of Early Civiliza-
tion.” American Anthropologist, 51:1-27.

1955 Theory of Culture Change. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

1956 “Cultural Evolution.” Scientific American, 194:69-8o.

1960 “Review of White’s The Evolution of Culture.” American Anthro-
pologist, 62:144-48.

1961 “Alfred Louis Kroeber 1876-1960.”
63:1038-60.

1965 “Some Problems Raised by Roger C. Owen’s The Patrilocal Band.”
American Anthropologist, 67:732-34.

1967 “Comment on K. C. Chang, Major Aspects of the Interrelationship
of Archacology and Ethnology.” Current Anthropology, 8:239-40.

STEWARD, J.and F. SELTZER
1938 “Function and Configuration in Archacology.” American Antiquity,

4:4-10.

American  Anthropologist,

754

*

Bibliography

STEWARD, J. and D. SHIMKIN
1962 “Some Mechanism of Sociocultural Evolution.” H. Hoagland and
R. Burhoe, eds., Evolution and Man’s Progress. New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 67-87.
STOCKING, G.
1960 “Franz Boas and the Founding of the American Anthropological
Association.” American Anthropologist, 62:1-17.
1964 “French Anthropology in 1800.” Isis, 55:134-50.
1965a “From Physics to Ethnology: Franz Boas’ Arctic Expedition as a
Problem in the Historiography of the Bchavioral Sciences.” Journal
of the History of the Behavioral Sciences,” 1:53-66.
1965b “On the Limits of Presentism and Historicism in the Historiog-
raphy of the Behavioral Sciences.” Journal of the History of the
Behavioral Sciences, 1:211-17.
1965¢ “Cultural Darwinism and Philosophical Idealism in E. B. Tylor:
A Special Plea for Historicism in the History of Anthropology.”
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 21:130-48.
STOETZEL, J.
1955 Without Chrysanthemum and Sword: A Study of the Attitudes of
Youth in Postwar Japan. New York: Columbia University Press.
STOLPE, H.
1891 Evolution in the Ornamental Art of Savage Peoples. H. C. Cooley,

trans., Rochdale: Transactions of the Rochdale Literary and
Scientific Society.

STRONG, W. D.
1936 “Anthropological Theory and Archacological Fact.” R. Lowie, ed.,
Essays in Anthropology Presented to A. L. Kroeber. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 359-70.
STRONG, W. D., W. E. SCHENCK, and J. STEWARD
1930 “Archaeology of the Dallas-Deschutes Region.” University of Cal-
ifornia Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, 29:1-
154.
STURTEVANT, W.
1964 “Studies in Ethnoscience.”
2:99-131.
SUMNER, W. G. and A. KELLER
1927 The Science of Society. New Haven: Yale University Press.
SUTTLES, W.
1959 “Cultural Relativism, Cultural Evolution, and Popular Ideology.”
Western Humanities Review, 13:311-19.
1960 “Affinal Ties, Subsistence and Prestige among the Coast Salish.”
American Anthropologist, 62:296-30.
SWANSON, G. E.

1960 The Birth of the Gods. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.

American  Anthropologist, 66, part

755



===== PAGE 383 =====

Bibliography

SWANTON, J. R.
1904 “The Development of the Clan System and of Secret Societies
among the Northwestern Tribes.” American Anthropologist, 6:477-
8s.
1905 “T?xe Social Organization of American Tribes.” American An-
thropologist, 7:663-73.

1906a “Review of Frazer’s Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship.”
American Anthropologist, 8:157-60.

1906b “Review of Lang's The Secret Totem.” American Anthropologist,
8:160-65.

1908 “Review 5of Webster’s Primitive Secret Societies.” American An-
thropologist, 10:457-59.
1917 “Some Anthropological Misconceptions.” American Anthropologist,
19:459-7°-
SWEET, L.
1966 “Comment on ‘Ethnographic Semantics’ by B. N. Colby.” Current
Anthropology, 7:24-25.
TACITUS
1948 (orig. a.p. 98) Tacitus on Britain and Germany. London: Pen-
guin.

TAMBIAH, S. J.

1965 “Kinship Fact and Fiction in Relation to the Kandyan Sinhalese.”
Journdl of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 95:131-73.

TAX, S.

19552 “Some Problems of Social Organization.” . Eggan, ed., Social An-
thropology of North American Tribes. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 3-32.

1955b “From Lafitau to Radcliffe-Brown: A Short History of the Study
of Social Organization.” F. Eggan, ed., Social Anthropology of
North American Tribes. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
445-81.

1964 (ed.) Horizons of Anthropology. Chicago: Aldine.

TAYLOR, S.

1956 Conceptions and the Theory of Knowledge. New Haven: Book-
man Associates.

TAYLOR, W. C.

1840 The Natural History of Society. The Barbarian and Civilized
State. London: Orme, Brown. 2 vols.
TEGGART, F
1916 “Prolegomena to History.” University of California Publications in
History, 4:156-29z2.
1941 Theory and Processes of History. Berkeley: University of Cal-
ifornia Press.
TEXTOR, R. B.

1966 A Cross-Cultural Summary. New Haven: Human Relations Area
Files.

756

e

Bibliography

THOMAS, F.
1925 The Environmental Basis of Society: A Study in the History of
Sociological Theory. New York: Century.
THOMAS, N.
1916 Law and Custom of the Timne and Other Tribes. London: Har-
rison.
THOMAS, W. (ed.)
1955 Yearbook of Anthropology. New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation.
THOMAS, W. I
1909 “The Mind of the Savage.” W. I. Thomas, ed., Sourcebook in So-
cial Origins. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 155-73.
THOMSEN, C. J.
1848 (orig. 1836) A Guide to Northern Antiquities. London.
THORNER, D.
1966 “Marx on India and the Asiatic Mode of Production.” Contribution
to Indian Sociology, 9:3-66.
THURNWALD, R.
1936 “Review of Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies,”
by Margaret Mead. American Anthropologist, 38:558-61.
TIJM, J.
1933 Die Stellung der Frau bei den Indianern der Vereinigten Staaten
und Canadd’s. Zatphen: W. J. Thieme.
TIMASHEFF, N. S.
1955 Sociological Theory. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.
TINKER, C. B.
1922 Nature's Simple Plan. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
TODOROV, T.
1965 “L’Héritage Méthodologique du Formalisme.” L’Homme, 5:64-83.
TOKEI, F.
1964 “Le Mode de Production Asiatique dans I’Oeuvre de K. Marx et F.
Engels.” La Pensée, 114:7-32.
TOLSTOY, P.
1952 “Morgan and Soviet Anthropological Thought.” American An-
thropologist, 54:8-17.
TOPINARD, P.
1885 Eléments d’Anthropologie Générale. Paris: Delahaye et Lecros-
nicr.
TOURNAL, M.
1959 (orig. 1833) “General Considerations Concerning the Phenomena
of the Bone-Bearing Caves.” Translated in Kroeber Anthropolog-
ical Society Papers, 21:6-16.
TOZZER, H. F.
1964 A History of Ancient Geography. New York: Biblo and Tannen.
TROTTER, W.
1916 Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War. New York: Macmillan.

757


===== PAGE 384 =====

Bibliography

TRUBETZKOY, N.

1933 Le Phonologie Actuelle. Psychologie du Langue. Paris: Librairie F.
Alcan.

TRUMBULL, H. C.

1898 (orig. 1887) Blood Covenant, A Primitive Rite and Its Bearing on

Scripture. Philadelphia: John D. Wattles.
TURGOT, A. R. J.

1844 (orig. 1750) Plan de Deux Discours sur I'Histoire Universelle.
Oecuvres de Turgot. Paris: Guillaumin.

1895 Life and Writings. W. W. Stephens, trans. and ed. London:
Longmans, Green.

TYLOR, E. B.

1861 Anahuac or Mexico and the Mexicans, Ancient and Modern.
London: Longmans, Green, Longman, and Roberts.

1865 Researches into the Early History of Mankind and the Develop-
ment of Civilization. London: J. Murray.

1871 Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of Mythology,
Philosophy, Religion, Language, Art and Custom. London: J.
Murray.

1878 “Anthropology.” Encyclopaedia Britannica, gth ed., 2:107-23.

1889 “On a Method of Investigating the Development of Institutions;
Applied to Laws of Marriage and Descent.” Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute, 18:245-69.

1899 (orig. 1881) Anthropology: An Introduction to the Study of Man
and Civilization. New York: D. Appleton.

1905 “Obituary: Adolf Bastian.” Man, 5:138-43.

1958 (orig. 1871) Primitive Culture. New York: Harper Torchbooks.

UNESCO

1961 The Race Question in Modern Science. New York: Columbia

University Press.
VAN AMRINCE, W. F.

1848 An Investigation of the Theories of the Natural History of Man.

New York: Baker and Scribner.
VAN DER BIJ, T. S.

1929 Ontstaan en Eerste Ontwikkeling van de Oorlog. Groningen: Wol-

ters.
VAN GENNEP, A.

1910 “Une Ethnographe Oublié du XVIIIe Siécle: J. N. Demeunier.

Revue des Idées, 7:18-28.
VARTANIAN, A. (ed.)

1960 La Mettrie’s L'Homme Machine: A Study in the Origins of an

Idea. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
VAYDA, A.

1956 “Maori Conquests in Relation to the New Zealand Environment.”

Journal of the Polynesian Socicty, 65:204-11.

758

T

Bibliography

1960 “Maori Warfare.” Polynesian Society Maori Monographs, No. 2.
Wellington: Polynesian Society.
1961a “Maori Prisoners and Slaves in the Nineteenth Century.” Ethno-
history, 8:144-55.
1961b “Expansion and Warfare among Swidden Agriculturists.” American
Anthropologist, 63:346-58.
1961¢ “A Re-examination of Northwest Coast Economic Systems.”
Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences. Ser. 2, Vol.
23, No. 7: 618-24.
VAYDA, A., A. LEEDS, and D. SMITH
1961 “The Place of Pigs in Melanesian Subsistence.” Proceedings of the
1961 Annual Spring Meeting of the American Ethnological Society.
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 69-77.
VICO, G.
1948 (orig. 1725) The New Science. T. G. Bergin and M. H. Fisch,
trans. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
VIDICH, A. and J. BENSMAN
1958 Small Town in Mass Society. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
VIREY, J.
1837 Natural History of the Negro Race. Charleston, South Carolina.
VITRUVIUS
1914 The Ten Books on Architecture. M. Morgan, trans. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
VOEGELIN, C.
1965 “Sociolinguistics, Ethnolinguistics and Anthropological Linguistics.”
American Anthropologist, 67:484-85.
VOGET, F. W.
1960 “Man and Culture: An Essay in Changing Anthropological Inter-
pretation.” American Anthropologist, 62:943-65.
VOLTAIRE
1829 (orig. 1745) Essai sur les Moeurs et I'Esprit des Nations. Paris:
Chez Werdet et Lequien Fils.
WAFER, L.
1934 (orig. 1699) A New Voyage and Description of the Isthmus of
America. Oxford: Hakluyt Society.
WAGLEY, C.
1965 (orig. 1958) “On the Concept of Social Race in the Americas.”
D. Heath and R. Adams, cds., Contemporary Cultures and So-
cieties of Latin America. New York: Random House, 531-45.
WAGLEY, C. and M. HARRIS
1958 Minorities in the New World. New York: Columbia University
Press.
WAISSMAN, F.

1959 “The Decline and Fall of Causality.” A. C. Crombie, ed., Turning
759

|
|
r
[
i
i
E
i
|


===== PAGE 385 =====

Bibliography

Points in Physics. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co.,
84-154.
WAITZ, T.

1859 Anthropologie der Naturvélker. Leipzig: G. Gerland.

1863 Introduction to Anthropology. ]. F. Collingwood, trans. London:
Longmans, Green, Longman, and Roberts.

WAKE, C. S.

1967 Primitive Marriage. R. Needham, ed. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press.
WALLACE, A. F. C.

1952 “The Modal Personality of the Tuscarora Indians as Revealed by
the Rorschach Test.” Washington: Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bull. 150.

1961 “Mental Illness, Biology and Culture.” F. Hsu, ed., Psychological
Anthropology: Approaches to Culture and Personality. Homewood,
IIL.: Dorsey Press, 255-94.

1962 “The New Culture-and-Personality.” T. Gladwin and W. Sturte-
vant, eds., Anthropology and Human Behavior. Washington: An-
thropological Society of Washington, 1-12.

1965 “The Problem of the Psychological Validity of Componential
Analysis.” American Anthropologist, 67, part 2:229-48.

1966 Religion, An Anthropological View. New York: Random House.

WALLACE, A. F. C. and J. ATKINS
1960 “The Meaning of Kinship Terms.” American Anthropologist, 62:
58-80.
WALLACE, A. R.
1905 My Life. London: Chapman and Hall.
WALLACE, S. E.
1965 Skid Row as a Way of Life. Totowa, N. J.: Bedminster Press.
WALLIS, W.

1930 Culture and Progress. New York: McGraw-Hill.

1957 “Anthropology in England Farly in the Present Century.” American
Anthropologist, 59:781-go.

WARD, B.

1965 “Varicties of the Conscious Model: The Fishermen of South
China.” The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology. A.S.A.
Monograph 1. London: Tavistock Publications: 113-38.

WARD, L.

1904 “Review of Where Did Life Begin? by G. H. Scribner.” American
Anthropologist, 6:1 51-52.

1905 “Relation of Sociology to Anthropology.” American Anthropologist,
8:241-56.

WASHBURN, S.

1951 “The New Physical Anthropology.” Transactions of the New York

Academy of Sciences, 13:298-304.

760

Bibliography

1963 “The Study of Race.” American Anthropologist, 65:521-31.
WATERMAN, T. T.

1917 “Bandelier’s Contribution to the Study of Ancient Mexico.” Uni-
versity of California Publications in Archacology and Ethnology,
12:249-83.

WAX, M.

1956 “The Limitations of Boas’ Anthropology.” American Anthropologist,

58:63-74.
WEDGWOOD, C.

1934 “Introduction.” A. B. Deacon, Malekula: A Vanishing People in

the New Hebrides. London: George Routledge, xxxi-xxxviii.
WEINBERG, C. B.
1937 “Mach’s Empirio-Pragmatism in Physical Science.” Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation. Columbia University.
WEINER, P. and A. NOLAND, (eds.)
1957 Roots of Scientific Thought. New York: Basic Books.
WELLS, W. C.

1818 An Account of a Female of the White Race of Mankind, Part of
Whose Skin Resembles That of a Negro: With Some Observations
on the Causes of the Differences in Color and Form between the
White and Negro Races of Men Appended to Two Essays: One
Upon Single Vision with Two Eyes and the Other on Dew.
London: A. Constable.

WESTERMARCK, E.

1894 (orig. 1891) The History of Human Marriage. New York: Mac-

millan.
WHATELY, R.

1855 On the Origin of Civilization. London: Young Men’s Christian
Association.

1861 Miscellaneous Lectures and Reviews. London: British Museum.

WHITE, C.

1799 An Account of the Regular Gradation in Man, and in Different
Animals and Vegetables; and from the Former to the Latter. Lon-
don: C. Dilly.

WHITE, LESLIE

1925 “Personality and Culture.” The Open Court, 39:145-49.

1939 “A Problem in Kinship Terminology.” American Anthropologist,
41:566-73.

1940 Pioneers in American Anthropology: The Bandelier-Morgan Letters,
1873-1883. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

1942 The Pueblo of Santa Ana, New Mexico. American Anthropological
Association. Memoir 6o.

1943 “Energy and the Evolution of Culturc.” American Anthropologist,
45:335-56. )

1945 “Diffusion Versus Evolution: An Anti-evolutionist Fallacy.” Ameri-
can Anthropologist, 47:339-56.

761



===== PAGE 386 =====

Bibliography

1947a “The Expansion of the Scope of Science.” Journal of the Wash-
ington Academy of Sciences, 37:181-210.
/1947b “Evolutionism in Cultural Anthropology: A Rejoinder.” American
Anthropologist, 49:400-11.
1949a The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
1949b “Ethnological Theory.” R. W. Sellars, cd., Philosophy for the Fu-
ture: The Quest of Modern Materialism. New York: Macmillan,
-84.

1957 “}glsezie?v of Steward’s Theory of Culture Change.” American An-
thropologist, 59:540-42.

1958 “What Is a Classificatory Kinship Term?” Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology, 14:378-85.

1959a “The Concept of Evolution in Cultural Anthropology.” B. Meggers,
ed., Evolution and Anthropology. Washington: The Anthropologi-
cal Society of Washington, 106-25.
v1959b  The Evolution of Culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.

1963 The Iithnology and Ethnography of Franz Boas. Austin: Bulletin
of the Texas Memorial Museum, no. 6.

1966 “The Social Organization of Ethnological Theory.” Rice University
Studies, 52:1-66.

WHITE, LYNN
1962 Medieval Technology and Social Change. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
WHITING, J.

1941 Becoming a Kwoma: Teaching and Learning in a New Guinea
Tribe. New Haven: Yale University Press.

1961 “Socialization Process and Personality.” F. Hsu, ed., Psychological
Anthropology: Approaches to Culture and Personality. Homewood,
I1L.: Dorsey Press, 355-80.

1964 “Effects of Climate on Certain Cultural Practices.” W. Good-
enough, ed., Exploration in Cultural Anthropology. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 511-44.

WHITING, J. and 1. CHILD

1953 Child Training and Persondlity: A Cross-Culturdl Study. New

Haven: Yale University Press.
WHITING, J., C. KLUCKHOHN, and A. ANTHONY

1958 “The Function of Male Initiation Ceremonies at Puberty.” E.
Macoby, T. M. Newcomb, and E. L. Hartley, eds., Readings in
Social Psychology. New York: Holt, 359-70.

WILDER, W.

1964 “Confusion versus Classification in the Study of Purum Society.”

American Anthropologist, 66:1 365-71.
WILKINSON, SIR J. G.

1878 The Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians. New York:
Scribner and Welford.

762

T

Bibliography

WILLEY, G.
1953 “Archaceological Theories and Interpretation: New World.” A.
Kroeber, ed., Anthropology Today. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 361-85.
WILLIAMS, ELGIN
1947 “Anthropology for the Common Man.” American Anthropologist,
49:84-89.
WILLIAMS, ERIC
1944 Capitalism & Slavery. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press.

WILLIAMS, J. L.
1936 “Boas and American Ethnologists.” Thought, 11:194-209.
WILLIAMS, R.
1958 Culture and Society: 1780-1950. New York: Columbia University
Press.
WILSON, G. and M. HUNTER
1939 “The Study of African Society.” Rhodes-Livingstone Institute.
Rhodes-Livingstone Papers 2.
1945 The Anadlysis of Social Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
WISSLER, C.
1913 “Doctrine of Evolution and Anthropology.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 15:355-56.
1917 The American Indian; An Introduction to the Anthropology of the
New World. New York: D. C. McMurtrie.
1923 Man and Culture. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
1926 The Relation of Nature to Man in Aboriginal America. New York:
Oxford University Press.
1929 An Introduction to Social Anthropology. New York: Holt.
1933 “The American Aborigines.” Unpublished Collected Writings.

WITTFOGEL, K.

1929 “Geopolitik, geographischer Materialismus and Marxismus.” Unter
dem Banner der Marxismus, 3:17-51;485-522;698-735.

1931 Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Chinas. Leipzig: C. L. Hirschfeld.

1935 “The Foundations and Stages of Chinese Fconomic History.”
Zeitschrift fiir sozial Forschung (Paris), 4:26-60.

1938 “Die Theorie der Orientalischen Gesellschaft.” Zeitschrift fiir
sozial Forschung (Paris), 7:90-122.

1953 “The Ruling Bureaucracy of Oriental Despotism: A Phenomenon
that Paralyzed Marx.” The Review of Politics, 15:350-59.

1957 Oriental Despotism. New Haven: Yale University Press.

1960 “A Stronger Oriental Despotism.” China Quarterly, 1-6.

1964 “Ideas and the Power Structure.” W. T. de Bary and A. T. Embree,

763



===== PAGE 387 =====

Bibliography

eds., Approaches to Asian Civilizations. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 86-97.
WITTKOWER, E. D. and J. FRIED (eds.)
1963 Transcultural Psychiatric Research. Montreal: McGill University
Press.
WOLF, A.
1966 “Childhood Association, Sexual Attraction, and the Incest Taboo:
A Chinese Case.” American Anthropologist, 68:883-g8.
WOLF, E.
1957 “Closed Corporate Peasant Communities in Mesoamerica and
Central Java.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 1-18.
1959 Sons of the Shaking Earth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1960 “Review of White’s The Science of Culture.” American Anthropolo-
gist, 62:148-51.
1966  Peasants. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
WooD, J. ¢.

:ggg} Natural History of Man. London: George Routledge.

WORSAAE, J. J. A.
1849 The Primeval Antiquities of Denmark. W. J. Thoms, trans.
London.
WORSELEY, P.M.
1956 “The Kinship System of the Tallensi: A Revaluation.” Journal of
the Royal Anthropological Institute, 86:37-77.
1957 The Trumpet Shall Sound: A Study of ‘Cargo’ Cults in Melanesia.
London: MacGibbon and Kee.
1961 “The Analysis of Rebellion and Revolution in British Social An-
thropology.” Science and Society, 21:26-37.
ZANNOLL, V.
1910 Le T¢orie da A. Bastian e I'Etnologia Moderna. Padova: Accademia
Scientifica Veneto-Trentino-Istriana.
ZETTERBERG, H.
1965 On Theory and Verification in Sociology. Totowa, N. J.: The Bed-
minster Press.
ZHUKOV, E.
1960 “The Periodization of World History.” Rapporte, 1:74-88. Stock-
holm: International Historical Congress.
ZIPF, G. K.
1935 The Psycho-Biology of Language; An Introduction of Dynamic
Philology. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
ZIRKLE, C.
1959 Evolution, Marxian Biology and the Social Sciences. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.

764

Index

Aberle, D., 459
Account of the Abipones (Dobrizhoffer),
1
Account (An) of the Regular Gradation
in Man (White), 89
Ackerman, Charles, on Purum marriage
exchange, 508—9
Adams, Robert, on Meso-American and
Mesopotamian  civilization, 686~
8
adnpta’{ions
in cultural vs. biological evolution,
156
effects of, 652
Steward on, 652-53
aesthetic judgments of progress, 37-38
Africa, social organization in, 537-38,
| 557258, 559, 561
African Systems of Kinship and Mar-
riage (Radcliffe-Brown, ed.), 516~
17, 537, 539 B
Agassiz, Louis, racial theories, 91
agriculture
Comte on, 66
Mill on, 72, 73

S

Agrippa, Henry, stereotypes of, 399—
400
Algonkian land tenure, 357, 358-59
Aliotta, A., 271, 296-97
Alorese, studies of, 440, 460
ambiguities
in _ethnosemantic domains, 582-85
in kinship terminology, 585-88, 589
American Anthropological Association,
251, 2
Amzric)‘an Asnthropologis! (journal), 251
American Ethnological Society, 231,
257
American Folk-Lore Society, 251
Ancient Law (Maine), 143, 189, 190
Ancient Society (Morgan), 137, 189
critique of, 202
cultural materialism and, 213-14
effects, on Marx and Engels, 246-48
Lowie’s critique, 347-51
“animatism” of Marett, 205
animism, 65; of Tylor, 202, 207 .
Ankerman B., culture circle theories,
382 . .
Année (L) Sociologique (journal), 482

765

!
}
{
!
i
§
i
|
i
|
i



===== PAGE 388 =====

Index

Anthropological Review (journal), 100,
101

Anthropological Society of London,
100

Anthropologie der Naturvélker (Waitz),
102

Anthropologist (An) Looks at History
(Kroeber), 334
anthropology
American  School: polygenesis and,
90-91; slavery and, 91-93
“bohemianism” of, 431
continuity in, 142-43
cultural materialism strategy and,
67.
CVOl\!(iO‘t‘liStS’ contribution to, 170
Freudian critique in, 42627
Freudianism reconciled with, 430-35
heritage of, 59798
Marxism and, 228-29, 245-46, 249,
467
psychocultural analyses and, 448
racist and antiracist views, 100—1
research techniques, 674
Spencerism and, 296, 28
standards of Boas’ contemporaries,
253-57
see also ethnography; and under spe-
cific topic
Anthropology (Tylor), 140
anthropomorphism, 201
Anthropos (journal), 383
antievolutionism
of Boas, 259-60
of Boasians, 291-92, 293, 294, 295~
96, 392
of culture-circle school, 392
evolutionism vs., 29294
‘White on American, 291
antimaterialism, positivism and, 64
Antiquity of Man (Lyell), 147
antiscientism
historical particularism and, 29394
post-Napoleonic era, 55-59
of Schmidt, 391
Apollonian categories of Benedict, 398,
401, 402, 405
Arbuthnot, John, geographical deter-
minism of, 42

archaeology
advances in, 674
in Boasian period, 676-78
cu]lugal materialism and, 675, 679~
1
data: continuity of, 148—49; limita-
tions of, 149-50

archaeology (cont.)
ethnology and, 685
ethnosemantics and, 603—4
evolutionism and, 147-48
importance of, 145-46
metallurgy research, 146
Neolithic discovery, 14647
new techniques in, 677-7:
research needs in, 684-85
Steward and, 669, 683-84
Argonauts, The (Malinowski), 562-67
Armillas, Pedro, 682
art
Boas’ study, 284; Kroeber on, 276
Kroeber on, 320
Ashley Montagu, M. F., see Montagu,
Ashley
astronomy, comparative method in,
1c
athclsr;, Lubbock on, 200, 211

Atkins, J., 587

Audubon, John, 91
Australian family
Malinowski’s study, 547
Radcliffe-Brown’s study, 533
authority
kinship system and, 196
of state, 126, 468-69
territoriality principle and, 187-88
autoanalysis, role of, 234-35
Aztecs, civilization of, 685-86

Bachman, John, on slavery, 91-92
Bachofen, Johann J.
cultural evolutionary theories, 143,
188-89, 200
Engels and, 247
on evolution of religion, 200
on gynocracy, 189
on matriarchy and matrilineality, 143
Morgan and, 189
mother-right, 143, 188-89, 196
Back, K., 585
Bacon, Francis, 287
Bacon, M. K., 460
Baffin Island, Boas’ Eskimo study, 264,
265
Bagby, P.
on Kroeber, 33-34
on reality of cultural things, 33-34
Balinese Character (Mead), 434-35
bands, Steward’s study of primitive,
666-69
Bames, H. E,, 55, 639, 640

Bames, . A, 94, 547
766

7

Index

Barnouw, Victor
on Benedict’s work, 405, 406
on Boas’ data, 31
on Malinowski’s fieldwork, 548
on psychocultural approach, 410
on Whiting and Child’s demonstra-
tion, 452
Barry, H., 460
Bastian, Adolf
Boas and, 265
cultural idealism of, 137
evolutionism of, 17
on invention, 174
Ratzel on, 382
Réheim on, 430
Bateson, Gregory, 415; method of,
417, 418
Bathonga
joking relationship, 527-30
kinship terminology, 593; ambiguities

in, 585-86
rules among, as etic phenomena,
601—2
Beattie, John, on kinship terminology,
578-79
behavior
actual verbal, emics and, 580-82,
589

behavioremes, 570

Durkheim on individual, 472

emic vs. etic approach, 574-75, 580—
82, 58992

environmental interpretation of, 12
83

ideal vs. actual, 580-82

inheritance of, 130-32

Locke on, 10-12

Mead'’s study of sexual, 413-14

Morgan on race and, 138-39

natural law and, 18-25

nonverbal, emics and, 570, 589-92

predictability of, Quételet on, 74-75,

6

3

role in scientific racism, 81
Turgot on differences in, 14-15
see also customs
behavior science, D’Holbach on, 23-24
Benedict, Ruth
Boas and: on Boas’ Eskimo study,
267; Boas’ failure to correct,
310, 311; relations between,
253, 402, 40
Colby 0311,4;74 43
configurationist approach, 398, 402,
403, 423
contribution of, 403, 409-11

Benedict, Ruth (cont.)

on culture patterns, 335, 336~37
diffusionism of, 402, 403
Digger Indian myth, 313, 403
image of, 404
influences on, 398-99, 401, 402
on Japanese, 444
on Kroeber, 332, 404
Kwakiutl work, 404-5, 406, 407
Lowie and, 401
Mead and, 408, 409, 413-14
Murdock on, 617-18
national character studies, 418, 444
psychocultural approach, 307, 398,
401, 415; ethnographic errors,
404—7; individual deviancy and,
403-4
Sapir and, 403, 404
Southwest Indian work, 405-6, 407
training, 401
‘White on, 294
Bentham, Jeremy, 54; tradition of, 101
Bergmann, Carl, 85-86
Bergmann’s Rule, 85-86
Bergson, Henri, 294
Berreman, Gerald, 577; on ethnoseman-
tics, 591
Bettelheim, Bruno, 427
Bible, The
evolutionary doctrine in, 25-26
geologic theory and, 109-11
Bidney, David, 321
on culture and freedom, 300
on Kroeber, 332
biology, comparative method in, 152
Birdwhistell, Ray, 573
Birth (The) of Tragedy (Nietzsche),
398-99
Bloch, Joseph, 244
Blumenbach, Johann, racial doctrines
of, 84, 85, 95, 98
Boas, Franz, 15, 250-89
on aims of ethnology, 274, 275, 277—
78, 280
as antievolutionist, 259-60, 29192,
293, 294, 205-90
Baffin Island study, 264-66
basic philosophic errors, 286-8¢
Benedict and, 253, 310, 311, 402,
403
Brinton and, 256
on comparative method, 256, 258—
59, 615, 616-17; objectives in
reform, 278
determinism of, 283-84
on diffusion, 258, 260

767

|
|



===== PAGE 389 =====

Index

Boas, Franz (cont.)

Dilthey and, 268-69

eclecticism of, 284-85

on economic determinism, 279-8o

environmentalism of, g9

ethnographic studies, 301-18

on evolutionists, 177

followers, 250-51

on Freud, 426

generalizations of, 278, 282-83

on geographical determinism, 265-
66, 283-84

on geography as discipline, 262

geography work, 264, 265-67, 274

on history, approach to, 275-82, 321

image of, 252-53; Benedict’s errors
and, 310,

importance and influence, 250, 251—
53, 257, 261-62, 284-85

on kinship groups, 284

on knowledge, 269

Kroeber and, 252, 253, 266, 275-
76, 282, 321, 411

Kwakiutl study, 302-5; potlatch,
306-8; social organization, 170

liberalism of, 29192, 297

Lowie and, 253, 286, 310, 315, 347,
520

Mead and, 252, 286, 316-17, 408,

11

methzd of, 278, 394; Boas on, 276~
77; eclecticism in, 284-8s;
emics and, 316-17, 318; eth-
nographic data, 314-15, 316-17,
318; evaluation of fieldwork,
301-2; generalizations in, 278,
282-83; philosophic errors in,
286-89; purtanism and, 260—
63; systematization in, 285-86

Murdock and, 315, 607

1eo-Kantian influences on, 263-64,
267-71

origin of discipline, 263-66, 272—75

on parallel vs. convergent evolution,
258-59, 260, 278-79, 280, 292,
295, 296

on personality and culture, 280-81

philosophical paradox of, 262

on physicalism, 261-63

on race, 292, 297, 298, 470

scholarship standards, 259, 260-61,
262-63

on sequential elements, 322

on sociocultural laws, 274, 275, 277—
82

standards of contemporaries, 253-57

Boas, Franz (cont.)

on superorganic, 329—30

systematization by, 285-86

on Virchow, 257, 265

‘Waitz and, 102

see also Boasians; historical particu-
larism

Boasians

as antievolutionists, 291-92, 293,
294, 20596, 392

archacology and, 676—78

Boas’ image for, 252-53

as configurationists, 407

convergent evolutionist position, 176—
77

critiques of comparative method, 155

on cross-cultural similarities, 384

cultural milieu of movement, 295,

20—-21

on culture and freedom, 299-300

described, 250-51

on diffusionism, 379

on economic factors, 475

evolutionism of, 176-77, 292, 2965_,
296, 525, 526, 553, 641, 65
57; convergent position, 176-77;
diffusionism and, 379

Freudianism and, 393, 425, 426, 427,

431, 43435

functionalism of, 519, 520, 521, 522
Lowie on, , 348, 302, 392
Murdock 0?1‘,‘760374 303
neo-Kantians and, 398
on New World civilizations, 676—77
on racism, 296
relativism of, 163
Réheim on, 428-29
on sociocultural laws, 519, 520, 522
on technology, 232
‘White on, 348, 362, 392, 639—40
see also historical particularism; and
under specific individual
Bodin, Jean, geographical determinism
of, 42
body mo‘tions in communication, 573
Boemus, Johann, stercotypes of,” 399,
400
Bopp, Franz, 153
borrowing
invention vs., 173
Morgan on, 177
Bottomore, T. B.
on functionalism, 531
on Marx, 218
Boucher de Perthes, J., 147
Boulainvilliers, 15

768

T

Index

Brinton, Daniel G., importance of,
255-57
Bruzelius, M., 144, 146
Buckland, William, 111
Buckle, Henry Thomas, 36, 59, 7678
Boas and, 265
geographical determinism of, 77-78
on history, 76~77
on racism, 77-78
Buettner-Janusch, J., 362
Buffon, Georges, Comte de, 84, 83, 86
on geologic time, 86, 110
racial theories, 84, 95, 98
Bukharin, Nikolai, 637, 639
Bunzel, Ruth
White on, 294
on Zuiii, 405
Burnett, James, see Monboddo, Lord
Burrow, J. W.
on comparative method, 152
on Maine, 190
Buttekofer, 254

Campbell, Donald, on Whiting, 452—
53
Camper, Petrus, on monogenesis, 84
Candide (Voltaire), 21
capitalism
maintenance of, 108
Marxian analysis, 230, 241, 565
Marxism on transition to, 233
Spencer on, 125, 136
welfare, in United States, 29798
Carlyle, Thomas, racial theories, 98
Carneiro, Robert, 128; on Spencer, 173,
21
Cartesmsnism, 49293
caste, see social class; social organization
“catastrophism” doctrine, 111
causality
associational relations and, 620-24
cross-cultural correlations and, 658
eighteenth-century theories, 38-52
evolution and, 424-25, 646, 657-58
in Freudianism, 425, 433
Gorer on, 446
ideology and, Durkheim on, 479-80
Kroeber on, 336-37
in Marxism, 231-32, 233-35, 236
Mead on, 434-35
parallel sequences and, 657-58
i psychocultural analyses, 44142,
453-56, 462-63
Qudtelet on, 76
statistical demonstration of, 618, 619,
620-21

causality (cont.)
Steward on, 337; culture core and,
660-62; in social organization,
666, 667~68
time relationship and, 621
White on, 636-37, 638, 657
see also determinism
Central (The) Eskimo (Boas), 266, 276
cephalic index, use of, g9
Chagnon, Napoleon, 197
Chateaubriand, Frangois René de, 55
Child, I. L., 460; casual chain of, 450
Childe, V. Gordon
on diffusion vs. parallel evolution,
681, 683
evolutionism of, 643, 644, 647, 681—
83
on irrigation in Mesopotamia and
Egypt, 681-82
Marxism and, 681
Morgan and, 644
Chistol, Mme. de, 147
choice, see determinism; free will
Christian Evidences Movement, 55
chronology
Bible and theories of, 110-11
causality related to, 621
of monogenesists, 86
Neolithic and Paleolithic discovery
and, 146-48
New World civilizations, 678-79
perspective, in psychocultural analy-
ses, 456
Chrysanthemum (The) and the Sword
(Benedict), 444
Civilization and Its Discontents (Freud),
26
clan *
Boas on, 258
Engcls on, 247
Morgan on, 183, 186-87
see also kinship system(s); social or-
ganization
class struggle
Marx on, 476
in Marxism, 222, 223, 228
racism and, 105-6
social solidarity vs., 467-68
classes, see social class; social organiza-
tion
“Classificatory Systems of Relationship”
(Kroeber), 321
climate, see geographical determinism
Codere, Helen
on Boas’ Kwakiutl material, 314, 315,
318

769

1
i
t
I


===== PAGE 390 =====

Index

Codere, Helen (cont.)
on Boas’ writing, 261
on Kwakiutl economy, 312
on potlatch, 308, 309, 310
cognition, see thought
Cohen, Morris Raphael
on reasoning, 272
on science and history, 273
Cohn, Bernard, 584
Colby, Benjamin, on behavior analysis,
74
Cole,sFay—Cooper, 251, 639
collective representations
of Durkheim, 478, 479, 497
of Mauss, 482
see also ideas
Collingwood, R. G., 273
Collins, Paul, 423-24
colonialism
functional unity concept and, 516—
17
Malinowski on, 540
racism and, 134-36
Spencerism ang, 135-36
Combe, George, 99
Coming of Age in Samoa (Mead)
approach, 408—9
generalizations in, 410, 412-13
psychologic orientation and portraits
in, 409-13
“Common (The) Denominator of Cul-
ture” (Murdock), 624
communal ownership, see property
rights
Communism, see Marxism
Communist Manifesto (Marx and En-
gels), 225, 228
comparative method, 150-65
abandonment of, 170
abuses of, 161-62
bases of, 150-51
Boas’ critique, 256, 257-59, 278,
615, 616-17
Boasians on, 155
causality problems and, 618, 619,
620-21
critique of, 632~33
culture-circle concept and, 388
diffusion problem and, 615-16
eighteenth century, 152-53
in ethnography: errors in, 161-62;
establishment of bases, 156-61
evolutionism and, 169-71
Frazer's use, 204—5

comparative method (cont.)

functional context problem, 616-18,
629-31

in kinship terminology study, 618-
20, 621-23

Leach on, 543-44

limitations of, 156-57

limited possibilities principle, 384,
624-27, 628

of Lowie, 368

of Murdock, 629-31

nineteenth-century use, 153; signifi-
cance of, 210-11

origin of, 151-53

progress theory and, 152

of Radcliffe-Brown, 543-44

relativist critique, 163-64

revival of, 606, 607

sampling deficiencies, 632-33

Schmidt’s use of, 388

Spencer and, 159-61

statistics applied to, 158, 450-52,
612, 633

survivals and, 164-66, 168

Tylor's use of, 15758, 201-2, 612,

unilinear evolutionism and, 171-73
validity, in evolution interpretation,
15456
value of, 153-56
competition, see struggle
componential analyses, 573
Comte, Auguste, 27
Condorcet and, 63
critique of, 65-66
determinism of, 64, 65, 66
Durkheim and, 465, 466
idealism of, 64-65
importance of, 59, 60~61
on opinion ami social mechanisms,
63, 66
on origin of agriculture, 66
positivism of, 59, 60, 61-64, 473
Quételet and, 74
on racial factors, 101
rationalization of, 61-62
Saint-Simon and, 466
on social vs. natural laws, 21
on sociocultural phenomena, 62-64,
65
on wholism, 63
Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de, 236
conditioning factors, in personality de-
termination, 458-61
Condorcet, Marquis de

770

T

Index

Condorcet, Marquis de (cont.)
Comte and, 63
evolution scheme, 35
on history: mind in, 39, 40; natural
law and, 24-25
on progress, 37, 38; perfectibility and,
115, 116
racial theories, 98
conduct, see behavior
confederacies, Morgan on, 181, 182
confidence limits, see predictability
configurationalism
of Benedict, 402, 403, 423
of Boasians, 407
functionalism and, 423
homogeneity in, 414-16
of Mead, 407-8, 409
Ppattemns in, 423
Configurations of Culture Growth
(Kroeber), 330, 331, 332, 336,

338, 341
conflict

Gluckman on, 560

Malinowski on, 560, 561

structural-functionalists on, 516

see also struggle
Conklin, Harold, 580

data collection, 585

on descriptive adequacy, 572

on kinship terminology, 587-88,

592

consanguine family of Morgan, 181
consciousness, see mind
contradiction, see negation
convergence, adaptation and, 652
convergent evolution, 179

Boas on, 258-59, 260, 278

Boasians on, 292, 2935, 296

parallel evolution vs., 172, 176-77
Coon, Carlton, on racial evolution, 86,

94

Coult, Allan, on kinship, 531, 596

Count, E., 85

Cours de Philosophie Positive (Comte),
6o, 61, 64

covariance, statements of, 649-50

Crania Americana (Morton), 9o, 99

Crania Egyptica (Morton), go

craniometry, uses, 99

Crashing Thunder: The Autobiography
of a Winnebago Indian (Radin)
2

Critique (The) of Political Economy
(Marx), 225, 228, 655; “preface”
to, 229, 241

Croce, B.
on Condorcet, 25
on science and history, 273
cross-cultural studies
Boasians on, 384
causality and, 658
diffusion problem and, 615-16
etic and emic data, 577-78, 579-80
functional context problem, 61618
independent inventions and, 378
Steward, 658; primitive band study,
666-69
Cross-Cultural Survey, see Human Re-
lations Area Files
Crow kinship terminology, 183-84; eth-
nosemantic study, 592—-96
“Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial
Formulation of Early Civilization”
(Steward), 670, 674, 675, 676,
682
cultural core classification of Steward,
660-62
cultural ecology
in approach to Oriental despotism,
671-73
cultural materialism and, 658
expansion of research in, 655
Forde (C. Daryll) on, 664-65
geographic determinism vs., 663-64,
665, 666, 667
of Kroeber, 33940, 662, 663
of Steward, 340, 655-56, 662, 666
6g; in approach, 658, 659-60,
661; in Southwest, 669—70
Wissler on, 663-64
see also geographical determinism
cultural laws, see sociocultural laws
cultural materialism
alternatives to, 662
anthropology and, 674
archaeology and, 675, 679-81
Childe and, 681, 683
cultural ecology and, 658
eighteenth-century roots, 47-49
emphasis in, 471
ethnographic explanations in, 24243
evaluation of, 651, 687
of evolutionists, 211-16
generalizations in, 651
history in, 565-67
ideologies and, 638
Lowic on, 344, 354
in Marxism, 230-32, 240—41
Morgan and, 31 3—31 o7
nomothetic statements and, 648-51

771

!
§
|


===== PAGE 391 =====

Index

cultural materialism (cont.)
psychocultural analysis and, 460-62
as scientific method, 659
of Spencer, 215-16
Steward and, 65860, 674, 675-76
strategy of, 240-41, 245-46
Sumner and Keller and, 6o
White and, 636-38, 639, 640—41
Whiting and, 461
Wittfogel and, 67273, 674
Cultural and Natural Areas of Native
North America (Kroeber), 339,
340, 662
cultural periods of Morgan, 181-84,
185-86
culture(s)
approaches to study of, 274-75; see
also ethnography
environment and, see cultural ecology
freedom and, 298-300
heredity and, 10, 82, 130-32
ideal vs. actual, emic-etic distinction,
580-82
interrelations of parts, 235
linguistics and, 419-21
reality of cultural things, 333-34
see also specific topic, e.g., culture
concepts
culture-area concept
culture center, 376
culture climax, 340—41, 377
diffusion and, 376, 377-79

Kroeber on, 340-41, 374, 376-77

origin of, 374-75
Steward on, 340, 377

weaknesses of, 37576, 377
Wissler on, 374, 375, 376
culture center, in culture-area concept,
376
culture-circle  (Kulturkreis) ~ concept,
373, 379, 382-92
American historical school and, 389—
90
antievolutionism and, 392
criteria of form and quantity, 383-
84
evolutionism in, 385-87
Graebner’s theory, 384, 388
Kluckhohn on, 389—go
Lowie on, 379, 385-87, 389—g0
origin of method, 382-83
Schmidt on, 385-87

culture climax, in culture-area concept,

34041, 377
culture concept

culture concept (cont.)
Enlightenment, 8-18
ethnography and, 16-18
ideology and modem, 10
see also under specific individual
Culture and Ethnology (Lowie), 353,
366
culture patterns
Benedict on, 335, 336-37
Kroeber on, 326-27, 328-29, 330-33,
1334-35, 33637, 338
Malinowski on change in, 556-58,
559-61
Sapir on, 327-28
Curtin, Phillip
on Klemm, 102
on Lawrence, 97
on race relations, 98
customs
rationality in explanation, 40
stupid, 168-69
see also behavior
Customs of American Savages Com-
pared with Those of Earliest Times
(Lafitau), 17
Customs (The) and Manners of Differ-
ent Peoples (Demeunier), 17-18
Cuvier, Georges, 111

D’Andrade, Roy, 615; on American
kinship terminology, 587
Dargun, L., 196
Darwin, Charles, 132
achievement of, 105, 116-18
Durkheim on, 475
on evolution of moral qualities, 120,
121
influences on, 96; Lyell 112, 113,
115; Malthus, 115-16
on learning and inheritance, 121-22
Marx and Engels on, 222-23
on Spencer, 128, 129
‘White and, 636
Darwinism
contribution of, 54, 105, 109, 116—
18
dichotomies in, 71
ideological roots of, 94-95, 105
Keller and, 610
modemn attacks on, 272, 29495
natural law in, 11718
organic evolution in, 36, 24041
polygenesis-monogenesis ~ controversy

and, 9394
progress in, 38, 120-22

772

Index

Darwinism (cont.)
racial determinism and, 94—98, 118—
1
social gciences and, 12223
sociocultural roots, 1057, 109
Spencerism and, 126-27
struggle in, 123; perfectibility and,
117-18; progress through, 120—
22
Wallace and, 123
Das, T. C., 506, 508
data, see research
Davenport, W., descent concept, 304
Davis, Kingsley, on functional analysis,

2
Deac(snsx, A. B, 59596
De Bonald, Louis, 54
antiscientism of, 56-57
on superorganic, 70
decision-making, cultural environment
and, 43-44
Decorative Symbolism of the Arapaho
(Kroeber), 320
De UEsprit (Helvétius), 4445
degenerationism
evolution vs., 54-55, 58-59
Tylor on, 58
‘Whately on, 58-59
De generis humani varietate nativa
(Blumenbach), 85
D’Holbach, Paul Henri Thiry, Baron,
22,110
De Maistre, Joseph, 54
antiscientism of, 55-56, 57
on superorganic, 70
Démeunier, J. N.
on totemism, 40
working categories, 17-18
Descartes, René, 18
descent
bases of rules, 187
as exchange system, 492
Kwakiutl, 301, 303~5; ambilateral,
301, 303
modern interpretation of numaym,
306
see also kinship system(s); matri-
lineality; patrilineality
Descent (The) of Man and Selection
in Relation to Sex (Darwin), 93;
theme of, 118
Descriptive Sociology (Spencer), 159,
160, 400-1
design, Boas on evolution of, 258
despotism

despotism (cont.)
cultural ecologic approach to Orien-
tal, 67173
Helvctius on, 45-46
Mill on, 7273
determinism, 20, 130-32
Boas on, 279-80, 283-84
of Comte, 65, 66
cultural, as paradox, 298-300
economic factors in, 47-49
eighteenth-century theories, 22-23,
43-44, 51
evolutionism and, 296
in Freudianism, 457-58
functionalism and, 423, 424
of Hegel, 66, 70
Helvétius on, 44-46
of Keller, 609
of Kroeber, 342
Lowic on, 354, 357-58, 363-64,
366-68, 369, 370~71
magico-religious beliefs and, 437-38,
438-39
Mead on, 408—9
in neo-Freudianism, 457-58
of Quételet, 74-76
Sapir on, 605-6
Spencerism and, 296
superorganic and, 43-44, 51
of Vico, 19-20
of White, 636-37, 638
see also causality; economic determi-
nism; geographical determinism;
materialism; racism
dialectic(s)
cognition and, 71
Hegelian: applied to history, 70; ne-
gation in, 67-6¢
of Lévi-Strauss, 493
dialectical materialism, 217-49; see also
cultural materialism; materialism
Diderot, Denis, 22, 36, 110
diffusion
Benedict on, 402, 403
Boas on, 258
Boasians on, 379, 384
British school of, 379, 380-82
Childc on, 681, 683
convergent evolution and, 176-77
critique of concept, 377-79
culture-area concept, origin of, 374—
75; see also culture-area concept
evolutionists and, 173-76
German diffusionism  school, 373,

773



===== PAGE 392 =====

Index

diffusion (cont.)
379, 382—92; see also culture-
circle concept
independent invention vs., 173-76
independent selection by, 378
law of, 376
limited-possibilities ~ principle and
6235
Lowie on, 174, 176, 353-54
Morgan on, 177
New World evolution sequence and,
680
social system selection and, 378
Steward on, 658-59
system boundaries and, 615-16
‘White on, 642
see also invention, independent
Dilthey, Wilhelm
Benedict and, 398
philosophy of, 268-69
Dionysian categories of Benedict, 398,
401, 402, 406
Discourse on the Origin and Founda-
tion of Inequality among Men
(Rousseau), 16
“Dismal (The) Science of Functional-
ism” (Gregg and Williams), 331,
45
distinsch'\'e feature analysis in ethno-
semantics, 600
divergence, adaptation and, 652

diversity,  individual,  psychocultural
analysis and, 403-4, 415-16, 410,
455

division of labor
causes, theories on, 474-76, 478
Durkheim on, 466, 474—76, 478; in-
dividual and, 468-6g; social soli-
darity and, 469, 476
Spencer on, 475, 476, 477, 478-79
Division of Labor in Society (Durk-
heim), 465, 466, 469, 477
Dobrizhoffer, Martin, 14 7,95',?
dress fashions, Krocber's study, 328-29
Driesch, Hans, 294
Driver, Harold, 378; on cross-cultural
method, 616
DuBois, Cora, 367, 440
Diihring, Karl Eugen, on Ilegel, 68
Durkheim, Emile, 23, 62
collective representations  of, 478,
479, 497
Comte and, 465, 466
on Darwin, 475
on division of labor, 466, 46869,
47476, 478

Durkheim, Emile (cont.)

economic concepts, 480

focus of, 234

on French national character, 481~
82

on group mind, 472, , 481

Hegge]ian inﬂuenzz or;‘,7172—73, 480,
481

idealism of, 465, 47274, 478, 479,
480, 481

importance and influence, 464, 465,
476, 482, 483

on individual, 468-69, 470~72

Lévi-Strauss and, 484, 485, 486

materialism of, 474, 479~80

Mauss and, 482, 483

mentalism of, 473-74

methodological rules, 470, 471~72

on mind over matter, 479-80

on Montesquieu, 21

positivist heritage, 465-66

psychol(égical approach, 484, 485,

8

on racial factors, 470

on religion, 478

Saint-Simon and, 6o, 466

social condensation of, 475-76, 477

on social facts, 470, 471-72, 484,
485, 486

on socialism and individualism,
467-68

on social solidarity, 466; structural-
functionalists and, 515-16

on society’s evolution, 192

on Spencer, 475

structural-functionalists and, 515-16

on struggle, 475, 476, 477, 47879

suicide study, 75, 465, 477

superorganic of, 469, 47

Dynamics (The) of"CZm‘s‘)éi;p among the
Tallensi (Fortes),
Dynamics (The) of ézﬁ:ﬁz Change
(Malinowski), 556

eclecticism
of Boas, 284-85
of Kroeber, 339
ecology, see cultural ecology
economic factors, 47-49
Boas on, 279-80, 283-84, 286
Boasians on, 475
classical economic theory, 120, 565
Durkheim on, 466, 468-69, 474-76,
478, 480
cmic approach, 315-16, 487-89
cthnographic data and, 315

774

e

Index

economic factors (cont.)
etic approach, 315-16
laissez faire doctrine, 54, 106, 108,
L 534735 8 263-6
owic om, 354, 357-50, 303-04,
366-68, 3069, ;7’0-71; Tesource
management, 366-68, 369; slav-
ery and, 354-57; warfare and,
304-65
Malinowski’s approach, 561-65, 566—
6

7
in Marxism: classical theories and,
565; definition of mode of pro-
duction, 233; developmental
stages, 226-27, 230
Mill’s theory, 72-73
personality development and, 460-61
potlatch and, 308-10
racism and theories of, 106-7
resource base of Northwest Indians,
311-12, 313
social organization and, 232; Rad-
cliffe-Brown on, 518; redistribu-
tive systems and, 313
Spencer on, 125-26
structural-functionalists on, 534-35
see also capitalism; division of labor;
property rights; subsistence; sur-
plus theory
“Economic Factors and Culture”
(Lowie), 367
“Economic ('T?IS) and Social Basis of
Primitive Bands” (Steward), 662,
666
Edmunson, Munroe, 587
education
family role in, 31
mind and, 12, 15-16
Edwards, W. F., 99
Eggan, Fred
on diachronic studies, 539
method of, 539
on Radcliffe-Brown’s principles, 531
Egypt, culture development in
Childe on, 681-82
Smith and Perry on, 380, 381-82
“Eighteen (The) Professions” (Kroe-
ber), 325-26
Einstein, Albert, on scientific method,
288
Elementary (The) Forms of the Reli-
gious Life (Durkheim), 478, 480
Elementary (The) Structures of Kin-
ship (Lévi-Strauss), 484, 488, 495,
496, 498
central contribution, 490

Elementary Structures . .
critiques of, s01-5
importance of, 484-85, 489-9o
second edition, 511
emics
actual verbal behavior and, 589
ambiguities in class definitions with,
583-84

background of use, 59798

as basis of kinship system, 578-79

Boasian program and, 316-17, 318

in  cross-cultural studies, 577-78,
579~80

defined, 571; by Pike, 569—71

domains of studies, 572-73, 574-75

economics and, 315-16, 487-89

empiricism of, 576

cthnography and approach of, 394-

95 57477% 576-77

in ethnosemantics, 582, 6oo-1

ctical study, 579

etics plus, 582

etics vs.: distinction between, 575;
as ideal vs. actual, 580-82; as
research option, 569

identification of categories, 577-78

Marxism and, 564

nonverbal behavior and, 589—92

nonverbal units (behavioremes), 570

statement predictability, 571-72

transmutation into etics, 577-78

in warfare study, 364-66

enculturation

evolution and, 131-33

freedom and, 298-300

human nature and, 429

importance of, 78-79

mind and, 11

personality determination and, 458-
61

Encyclopédie, 36

endogamy
McLennan on, 193-94
Morgan on, 195
Starcke on, 178
see also incest taboos

Engels, Friedrich
on Condillac, 236
on Darwin, 223
on economic negation, 69
cvolutionary scheme, 224-30
on Hegelian dialectic, 68-69
on inheritance of acquired character-

istics, 237, 238, 239-40
on Marx, 217
on Morgan, 213, 230, 246, 248

. (cont.)

775

|
|
e
!
|
?
|


===== PAGE 393 =====

Index

Engels, Friednch (cont.)
on oversimplification, 24445
on prehistory, 248-49
as racist, 238, 240
on sociocultural phenomena, 54
on status to contract transition, 227
see also Marxism
entelechism, 295
environment
behavior and, Locke on, 12
cultural, decision-making and, 43-44
see also cultural ecology; environ-
mentalism
environmentalism
American, 86-87
behavior interpretation and, 10-12,
83
of Boas, 99
in Communist ideology, 237—-40
of Darwin, 128
eighteenth-century, 82
of Lamarck, 83-84, 128
of Locke, 12
in Marxism, 101, 23638
racial differences explained by, 83—
87, 238-39
of Spencer, 128, 239
trends in, 78-79
Epochs of Nature (Buffon), 86, 110
Erdmann, Benno, 268
Erikson, Erik, 433
on infant sexuality, 443-44
psychocultural approach, 442-43
Esquisse d’un Tableau Historique des
Progrés de I'Esprit Humain (Out-
line of the Intellectual Progress of
Mankind, Condorcet), 24, 35, 39,
115
Essai Sur le Don (The Gift, Mauss),
83, 484-86, 487, 489
Essay (An) on the Causes of the Variety
of the Complexion and Figure in
the Human Species (Smith), 86
Essay (An) Concerning the Effects of
the Air on Human Bodies (Arbuth-
not,), 42
Essay (An) Concerning Human Under-
standing (Locke), 8, 10-12
Essay on the Customs and Spirit of
Nations (Voltaire), 21, 27
Essay (An) on the History of Civil So-
ciety (Ferguson), 29-31
Essay (An) on the Principle of Popula-
tion (Malthus), 35, 125
Eskimo, Boas’ Baffin Island study, 264,
265, 266

Ethics (Spinoza), 19
ethnocentrism, 88-8g
Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock), 614
ethnography
archaeology and, 146, 685
as basis of historical particularism,
301-18
Boas and: on aims of, 274, 275, 277~
78, 280; data of, 31415, 316—
317, 318; research by, 170
British social anthropologists and,
540
compatative method and: basis cs-
tablishment, 156-61; limitations
on, 156-57, 158
continuity of sources, 143-45, 148-49
culture concepts and, 16-18, 374-75
data: archaeological, 145-46, 148-49;
of Boas, 314-15, 316-17, 318;
economic, 315; as limitations on
comparative ‘method, 156-57,
158
emic approach, 394-95, 574-75
emic/etic confusion, 582
empiricism of, 576
error: Benedict, 404~7; evolutionists,
161-62; Lubbock, 161-62: Mor-
gan, 185
ethnosemantics and, 603—4
evolutionists and, 161-62, 169-71
informants in, emic vs. etic informa-
tion, 576-77
linguistics and, 419-21
of Lowie, 357-58, 363-64, 366-68,
6

309

of Malinowski, 196, 546, 548, 562,
563-65

Marx’s knowledge of, 228-29

photography in, 416-18

pre-Boasian research, 257

processes and methods, 410

psychologic approach, 393—421

psychologic variability measurement,
415-16, 419

relativism in, 163-64

single factor explanations, 242-43

standard improvement, 144

statistical validation in, 415

stupid customs in, 168-69

value judgments and, 163-64

see dlso cross-cultural studies; eth-
nosemantics; psychocultural ap-
proach; and under specific topic

Ethnology (journal), 614
ethnosemantics
ambiguity in domains of, 582-85

776

T

Index

ethnosemantics (cont.)

in Crow ki6nship terminology study,
£02—
data >c?)lleztizm and sources, 585-8¢
diachronic approach and, 6034
distinctive feature analyses, 600
etic features and, 6013
evaluation of, 419—21, 8
Freudianism ﬂgd? ;gg—ézg_g
heritage of, 50798
influence on Lévi-Strauss, 493-94
kinship system studies, 494-95, 496,
497; as emic-etic domain, 578—
79; Kroeber on, 577
mentalism and, 598-600
nonverbal behavior as domain of,
58992
origin of, 568
research strategy, 579-80; emic com-
mitment of, 6oo-1; etics plus
emics in, 582
use of, 545
verbal "behavior as domain of, 58g
etics
as basis of kinship system, 578-79
cross-cultural study of data, 579-80
defined, 575; by Pike, sﬁgfgl
in economic studies, 315-1
emics plus, in IESSEICEA, 582
in emics study, 579
emics vs.: distinction between, 575;
as ideal vs. actual, 580-82; as
research option, 569
emic transmutation into, 577-78
empiricism of, 576
in informants’ information, 576-77
Malinowski on, 556-57
need for approach of, 601-3
predictability of, 575
warfare study with, 366
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 536, 537
on African state formation, 537, 538
on scientific approach, 542—43
Evolution (The) of Culture (White),
643; Steward on, 648
evolutionism
acceptance of evolution doctrine,
634-35
achievements of, 210-11
Adams, 686-87
anthropological theory and, 170
antievolutionism vs., 292—94
archaeology and, 147-49
Bachofen, 188-89
Bastian, 176
in Bible, 25-26

evolutionism (cont.)

Boas on, 258-359, 260, 277-82

Boas’ contemporaries, 254-55
Boasians, 17677, 292, 295, 266,

vty and 4o ss, b, 643

usality and, 424-253, , 657—

Childe, 643, 614‘,‘ 6457, 6481—827 5

comparative method and, 169-71;
fieldwork vs., 169—71; value of,
153-56

continuity in, 142—43

covariance statements in, 649—50

cultural materialism and, 211-16

in culture-circle concept, 385-87

culture core in, 660-62

Darwinian, 240-41

defined, 25

degenerationism vs., 54-55, 58~59

determinism and, 296

diffusion concept and, 173-76, 177

eighteenth-century, 82-83

enculturation and, 131-33

environmentalism and, 83-87

ethnographic errors and, 16162

feedback between personality and cul-
ture, 455, 456-57

Fortes, 554

Frazer, 552

Freud, 425-26

in Freudianism, 433

Hegel, 67, 68

historical perspectives and, 167-68

Kardiner, 439, 440

Keller, 607-8, 61011

Lowie, 348-53, 553

Lyell, 112-13, 114

McLennan, 193-95

Maine, 189—92

Malinowski, 551-53

Marx and Engels, 222-23, 224-30

Marx and law of historical, 218, 240,
241

methodology of, 33-38

Mill, 72

mode and sequence of, 64446

of monogenesists, 83-84

Morgan, 29, 161, 167, 171-72, 177—
79, 180-88, 641, 642, 643

multilinear, 642-43; Steward on,
655-57; Wittfogel on, 673

Murdock, 610-11, 627-29

negation in, 68-6g; transformation
vs., 69=70, 292

Nietzsche and, 297

parallel vs. convergent, 172, 176-
77> 179, 25859, 260, 278-79;

777



===== PAGE 394 =====

Index

evolutionism (cont.)
280, 292, 295, 296, 645, 656,
66062, 681, ;683?&'22 jlz«:/ cgn-
vergent evolution; parallel evolu-
tion
phylogenetic approach, 652
pre-Darwinian influences, 14243
predictability and, 627-29
progress concept and, 36-37, 6
Radcliffe-Brown, 525}26,3251,53553,
. 554
Rivers, 380
scriptural authorities and, 109-11
sociocultural background, 129
species concept and, 652
specific vs. general, 651-53
Spencer, 123-27, 133, 17273, 292;
Sumner and Keller on, 607, 608,
610
Steward, 171, 173, 608, 627, 64243,
644-45, 652-53, 657; culture
core in, 660o-62; development
sequence, 670-71, 674; diffu-
sion in, 658-59; Murdock on,
627; parallelism in, 656; uni-
linear, 171; White on, 646-47,
648-49
Steward and White compared, 654
Sumner, 607-8, 610, 611
superorganic and, 70
survivals and, 164-66, 168
traditional ideology and, 25-26
transformations and, 6g9—70, 292
646, 647, 653 )
Tylor, 172, 641, 642, 651; inven-
tion and diffusion in, 174, 175—
76; uniformity and, 177
uniformity in, 177
unilinear, 171-73, 642
universal, 642, 643, 645
Westermarck, 551
White, 292, 627, 635-36, 637, 638,
639, 640, 64144, 645, 647,
649-53, 657; criteria in, 646-47;
Steward on, 646, 647-48
Wittfogel, 173, 673, 683
see also antievolutionism; and under
specific individual and/or topic
exchange, see gift-giving
exogamy
McLennan on, 193-94, 197
Morgan on, 195, 197
Tylor on, 198
see also incest taboos
“Expansion (The) of the Scope of
Science” (White), 332 P

extinction, Lyell on, 112
extrasomatic factors and culture con-
cept, 10

facts, Comte on, 61-62
family
Boas on, 279
economic and educational role of,
1-32
Enge];s og, 224, 247
Ferguson on, 31
Lowie on, 348-50, 351-52
Maine on, 19192
Malinowski on, 547
Marx on, 224
Millar on, 32
Morgan on, 181-82, 183, 186
Murdock on, 578
power and kinship and, 196
property rights and, 188
Radgcliffe-Brown on: Australian fam-
ily study, 533; on nuclear fam-
ily, 549
Spencer on, 208-9
Steward on, 666, 667
Westermarck on, 547
see also kinship system(s); kinship
terminology
Ferguson, Adam, 35, 152
on history, 70
on hunting peoples, 32
on primitive peoples, 10, 29-31
on subsistence and social structure,
on su‘;/cmrganic, 51
fetichism, Lubbock on, 201
feudalism
Marx and Engels on, 225, 226, 230,
241
Mill on, 73
Millar on, 33
Feuerbach, Ludwig, Marx on, 219-20,

235
Fichte,; Johann Gottlieb, 57
fieldwork, see research
Fighting with Property (Codere), 308,
309, 310
Firth, Raymond
on diachronic studies, 539—40
on Marxism, 542
on Murdock, 540
psychology in approach of, 395—96
on science of man, 522-23
on social organization, 54142
on sociocultural change, 561
Fischer, Theobald, 265

778

Index

Fletcher, Alice, 257
folk-urban theories, 19293
food taboos, 366-70
Forde, C. Daryll, 339
cultural ecologic approach, 664-65
on documentation, 540
form, criterion of, in culture-circle con-
cept, 384
Tortes, Meyer, 526, 537
on African state formation, 537, 538
culture concept, 518-19, 523
on evolutionism, 554
psychology in approach of, 396-97
on scientist approach, 543
Fothergill, P., 294
Frake, Charles
data collection, 585
on descriptive adequacy, 572
on emic approach, 6o1
on ethnography, 599
on etic description of behavior, 582
on semantic distinctions, 589
Subanum  settlement pattern study,
602-3
Frazer, James G.
evolutionism of, 552
on Malinowski, 562-63
religion studies, 204-5
Freed, Stanley, 584
freedom, culture and, 298-300
free will, 8
illusion of, 24
Quételet on, 74
social science and, 23-24
see also determinism
Frere, John, 147
Freud, Sigmund
Kardiner on, 436
on religious phenomena, 436
see also Freudianism
Freudianism
anthropological critique, 426-27
anthropology and, 430-35
appeal of, 430-32
Boasians and, 393, 425, 420, 427,
431, 434-35
causality in, 433
ethnosemantics and, 599600
evolutionism in, 425-26, 433
functionalism in, 425, 433
historical determinism in, 457-58
importance of, 457
Kardiner’s neo-Freudian work, 435-
42
Malinowski and, 548
materialism and, 457-58

Freudianism (cont.)
modifications of, 432-33
neo-Freudianism origin, 432-33
Réheim and, 427-30
Fried, Morton, 368, 631, 654
Frobenius, Leo, 260, 383
Fromm, Erich, 433
“Functional (A) Developmental Classi-
fication of American High Cul-
tures” (Steward), 682
functionalism
of Boasians vs. structural-functional-
ists, 519, 520, 521-22, 523
configurational approach in, 423
evolutionary approach in, 424-25
in Freudianism, 425, 433
historical determinism and, 423, 424
homeostatic model, 423-24
in Kachin analysis, 545
of Lowie, 353-54
of Malinowski vs. Radcliffe-Brown,
545-46, 547, 548, 550, 554-56
in Marxism, 235-36, 240
origin of explanations, 47879
political position and, 558
psychocultural analyses and, 462-63
psychologic, 423
in religious ritual explanation, 424
of social anthropologists, 467, 514
survivals in, 166-67
see also causality; determinism; struc-
tural-functionalists
functional unity concept, 516-17
Future (The) of an Iilusion (Freud),
426

Galileo, 109
Gall, Franz Joseph, 99
Galton, Sir Francis, 615
Gardiner, P, 19
Gay, Peter
on progress theoty, 40
on Voltaire, 36
Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft (Ton-
nies), 192
general evolution, 651-53
generalization (s )
of Boas, 282-83
in cultural materialist strategy, 651
of Mead, 410, 412-13
in sciences, 271
use of, 254
White on, 648-51
genetics, Soviet, 237
genocide, 103

779

i
i



===== PAGE 395 =====

Index

geographical determinism, 4142
Boas, 26566, 283-84 .
Buckle, 77-78
cultural ecology vs., 663-64, 665,
666, 667
D’Holbach, 42, 43
eighteenth-century theories, 41-42
Helvétius, 44-46
see also cultural ecology; culture-area
concept; environmentalism
geography, Boas and, 262, 264, 265-67,
274

geology
comparative method in, 153

eighteenth-century theories, 109-11
Lyell’s contribution, 111-12
on origin of man, 111
scriptural authority and, 109-11
uniformitarianism in, 153
German (The) Ideology (Marx and
Engels), 224, 227
Gibbon, Edward, 27
Gift, The (Mauss), 483, 484, 487
critique of, 487
Lévi-Strauss on, 483, 484, 486, 489
gift-giving
Lévi-Strauss on, 488, 489, 490, 491~
92
Mauss on, 484, 486-87, 489
see also potlatch; reciprocity
Gillispie, C., 109, 111
Ginsberg, M., 33, 612
Gladwin, T., 410
Gliddon, George R.
racial theories, 91, 92
theology and, 109
Gluckman, Max, 537
on conflict, 560
on Malinowski, 555, 560
Gobineau, Joseph Arthur, Comte de,
516-17
on Christianity, 104
racial theories, 103-§
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 36
Goguet, Antoine, 146
Golden (The) Bough (Frazer), 2045
Goldenweiser, Alexander, 639
on Boas, 253
on descent patterns, 305
on limited possibilities principle,
625-26
on survival, 166
on totemism, 346
White on, 204
Goodenough, Ward, 600

Goodenough, Ward, (cont.)
on American kinship terminology,
586, 587
componential analysis of, 573
data collection, 585
on phonetic notation, 578
role behavior study, 59-91
on unilinear descent concept, 304
Gorer, Geoffrey, 444-45
on causality, 446
Mead on, 447
national character studies, 418, 444,
44548
Gossett, T. F., 80, 85
Gouldner, Alvin, 466
government, see politics; state
Graebner, Fritz
culture-circle theories, 383, 384, 388
on diffusion, 260
on invention, 174
Greene, John, 83
Gregg, Dorothy, 331, 534, 535, 536,

. 545
Grimm, Jacob, 153

Grosse, Emst, 196
Grossman, M., 44
group mind of Durkheim, 472, 477,
81
Growing Up in New Guinea (Mead),
413

gynocracy, theories of, 189, 196

Haber, F. C, 110, 112
Haddon, Alfred, 258, 320
Haeckel, Emst, 294
Hahn, E., 350
Hallowell, A, 1., 228
Hammel, E., Comanche kinship study,
599-600
Handbook of the Indians of California
(Kroeber), 339
Handbook of the South American In-
dians (Steward, ed.), 340, 658,
675
Harding, T., 213
Haring, Douglas, 444
Harris, M., 243, 309
Hart, C. W. M.
on configurational homogeneity, 416
on Locke, 11
Hazard, Thomas
on bilateral descent, 306
on numaym, 313
Hearst, Mrs. Phocbe, 321
Hegel, Georg W. F,, 57, 59

780

S

Index

Hegel, Georg W. F. (cont.)
on determinism, 66, 70
dialectic: applied to history, 70;
evaluation of, 71; negation in,
67-69
Durkheim ‘and, 472-73, 480, 481
on evolution, 67, 68
on history, 481; dialectic applied to,
70; on mind and, 66-67; on
racial factors in, 101
Lévi-Strauss and, 480-81
Marxism and, 67, 230, 236
Marx on, 233
Helvétius, Claude, 14, 131
geographical determinism, 42, 44-46
materialism of, 44—46
on mind and education, 12
on national character, 456
on subsistence and social structure,

47
Henry, Jules, 459, 590
Herder, Johann von, 89
heredity, see inheritance
Herodotus, 27
Herskovits, Melville, 251, 310, 368,
431; on Boas, 242, 267
“hetairism” of Bachofen, 188-8¢
Himmelfarb, Gertrude, on Darwin, 117,
118, 122
Hippocrates, 41
Histoire Naturelle (Buffon), 85
historical particularism
archaeology and, 67678
Boas’ arguments for, 282-83
decline of, 606, 607
emergence of, 273-75
cthnographic basis, 301-18
individualization of, 431-32
invention in, 173-74
Krocber’s version, 325-27
of Lowie, 353-54
negativism and antiscientism in, 23—
94
strategy of, 251
see also Boasians; and under specific
individual
history
approaches to study of, 273-75, 335,
336-37
Boas” approach, 277-82, 321
Boas-Kroeber controversy, 275-7
Buckle on, 76-77
comparative method and, 15065
contest with science, 273-75
covariance statements and, 649-50

history (cont.)

determinism in, 20

evolutionary stages of Marx and
Engels, 222, 224-28, 228-30

evolution in, Marx and law of, 217,
218

Hegel on, 66-67, 70, 101, 481

Kroeber on: Boas and, 275-77; scien-
tific approach, 335, 336-37

lesson of, 537-38

Maine on, 190

materialist concept, 565-67

orderliness in, 231

personality and, 456-57

racial interpretation of, 105-~7

Steward’s developmental sequence,
670-71, 674

structural-functionalists on, 524-25,
535, 539740

Sumner and Keller on, 624

theological interpretation, 55-59

universal, 27-29

see also determinism; evolutionism;
social organization; and under
specific person, school, and/or
topic

History (The) of America (Robertson),

-34
“Hist?ryz('l"he) of the American Race”
(address by Boas), 276
History of Cuvilization in England
(Buckle), 76
History (The) of the Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire (Gibbon),
2
Histor;/* of Ethnological Theory (Lowie),
161, 245, 352-53
History of Jamaica (Long), 89
History (The) of Mankind (Ratzel),
8
Histoaryz(The) of Melanesian Society
(Rivers), 380
Hobbes, T, 38, 526
Hobhouse, L. T, 33, 612
Hobsbawm, Eric
on feudalism, 225
on Marx and Engels, 227
Hodgen, Margaret, 34, 399
on eighteenth century, 8-9
on Tylor, 164, 165, 166, 167
Hodges, 11. A, 269
Hoebel, E. A, 33-34, 406; on Pueblo,

407
Hofstadter, Richard, 208
determinism of, 42, 43

781



===== PAGE 396 =====

Index

Hofstadter, Richard (cont.)
materialism of, 2224
Holmes, G., culture-area concept, 374
Holmes, W. H., 257
Holy (The) Family (Marx and Engels),
236
IIoma?As, George, 491
marriage systems study, 510; cross-
cousin marriages, 501-5; Mur-
dock on, 503; Needham on,

504=5 . .
on Radcliffe-Brown vs. Malinowski,
556
Home, Henry, Lord Kames, 87, 88
homeostasis

in functionalism, 423-24
in Kardiner’s work, 439, 440
personality and, 458-59
Hooker, Sir Joseph, 117
Hooton, Emest, 93
Hopi, critique of Benedict’s work with,
o
Homiy,sKaren, 433
Howard, G. E., 196
Hubert, H., 482
Hull, Clark, 449
human nature, culture and, 429
Human Relations Area Files (Mur-
dock), 158, 159, 450, 452, 612-14
sampling deficiencies, 632
significance of, 614-15
Hume, David
on inductive method, 620
racial theories, 87, 88
Hunt, George, 302, 316
Hunt, James
on Buckle and Mill, 78
on Darwinism, 93
Hunter, John, racial doctrines, 85, 86,
88
Hunter, Monica, 540
Hutton, James, geologic theories, 109,
110, 153
Huxley, Julian, 651
Huxley, Thomas, Darwinism and, 93,
94,117, 128
hydraulic civilizations
Adams on, 686, 687
Childe on, 681-82
critiques of hypothesis, 686-87
Steward on, 671, 68o, 686-87
testing hypothesis, 685-86
Wittfogel on, 671-72, 67273, 674
Hydrogeology (Lamarck), 110

idealism
of Comte, 64-65
of Durkheim, 465, 472-74, 478, 479,
480, 481
in ethnosemantics, 600
of Lévi-Strauss, 465, 513
nondeterministic, 40
philosophical, vs. philosophical ma-
terialism, 216
sociocultural determinism and, 66
of Spencer, 215-16
of Tylor, 212-13
ideas
Lévi-Strauss on, 496, 497
Locke on development of, 11, 12
see also knowledge; thought
ideology
cultural materialism and, 638
Durkheim on causality and, 479-80
evolutionary doctrine and traditional,
2526
Kroeber’s exposure to, 319, 320-21
of Lowie, 371-72; bias in, 362-63
in Marxism, 240
modern culture concept and, 10
roots, in Darwinism and Spencerism,
105
of Schmidt, bias in, 390
Tylor on, 203
idolatry, Lubbock on, 201
Idrisi, al, 41
imperialism, see colonialism
incest taboos
emerging theories on, 19799
Engels on, 247
Lévi-Strauss on, 490, 492, 495
McLennan on, 197
Malinowski on, 198, 548-49
Morgan on, 182, 183, 186, 197, 199
Murdock on, 198
Starcke on, 198
‘White on, 198
Wolf (Arthur) on, 199
individual(s)
diversity, psychocultural analysis and,
4034, 415716, 419, 455
division of labor and, Durkheim on,
468-69, 470~72
needs of, Malinowski on, 549-51,
554, 555
sociocultural conditions and, 467-68;
Durkheim on, 470, 471-72;
Kroeber on, 326-27, 328-29,
330, 332; Sapir on, 327-28

782

I

Index

individual(s) (cont.)
see also personality; psychocultural
approach
inheritance
of acquired characteristics: in Com-
munist ideology, 237-38; 239—
40; Darwin on, 128; Lamarck
on, 83-84, 128; racism and, 83—
87, 238-39; Spencer on, 128
cultural differences and, 82
Helvétius on, 44
¢ learning and, 121-22, 130-32
i role, in scientific racism, 8182, 238—

39
Instinct and the Unconscious (Rivers),
32
Institute of Ethnology of the University
of Paris, 482
institutions, see social institutions
intelligence
race and, 133
Spencer on, 127
invention, independent
Boasians on, 384
cross-cultural resemblances, 378
diffusion in explanation, 378
New World culture origin and, 679—
80
occurrence of, 378
psychic unity doctrine and, 175, 176
social system selections and, 378
Troquois
kinship terminology, 184
Morgan’s work with, 138-40, 184,
196, 257

irrigation, see hydraulic civilizations

Jacobi, Abraham, 263
Jakobson, R., 493, 598
James, William, 294
Jameson, Robert, geologic theories, 110
Japan, neo-Freudian national character
studies, 443-44
Jarvie, I. C., on Malinowski, 552
Jefferson, Thomas, on race, 8o
‘ Jones, William, 153
1 Jorgensen, ., 616; on statistical method,
618
Josselin de Jong, J. P. B., 501
Junod, Henri
on Bathonga joking relationship, 528,
52
on Iiat?mngu kinship terminology,
586
Radcliffe: Brown and, 538

Kaberry, Phyllis, 546, 556
Kachin, 545, 584
Kant, Immanuel
on organic evolution, 36
racial doctrines, 85
return to philosophy of, 267
on thought and knowledge, 39-40
on universe, 110
Kaplan, B., on configurational homoge-
neity, 415-16
Kardiner, Abram, 433
causal chain, 450
on Freud, 436
on Mead, 441
Mead on, 447
neo-Freudian psychocultural analysis,
435—42; defects of, 441—4z;
homeostatic and evolutionary
models in, 439, 440; institutions
related to personality in, 436,
439, 441—42; methods of, 439—
41; significance of, 437-39
on religious beliefs, 437-39
Keller, Albert, 624
cultural materialism and, 608—9
Darwinism and, 610
on domain of history, 624
economic determinism of, 609
evolutionism of, 607-8, 610-11
on Marxism, 60g
Spencerism and, 610
Khaldun, Ibn, 41
Kidder, Alfred
on New World chronology, 679
on particularism, 676
kinesics, 573
kinship system (s)
Bathonga joking relationship, 527-30
Boas on, 284
as emic-etic phenomena, 558-39
Ferguson on, 31
Krocber on, 195, 305, 322-23, 324
Kwakiutl, 303, 304, 303
Lévi-Strauss on, 49o; critiques of,
501-5; law of negative and posi-
tive relations, 495—97; linguistic
structural model, 49495, 496,
497; marriage exchange systems,
499-505, 506, 507, 509, 510
patrilineality and matrilineality,
503—4; restricted vs. general ex
changes, 499—501; statistical and
mechanical models, 498-99
linguistics and: Krocber on, 577;

783

|
i



===== PAGE 397 =====

Index

kinship system(s) (cont.)
Lévi-Strauss on, 494-95, 496,
497

Lowie on, 178, 305, 350-51, 353-54,
620

Maine on, 19192

Malinowski on, 548-49; Australian
family, 547; Freudianism and,
548

Marx on, 227

Millar on, 31-33

Morgan on, 178-79

Murdock on, 305, 578, 611; criteria
for comparing, 629-30; state
level and, 631

Needham on, 505

power and, 196

Radcliffe-Brown on, 495, 533-34; in
Australia, 533; nuclear family,

state formation and, 188; Ferguson
on, 31; Lowie on, 350-51;
Millar on, 32-33; Murdock on,
631
Steward on: nuclear family, 666,
667; primitive bands, 666-69
see also kinship terminology; marnage
systems
kinship terminology
ambiguities in, 586-88, 589; field-
work and, 585-86
Crow, 184-84; ethnosemantic study,
5996~
determinants, statistical comparative
study, 61820, 621-23
first European description, 17
Iroquois, 183-84
Kroeber on, 195; Morgan’s scheme,
321-22, 323, 325, 351, 352; SO-
cial structure and, 322-23, 324
Lowie on, 348-49, 349-50, 351-52;
social organization and, 353-54
McLennan on, 195
Morgan on, 181, 182, 186, 187, 324;
Kroeber on, 321-22, 323, 325,
351, 352; Lowie onm, 348-50,
51-52
Murdock’s study, 618-19, 619-20,
620-23
Omaha, 183-84
Radcliffe-Brown on, 534
Klemm, Gustav, 106, 144; racial theo-
ries, 101—2
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 293
culture concept, g-10, 13, 14
on goals in anthropology, 597

Kluckhohn, Clyde (cont.)
position, 394
on Schmidt’s culture-circle, 38990
Knight, Rolf, on land tenure, 359, 362
knowledge
Boas on inner, 269
Kantian views, 39-40, 267
Locke on development of, 11, 12
see also ideas; mind; thought
Knox, Robert
evolutionary and racial theories, 99—
100
influences on, 96
on Vedda, 359
Kabben, A. ].'F., 503
on comparative method, 617
on marriage exchange, 510
Kroeber, Alfred Lewis, 251, 374
on autonomy of culture, 469
background, 319, 320-21
Benedict and, 404
on Boas, 252, 253, 411; Boas’ art re-
search, 276; Boas’ Eskimo study,
266; Boas and history, 27576,
21
on cuzusa]ity, 336-37
credo, 325-27, 331
on cultural evolution, 300
culture concepts, g-10, 13, 14; cul-
tural intensity and climax, 340—
41; culture-area concept, 374,
376-77; culture and freedom,
299
on culture patterns, 328-29, 330-33;
approach, 334-35, 336-37, 338;
individual and, 326-27, 328-29,
339, 332
on descent, 305
as determinist, 342
ecologic approach, 339-40, 662, 663
on Freud, 425
on Freudianism, 431
on history, Boas and, 27576, 321
ideological milieu of, 319, 320-21
on individual and culture, 326-27,
328-29, 330, 332
influences on, 275, 277
on kinship systems, 195; on Mor-
gan’s, 321-22, 323, 325, 351,
352; semantic dimensions, 577
on kinship terminology and social
structure, 322-23, 324
on Lowie, 605
on Mead, 411
methodology, 330-33

784

I a8

Index

Kroceber, Alfred Lewis (cont.)
on Morgan, 321-22, 323, 325, 351,

doh

Murdock o, 324

orientation of, 329, 330-31, 334,
335, 336

on relativism, 331-32

Sapir and, 299, 321, 327-28

on scientific approach to history, 335,

336-37
on sociocultural law, 330, 333
‘ Steward and, 337-38, 662

on superorganic, 321, 325
on theorization, 320
White and, 325, 641
Kroeber, Theodora, 330, 334
Kula
Malinowski on, 562, 563-64, 565,
582
Mauss on, 483, 487
Kulturkreise, see culture-area concept;
culture-circle concept
Kwakiutl
Benedict’s portrayal, 404-5, 406, 407
Boas’ study, 302-5, 306-8
numaym, 303, 304, 305, 313
potlatch, 303; Boas on, 306-8; in
historical perspective, 308-10;
numaym and, 313
social structure, 301, 303-5; ambi-
lateral descent and, 301, 303
subsistence base, 311-12, 313

La Barre, Weston, 444
labor, see division of labor
Lafitau, Joseph, 17, 388
Laguna, Frederica de, 317
laissez-faire doctrine
importance of, 54
rise of, 106
science and, 108
structural-functionalists and, 534-35
Lamarck, Jean Baptiste
biological transformism of, 57
on chronology of earth, 110-11
environmentalism of, 83-84
Lyell on, 112, 113, 114
Marxists and, 237-38
significance of, 36~37
sociocultural factors and, 109

La Mettrie, J. O. de, man-machine con-

cept, 22
land tenure, see property rights
Lang, Andrew
mysticism of, 204
on religion, 206—7

Lange, F. A, 22
language, see ethnosemantics; linguis-
tics
Lanham, B., 444
La Peyrere, Isaac de, 87
Lassalle, Ferdinand, 238
Latham, R. G., 144
Laufer, Berthod, 293-94
Lawrence, Sir William, 106
phrenology and, 99
racial theories, 9697
Leach, Edmund, 205

approach of, 544-45
on Crow and Omaha kinship termi-

nology, 593
on documentation, 540
on Frazer, 204
on Kachin, 584
Lévi-Strauss and, 545
on Malinowski, 548
on political organization in Burma,

1
on Rzgcliﬁeerwn, 543—44
Leacock, Eleanor
on land tenure, 358-59, 362
on Morgan, 137-38, 1835, 213-14
Leacock, Seth, 482
League of the Ho-de-no-sau-nee, or
Iroquois (Morgan), 138
learning
inheritance and, 130-32; Darwin on,
12122
neobehaviorist theories, 449, 450
Leclerc, Georges Louis, see Buffon,
Georges, Comte de
Lehman, F., 655
Lehman, Rudolf, 268
Leibnitz, Gottfried von, 110
Lenin, Nikolai, 221
Lesser, Alexander
on Boas, 283
function concept, 519
Letourneau, Charles, 196
Lévi-Strauss, Claude
on alliance function of marriage, 198
analytical position, 485
approach of, 418, 480, 491-92
authority of, 484-85, 489-go
cross-cousin  marriage  model, 500,
501-3
on cultural analysis, 598-99
dialectical mode, 493
Durkhcim and, 484, 485, 486
on gift-giving, 488, 489, 490, 491-92
Hegelian heritage, 480-81

785



===== PAGE 398 =====

Index

Lévi-Strauss, Claude (cont.)

Homans and Schneider critique of,
501-3

idealism of, 465, 513

on incest taboos, 490, 492, 495

influences on, 480-81, 484, 493, 513

kinship system studies, 490, 494-505,
506, 507, 509, 510; critiques of,
$01-5;  Cross-cousin  marriage
model, 500, 501-3, 505; law of
negative and positive relations,
495-97; patrilineality and ma-
trilineality, 503-4; reciprocity
and, 488-89, 490, 491, 506;
restricted vs. general exchanges,
499-501; statistical and me-
chanical models, 498—99; struc-
tural linguistic model and, 494—
95, 496, 497

Leach and, 545

Marxism and, 493, 512-13

on Mauss, 483, 484, 485, 486, 489

mechanical and statistical models,

420, 498-99
on mental structures, 491-92, 496,
497, 599
methodology of, 497
on myth and ritual, 71
Needham and, 505, 511
on potlatch, 488
psychology and, 49192, 492-93
on Radcliffe-Brown, 495
reality in work of, 49798
on reciprocity, 488-89, 490, 491
on social facts, 485
on social structure, 598
structural linguistics and, 492-95,
496, 497
on survival value, 491
on universal elementary principles,
478
“Lévi-Strauss in the Garden of Eden”
(Leach), 544
Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien, 413, 482
Lewis, Oscar 459
Li An-Che, 405
liberalism
of Boas, 291-92, 297, 298
science and, 108
“Limitations (The) of the Comparamc
Meglhod of Anthropology” (Boas),
limited possibilities principle, 384, 624
27, 628
Goldenwc:ser on, 625-26
Lowie on, 626

limited possibilities principle (cont.)
Murdock on, 624-25, 626, 627, 628
lineage, see kinship system(s); kinship
terminology
linguistics
antiscientific doctrines on language
origin, 56-57
comparative method in, 152-53
componential analysis in, 573
culture and, 419-21
emic studies, 572-73, 57475
Mead on, 419-20
race and language, 255
structural: development of, 493-94;
emphases in, 494; kinship stud-
ies and, 494-95, 496, 497
see also ethnosemantics
Linnaeus, Carolus, 1
Linton, Ralph, 460; mentalism of, 394
Lippert, ]., 196
loans, 173, 177
Locke, John
behaviorism of, 10-12
materialism of, 55-56
racism of, 8o
on tolerance, 13
Long, Edward, 89
Lounsbury, Floyd
on kinship terminology, 586; Crow
and Omaha, 592-95, 596
on kin types, 578
Lowie, Robert, 228, 251
on acceptance of evolution, 295
antifunctionalism of, 401
Benedict and, 401
on Boas, 253, 347; Boas’ data, 315;
Boas funchonahsm 520; Boas’
systematization, 286 defense of
Bo:ls, 310
on Boasians, ;4/, 348, 362, 392
capab:htxeso 343-44
on communal hunting territories,
357-58, 360-61
on comparative method, 151, 153—
54, 162, 163
comparative method abuses, 368
cultural cvolution theory, 348-53
cultural materialism and, 344, 354
on culture-circle school, 386, 388,
389-90, 392
on data, 365
on Démeunier, 18
on descent patterns, 305
on diffusion, 174, 176
on divergent evolution, 179
on cconomic determinism, 354, 357~

786

T

|

Index

Lowie, Robert (cont.)

58, 363-64, 36668, 369, 370-
71

on economics and warfare, 364-65

on emic perspective, 394

evolutionism of, 179, 553

on evolutionists, 177

on family, 348-50, 351-52

on food tabggos 53663—568 5369, 370

on Fortes, 519

functionalism of, 353-54

on goals in anthropology, 597

on Goldenweiser, 346

on Graebner, 388

ideology and errors of, 37172

importance of, 343

influences on, 344—47

on kinship groups, 178, 179; descent
patterns, 305; Morgan’s theory,
348-50, 351-52; residence and,
620; social organization and,

on K];esnims,“loz

Kroeber on, 605

on Kulturkreis school, 379

on limited possibilities principle, 626

on Lubbock, 162

Mach and, 344, 345, 346, 347, 363

on Mame 191, 371; evolutionary
sequences, 189—9o, 191

on Marett, 205

on Marx, 245

on matrilineality and patrilineality,
350

method, bias in, 362-63

Morgan and: critique of Morgan’s
kinship study, 347-52; debt to,
351-53; on Morgan’s evolution-
ism, 178

Murdock on, 620

on neo-Kantians, 270

on political organization, 350-~51

on potlatch, 364

on Radcliffe-Brown’s laws, 533

on les60urce management, 366-68,
369

on Schmidt’s culture-circle concept,
386, 388, 389—go0

scientific method of, 346-47

on sibs, 349

on slavery, 354-57
on sociocultural laws, 34445, 352,

353
Steward and, 662
on survivals, 165, 352
on territoriality, 350

Lowie, Robert (cont.)
on Tylor, 352; Tylor’s diffusionism,
174; Tylor’s religious theory,
206
on value judgments, 163
on Waitz, 102
White and, 353, 362, 641; on
White’s antievolutionism theory,
293, 204
Lubbock, John, 54
comparative method and, 151, 152,
153
ethnographic errors, 16162
matriarchal theory, 191
on religion, 200-1, 211
Lucretius, 2627
Lyell, Charles
comparative method and, 151
Darwin and, 112, 113, 115, 117
on evolution, 112-13, 114
geologic theory, 111-12, 153
on Lamarck, 112, 113, 114
Malthus and, 114
on Paleolithic, 14748
on perfectibility, 114
Spencer and, 112, 113, 114,
Lysenko, 237

McClelland, David, 459
McCulloch, John, 54
McGee, William, 254-55
Mach, Emst
IﬂWlesandy 253, 344, 345, 346, 347,

363

scientific method of, 345-46
Mackintosh, Sir James, 152
McLennan, John, 54

on archaeological data, 150

evolutionary theory, 161, 19395

on incest taboos, 197

influence of, 19697

Maine and, 191

on matriarchy, 191

on Morgan, 195

on polyandry, 196

on religion, 200

on totemism, 200

use of survivals, 165
magic and ritual

eterminist explanations, 437-39

Frazer on, 205

Freud on, 436

Malinowski on, 555, 556

Marett on, zog

Marxians on, 438

787

|
i


===== PAGE 399 =====

RE

Index

magic and ritual (cont.)
neo-Freudians on, 437-39
pre-Freudian studies, 437-38
Radcliffe-Brown on, 555, 556
see also religion and myth
Maine, Henry S.
evolutionary theories, 189—92
on history, 190
on joint land tenure, 357
on kinship systems, 191—92
Lowie on, 371
on patriarchy and patrilineality, 143
use of survivals, 164, 165
Making (The) of Religion (Lang), 206
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 520
on African political organization,

557-58, 559, 561
approach to cultural change, 556—

58, 559-61
approach to economics, 56165, 566—

on colonial relations, 540

on conflict, 560, 561

culture concept, 14, 235, 523; in-
dividual needs in, 549-51, 554,
555

on emic categories, 394

on ethical bases, 556-57

evolutionism of, 551-53

on evolutionists, 169

Freudianism and, 426, 431, 548

functionalism of, 423, 515, 558; Rad-
cliffe-Brown’s functionalism vs.,
54546, 547, 548, 550, 55456

on goals in ethnography, 597-98

incest theories, 198, 54849

on individual needs, 549-51, 554,

inﬂue’nsc,eq on, 551-52

on kinship systems, 547, 54849

on Kula, 562, 563-64, 565, 582

on magic and ritual, 555, 556

on Oedipus theory, 437

Radcliffe-Brown ‘and functionalism

ofé 54546, 547, 548, 550, 554~

5
Réheim and, 428
on status quo, 517
on survivals, 166, 167, 169, 553
Trobriand studies, 196, 546, 548,
562, 563-65, 566-67
Malthus, Thomas, 33, 106, 126
Darwin and, 115-16, 122-23
on French Revolution, 115
Marx and Engels and, 223
on natural selection, 115, 116

Malthus, Thomas (cont.)
Spencer and, 115, 224
struggle for survival concept, 114,
116, 122-23
typicality of, 41
man
dating, 14648
evolution of, 131-33
place in nature, 2223
theology and theories on origin of,
111
Man a Machine (La Mettrie), 22
Manners, Robert, 655
Manus, Mead’s study, 413
Marcuse, Herbert, 6o; on dialectic, 67—
68
Marett, Robert R., 205
Markham, F. M. A,, 59, 6o
marriage systems, 492
ambiguity in descriptions of, 584
Homans and Schneider on, 510
Leach on, 544
Lévi-Strauss on, 198, 498-505, 506,
507, 509, 510, 511
Millar on,’; 192 5 5
Needham on, 504-5, 506-8, 511
social solidarity and, soo-1, 510
see also kinship system (s)
Marx, Karl
on class struggle, 476
on communalism, 226-27
on Condillac, 236
cultural evolution law, 240, 241
on cultural selection, 229
on Darwin, 222-23
D'Holbach and, 23-24
on economic development, 226-27,
230
on cconomic negation, 69
environmentalism of, 101
cthical concepts of, 220-22
evolutionary scheme, 224-30
as evolutionist, 222-23
on Feuerbach, 219-20, 235
Hegel and, 233
influence and importance
on kinship groups, 227
law of evolution in history, 217, 218
Morgan and, 213, 246
on oversimplification, 244-45
on progress, 222
as racist, 238, 239
scientism of, 59
on sociocultural phenomena, 54
on unity of theory and practice, 21—
20

7-19

788

Index l

Marx, Karl (cont.)
see also Marxism
Manxism
anthropology and, 228-29, 245-46,
249, 467 .
capitalism analyzed in, 230, 233, 565
Childe and, 681
classical economic theories and, 565
cultural ecolegy and, 655
cultural evolution law in, 240, 241
cultural materialism strategy in, 245—
46
emics and, 564
environmentalism in, 236-38
evolution of religion in, 200
Firth on, 542
functionalism in, 235-36
Hegelian heritage of, 67, 230, 236
on individual factors and social struc-
ture, 468
Lamarckian theme, 237-38
Lévi-Strauss and, 493, 512-13
on magico-religious beliefs, 438
materialism in, 231-32, 233-35, 236;
cultural matenalism, 230-32;
cultural materialism ~strategy,
245-46; philosophical matenial-
ism, 271, 272
materialist explanation in, 242—43
mode of production defined in, 233
Morgan and, 213, 246—49
on Oriental society, 672
oversimplification in, 242-45
political strategy of, 236-37
progress concept, 239
racism and, 81, 236—40
scientific honesty in, 220-22
sociocultural causality in, 231-32,
23335, 236 )
sociocultural systems in, 231-32,
233-35, 236, 51718
Spencenism and, 222, 223-24
Steward and, 659, 660, 661-62, 683
struggle in, 222, 223, 228
Sumner on, 609
superorganic in, 469
survival of the fittest in, 223
White and, 636-38, 639, 640-41,
651
masks, B(S)as on, 258
Mason, J. A, 678
Mason, Otis, 257, 663
culture-area concept and, 374
methods, 339
Material (The) Culture and Social In-
stitutions of the Simpler Peoples

(Hobhouse, Wheeler and Gins-
berg), 612
materialism
Boas on, 263-64
of Durkheim, 474, 479-80
of D’Holbach, 22-24
Freudianism and, 457-58
of Helvétius, 44—46
history and concept of, 565-67
of Locke, 55-56
in Marxism, 231-32, 233-35, 236,
271, 272
modern attacks on, 271-72
in neo-Freudianism, 457-58
neo-Kantianism as an alternative to,
267
philosophical: Mamxism and, 271,
272; philosophical idealism vs.,
216
of Tylor, 212-13
see also cultural materialism
matriarchy
advances in theories of, 196
Bachofen on, 143, 188-89, 196
Lippert on, 196
Maine on, 191
matrilineality
Bachofen on, 143, 188-89
Crow kinship terminology and, 184
Homans and Schneider on, 502, 503
Kwakiutl, 303, 304, 305
Lévi-Strauss on, 503—4
Lowie on, 350
McLennan on, 194, 195
Morgan on, 183, 186-87, 195, 321—
24, 325
Needham on, 504-5
Schmidt on, 386-87
sociocultural evolution stage and, 30—

31
Steward on, 666
matrisibs, of Morgan, 181
Mauss, Marcel, 464
approach of, 480, 484-85
collective representations of, 482
Durkheim and, 467-68, 482, 483
on gift-giving, 482, 484, 486-87, 489
importance of, 482, 485, 486
on Kula, 483, 487
Lévi-Strauss on, 483, 484, 485, 486,
489, 490
on potlatch, 482, 487
on reciprocity, 483, 487, 489
on religion, 483
on social facts, 484-85
Mayas, civilization of, 685-86

789

|
|



===== PAGE 400 =====

Index

Maybury-Lewis, David, 509
Mead, Margaret, 431
approach  in Coming of Age in
Samoa, 480—9
Balinese study, 434-35
Benedict and, 398, 401; on Benedict's
work, 402; similarities between,
408, 409, 413-14
Boas and, 252, 408, 411; on Boas
methods, 286; on Boas’ outlook,
316-17
causality in work, 434-35
configurationalism of, 407-8, 409
contribution of, 409-11
on cultural determinism, 408—9
cultural vs. mentalist approach, 397—
98
Freudianism and, 426, 434-35
generalizations of, 410, 412-13
interest in evolution, 634~35
Kroeber on, 411
on linguistics, 419-20
Lowie and, 401
Manus childheod study, 413
method of, 409-11, 415, 416-18,
419-21
national character studies, 418-19;
Russian national character, 444—
45, 447748
photography use, 416-18
on psychocultural analysis, 441
sex behavior study, 413-14
on statistics, 411, 415
theoretical position, 634-35
Meek, C. K., 594
Meggers, Betty, on White, 637
Meiners, C., 18
mentalism
of Buckle, 77
of Durkheim, 473-74
ethnosemantics and, 598-600
of Frazer, 2045
of Lévi-Strauss, 491-92, 496, 497,
599
of Marett, 205
of structural-functionalists, 598
of Tylor, 205
see also emics
Mercator, Gerardus, 399

Mesopotamm developmental sequences
in

Adams on, 686, 687
Childe on, 681-82
metallurgy, 146
Methode (Die) der Ethnologie (Gracb-
ner), 383

Metzger, Wolfgang, 267-68, 269
Mexico
developmental sequences in, 680
hydraulic hypothesis testing, 685-86
Meyer Alfred, 249; on Marxism and
anthmpc]ogy, 228, 229, 245-46
Mill, John Stuart, 59, 126
on agriculture, 72, 73
contribution of, 71
economic theory, 72-73
on government, 72-73
racial theories, 73, 78, 101
social science of, 54
Millar, John, 35
on history, 70
on rationalism, 49
on slavery, 48-50, 51-52
on social organizations, 31~33
surplus theory, 48
Millon, René, 655, 685
Mills, C. Wright, 218
mind
Cartesian theories, 492
cultural anthropology and, 39-40
Durkheim on, 470-72, 477, 479-80,
481
education and, 12, 15-16
Hegel on, 66-67
Helvétius on, 12
Lévi-Strauss on, 49192, 496, 497
see also 1deas, rationalism; reason;
thought
Mind (The) of Primitive Man (Boas),
15, 102, 316, 322
Mintz, Sidney, 654
Mivart, St. George, 294
monadic explanation, 242—43
Monboddo, James Burmett, Lord, 16,
83,131
monogamy
Engels on, 247-48
Morgan on, 181
monogenesis
arguments for, 175
chronology in, 86
doctrine origin, 83-84
effects of theory, 83-87
Morgan on, 139—40
polygenesis vs., 93, 94
racial theories and, 88-89
monotheism, 26
Spencer on, 209
Tylor on, 202, 209
Montagu, Ashley (M. F. Ashley Mon-
tagu), 122
Montesquieu, 23

790

Index

Montesquieu (cont.)
geographical determinism of, 42, 44—
45
on mind in history, 40
on natural Jaw, 20-21
on savages vs. barbarians, 29
on subsistence, 47
Mooney, James, 257
Morgan, Lewis Henry, 54
Bachofen and, 189
Brinton on, 256
Childe and, 644, 681
comparative method and, 158, 169
cultural materialism and, 213-14
data sources, 150
on diffusion, 177
evolution theory, 29, 161, 167, 171—
72, 178, 179, 180—88 641 642
643; dlﬁusmn in, 177; ethnical
periods, 181-8 ,18;»86 family,
181-82, 183, 186; kinship ter-
minology, 181, 182, 186, 187;
positive aspects, 187-88; socio-
political organization, 181-8z,
183, 184, 187-88; technology
stages, 181, 182-83, 184-8s;
weaknesses of, 183-87
on exogamy, 197
on heredity and culture, 82
on incest taboos, 197, 199
ITroquois study, 138-40; 184, 196,
257
on kinship groups, 178-79
on kinship terminology, 181, 182,
186, 187; approach to, 324;
Kroeber on, 321-22, 323, 325,
351, 352; Lowie on, 348-49,
349-50, 35152
Kroeber and, 321-22, 323, 325, 351,
352
Leacock on, 137-38, 185, 213-14
Lowie and, 347-53
on McLennan, 195
Marxism and, 246-49
on matrilineality, 321-24, 325
as monogenesist, 139-40
Murdock on, 324
on parallel evolution, 178
on past and present, 150
on polyandry, 196
on pnmltncs 154
racism of, 129-30, 137-40
Radcliffe-Brown on, 324
on relationships based on sex, 182
on religion, 199, 438
research by, 169, 257

Morgan, Lewis Henry (cont.)
on sociopolitical organization, 181—
82, 183, 184, 187-88
on uniformity of experience, 137
use of survivals, 164, 165, 166
White and, 353, 635, 636, 640, 641,
681

Morgan-Bandelier  reconstruction  of
Aztec democracy, 676
Morton, Samuel George
cranial measurements, 99
racial theories, 9o, 91, 9798
on slavery, 91
Moss, Henry, 87
mother right of Bachofen, 143, 188-89,
196
Mother Right (Das Mutterrecht, Bach-
ofen), 143
Muenster, Sebastian, 399
Muller, H. J., 237-38
multilinear evolutionism, 642-43
Steward on, 655-57
Wittfogel on, 673
Murdock, George Peter, 450
on African state formation, 538
on Benedict, 617-18
on Boas, 315, 607
on cultural relativism, 617-18
on descent patterns, 305
on diffusion, 615-16
evolutionism of, 610-11, 627-29
on family, 578
functional context abuse, 629-31
on Homans and Schueider’s marriage
systems study, 503
Human Relations Area Files, 158,
159, 450, 452, 612, 613-14, 632
incest theories, 198
on kinship groups, 305, 578, 611,
629-30, 631
on kinship terminology: Crow, 594,
595; determinants, 618-23
on Kroeber, 324
on Lévi-Strauss, 598
on limited possibilities principle,
624-25, 626, 627, 628
on Lowie, 620
methods: critique of, 632-33; sam-
pling problems, 632; statistical
cross-cultural ~ approach, 158,
159, 606
on Morgan, 324
position of, 607
on sib and clan, 631
on social anthropolngv 540
on Steward’s evolutionism, 627

791



===== PAGE 401 =====

Index

Murdock, George Peter (cont.)
on Sumner and Keller, 60g
taxonomic criteria, 629-31
theoretical approach, 325
on unpredictability, 627-29
on White’s evolutionism, 627

Murphy, Robert, 512

mysticism of Lang, 204, 206-7

myth, see religion and myth

Nadel, S. I, 394
Nagel, Emest, 423
Naroll, Raoul, 615, 616
nationalism
racial interpretation, 106
romantic, 57
Natural History of Society (Taylor),

naturalism, Schmidt on, 390-g1
natural law
behavior and, 18-25
Darwin on, 117-18
Enlightenment search for, 18-25
reason and, 24-25
Spinoza on, 19
see also sociocultural laws
natural selection
in Darwinism: influences on, 123; of
moral qualities, 120, 121; origin
of, 115, 116; racial differences
and, 119
Spencer on, 127-28
Wallace on, 123
Wells on, g6
Westermarck on, 199
see also struggle
Nature (The) of Cultural Things (Har-
1is), 299, 527
Needham, Rodney
on Homans and Schneider, 504-5
on marriage systems, 504-5, 506-9,
511
Lévi-Strauss and, 505, 511
on social structure, 598
needs, Malinowski on individual, 549~
51, 554, 555
negation
in evolution, 68-6¢; transformations
and, 69-70
in Hegelian dialectic, 67-69
in Marxism, 6g
negativism, in historical particularism,

29394
neobehaviorism

learning theories, 449, 450
psychocu]mral analyses and, 449

neoevolutionism
described, 634
see also evolutionism
neo-Freudianism
anthropology and, 432-33
determinism and, 457-58
magico-religious beliefs in, 437-39
materialism in, 457-58
psychocultural analyses: critique of,
453-56; of Erikson, 442—43;
Japanese national character, 443—
44; of Kardiner, 435-42; meth-
ods, 439—41; Russian national
character, 445-48
neo-Kantians, 398
Boas and, 263-64, 267-71
Lowic and, 344-47
Neolithic, discovery of, 146-47
Neptunist school of geology, 110
New Guinea, Mead’s work in, 413
Newman, John Henry, 55
New (The) Science (Vico), 19—20
New Testament, evolutionary doctrine
in, 26
New World civilizations
Adams on Meso-American, 686, 687
Boasians on, 676—77
chronology of, 678-79
diffusion and evolution of, 680
hydraulic hypothesis testing, 685-86
Peruvian evolutionary sequence, 67—
81
“as second earth,” 683
Steward on origin and sequence, 680~
81, 682, 683
Nieboer, H. ], 612
Nietzsche, Friedrich
Benedict and, 398—99, 402
evolutionism and, 297
Nilsson, Sven, 146
nondeterministic idealism, 40
Nootka social structure, 355-56
Norbeck, Edward and Margaret, 444
Northwest Coast Indians
Boas’ study, 302-3; critiques of, 310,
11
”‘”M;Ymv 303, 304, 305, 306, 313
potlatch, 306-10, 313; in_historical
perspective, 308-10; Lowie on,
304
social structure, 355-56
subsistence base, 311-12, 313
see also Kwakiutl
Notes and Queries (Royal Anthropo-
logical Institute), 159

792

Index

Notes on the State of Virginia (Jeff-
erson), 8o
Nott, Josiah Clark, 91, 92, 109
numaym, 303, 304, 305
Hazard on, 313
modern interpretation, 306
potlatch and, 313
Nutini, Hugo
on behavior models, 592
on Lévi-Strauss, 498-99
Nyerup, R., 146

Observations Concerning the Distinc-
tion of Ranks in Society (Millar),
31-33, 48

Oceania, Rivers’ study, 380

Oedipus situation, 425, 431

Freud on, 425
Malinowski on, 437, 548
Roheim on, 428, 429, 430

Of the Origin and Progress of Language
(Monboddo), 16

Old Testament, evolutionary doctrines
in, 25-26

Omaha kinship terminology, 183-84

Omnium Gentium Mores (Boemus),

0o

On /‘\}irs, Waters, and Places (Hippoc-
rates),

“On a Method of Investigating the De-
velopment of Institutions; Applied
to Laws of Marriage and Descent
(Tylor), 158, 612

On the Nature of Things (Lucretius),
26-27

Opler, Morris

Colby on, 574

on Morgan, 214

on Tylor, 211-12

on White, 637, 638-39

orderliness in history, 20-235, 231; see
also natural law

organisms, structure of, analogy with

social structure, 526-27, 530

Oriental despotism, cultural  ecologic
approach, 67173

Origin (The) of Cuwvilization and the
Primitive Condition of Man (Lub-
bock), 200-1

Origin (The) of the Family, Private
Property, and the State (Engels),
240, 246, 641

Origin of Species (Darwin), 71, 93, 94

background of, 142-43
greatness of, 116-17
Origin (The) of the State (Lowie), 351

Outline of the History of Mankind
(Meiners), 18

Outline of the Intellectual Progress of
Mankind (Condorcet), 24, 35, 39,
115

Outline; of a Critique of Political Econ-
omy (Marx), 225

oversimplification, in Marxism, 244-45

Oxford Movement, 55

Packard, Vance, 459
Paleolithic, 147-48
Paley, William, 55
parallel evolution, 65-66, 179
Boas on, 258-59, 260, 278-79, 280
Boasians on, 292, 295, 296
causality and, 657~58
Childe on, 681, 683
convergent evolution vs., 176-77
judgments on, 657
Morgan on, 178
Steward on, 656, 66062
in two cultures, 645
Parsons, Elsie Clews, on Zuii, 405
Parsons, Talcott
on Comte, 465-66
on Durkheim, 465-66, 474, 477, 480
on Hegel, 480
particularism, see Boasians; historical
particularism
pastoral stages, 28—29
patriarchy
Maine on, 143, 189, 190
Morgan on, 181
patrilineality
Bachofen on, 189
Homans and Schneider on, 502, 503
Kwakiutl, 303, 304, 305
Lévi-Strauss on, 503—4
Lowie on, 350
McLennan on, 194, 195
Maine on, 143, 189
Morgan on, 183, 186-87
Needham on, 505
Omaha kinship terminology and,
183-84
Radcliffe-Brown on, 502, 503
Steward on, 666, 667
Patterns of Culture (Benedict), 332
approach of, 398
Boas and, 311
deviancy discussed in, 403-4
ethnographic problems in, 402-3,
404~7
importance of, 402, 406
psychologic portraits in, 307

793



===== PAGE 402 =====

Index

Patterns of Culture (cont.)
taxonomic assumptions in, 401
theme of, 403
Pearson, Karl, 345
“Pearson Circle,” 345
Penniman, T. K., 228
perfectibility
Condorcet on, 115
Darwin on, 117-18
Gobineau on, 104
Lyell on, 114
progress and, 58
racism and doctrine of, 98, 104
Spencer on, 124, 125
see also progress
Perry, W. J.
diffusionism of, 380, 381-82
on Egyptian culture, 38182
emphasis of, 514
personality
crucial determinants of, 458-61
cultural evolution and, 455, 456-57
history and, 456-57
sociocultural institutions and, 436,
439, 44142, 455, 456-57
subsistence requirements and develop-
ment of, 46061
theoretical productivity of concept,
450-51
see also individual(s); psychocul-
tural approach
Peru, evolutionary sequence in, 679-81
Philosophical Reflections on the First
Objects of Moral Understanding
(De Bonald), 56-57
photography, ethnographic use, 416-18
phratries, of Morgan, 181
phrenology, 99
phylogeny, as approach to cultural evo-
lution, 652
physicalism, Boas on, 261-63
Piddington, R., 523, 554
Piddocke, S., 312
Pike, Kenneth
on emic ambiguity handling, 584
on emic-ctic mixture, 577
on emics and etics, 569-71
Pitt-Rivers, A. L.-F., 1 51
P]aing Indians’ warfare, Lowie on, 364—
5
Plan for Two Discourses on Universal
History (Turgot), 13-14
Plekhanov, G. V., 43-44
Polanyi, Karl, 313
political organization, see social organi-
zation; state

Political Systems of Highland Burma
(Leach), 541
politics
changes in, in Marxism vs. Spencer-
ism, 239
functionalism and position in, 558
Marxism strategy, 236-37
philosophical materialism and radical
movements, 271, 272
scientific honesty and, 220-22
social sciences and action in, 219—20
see also state
polyandry, changing theories on, 193
194, 196
Polybius, 41
polygamy, Morgan on, 181

polygenesis
American  School of anthropology
and, go—91

Darwinism and, 93-94
racial theories and, 87-88
slavery and, 89-9o
Polynesia, social structure in, 355
Popper, Karl, 542, 552
positivism, 59—-66
antimaterialism and, 64
on Comte, 59, 60, 61-62, 473
Durkheim and, 465-66
of Saint-Simon, 6o, 61
possibilities, principle of limited, 384,
624-27, 628
potlatch, 303, 306-10
Boas on, 306-8
in historical perspective, 308-10
Lévi-Strauss on, 488
Lowie on, 364
Mauss on, 482, 487
numaym and, 313
Pouwer, J., 503, 510
Powell, John W, 255
power, see authority
practice, unity of theory with, 219-20
Praeadamitae (La Peyrere), 87
predictability
Darwin on struggle for survival and,
117-18
on emic behavior studies, 589-92
of emic statements, 57172
of emics in psychoanalysis, 575
of etics, 575
of evolution, Murdock on, 627-29
Quételet on: of behavior, 74-75, 76;
confidence limits and sample

size, 74-75

Pre-Historic Times . . . (Lubbock), 161

794

he

" W

Index

prehistory
Engcls on, 248-49
Maine on, 190
Price, B., 686
Prichard, James Cowles, 100, 101, 106
influences on, 96
on perfectibility, 104
racial theories, 94-95, 102
Primitive Culture (Tylor), 140, 164,
168, 172
comparative method in, 201-2
critique of, 2023
Primitive Marriage” (McLennan), 165
primitive peoples
role of, 29-31
state of nature phase, 38-39
Primitive Society (Lowie), 347, 348;
contribution of, 353-54
principle of limited possibilities, 384,
624-27, 628
Principles of Biology (Spencer), 128
Principles of Geology (Lyell), 111
Principles of Political Economy (Mill),
7173
Principles of Sociology (Spencer), 130,
134, 159, 161, 208
production, Marxist definition of mode
of, 233
progress
Boasians on, 292, 295
comparative method and, 152
Condorcet on, 116
Darwin on, 114, 115-16, 120-22
eighteenth-century concepts, 37-38,
40-41, 152
evaluation of change as, 37-38
evolutionism and concept of, 36-37,
653
Malthus on, 114, 115-16
Marx on, 222, 239
moral judgments on, 37-38
perfectibility and, 58
Spencer on, 124-25, 127-28, 239
see also perfectibility
promiscuity stage
Bachofen on, 188
Lowie on, 348
McLennan on, 193, 195
Morgan on, 181, 182, 186
‘Westermarck on, 198-99
property rights
Algonkians, 357, 358-59
Engels on evolution of, 224-25
inheritance of, 188
Lowie on communal, 357-58, 360—
61

property rights (cont.)
Maine on communal, 357
Marx on, 224-25, 22627
Morgan on, 182, 183, 187
private vs. communal, 30-31
Queensland aborigines, 361-62
Steward on, 666
Vedda, 357, 359-61
wealth and communal, 32
Proudhon, P. ], 239
psychic unity doctrine, 15
independent inventions and, 175, 176
racism and, 137
Réheim’s unconscious and, 430
psychoanalysis
appeal of, 431
Cglptural an?};ropology and, 448
emic/etic distinction in, 575
new approaches, 433
theories, in psychocultural analyses,
43637
see also Freudianism; psychocultural
approach
psychocultural approach, 393-421
aim of, 462-63
anthropology and, 448
of Benedict, 307, 401, 403—4
Boas on, 280-81
causality in, 441—42, 453-56, 462~63
contribution of, 422-25
critique of, 453-56
cultural materialism and, 460-62
Durkheim and, 484, 483, 486
of Erikson, 44243
homeostasis and, 458-59
homogeneity concept, 414-16
individual deviancy in, 403-4, 415-
16, 419, 455
Japanese national character, 443-44
of Kardiner, 435-42
Lévi-Strauss and, 491-93
Mauss and, 484-85
of Mead, 408-13
neobehaviorism and, 449
of neo-Freudians, 439-41
new trends in, 449-50
personality determinants and, 45861
psychoanalytic theory in, 437-38
Radcliffe-Brown and, 531-32, 533
Russian national character, 445-48
stereotypes and, 399401, 415-16,
419, 44344
time perspective and, 456
Whiting and, 450-52

795

i
|
i


===== PAGE 403 =====

R

psychology
mntnbunons to cultural theory, 422—
Dnl(hny and experimental, 269
as emic study domain, 572, 574-75
emic vs. etic approach, 574
in ethnographic approach, 393-421
functionalist approach, 422-25
see also psychocultural approach
psychophysics, 267-68
Pueblo Indians, Benedict’s study, 405—
6, 407
punaluan family of Morgan, 181
Purum marriage exchange studies, 506~

9, 511

quantity cntenon in culture-circle con-
cept,
ueens]an abongmcs property rights
of, 361-62
Quetelet Adolphe, 6;9, 60, 73~76
critique of, 757
determinism of, 7476
on free will, 74
on predictability of behavior, 74-75,
7
on social conditions, 75

race
environmental interpretation, 83-87
intelligence and, 133
see also racism
racism, 81-82, 100-1
behavior in scientific, 81
Blumenbach, 84, 85, 95
Boas, 292, 297, 298, 470
British theories, gg—101
Buckle on, 77-78
Buffon, 84, 95
chronology and doctrines of, 86
Darwinism and, 94—98, 118-19
Durkheim, 470
economic theory and, 106-7
eighteenth-century doctrines, 80, 82—
83, 85-86, §8, 98
environmentalism and, 83-87, 238-
39
in France, 103-5
in Germany, 101-3
Gobineau, 103~5
Helvétius,
Hume, 87, ?&
imperialism and, 134-36
Lawrcncc 96-97
Locke, 8
in Marxism. 81, 23640

racism (cont.)
Mill, 73, 78
modemn viewpoints, 131-33, 29798
monogenesis and, 83, 88-89
Morgan, 129-30, 137—40
Morton, 9o, 91, 97-98
nationalism and, 106
neo-Hegelian, 272
nineteenth-century theories, 80-81,
85-86, 100-1, 129-30, 137
perfectibility doctrine and, 98, 104
phrenology and, 99
polygenesis and, 87-88
psychic unity doctrine, 137
in sciences, 129-30
slavery and, 89—~go
sociocultural milieu of, 1057
stereotypes and, 82
Tylor, 129-30, 140—41
in United States, 86-87, 88, go—93,
Voltaire, 87
Radcliffe-Brown, Alfred Reginald, 62,
401, 465
on African institutions, 538
on Bathonga joking relationship, 527-
28, 529
biological organismic model of, 526
comparative method of, 543-44
on conflict, 516
on Durkheim, 515
on economic system, 518
evolutionism of, 525-26, 551, 5353,
554
functionalism of, 423,6;15~16, 519,
520, 521, 545-46, 547, 548,

550, 55450
on functional unity, 516-17

on history, 524-25

Junod and, 538

on kinship systems, 495, 533-34,
549; Australian kinship study,
533; nuclear family, 549; patn-
lineality, 495, 502, 503

on kinship terminology, 534

Leach on, 543-44

Lévi-Strauss on, 495

on magic and ritual, 555, 556

Malinowski’s functionalism and, 545—
46, 547, 548, 550, 55456

on Morgan, 324

psychology in approach of, 531-32,

533

scientific standards of, 519, 520, 521,
522

on social structure, 517, 518, 561,
598

796

Index ‘ Index

Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. (cont.)
on sociocultural laws, 519, 520, 521~
22, 523, 554
on Spencer’s superorganic, 554
structural principles as sociocultural
laws, 530-31, 532-34, 554
theoretical justification of strategy,
52
Radin, I’,:?xl
appmach to history, 299-300
on Boas, 276, 287, 299
‘White on, 296
Radl, E,, 29495
Rappaport, Roy, 6oz; warfare pattern
studies, 366
rationalism
Cartesian, 492
as measure of change, 38
Millar on, 49
rationalization, of Comte, 61-62
Ratzel, Fricdrich, 339, 664
on cross-cultural similarities, 382-83
culture-circle concept, 384
Ray, Verne, 261
on Benedict, 310, 311
on Boas, 310, 311, 315
reality
of cultural things, 333-34
Durkheim on, 472
in Lévi-Strauss’ work, 497-98
in social sciences, 471
of social things, 472
reason
cultural anthropology theories and,
39-40
natural law and, 24-25
see also rationalism; thought
reciprocity, 500
Lévi-Strauss on, 488-89, 490, 491,
5006, 507, 509, 510
Mauss on, 483, 487, 489
mental sub-structure of, 492
see also gift-giving
Redfield, Robert, 192—93
reductionism
biological, 292, 295
pyschological, effects of, 531-32, 533
Reichard, Gladys, 266, 305
relativism
critique of, 163-64
Kroeber on, 331-32
Murdock on, 617-18
Spencer on, 133-34
toleration vs., 13-14
religion and myth, 199207
Bachofen on, 188-89, 200

religion and myth (cont.)
Boas on, 284
dichotomies in, 71
Durkheim on, 478, 480
Frazer on, 204-5
Freud on, 436
functionalist approach, 424
illusion and, 436
Lang on, 204, 206-7
Lévi-Strauss on, 71
Lubbock on, 2012, 211
McLennan on, 200
Marett on, 205
Marxists on, 2c0
Mauss on, 483
Morgan on, 199, 438
orthodoxy revival, 55
Smith (W. Robertson) on, 207-8
Spencer on, 209-10
Tylor on, 201—4, 206-7, 209
see also magic and ritual; theology
Religion (The) of the Semites (Smith),
207
research
anthropological: cultural materialist
strategy and, 674; French an-
thropologists, 464
archaeological: needs in, 684-83;
new techniques in, 677-78
by Boas: data in, 314-135, 316-17;
evaluation of, 301—2; strategy of
278
in cultural ecology, 655
cultural materialist strategy in, 674,
687
emic vs. etic options, 569, 582, 600—1
cthnology, pre-Boasian, 257
in ethnosemantics: data collection
and sources, 585-89; emic com-
mitment of, 6oo-1; etics plus
emics in, 582; strategy of, 579—
8o
by evolutionists, 169—71
in hydraulic h\poﬂlcm 685-86
philosophy of scientific, 286 89
political factors and data interpreta-
tion, 220-22
of structural-functionalists, 516; re-
sumption of diachronic, 539—40
see also scientific method
Researches into the Early History of
Mankind and the Development of
Civilization (Tylor), 144-45, 145
9, 175
Rcsc;rches into the I’h)mal History of
Man (Prichard),

797

|
|

i



===== PAGE 404 =====

Index

Resck, Carl, 139
resource management, Lowie on, 366—
68, 369
Retzius, Anders, 99
Revel, J. F., 488
Ricardo, David, 54, 106, 126
Richards, Audrey, 539
Richardson, Jane, 329
Rickert, Heinrich, 270-71, 294
Rickman, |, 444
Riesman, David, 459
Rigollot, Dr., 147
Ritter, Karl, 265
ritual, see magic and ritual; religion and
myth
Rivers, W. H. R
diffusionism of, 380
cmphasis of, 514
on evolutionism, 380
on Freudianism, 432
on Kroeber, 322
Rivet, Paul, 482
Robertson, William, 34-35, 384
Robespierre, M., 2
Rodinson, M., 512
Roheim, Géza
on Boasians, 428-29
Freudianism and, 427-30, 434
Malinowski and, 428
on Mead, 434
mcthod of, 427, 428
on Oedipal situation, 428, 429, 430
on totemism, 437
romantic nationalism, 57
Romney, A. K, 587
Ronhaar, ]. I, 613
Roth, H. R, 4035
Roth. Walter E., 361-62
Rousscau, Jean Jacques
on cducation, 16
environmentalism of, 83
political doctrines, 21—22
on primitive man, 38
[Royal] ~ Anthropological ~Society of
Great Britain and Ireland, 100
Rules (The) of the Sociological Method
(Durkheim), 465, 469, 473, 474,
477
Rumacy, J., 161
Rush, Benjamin, 8~
Russians, neo-Freudian study of national
character, 445-48
Sahlins, Marshall, 496, 502
on kinship relations, 496
on Lévi-Strauss, 599
on reality, 497

Sahlins, Marshall (cont.)
on social structure, 313, 355
on specific vs. general evolution, 651~
53
on Tylor, 641
Saint-Simon, Claude Ilenri
Comte and, 466
Durkheim and, 466
importance of, 59, Go-61
positivism of, 6o, 61
Samoa
Mead’s work in, 408-10, 411-13
social structure, 355
Sanday, P., 616
Sanders, William, 686
Sapir, E., 251, 646 7'f
Benedict and, 398, 403, 404
on etic data, 582
on individual, 327-28
on innovations, 605~6
Kroeber and, 299, 321, 327-28
on neo-IFreudianism, 432
Pike on, 570-71
on Rickert, 270
on superorganic, 321, 327-28
White on, 294
Sauer, Carl, 662
Schlegel, Friedrich von, 153
Schmidt, Wilhelm, 382
antiscientism of, 391
bias of, 390
comparative method use, 388
culture-circle theories, 383, 384, 385~
87, 388
evolutionism of, 385-87
on Frobenius, 383
on independent invention, 174
Kluckhohn on, 389—qo
Lowie on, 38990
on matrilincality, 386-87
supernaturalism of, 39091
Schneider, David, 491, 578, 598
on  Amcrican Kinship terminology,
586-8~
on marriage cxchange systems, 501—
3, 504-5, 510
Murdock on, 503
Needham on, 504-5
Schneider, Harold, 36869
Schoolcraft, TTenry,
Schumpcter, Joseph, 126
Schurtz, 11, 351
science(s )
Bacon on, 28~
Dilthey on, 269, 20, 271
Frazer on, 203

798

e

|
|

Index

science(s) (cont.)
generalization in, 271
history and, 273-75, 335, 336-37
honesty, in Marxism, 220-22
Krocber on, 335, 336-37
modern attacks on, 271-72
positivist compromise, 59-66
pure vs. applied, 411-12
Rickert and Windelband on, 270
sociocultural factors and, 1089
speculation and, 286-88
supernaturalism and, 23
theology and, 108, 389—g0
unity of theory and practice doctrine,
219-20
see also scientific method; scientism;
social science(s)
Science (The) of Society (Sumner and
Keller), 607
scientific method
anthropology, 448
of Benedict, 415
of Boas: eclecticism in, 284-85; emics
and, 316-17, 318; generaliza-
tions in, 282-83; philosophic
errors in, 286-8¢; standards in,
259, 260-61, 262-63; system-
atization in, 285-86
cultural materialism as, 659
of Durkheim, 470
in historical particularism, 251
Hume on inductive, 620
of Kroeber, 33033, 339-40
of Lowie, 344, 346-47; abuses in,
368; errors in, 371~72; ideologi-
cal bias in, 362-63
of Mach, 345-46
of Mead, 409-11, 415, 416-18, 419—
21
neobehaviorism and, 449
neo-Freudian psychocultural analyses,
43941
political factors and approach of, 53~

55
of White, 651
of Whiting school, 452-53
scientism
British social anthropology and, 542—

43
of Buckle, 76-78
modern attacks on, 271-72
ost-Napoleonic antiscientism, 55-5.
of Ouctelet, 73026 55759
religion and, 54
see also science(s)
Sée, Tenri, 371

selection
cultural: of diffused or invented in-
novations, 378; Marx on, 229
sexual, Darwin on, 119, 120-22
Spencer on, 215
see also natural selection; struggle
Seligman, C. G, 426, 548; Vedda
study, 359, 360-61
Seltzer, F., 684
semantics, see ethnosemantics; linguis-
tics
Serres, Marcel du, 147
Service, Elman, 654, 675
on specific vs. general evolution,
651-53
on Tylor, 641
Sex and Repression in Savage Society
(Malinowski), 548
Sex and Temperament ‘in Three Primi-
tive Societies (Mead), 413-14
Sexual (The) Life of Savages in North-
western Melanesia (Malinowski),
548
shamanism, Lubbock on, 201
Shapiro, H. L., 24, 25
Simmons, L. W, 405-6
Singer, Milton
on configurational approach, 423
on Kroeber, 341, 342
Skinner, B. F., 449
Skinner, Elliot, 537-38
slavery
American School and, 91-93
development of, 33, 46, 48-52, 139,
224, 354-57
Helvétius on, 46
Lowie on, 354-57
Marx and Engels on, 224
Millar on, 33
Morgan on, 139
polygenesis and, 89—go
Slavery as an Industrial System (Nie-
boer), 612
Slotkin, J. S., 84
Smith, Adam, 72, 474
cconomic theory, 106
on government, 126
Smith, Grafton Elliot, 384, 514
diffusionism of, 380-81, 382
on Fgyptian cultural evolution, 380~
82
Smith, M. 286-87
Smith, S. S., 86-87, 237, 238-39
Smith, W. Robertson
on religion, 207-8
study of Arabs and Hebrews, 196-97

799



===== PAGE 405 =====

Index

social class
ambiguities in description, 583-84
racism and, 106
wealth redistribution and, 32
see also social organization
social condensation of Durkheim, 475-
76, 477
Social (The) Contract (Rousseau), 21—
22
Social Darwinism, 122-23
social facts
Durkheim on, 470, 471-72, 484, 485,
486
Lévi-Strauss on, 485
Mauss on, 484-85
social institutions
personality and, 455, 456-57; Kard-
iner on, 436, 439, 441-42
religion and, 208, 480
source, in Marxism, 231-32, 233-35,
236
see also social organization
Socialism, see Marxism
social organization
African, 557-58, 559, 561; structural-
functionalists on, 537-38
Boasians on, 284, 676-77
causality and, 38-52, 666, 667-68
Comte on, 62-64, 65
cultural ecologic approach, 671-73
Durkheim on, 192, 470-72
carly theories, 18-52
economic factors and, 47-49, 54-55,
518; redistributive systems, 313;
subsistence, 4748, 667; surplus,
72; see also economic factors
Firth on, 54142
Hegel on, 70
Helvétius on, 44-46
individual’s role in, 467-68, 470-72,
549-51
Kachin, 584
Kroeber on, 322-23, 324
Kwakiutl, 301, 303
Leach on Burmese, 541
Lévi-Strauss on, 598
Lowie on, 353-54
Maine on, 19293
Malinowski “on, " 549-51, 557-58,
559, 561
Marxian theory, 22426, 227, 240,
241, 51718
Micronesia, 355
Mill on, 72
Millar on, 31-33, 49

social organization (cont.)

Morgan on, 181-84, 187-88

Necdham on, 598

New World origin, 67679

Northwest Coast cultures, 355-56

organic structure analogy with, 526-
27, 530

primitive man and, 29-31

Quétclet on, 75, 76

racism and, 106

Radcliffe-Brown on, 518, 561, 568

semantic ambiguities in describing,
583-84

societies in study of, 64

solidarity and, 467-68

Spencer on, 125-26, 193

stages, 28-29

state of nature and, 38-39

Steward on: causality, 666, 667-68;
developmental sequence, 670—
71, 674; primitive band study,
666-69; subsistence and, 47—
48, 667; Yuman, 669-70

structural-functionalist approach,
536-38

subsistence and, 47-48, 667

Tonnies on, 192

Turgot on, 666

White on, 643

Yuman, 669-70

see also evolutionism; kinship sys-
tem (s); state; and under specific
topic

Social Organization (Lowie), 370-71
Social (The) Organization and the

Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl
Indians (Boas), 303
social science(s)
Cartesian, 181-19
Darwinism and, 122-23
Durkheim on, 469-7
free will and, 23-24
Marx and, 217-19
racist outlook in, 129-30
reality in, 471
Spencerism and, 292
unity of theory and practice doctrine,
219-20
social solidarity
class struggle vs., 467-68
division of labor and, 47!
Durkheim on, 466, 467-68; division
of labor and, 476; growth, ef-
fects of, 468-69; structural-
functionalists and, 515-16

800

Index

social solidarity (cont.)

marriage exchange systems and, 500—

1, 510

Marx on, 468

Spencer on, 468

structural-functionalists and, 515-16
Social Statics (Spencer), 124, 125-26
social structure, see social organization
“Social Structure” (Lévi-Strauss), 503
Social Structure (Murdock), 324, 611,

614, 618, 620, 624-25

critique of, 629

taxonomic criteria in, 629—30
society, see social organization; state

sociocultural evolution, see evolution-

ism; history; social organization
sociocultural laws

bases of, 234-35

Boas on, 274, 275, 277-82

Boasians on, 519, 520, 522

Comte on, 65, 66

Firth on, 561

Kardiner on, 436, 439, 441-42

Kroeber on, 330, 333

Lowie on, 344-45, 352, 353

Marx and, 240, 241

Radcliffe-Brown on, 519, 520, 521—
22, 523, 530-34, 554

Steward’s developmental = sequence
and, 670-71, 674

structural-functionalist principles and,
521-22, 523, 524, 530-34

Tax’s structural principles, 531

‘White on general, 648-51

see also determinism

sociolinguistics, see ethnosemantics
sociopolitical organization, see social or-

ganization; state

Sorokin, Pitirim

on Gobineau, 103
on Marx, 218

South American Indians, 675
Southwest

Benedict’s portrayal of Indians, 405—
6, 407

Steward’s cultural ecologic study,
66970

speciation

applicability to cultural evolution,
52

Spencer on, 124, 128

specific evolution, 651-53
Speck, Frank G., 666; on land tenure,

358, 362

speculation, science and, 286-88
Spencer, Herbert, 62, 132, 526
comparative method use, 159-61,
169
Durkheim on, 475
on economics, 125-26
Lyell and, 112, 113, 114
Malthus and, 115
political beliefs, 125-26
on polyandry, 196
research by, 169
sociocultural studies, 208-10
see also Spencerism
Spencerism
anthropology and, 296, 298
Boasians on, 292, 298
contribution of, 54, 71, 105, 128~30
cultural materialism and, 215-16
cultural relativism in, 133-34
determinism in, 296
division of labor i, 475, 476, 477,
478-79
environmentalism and, 128, 239
evolution in, 123-27, 133, 172-73,
193, 208-10, 292, 607, 608, 610
fallacy of, 130-32
family in, 208-g
French rejection of, 464
ideological roots, 105
impenalism and, 135-36
on individual factors, 468
Marxism and, 222, 223-24
modern attacks on, 272, 297-98
political organization in, 216
predictability in, 74
progress concept in, 38, 239
psychic unity doctrine and, 137
religion in, 209-10
scientism in, 59
selection in, 215
socia) sciences and, 292
sociocultural roots, 105—7
stereotypes in, 400-1
Sumner and Keller on, 607, 608, 610
superorganic in, 469, 554
survival in, 125, 127-28
universe in, 215
uses of, 133-34
White and, 636
see also Spencer, Herbert

Spinden, Herbert, 678-79
Spinoza, Baruch, 19
Spirit (The) of Laws (Montesquieu),

20, 42

Spiro, M., 410

801



===== PAGE 406 =====

Index

Stalin, Joseph, 221
Stalinism, world history in, 672
Stanton, William, 89, g1
Starcke, Carl N, 196, 198
state
division of labor and, 474~76, 478
Ferguson on, 31-32
Helvétius on,
individualism and, 467-68
kinship groups and, 31-33, 188, 350—
51, 631
Lowie on, 350-51
McLennan on, 195
Marx and Engels on, 225
Millar on, 32-33
Morgan on, 19z, 193
Murdock on, 631
power of, 126, 468-69
solidarity and, 46769
Spencer on, 126, 216
structural-functionalists on African,
537-38 .
see also social organization
state of nature, 38-39
statistical method, 158, 415, 450-52,
606
causality problem, 618, 619, 620-21
comparative method and, 158, 450~
52, 612, 633
critique of, 63233
diffusion problem, 615-16
functional context problem, 616-18,

629-31

kinship terminology study, 61820,
621-23

limited possibilities principle, 384,
624-27, 628

Mead on, 411, 415
of Murdock, 158, 159, 606, 629-31,
63233
sampling deficiencies, 63233
of Tylor, 157-58, 169, 612, 633
of Whiting school, 452-53
Steinmetz, S, R., 612
stereotypes
in psychocultural analyses, 399—401,
443-44; of Benedict, 401; varia-
bility and, 415-16, 419
in racist theory, 82
Stevenson, R. F., 537
Steward, Julian
achievement of, 662, 666, 668-69,
674, 675-76
on adaptation, 652—53
approach of, 606, 607, 615, 635, 636

e

Steward, Julian (cont.)
archaeology and, 669, 683-84
on causality, 337, 657, 660-62, 666,
667-68
on cross-cultural correlations, 658
cultural ecology of, 655-56, 658,
659~60, 661, 662, 666-70
cultural materialism and, 658-60,
674, 675-76
on culture-area concept, 340, 377
on culture core, 660-62
developmental sequence of, 67071,
674
on diffusion, 658~59
early influences on, 662
evolutionism of, 171, 173, 608, 627,
642-43, 64445, 652-53, 657;
culture core in, 660-62; develop-
mental sequence, 670-71; dif-
fusion in, 658-59; multilinear
evolution, 655-57; Murdock on,
627; parallelism in, 656; uni-
linear evolution, 171; White on,
646-47, 648-49; White’s evo-
lutionism vs., 654
on family, 666, 667
on hydraulic civilizations, 671, 680,
686-87
influence of, 654—56
on Kroeber, 320, 331, 338
Marxism and, 659, 660, 66162, 683
on multilinear evolution, 655-57
Murdock on, 627
on New World origin and develop-
ment, 680-81, 682, 683
on parallel evolution, 656
primitive band study, 28, 666-69
on sociocultural integration, 341
on South American Indians, 675
on unilinear evolution, 171
‘White and, 641, 648-49
on White’s evolutionism, 646, 647—
48, 654
Wittfogel and, 682, 683
on Yuman, 669-70
Stocking, George
on Boas, 263, 266
on philosophical idealism vs. philo-
sophical materialism, 216
on Tylor, 212
Stolpe, Hjalmar, 258
Strong, W. D., 67980, 683
structural-functionalists
on African state formation, 537-38

802

Index

structural functionalists (cont.)
colonialism and, 516-17
on comparative method, 617
on conflict, 516
culture concept, 523
Durkheim’s social” solidarity and,
515-16
ethnosemantics and, 531
evolutionism of, 525-26
functionalism of, 514, 519, 520, 521~
22, 523; Malinowski vs. Rad-
cliffe-Brown, 545-46, 547, 548,
550
functional unity concept, 516-17
on history, 524-25, 535, 539-40
laissez-faire doctrine and, 534-35
mentalism and, 598
objectives of, 52223
on political organization, 536-38
research, 516; diachronic, §39-40,
;?z; new trends in, 54243
scientific standards, 519, 520-22
scientism and, 54243
on social structure, 517-18
sociocultural laws and, 521-22, 523,
524, 530-34
strategy of, 524
see also under specific individual
structuralism
Cartesianism and, 49293
see also structural-functionalists
Structures (Les) Elémentaires de la
Parenté, see Elementary (The) Struc-
tures of Kinship (Lévi-Strauss)
struggle
Darwin on, 117-18, 120-22, 12
Durkheim on, 475, 476, 477, 478-79
Lévi-Strauss on, 491
Lyell on, 113
McLennan on, 193
Malthus on, 114, 116, 12
in Marxism, 222, 223, 22
perfectibility and, 117-18
racism and, 105~6
Spencer on, 125, 127-28
Wells on, 96
see also class struggle
“Study (The) of Geography” (Boas),
277
Study (The) of Sociology (Spencer), 74
Sturtevant, W., 568, 507
on etic description, 582
on Krocber, 577
subsistence
base, of Northwest Indians, 311-13

subsistence (cont.)
Lowie on: resource management,
366-68, 360; slavery and, 354-57
Morgan on, 183, 184

personality and, 460~61
sequence, in Peru, 679-81
social structure and, 47-48, 667
sociocultural evolution and, 30
Steward on, 667
surplus theory, 48, 72
see also economic factors
suicide
Durkheim’s study, 75, 465, 477
Quételet’s study, 75
Suicide (Durkheim), 465, 477
Sumner, William Graham
cultural materialism and, 608—
on domain of history, 624
evolutionism of, 607-8, 610, 611
on Marxism, 609
on Spencerian evolution, 610
supernaturalism
of Schmidt, 39091
sciences and, 23
superorganic
Boas on, 329~30
Durkheim on, 469, 473
Enlightenment theoriés, 43-44, 51
evolution and, 70
Kroeber on, 321, 325, 326-27, 328-
29330, 332,336
in Marxism, 469
Sapir on, 321, 327-28
in Spencerism, 469,
White on, 3254 %554
“Superorganic, The” (Kroeber), 327,
330
surplus theory
of Mill, 72
of Millar, 48
survival of the fittest, see environmen-
talism; struggle
survivals, 164-66, 168
Frazer on, 205
functionalist critique, 166-67
Lang on, 2067
Lowie on, 352
Malinowski on, 553
origin of term, 164
useful and useless, 165-66
Suttles, Wayne, 311, 312
Swanton, John, 305, 321, 349
systematization, by Boas, 285-86
Systéme de la Nature (D’Holbach), 22—
23, 43

803



===== PAGE 407 =====

Index

Systéme de Politique Positive (Comte),
61, 63

Systéme Social . . . (D’Holbach), 43

Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity
of the Human Family (Moigan),
158, 165, 323, 621

taboos, see food taboos; incest taboos
Tacitus, 395
Tambiah, S. ], 584
Tate, Henry, 302, 316
Tax, Sol, 17, 596
on anthropology, 142
structural principles, 531
taxation, Mill on, 72
Taylor, W. Cooke, 54, 58, 144
techniques, see research;  scientific
method
technology
Boasians on, 232
Morgan on, 181, 182-83, 184-85
Teggart, Frederick, 242
temperament, race and, 138-39
territoriality
authority relations and, 187-88
Lowie on, 350
Morgan on, 182, 183
theology
chronology of earth theories and,
110-11
degenerationism and, 54-55
evolutionism and, 55, 210-11
geologic theory and, 109-11
history interpretation and, 55-59
national predestination in Western,
20
positivist compromise and, 59-66
Schmidt’s work and, 390-91
sciences and, 54, 108-9, 271-72,
38990
see also 1eligion and myth
Theory of Culture Change (Steward),
646
"l‘heor):1 of the Earth . .. (Hutton),

109
“Theory (A) of Population . ..”
(Spencer), 126, 127
Thierry, Augustin, g9
Thomsen, C. J., 146
thought
dialectics of, 71
dichotomies in, 71
Hodges on, 269
Locke on origin of, 12
see also ideas; knowledge; mind
three, cabalistic fixation on, 68

Tijm, Jan, 613
time, see chronology
toleration, relativism vs., 13-14
Ténnics, Ferdinand, 192
Totem and Taboo (Freud), 425, 431
totemism
Démeunier on, 40
Durkheim on, 478
Freud on, 425
Goldenweiser on, 346
Lubbock on, 201
McLennan on, 193, 194, 200
Réheim on, 437
Tournal, M., 147
transformism, 292, 646, 647, 653
De Bonald on, 57
negation vs., 6970
Treatise (A) on Man (Helvétius), 12
Trobriand Island, Malinowski’s study,
196, 546, 548, 562, 563-65, 566~
6

2
7
Trubetzkoy, N., 493, 494
Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, 13-14,
18
on behavior, 14-15
culture definition, 14
on cducation, 15-16
on evolution of culture, 28~29
on hunting peoples, 32
racial theories, 98
on social organization, 666
on universal history, 43, 82
Tylor, Edward, 54, 491
animism of, 202, 207
Brinton on, 256
comparative method use, 157-58,
169, 612, 633
data: archaeological data and, 148-
49; sources, 144-45, 148-49
on diffusion, 174-76
cvolutionism of, 172, 641, 642, 651;
invention and diffusion 1, 174,
175-76; paths in, 179; perspec-
tives in, 167-68; uniformity in,
177
on exogamy, 198
on gynocracy, 196
idealism and materialism of, 212-13
on invention, 174, 17576
Lang on, 207
Lowic on, 352
racism of, 12g-30, 140-41
on Ratzel, 383
on religion, 201-4, 206~7, 209
rescarch by, 169
on stupid customs, 168

804

Index

Tylor, Edward (cont.)
on survivals, 164, 165, 166, 167
on uniformity, 177
White and, 635, 636
Types of Mankind (Nott and Gliddon),
91

understanding, see knowledge; thought
uniformity inevolution, 177
unilinear evolutionism, 171-73, 642
unity of theory and practice” doctrine,
219-20
universal evolutionism, 642, 643, 645
Universal History (Turgot), 28
Universal Natural History and Theory
of the Heavens (Kant), 110
universe
Kant on, 110
Spencer on, 215
Ursprung (Der) der Gottesidee (Origin
of the Idea of God, Schmidt), 391
utility of survivals, 165-66

validity
of comparative method, 154-56
universal, of moral beliefs, 13
value judgments
on customs, 168-6g
in ethnography, 163-64
Kroeber on, 331-32
on progress, 37-38
Van Der Bij, T. S, 613
Vartanian, A., 22
Vayda, Andrew, 655
on Kwakiutl economy, 311, 312
warfare pattemn studies, 366
Vedda ]m\g tenure, 357, 359-61
Vedel-Simonsen, 146
verification, see predictability
Vico, Giambattista, 65, 269
natural determinism of, 19-20
on sociocultural evolution, 27-28
Virchow, Rudolf, 257, 265
“Vision (The) in Plains Culture”
(Benedict), 401
vitalism, 294, 295
Vitruvius Pollio, Marcus, 41
Voltaire, 18
on history, 27, 36, 39, 40
racial theories, 87
on science of culture, 21
von Raumer, Georg Wilhelm, 218
Vulcanist school of geology, 109, 111

Waitz, Theodor, 101, 106

Waitz, Theodor (cont.)
on perfectibility, 104
racial theories, 102-3
Wallace, Alfred R., 94
Darwinism and, 123
Malthus and, 114
on natural selection, 123
Wallace, Anthony F. C., 587, 588
on configurational homogeneity, 415,
416
on psychological factors, 46162
Ward, Lester, 254
warfare
emic approach, 364-66
etic approach, 366
Lowie on economics and, 364-65
Wax, M., 283
We, the Tikopia (Firth), 39596
Wedlth of Nations (Smith), 72
‘Weber, Max, 672
position of, 465
Protestant cthic, 459
strategy of, 285
Wedgwood, Camilla, 595, 596
Wells, William Charles, 95-96
Wemer, Abraham Gottlob, 110
‘West, Edward, 126
Westermarck, Edward
on male domination, 196
on natural selection, 199
on nuclear family, 547
on polyandry, 196
on promiscuity, 198-99
‘Whately, Richard, 54
degenerationism of, 58-59
on God and evolution, 211
Wheeler, G. C,, 33, 612
White, Charles, 8¢
White, Leslie, 323
on antievolutionism, 291, 292, 293,
294
on Benedict, 294
on Boas, 256; Boas’ antievolutionism,
201, 292, 293, 204; Boas’ ap-
proach, 273; Boas as fieldworker,
301; Boas’ research strategy, 277;
Boas’ scholarship, 260-61
Boasians and, 348, 362, 392, 639—40
on Brinton, 256
on Bunzel, 294
on causality, 636-37, 638, 657
cultural materialism and, 636-38,
639, 640-41
on culture-circle concept, 392
culture concept, 14, 208
“culturology,” 469

805


===== PAGE 408 =====

Index

White, Leslie (cont.) Willey, Gordon, 678, 680
Darwinism and, 636 Williams, Elgin, 331, 534, 535, 536, |
on diffusion, 642 545 :
evolutionism of, 292, 635-36, 637, Wilson, Edmund, 406
638, 639, 640, 641-42, 643-44, Wilson, G., 540
645, 647, 649-51, 652, 653, Windelband, Wilhelm, 270, 280, 294
657; criteria 1n, 646-47; dif- Wissler, Clark

fusion in, 642; Murdock on,
627; Steward on, 646, 647-48;
Steward’s evolutionism vs., 654

on incest prohibition, 198

influences on, 635-37, 638, 639-40

Kroeber and, 325, 332

laws and generalizations, 648-51

Lowie and, 353, 362

Marxism and, 636-38, 639, 640—41,
651

Morgan and, 353, 635, 636, 640,
641, 643, 681

Murdock on, 627

on cultural ecology, 663-64
culture-area concept, 374, 375, 376
methods of, 339

on New World chronology, 679
on universal patterns, 17

Wittfogel, Karl

cultural materialism and, 672-73,
67

deve]ogncntal sequences of, 683

evolutionism of, 173

hydraulic hypothesis, 671-73, 674;
critiques of, 686-87

on Marx, 220-21

psychology in approach of, 397 on Mill, 72-73
on social structure, 643 on morality in history, 673
Spencerism and, 636 on multilinear evolution, 673
Steward and, 646, 647-48 on Soviet ideology, 22122
on Steward’s evolutionism, 646-47, Steward and, 682, 683
648-49 Wolf, Arthur, 199
strategy of, 606, 607, 635, 636-37, Wolf, Eric, 654
639—40, 64041, 651 }VQDd, J. G144 .
on superorganic, 325 Woggckh)'th:"g“g’h‘c Sample” (Mur-
, , 614, 632
i‘ylr?r ?ﬁd’ 213, 635, 636, 6:“ Worsaae, J. J. 7\., 1346
n variables and constants, 531 Worseley, P. M., <61
Whiting, John ¥, B Mo s
psychocultural analyses, 450-52 7\ 4 cati -
sta}tisncal approach, 452j553, ;61 Yuman sib organization, 669-70
wholism, 63 Zitkle, C,, 238
Wilde, W., 146 Zuii, Benedict on, 405 I

806
