9780415606301.c:Layout 1   22/8/10   09:47   Page 1




                                                      ISBN 978-0-415-60630-1

                                                                               90000




                                                  9 780415 606301
The International Behavioural and Social Sciences Library




             FOUNDATIONS IN
             SOCIOLINGUISTICS




                    TAVISTOCK
The International Behavioural and Social Sciences Library


                   ANTHROPOLOGY
                     In 6 Volumes

I     Darwinism and the Study of Society
      Edited by Michael Banton
II    The Translation of Culture
      Edited by T 0 Beidelman
III   Urban Ethnicity
      Edited by Abner Cohen
IV    Man in Africa
      Edited by Mary Douglas and Phyllis M Kaberry
V     The Consumer Society
      Edited by IRC Hirst and W Duncan Reekie
VI    Foundations in Sociolinguistics
      Dell Hymes
  FOUNDATIONS IN
  SOCIOLINGUISTICS

An Ethnographic Approach




       DELL HYMES
                         First published in 1977 by
                       Tavistock Publications Limited

                            Reprinted in 2001 by
                                 Routledge
         2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, O X 14 4 R N
                                   or
               2 7 0 Madison Avenue, New York, N Y 10016

                       First issued in paperback 2 0 1 0

             Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group

                             © 1974 Dell Hymes

 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
          or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
 and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
                  permission in writing from the publishers.

The publishers have made every effort to contact authors/copyright holders
  of the works reprinted in the International Behavioural and Social Sciences
 Library. This has not been possible in every case, however, and we would
 welcome correspondence from those individuals/companies we have been
                              unable to trace.

 These reprints are taken from original copies of each book. In many cases
 the condition of these originals is not perfect. The publisher has gone to
 great lengths to ensure the quality of these reprints, but wishes to point
 out that certain characteristics of the original copies will, of necessity, be
                        apparent in reprints thereof.

               British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
                    A CIP catalogue record for this book
                     is available from the British Library


                      Foundations in Sociolinguistics
                     I S B N 9 7 8 - 0 - 4 1 5 - 2 6 3 9 6 - 2 (hbk)
                     I S B N 9 7 8 - 0 - 4 1 5 - 6 0 6 3 0 - 1 (pbk)
                          Anthropology: 6 Volumes
                          ISBN 978-0-415-26505-8
         The International Behavioural and Social Sciences Library
                                  112 Volumes
                          ISBN 978-0-415-25670-4
                          ISBN 978-1-134-55659-5 (ebk)
FOUNDATIONS in
SOCIOLINGUISTICS
An Ethnographic Approach



Dell Hymes




Tavistock Publications
                                                  In memory of
                                                  Edward Sapir




First published in Great Britain in 1977
      by Tavistock Publications Limited
      2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
ISBN 0 422 74810 2
© 1974 by Dell Hymes
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Contents




/ii   INTRODUCTION

1     Toward Ethnographies of Communication

3     1. Toward ethnographies of communication
29    2. Studying the interaction of language and social life

67    The Status of Linguistics as a Science

69  3. Why linguistics needs the sociologist
83  4. Social anthropology, sociojinguistics, and the ethnography
       of speaking
119 5. Bilingual education: linguistic vs. sociolinguistic bases
125 6. The contribution of folklore to sociolinguistic research
135 7. The contribution of poetics to sociolinguistic research

143 Linguistics as Sociolinguistics

145 8. Linguistic theory and functions in speech
179 9. Syntactic arguments and social roles: Quantifiers, Keys, and
       Reciprocal vs. Reflexive Relationships
vi
                                        CONTENTS

193 10. The scope of sociolinguistics

211   BIBLIOGRAPHY
235   INDEX
Introduction




      "Sociolinguistics" could be taken to refer to use of linguistic
data and analyses in other disciplines, concerned with social life,
and, conversely, to use of social data and analyses in linguistics.
The word could also be taken to refer to correlations between
languages and societies, and between particular linguistic and
social phenomena. These worthwhile activities would not really
require a special name. They leave linguistics and the other disci-
plines as they are. They presuppose a science of mankind among
whose departments human life has been accurately and completely
apportioned. But sociolinguistics merits our attention just insofar
as it signals an effort to change the practice of linguistics and
other disciplines, because their present practice perpetuates a
fragmented, incomplete understanding of humanity. Sociolinguis-
tics, so conceived, is an attempt to rethink jeceived categories and
assumptions as to the bases of linguistic work, and as to the place
of language in human life.
      The chapters of this book come together in the expression of
three themes that I take to be fundamental to sociolinguistics: first,
that there is a mode of organization of language that is a part of
the organization of communicative conduct in a community, whose
understanding requires a corresponding, new mode of description
of language; second, that recognition of this mode of organization
leads one to recognize that the study of language is a multidisci-
                                                                   vii
viii                                                         INTRODUCTION

plinary field, a field to which ordinary linguistics is indispensable,
but to which other disciplines, such as sociology, social anthro-
pology, education, folklore, and poetics, are indispensable as well;
third, that study of this mode of organization leads one to recon-
sider the bases of linguistics itself. One might say that the three
themes have to do with the scope, the dependencies, and, ulti-
mately, the foundations of linguistics.
      The three themes are closely connected, and appear inter-
woven throughout the book. Still, each of them in turn provides
the. focus for a section. The first section, "Toward ethnographies
of communication," presents the general standpoint to which rec-
ognition of speaking as a topic of ethnography brings one. It
depicts the scope and goals of a sociolinguistic mode of descrip-
tion, first in the context of cultural patterning of communicative
conduct generally (ch. 1), then specifically in terms of speech (ch.
2). The second section, "The status of linguistics as a science,"
takes up the concern and title of an essay by Sapir (1929). Toward
the end of that essay, Sapir remarked:
        One can only hope that linguists will become increasingly
   aware of the significance of their subject in the general field of sci-
   ence and will not stand aloof behind a tradition that threatens to
   become scholastic when not vitalized by interests which lie beyond
   the formal interest in language itself. [SWES 16s]
In recent years the dominant vitalizing interest has linked linguis-
tic inquiry with cognitive psychology, and has tended to reinforce,
rather than transcend, a purely formal interest. The chapters in
this second section show a running debate with that outlook, and
stress the significance of several social and humanistic disciplines
to the vitalization of linguistic inquiry. The third section of the
book, "Linguistics as sociolinguistics," takes up technical questions
within linguistics, in order to show that the perspective of the
preceding chapters is not external to linguistics, but arises out of
its own practice. The linguistic commandment, "capture general-
izations," is applied to hitherto "marginal" aspects of language, and
is shown to lead linguistics to new foundations. The final chapter
takes up the major themes of the book in an overview, and
addresses the social concerns of linguists directly. The scientific
and social concerns of linguists are held to lead to a reconstruc-
tion of linguistics as sociolinguistics, that is, as a discipline which
accepts the social constitution of its subject matter, and the social
bases of its practice and theory.
      In these chapters I sometimes speak of future directions for
linguistics, as if the perspective set forth here should be consid-
ered the next stage in the development of the subject. Let me
emphasize that I consider this perspective a desirable next stage,
Introduction                                                       IX


but do not think any particular development inevitable. Nor do I
think that the construction of what seem to me necessary new
foundations for linguistic theory and practice must eclipse all
current lines of work, let alone entail scorn for such long-standing
traditions as those of philology, comparative reconstruction, and
the like. I continue to practice some of that sort of work myself,
in connection with American Indian languages. It would be a
healthy thing for linguistics if it could come to accept an advance
in one direction without forgetting what it has learned and could
still learn in others.
      I say this with some feeling, and I hope, understanding,
because some years ago I found myself with a mixed and trouble-
some intellectual and professional heritage—from anthropological
philology, into which I had been willy nilly cast as a graduate stu-
dent; from socialist aspirations, chosen in undergraduate years;
from precedents and patterns in the development of anthropology,
folklore, and Amerindian linguistics, for whose historiography I
felt a steadily deepening affinity. With such a heritage the past
decade or so has seemed one in which a generation of linguists
talked of the same goals as those of the traditions I knew, if in
sometimes different words, yet enthusiastically pursued a practice
that appeared to deny them.
      All these chapters share, then, the problem of coming to terms
with an ostensible profession (my doctorate being in linguistics,
although with a great deal of work in anthropology and folklore).
Linguistics was veering from its roots in anthropology, and, as I
felt, in human realities, already when I first encountered it; in a
few years that direction was being pursued pell mell. Yet unre-
solved problems of the older traditions persisted, even came newly
to awareness, and a certain logic, as to the bases of past advances,
a certain pattern of advances, calling for completion, appeared as
well. In a sense I could not help working out the ideas dealt with
in these chapters. None of the original papers, in fact, represents a
task set by an immediate research problem or technical issue; there
have always been other things that might have been, perhaps
should have been, worked on, or poems that might have got writ-
ten. Thoughts on these problems have almost seemed to have
taken up residence in my brain for meetings and purposes of their
own, not asking my permission, but unpredictably popping up
perhaps while I was drifting into sleep, or shaving, or listening to
music. Often enough a bit of ethnographic data has turned out to
conceal something problematic that had to be inspected, and fitted
into something larger than itself.
       It seems now that linguistics itself is moving into areas to
which these ideas are pertinent, areas with which linguistics
X                                                     INTRODUCTION

would be much better prepared to deal, had so much of earlier
lines of work not been lost in the bliss of a revolutionary dawn
and an atmosphere of contempt for all else. If these explorations
in a border country prove central now, I shall be very glad indeed.
     All these chapters were first written in response to an invi-
tation or opportunity afforded by colleagues, and I want to thank
them collectively here; most of this book might otherwise not have
reached paper. In preparing this book, I have changed every paper
to some degree, and most papers substantially. A good many bits
of overlap and repetition have been excised, and I hope that those
that remain are mutually clarifying and reinforcing, rather than
tiring. In the most extended statements of approach (chs. 2, 4, and
8), the presentation of some essential terms and notions has been
significantly revised. Thus this book is not an accurate source
for the development of ideas, if any wish to trace that; and other
versions of these papers are not an adequate portrait of what I
take my ideas now to be.
     This book does deal with ideas, more than with data; I hope
that there is room in the study of language for both. The ideas I
have most wrestled with, most kept coming back to, have been in
work of Kenneth Burke, Ernst Cassirer, Noam Chomsky, Roman
Jakobson, Karl Marx, and Edward Sapir. What I say here is nbt
in strict agreement with any of them, indeed is critical or a crucial
departure in one or another respect, but the saying has grown out
of the wrestling. Linguists, I hope, will see in this book a contri-
bution especially to the tradition of Sapir, whose work and whose
family have touched on mine over the years in so many ways.
      I owe a special debt to Erving Goffman; sociolinguistics is
discovering that at its core lie concerns that have long been his,
and this book would not exist without his intervention. The Center
for Urban Ethnography, and its director, John Szwed, have been
an ever present help these past few years; and it is no coincidence
that the writing of the chapters in the book largely coincides with
my participation in the Committee on Sociolinguistics of the Social
Science Research Council. Let me also thank A1 Romano and lies
Minoff for indispensable help in preparation of the manuscript,
lies Minoff prepared, and Sally Yerkovich typed, the index. Fred
Wieck, Joel Sherzer, and Michael Silverstein objected successively
to tentative titles; Virginia Hymes proposed the form and nouns of
the third.

                                                       Dell Hymes
                                          Mt. Hood National Forest
                                                      June 7, 1973
Part One



Toward Ethnographies
of Communication

      To make a start
      out of particulars
      and make them general, rolling
      up the sum, by defective means—
               William Carlos Williams,
                        Paterson: Book I
Chapter 1

Toward Ethnographies
of Communication


      The term "ethnography of communication" is intended to
indicate the necessary scope, and to encourage the doing, of stud-
ies ethnographic in basis, and communicative in the range and kind
of patterned complexity with which they deal.1 That is, the term
implies two characteristics that an adequate approach to language
must have.
      As to scope: one cannot simply take separate results from lin-
guistics, psychology, sociology, ethnology, as given, and seek to
correlate them, however partially useful such work may be, if one
is to have a theory of language (not just a theory of grammar). One
needs fresh kinds of data, one needs to investigate directly the
use of language in contexts of situation, so as to discern patterns
proper to speech activity, patterns that escape separate studies of

     1. This chapter is based upon "Introduction: Toward Ethnographies of
Communication," in The Ethnography of Communication, ed. by John J.
Gumperz and Dell Hymes (Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological
Association, 1964), pp. 1-34, issued as Part 2 of the American Anthropologist
66(6) (December). It comprises mainly sections VI and VII of that essay. To
Susan Ervin-Tripp, John Gumperz, Michael Halliday, Sydney Lamb, Sheldon
Sacks, and Dan Slobin, I am indebted for warm discussions of language and
its social study; to Bob Scholte and Erving Goffman for pointed argument
about the notion of communication; and to Harold C. Conklin, Charles Frake,
Ward Goodenough, Floyd Lounsbury, and William C. Sturtevant, for discus-
sion through several years of the nature of ethnography. To all much thanks
and no blame.

                                                                           3
4                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

grammar, of personality, of social structure, religion, and the like,
each abstracting from the patterning of speech activity into some
other frame of reference.
     As to basis: one cannot take linguistic form, a given code, or
even speech itself, as a limiting frame of reference. One must take
as context a commujiity, or network of persons, investigating its
communicative activities as a whole, so that any use of channel
and code takes its place as part of the resources upon which the
members draw.
     It is not that linguistics does not have a vital role. Analyzed
linguistic materials are indispensable, and the logic of linguistic
methodology is an influence in the ethnographic perspective. It is
rather that it is not linguistics, but ethnography, not language, but
communication, which must provide the frame of reference within
which the place of language in culture and society is to be assessed.
The boundaries of the community within which communication is
possible; the boundaries of the situations within which communi-
cation occurs; the means and purposes and patterns of selection,
their structure and hierarchy—all elements that constitute the
communicative economy of a group, are conditioned, to be sure,
by properties of the linguistic codes within the group, but are not
controlled by them. The same linguistic means may be made to
serve various ends; the same communicative ends may be served,
linguistically, by various means. Facets of the cultural values and
beliefs, social institutions and forms, roles and personalities, his-
tory and ecology of a community may have to be examined in
their bearing on communicative events and patterns (just as any
aspect of a community's life may come to bear selectively on the
study of kinship, sex, or role conflict).
     It will be found that much that has impinged upon linguistics
as variation and deviation has an organization of its own. What
seem variation and deviation from the standpoint of a linguist's
analysis may emerge as structure and pattern from the standpoint
of the communicative economy of the group among whom the
analyzed form of speech exists. The structures and patterns that
emerge will force reconsideration, moreover, of the analysis of
linguistic codes themselves. }ust as elements and relations of
phonology appear partly in a new light when viewed from the
organization of grammar, and just as elements and relations of the
grammar appear in a new light when viewed from the organiza-
tion of sememics (Lamb 1964), so elements and relations of the
linguistic code as a whole will appear partly in a new light, viewed
from the organization of the elements and relations of the speech
act and speech event, themselves part of a system of communica-
tive acts and events characteristic of a group.
     To project the ethnography of communication in such .a way
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                5


is tantamount to the belief that there awaits constitution a second
descriptive science comprising language, in addition to, and ulti-
mately comprehending, present linguistics—a science that would
approach language neither as abstracted form nor as an abstract
correlate of a community, but as situated in the flux and pattern of
communicative events. It would study communicative form and
function in integral relation to each other. In this it would con-
trast with long held views of linguistics and of what is within
linguistics. Some divorce linguistic form from context and func-
tion. An old but apt illustration is found in Bloomfield's often
cited remark that, if a beggar says "I'm hungry" to obtain food,
and a child says "I'm hungry" to avoid going to bed, then linguis-
tics is concerned just with what is the same in the two acts. It
abstracts, in other words, from context. In contrast, an influential
book has characterized pragmatics in a way exactly complemen-
tary as "all those aspects which serve to distinguish one communi-
cation event from any other where the sign types may be the
same" (Cherry 1961: 225). It abstracts, in other words, from lin-
guistic form.
     Such views are not the only ones to be found, but they have
been. characteristic of linguistics, on the one hand, and social
science, on the other, and most practice has exemplified one or
the other. For ethnographies of communication, however, the aim
must be not so to divide the communicative act or event, divorcing
message-form (Cherry's sign-type) and context of use from one
another. The aim must be to keep the multiple hierarchy of rela-
tions among messages and contexts in view (cf. Bateson, 1963).
Studies of social contexts and functions of communication, if
divorced from the means that serve them, are as little to the pur-
pose as are studies of communicative means, if divorced from the
contexts and functions they serve. Methodologically, of course, it
is not a matter of limiting a structural perspective inspired by
linguistics to a particular component of communication, but of
extending it to the whole.
     The ethnography of communication is indebted to the method-
ological gains from recent studies of linguistic form for its own
sake, and to a climate of opinion created by arguments for the
significance of formal linguistics. Its roots, however, are deeper
and more pervasive. On the one hand, there is the long-term trend
away from the study of sociocultural form and content as product
toward their study as process—away from study of abstracted
categories, departments of culture, toward study of situations,
exchanges, and events (cf. Sapir 1933b). On the other hand, there
is the continuing trend in linguistics itself toward study of the full
complexity of language in terms of what the Prague Circle as long
ago as 1929 (the year of Sapir's "The status of linguistics as a
6                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

science") called "functional and structural analysis," and which
Jakobson now designates as interwar efforts towards a "means-
ends model" (Jakobson 1963); there are parallels in the perspec-
tives of J. R. Firth (1935—cf. ch. 4 of this volume) and of Sapir (cf.
chs. 3,10 of this volume) in the same period. These traditions have
had their vicissitudes, but it is fair to see in the ethnography of
communication a renewal of them.
      For many people, the place of the ethnography of communi-
cation will appear to be, not in relation to one or more traditions
in linguistics, but in relation to some general perspective on human
behavior. For many, the name of this perspective will be social
anthropology, or sociology, or psychology, or some other disci-
plinary category. The work required does fall somewhere into
place within the purview of each such discipline, and there can be
no quarrel with any, except to say that the division of the study of
man into departmentalized disciplines seems itself often arbitrary
and an obstacle. What is essential, in any case, is that the distinc-
tive focus of concern advanced here be recognized and cultivated,
whatever the disciplinary label. One way to state the need is to
remark that there are anthropological, sociological, and psycho-
logical studies of many kinds, but of ethnographic analyses of
communicative conduct, and of comparative studies based upon
them, there are still few to find. (Chs. 3 and 4 take up relationships
with sociology and social anthropology further.)
     These remarks apply as well to the field of interest under
which others would subsume the concerns represented here,
namely, semiotics. De Saussure had proposed semiology as a field
more general than linguistics, and Levi-Strauss has characterized
it as the study of the life of signs in the bosom of social life, sub-
suming both linguistics and social anthropology within it (1960).
Despite the broad interpretation given the term, however, semi-
otics (semiology) has continued to suggest most readily logical
analysis, and the study of systems of signs as codes alone. The
empirical study of systems of signs within systems of use in actual
communities seems secondary, when not lost from sight.
     Here a division of semiotics in the tripartite formulation of
Morris (1946) might serve. Pragmatics, concerned with the use of
signs by an interpreter, might be the bridge between the present
area of concern and linguistics proper, and stand as name for the
cultivation of theory of the use of language (and other codes),
alongside theory of their formal and semantic structure (Morris'
syntagmatics and semantics). Such a usage of the term 'pragmatics'
indeed seems to be gaining vogue in German-language research.
Some characterizations of pragmatics, to be sure, would not be
adequate, as has been noted above. A conception of pragmatics as
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                7

concerned with what varies in import, while message-form remains
constant, allows for but one of the two relationships between
structures of action and structures of communicative form. The
relations between means and ends are multiple in both directions,
the same means serving sometimes varied ends, and the ends
being served by sometimes varied means.
      In terms of the criteria systematized by Lamb (1964), we can
indeed see a natural extension of grammar to features of action,
a pragmemic level if one wishes to call it that. Lamb distinguishes
linguistic strata by the twin criteria of "diversification" and "neu-
 tralization" (see further ch. 4). Diversification is illustrated by
such facts as that one element of meaning can occur in diverse
representations (as in dog house : kennel, or cat house : whore
house); neutralization is illustrated by such facts as that the same
representation may serve diverse elements of meaning (as dog in
dog house, dog fight, dog nap, or cat in cat house, cat fight, catnap).
One might well recognize a stratum involving the "pragmeme" as
an element or feature of action, since the same feature of action
can occur in diverse semantic representations, and the same
semantic representations can serve diverse features of action. To
use an example from Susan Ervin-Tripp, the same feature of
request may be encoded in "Would you get me my coat?" and
"Don't you think it's getting cold?"; and conversely, to complete
the example, "Don't you think it's getting cold?" may express
(among other things) features of literal question or demand for
action ("Get me my coat," "Take me inside").
      Invaluable as a structural pragmemics would be, it would not
suffice for the whole of the subject. Nor, as ordinarily conceived,
would communication theory or cybernetics. What is sometimes
specifically meant by each of the latter terms would seem to fit,
quite importantly indeed, as parts of a general strategy for ethno-
graphic research into communication.
      In general, experience suggests that work contributing to
study of communication in an ethnographic spirit is likely not to
duplicate work under another aegis. Each of the other general
notions seems in practice to lose sight of concrete communication,
in the sense of actual communities of persons. Forms of formal-
ization, the abstract possibilities of systems, hoped-for keys to
mankind as a whole, seem to overshadow the dogged work of
making sense of real communities and lives. I find in this a politi-
cal as well as a scientific liability. In any case, the long-standing,
close ties between ethnography and linguistic description; the
ethnographic practice of participant observation; and the values
placed on the specifics of cultural life and the viewpoint of the
other participants in the communication that is ethnography—
8                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

such traits tend to ensure two characteristics. First, there is likely
to be a more egalitarian distribution of detailed interest among
the several components of communicative events. Not only the
participants and the contents of messages, but also the structures,
degrees of elaboration, distinctiveness, values and genres asso-
ciated with channels, codes, message-forms and settings attract
attention partly in their own right—the linguistic codes, of course,
as most explicit, and as indispensable, if not wholly adequate,
avenues of access to other codes, and to the meanings of other
components—but also specialized subcodes and marginal systems,
techniques of speech disguise, languages of concealment, drum-
languages, ceremonial speech and oratory; the channels, especially
when complexly elaborated as in West Africa, or distinctively
specialized, as writing for lovers' messages among the Hanunoo of
the Philippines; the forms of poetry, ritual speech, and dramatic
enactment; and so forth. Such aspects of communication are less
likely to receive full due in studies whose concern with communi-
cation is not so much with an activity of people, but with fodder
for models, or not so much with realization of the purposes of
others, as with a way of achieving purposes of one's own. The
ethnographer is likely to have, or come to have, the view that
models are for people, not people for models; and that there are
no masses, only ways of regarding people as masses; that one
man's mass is another's public, or community, and that to speak
of mass communications is already to express a separateness from
the portion of humanity concerned that prejudices the result (see
Williams 1960: 315-58). The ethnographer is likely to look at
communication from the standpoint and interests of a community
itself, and to see its members as sources of shared knowledge and
insight. I believe that the only worthwhile future for the gfciences
of man lies in the realization of such an approach (cf. Hymes
1972c).
     The linguistics that can contribute to the ethnography of com-
munication is now generally known as sociolinguistics, and it is
here that my own training and experience lie. Such a sociolinguis-
tics, however, is not identical with everything that currently
comes under that name. The sociolinguistics with which we are
concerned here contributes to the general study of communication
through the study of the organization of verbal means and the
ends they serve, while bearing in mind the ultimate integration of
these means and ends with communicative means and ends gen-
erally. Such an approach within sociolinguistics can be called, in
keeping with the general term, ethnography of communication,
the study of the "ethnography of speaking." (Cf. Hymes 1962, and
ch. 4). For the contribution of the ethnography of speaking to be
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                               9


realized, there must be change with respect to a number of orien-
tations toward language. Seven can be singled out as the Pleiades,
pointing to the North Star, of this firmament. Primacy must go to
(1) the structure, or system of speech (la parole); (2) function as
prior to and warranting structure; (3) language as organized in
terms of a plurality of functions, the different functions them-
selves warranting different perspectives and organizations; (4) the
appropriateness of linguistic elements and messages; (5) diversity
of the functions of diverse languages and other communicative
means; (6) the community or other social context as starting point
of analysis and understanding; (7) functions themselves to be war-
ranted in context, and in general the place, boundaries, and organ-
ization of language and of other communicative means in a com-
munity to be taken as problematic. In short, primacy of speech
to code, function to structure, context to message, the appropriate
to the arbitrary or simply possible; but the interrelations always
essential, so that one cannot only generalize the particularities, but
also particularize the generalities.
     It remains that sociolinguistics, conceived in terms of the
ethnography of speaking, is ultimately part of the study of com-
munication as a whole. To further establish this context, I shall
sketch a general framework in terms of communication proper.
The other chapters of this book should be read with the communi-
cative framework in mind.
     There are four aspects to the framework, concerned, respec-
tively, with (1) the components of communicative events; (2) the
relations among components; (3) the capacity and state of com-
ponents; and (4) the activity of the whole so constituted. It is
with respect to the third and fourth aspects that two topics promi-
nently associated with the topic of communication, communication
theory (in the sense of information theory), and cybernetics, find
a place.

      THE COMPONENTS OF COMMUNICATIVE EVENTS

     The starting point is the ethnographic analysis of the com-
municative conduct of a community. One must determine what
can count as a communicative event, and as a component of one,
and admit no behavior as communicative that is not framed by
some setting and implicit question. The communicative event thus is
central. (In terms of language the speech event, and speech act,
are correspondingly central; see ch. 2).
     Some frame of reference is needed for consideration of the
several kinds of components copresent in a communicative event.
The logical or other superiority of one classification over another
10                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

is not at issue. What is at issue is the provision of a useful guide
in terms of which relevant features can be discerned—a provi-
sional phonetics, as it were, not an a priori phonemics, of the
communicative event.
      For what has to be inventoried and related in an ethnographic
account, a somewhat elaborated version of factors identified in
communications theory, and adapted to linguistics by Roman Jakob-
son (1953;1960), can serve. Briefly put, (1) the various kinds of
participants in communicative events—senders and receivers,
addressors and addressees, interpreters and spokesmen, and the
like; (2) the various available channels, and their modes of use,
speaking, writing, printing, drumming, blowing, whistling, singing,
face and body motion as visually perceived, smelling, tasting, and
tactile sensation; (3) the various codes shared by various partici-
pants, linguistic, paralinguistic, kinesic, musical, interpretative,
interactional, and other; (4) the settings (including other communi-
cation) in which communication is permitted, enjoined, encour-
aged, abridged; (5) the forms of messages, and their genres,
ranging verbally from single-morpheme sentences to the patterns
and diacritics of sonnets, sermons, salesmen's pitches, and any
other organized routines and styles; (6) the attitudes and contents
that a message may convey and be about; (7) the events them-
selves, their kinds and characters as wholes—all these must be
identified in an adequate way.
      Ethnography here is conceived in reference to the various
efforts of Conklin, Frake, Goodenough, Metzger, Romney, and
others to advance the techniques of ethnographic work and to
conceptualize its goal, such that the structural analysis of cultural
behavior generally is viewed as the development of theories ade-
quate to concrete cases, just as the structural analysis of behavior
as manifestation of a linguistic code is so viewed. One way to
phrase the underlying outlook is as a question of validity. Just as
analysis of phonological capabilities must determine what set of
phonological features is to be taken as relevant to identification
and distinction of phonological sound on the part of the possessors
of those capabilities, so analysis of cultural capabilities generally
must determine what sets of features are to be taken as relevant
to identification and contrast of cultural behavior on the part of
the participants. (Sapir's "Sound Patterns in Language" [1925],
seen as implying a general statement about the cultural aspect of
behavior, remains classic and crucial to the development of
anthropological thought in this regard, although it has taken a
generation for its ethnographic import to become salient.) Another
way to phrase the underlying outlook is as a question of the com-
mon element in the situation of ethnographer and person-in-the-
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                      11


culture. Each must formulate from finite experience theories ade-
quate to predict and judge as appropriate or inappropriate what
is, in principle, an infinite amount of cultural behavior. (Judgments
of grammaticality are a special case.)
      Mere observation, however systematic and repeated, can
obviously never suffice to meet such high standards of objectivity
and validity. As Sapir once observed regarding a rule of avoid-
ance among the Wishram Chinook:
        Incidentally there is a lesson here for the theoretical ethnolo-
   gist. If the avoidance of man and woman here were known only
   objectively it would present a situation resembling that, say, in
   Melanesia. One might suppose then the explanation to be that
   women were set apart from the man's social fabric because of the
   low esteem in which they were held, or that men avoided them
   because of their periodic impure state. Either guess would be a
   shot far wide of the mark. The moral is that it is as necessary to
   discover what the native sentiment is as well as to record the
   behavior.2
The point is essentially the same as that of "Sound Patterns in
Language," from which stems the current distinction of "otic'' and
"emic." An "emic" account is one in terms of features relevant in
the behavior in question; an etic account, however useful as a
preliminary grid and input to an emic (structural) account, and as
a framework for comparing different emic accounts, lacks the emic
account's validity. The point is an old one in anthropology, only
made more trenchant by the clarity with which the point can be
made in terms of the contrast between phonetics and phonemics.
(See Pike 1954 for coinage of the terms, and conscious develop-
ment of the perspective from a linguistic basis beyond linguistics,
under inspiration from Sapir.) Ethnographic objectivity is inter-
subjective objectivity, but in the first instance, the intersubjective
objectivity in question is that of the participants in the culture. No
amount of acoustic apparatus and sound spectrography can crack
the phonemic code of a language, and a phonemic analysis, based
on the intersubjective objectivity in the behavior of those who
share the code, is the necessary basis for other studies, experi-
mental and otherwise. (Cf. Hockett 1955:210-11; Lisker, Cooper,
and Liberman 1962.) The same is true for the shared codes which
constitute the mutual intelligibility of the rest of cultural behavior.
The advantages of such an approach in providing a criterion
against which to appraise participants' own explanations and con-

    2. Spier and Sapir (1930: 217, n. 97). The point and the language indicate
that the comment is due particularly to Sapir. The Wishram avoidance is
due to the severe punishment, even death, visited for Constructive adultery,
which offense may be attributed in some circumstances even for private con-
versation or physical contact. Cf. the last section of Hymes (1966b).
12                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

ceptualizations of their behavior, their "homemade models,"
should be obvious, as should the advantages in providing a basis
for controlled comparison, study of diffusion, and any other gen-
eralizing or analyzing approach that depends in the last analysis
on the adequacy and precision of ethnographic records of cultural
behavior. (Ethnographic records, of course, may be of other things:
censuses, for example.)
      In a discussion of genealogical method, Conklin (1964:25-26),
observing that all kinship data derive from ethnographic contexts,
makes explicit his assumptions regarding the nature and purpose
of ethnography (citing also Goodenough 1956, and noting Frake
1962b, 1964, and a previous article of his own [1962]). The state-
ment applies to communicative data as well as to kinship data,
and can be adopted here:
        An adequate ethnography is here considered to include the
   culturally significant arrangement of productive statements about
   the relevant relationships obtaining among locally defined cate-
   gories and contexts (of objects and events) within a given social
   matrix. These nonarbitrarily ordered statements should comprise,
   essentially, a cultural grammar (Goodenough 1957a; Frake 1962a).
   In such an ethnography, the emphasis is placed on the interpreta-
   tion, evaluation, and selection of alternative statements about a
   particular set of cultural activities within a given range of social
   contexts. This in turn leads to the critical examination of intra-
   cultural relations and ethnotheoretical models (Conklin 1955;
   Goodenough ms.). Demonstrable intracultural validity for state-
   ments of covert and abstracted relationships should be based on
   prior analysis of particular and generalized occurrences in the
   ethnographic record (Lounsbury 1955:163-164, 1956; cf. Morris
   1946). Criteria for evaluating the adequacy of ethnographic state-
   ments with reference to the cultural phenomena described,
   include: (1) productivity (in terms of appropriate anticipation if not
   actual prediction); (2) replicability or testability; and (3) economy.
   In actual field situations, recording activities, analytic operations,
   and evaluative procedures (in short, the application of ethno-
   graphic technique, method, and theory) can, and I think should, be
   combined. The improvement and constant adjustment of field
   recording is, in fact, dependent upon simultaneous analysis and
   evaluation.
     Notice that strict conception of ethnography constrains the
conception of communication that is admissible. Just as what
counts as phonemic feature or religious act cannot be identified
in advance, so with what counts as a communicative event. There
are, of course, general criteria for phonemic and for communica-
tive status; it is a question of the phenomena by which they are
satisfied in a given case. If one examines the writings of anthro-
pologists and linguists, one finds that general conceptions of com-
municative status vary, sometimes in ways at variance with the
conception of ethnography adopted here.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                   13


      The concept of message would seem to suffice as starting
point for any conception, if one grants two kinds of things. The
first is that the concept of message implies the sharing (real or
imputed) of (1) a code or codes in terms of which the message
is intelligible to (2) participants, minimally an addressor and
addressee (who may be the same person), in (3) an event consti-
tuted by its transmission and characterized by (4) a channel or
channels, (5) a setting or context, (6) a definite form or shape to
the message, and (7) a topic and comment, i.e., that it says some-
thing about something—in other words, that the concept of mes-
sage implies the array of components previously given. The second
is that what can count as instances of messages, and as instances
of the components of the event constituted by the transmission of
a message, must be determined in the given case along the lines
of the ethnographic approach just discussed and just characterized
by Conklin.
      If one accepts the latter point, then some anthropological con-
ceptions of communication must be judged to exclude too much, or
to include too much, or, occasionally, both. To take first the prob-
lem of excluding too much, one cannot a priori define the sound
of approaching footsteps (Sapir 1921:3) or the setting of the sun
(Hockett 1958:574) as not communicative. Their status is entirely
a question of their construal by a receiver. In general, no phenom-
enon can be defined in advance as never to be counted as consti-
tuting a message. Consider a case related by Hallowell:

       An informant told me that many years before he was sitting in
  a tent one afternoon during a storm, together with an old man and
  his wife. There was one clap of thunder after another. Suddenly
  the old man turned to his wife and asked, "Did you hear what
  was said?" "No/' she replied, "I didn't catch it." My informant, an
  acculturated Indian, told me he did not at first know what the old
  man and his wife referred to. It was, of course, the thunder. The
  old man thought that one of the Thunder Birds had said something
  to him. He was reacting to this sound in the same way as he would
  respond to a human being, whose words he did not understand.
  The casualness of the remark and even the. trivial character of the
  anecdote demonstrate the psychological depth of the "social rela-
  tions" with other-than-human beings that becomes explicit in the
  behavior of the Ojibwa as a consequence of the cognitive "set"
  induced by their culture. [1964:64]

There are manifold instances from cultures around the world, e.g.,
to take a recent report, the drinking, questioning and answering
in which Amahuaca men are joined by the class of supernaturals
known as yoshi associated interestingly enough with a specific
form of chant and use of the vocal .channel (vocal chords tightly
constricted) (Carneiro 1964:8). Hallowell's account of the Ojibwa
concept of person shows with particular depth the implications of
14                                       FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

cultural values and world view for occurrences of communicative
behavior. As indication of the contribution a conscious ethnog-
raphy of communication, focused on occurrences of activity such
as speech, might make to such anthropological concerns as world
view, let me cite one other Ojibwa instance and Hallowell's inter-
polated regret: having discussed the fact that stones are classified
grammatically as animate in gender, and are conceived as poten-
tially capable of animate behavior, especially in ceremonially-
linked circumstances, Hallowell records:
          A white trader, digging in his potato patch, unearthed a large
      stone similar to the one just referred to. He sent for John Duck, an
     Indian who was the leader of the wabano, a contemporary cere-
     mony that is held in a structure something like that used for the
     Midewiwin (a major ceremony during which stones occasionally
     had animate properties such as movement and opening of a mouth).
     The trader called his attention to the stone, saying that it must
     belong to his pavilion. John Duck did not seem pleased at this. He
     bent down and spoke to the boulder in a low voice, inquiring
     whether it had ever been in his pavilion. According to John the
     stone replied in the negative.
          It is obvious that John Duck spontaneously structured the sit-
     uation in terms that are intelligible within the context of Ojibwa
     language and culture. . . . I regret that my field notes contain no
     information about the use of direct verbal address in the other
     cases mentioned (movement of stone, opening of a mouth). But it
     may well have taken place. In the anecdote describing John Duck's
     behavior, however, his use of speech as a mode of communication
     raises the animate status of the boulder to the level of social inter-
     action common to human beings. Simply as a matter of observa-
     tion we can say that the stone was treated as if it were a "person,"
     not a "thing," without inferring that objects of this class are, for
     the Ojibwa, necessarily conceptualized as persons. [1964:56]
     Again, within the aboriginal culture of the Wishram and
Wasco Chinook of the Columbia River, one must recognize not
one but three communicative networks within a community,
defined by distinct shared codes. One consisted of normal adults,
and children past infancy; a second comprised babies, dogs, coy-
otes, and the guardian spirits Dog and Coyote, and, possibly old
people possessing those guardian spirits; a third comprised those
whose guardian spirit experience had granted them the power of
being able to interpret the language of the spirits.3
     If the strict ethnographic approach requires us to extend the
concept of communication to the boundaries granted it by partici-

    3. With regard to the first and second networks, babyhood lasted "until
they could talk clearly" (Spier and Sapir 1930: 218)—in Wishram, of course.
With regard to the second, "Such guardian spirits could understand the lan-
guage of babies. They maintain that a dog, a coyote, and an infant can under-
stand each other, but the baby loses his language when he grows old enough
to speak and understand the tongue of his parents" (ibid.: 255). With regard
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                      15


 pants of a culture, it also makes it necessary to restrict it to those
boundaries. To define communication as the triggering of a
 response (as Hockett [1958:5731 has done, and Kluckhohn [1961:
 895] has accepted), is to make the term so nearly equivalent to
 behavior and interaction in general as to lose its specific value as
 a scientific and moral conception. There are many illustrations
 possible of actions that trigger response and are not taken as com-
municative by one or both participants. As an act clearly based
on the triggering of response (in another or oneself), sexual inter-
 course would be an ideal event to test this point; what part, less
than all, of triggering of response is sent or received as communi-
 cation? Again, it is desirable to treat the transmission or receipt of
information as not the same as, but a more general category than,
communication, the latter being treated         a more specific sphere,
necessarily either participated in or constituted by persons (cf.
Cherry 1961:247 n). The sound of footsteps or the setting of the
sun may be taken as a source of information without being taken
as a message (although in either case a receiver may interpret the
event as a message).
      From this standpoint, genes may transmit information, but the
process is communicative only from the standpoint of, and as
reported by, an observer and interpreter. For the human observer
to report and treat the process experienced or inferred as a com-
municative one is of course a right not to be challenged, for, for-
mally, it is the same right that the ethnographer accepts when
acted upon by an Ojibwa, Wishram, or other participant in a
culture. The formal feature is that the evidence for the communi-
cative event is a report by one who did not participate in it as
either addressor or addressee. Such reported events (En, or nar-
rated events, in Roman Jakobson's symbolization [1957] for the
constituents of speech events) are common in myth, for example,
and are of course of considerable importance, as when the origin
of the world is so described by the ancient Hebrews, or the origin
of death explained by the Wishram in a narrative culminating (as
is typical for their myths) in an announcement ordaining how
that aspect of cultural life is to be and what people will say in
its regard.
      We deal here, in short, with the fact that the communicative



ot the third, the group may have been individuated into various dyadic rela-
tionships between particular persons and spirits, for the example is given as
"For instance, one who had gained the protection of Coyote could tell, on
hearing a coyote's howl, what person was going to die" (ibid.: 239}; but men
still living, who make no claim to having had guardian spirit experience,
recall having been able to understand the import of howls of coyotes (Mr.
Hiram Smith, pers. comm.).
16                                       FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

event is the metaphor, or perspective, basic to rendering experi-
ence intelligible. It is likely to be employed at any turn, if with
varying modes of imputation of reality (believed, supposed, enter-
tained in jest, etc.). It is this fact that underlies the apparently
central role of language in cultural life. Of codes available to
human beings, language, as the one more than any other capable
at once of being explicitly detailed and transcendent of single
contexts, is the chief beneficiary under many circumstances of the
primary centrality of communication. Under some circumstances,
of course, it is not.
     In general, any and all of the components of a communicative
event, and the occurrence of a message itself, can be imputed by
one who adopts the standpoint of an addressor, addressee, or
receiver as observer. One consequence is the point already made,
but the ethnographic observer must do more than observe to pre-
vent his own habits of imputation from interfering with recogni-
tion of where and what participants in another culture impute.
Another consequence, since persons can impute either an addres-
sor and intent or an addressee and attention, is to make heuristic-
ally useful for ethnographic purposes a characterization of a
communicative event as one in which to the observer one at least
of the participants is real.
     The identification of communicative events and their com-
ponents has been dwelt on, because it is seldom treated, except
incidentally, in most writing relevant to ethnography. The discus-
sion so far has been concerned with gross identification of events
as such and of components individually. In point of fact, adequate
determination usually will involve more than inventory of chan-
nels, setting, etc. The structures of relations among different
events, and their components; the capabilities and states of the
components; the activity of the system which is the event; all will
be involved. Explication of genres of verbal art, once such have
been identified (e.g., Ssukung Tu 1963),4 commonly involves appeal
at least to relations among components, and often to their states
and activity. Such questions comprise the other aspects of the
frame of reference being sketched, and to these we now turn.

     4. The classical Chinese writer Ssukung Tu discriminated 24 modes, trans-
lated as Grand, Unemphatic, Ornate, Grave, Lofty, Polished, Refined, Vig-
orous, Exquisite, Spontaneous, Pregnant, Untrammeled, Evocative, Well-knit
Artless, Distinctive, Devious, Natural, Poignant, Vivid, Transcendent, Ethereal,
Light-hearted, Flowing (Ssukung Tu, as translated [1963] with accompanying
discussion by Wu Tiao-kung, "Ssukung Tu's Poetic Criticism," 78-83). Such
modes would entail considering the relevant components of the event consti-
tuted by the composing or performance of a poem from the standpoint of
what is labelled "key" in ch. 2.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                     17


               RELATIONS AMONG COMPONENTS
     In one sense, the focus of the present approach is on com-
munities organized as systems of communicative events. Such an
object of study can be regarded as part of, but not identical with,
an ethnography as a whole.5 One way in which to indicate that
there is a system, either in the community or in the particular
event, is to observe that there is not complete freedom of cooccur-
rence among components. Not all imaginably possible combina-
tions of participants, channels, codes, topics, etc., can occur.
     It is to the structure of relations among components that
much of the surge of work in sociolinguistics is directed. (Notice
that focus on relations among components more readily invites
description and comparative analysis of the variety of such mar-
ginal systems than does focus on the code alone. Also, more gen-
erally, it leads into description and comparison of whatever may
characterize such an event or relationship, e.g., talk to babies,
whether or not special features characterize it from the standpoint
of the code as such. It is equally important to know the charac-
teristics of talk to babies in societies where "baby talk" is
eschewed. With regard to message-form, there is much to be dis-
covered and described in the sequential patterning of speech as
routines, specialized to certain relationships.)
     Ervin-Tripp (1964) suggests that the structures of relations
with respect to language will prove to be specific in some ways,
to be more than illustration of more general sociological or psy-
chological or cultural notions. The same is likely to prove true for
each of the kinds of codes employed in a community. The heuris-
tic assumption is that their separate maintenance implies some
specific role for each which is not wholly duplicated by any other
(including language). On the other hand, studies focused on the
relations among components of communicative events are likely
to discern patterns general to them, but partly independent of, and
cutting across, the other departments of study into which the
events might be cast ethnographically. Once looked for, areal
styles, in the use of specific codes, and areal communicative styles
generally, are likely to be found. Lomax (1959) has suggested such
for musical performance, and Melville Jacobs (1958) has suggested
such may be the case for the dramatic performances that enact
myths.

    5. Notice Conklin (1962: 199): "An adequate ethnographic description of
the culture (Goodenough 1957a) of a particular society presupposes a detailed
analysis of the communications system and of the culturally defined situa-
tions in which all relevant distinctions in that system occur."
18                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

     It is especially important to notice that delineations of com-
munities in these respects are crucial to understanding of the place
of language in culture, and to understanding of the particular place
of language in culture signalled by what is commonly called the
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. To assume that differences in language
shape or interact with differences in world view is to assume that
the functional role of language in relation to world view is every-
where the same. Indeed, anthropological thought quite generally
has tended to assume identity or equivalence of function for lan-
guage throughout the world (see discussion in Hymes 1961a; 1962;
1966b).
     When a particular code is considered but one component of
communicative events, the studies of the structure of communica-
tive events in a society will provide detailed evidence on the dif-
ferential ways in which the code enters into communicative
purposes and cultural life. The different ways and stages in which
a language enters into enculturation, transmission of adult roles
and skills, interaction with the supernatural, personal satisfac-
tions, and the like will appear. Languages, like other cultural traits,
will be found to vary in the degree and nature of their integration
into the societies and cultures in which they occur. It will be pos-
sible to focus on the consequences of such differences for accul-
turation and adaptation of both languages and peoples. Such
information has been brought to attention in studies of accultura-
tion, bilingualism, and standard languages. What is necessary is to
realize that the functional relativity of languages is general, apply-
ing to monolingual situations too.
     With particular regard to the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, it is
essential to notice that Whorf's sort of linguistic relativity is sec-
ondary, and dependent upon a primary sociolinguistic relativity,
that of differential engagement of languages in social life. For
example, description of a language may show that it expresses a
certain cognitive style, perhaps implicit metaphysical assumptions,
but what chance the language has to make an impress upon indi-
viduals and behavior will depend upon the degree and pattern of
its admission into communicative events. The case is clear in
bilingualism; we do not expect a Bengali using English as a fourth
language for certain purposes of commerce to be influenced deeply
in world view by its syntax. What is necessary is to realize that
the monolingual situation is problematic as well. Peoples do not
all everywhere use language to the same degree, in the same situa-
ations, or for the same things; some peoples focus upon language
more than others. Such differences in the place of a language in
the communicative system of a people cannot be assumed to be
without influence on the depth of a language's influence on such
things as world view.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                               19


      More particularly, if a language is taken as a device for cate-
gorizing experience, it is not such a device in the abstract. There
remains the question of what may be the set of events in which
categorizing dependent upon the language occurs. (The set
includes events in which a single person is using a language
excogitatively.) Although anthropologists have sometimes talked
of the use of language "merely" as a tool of communication, and
of the categorizing of experience as if it were a superior category
(cf. Hymes 1967c), the role of a language as a device for cate-
gorizing experience and its role as an instrument of communica-
tion cannot be so separated, and indeed, the latter includes the
former. This is the more true when a language, as is often the case,
affords alternative ways of categorizing the same experience, so
that the patterns of selection among such alternatives must be
determined in actual contexts of use—as must also, indeed, the
degree to which a language is being used as a full-fledged semantic
instrument (as distinct from its use as an expressive, directive,
etc., instrument) at all in a given case.
      Such considerations broach the third aspect of our frame of
reference.

           CAPACITY AND STATE OF COMPONENTS
      So far we have considered the identification of events and
components, and the structures of relations among them. Now we
must consider their capacities, or capabilities, and states. It is here
that "communication theory," in the sense in which the term is
equivalent to "information theory," enters, with its concern for
the measurement of capacity. Although associated primarily with
the capacity of channels and codes, the underlying notion extends
equally to all components of a communicative event, and to the
events of a system.
      Questions of capability can be broached in terms of focus
upon some one of the components of an event (or the event itself)
in relation to all other components in turn. Some topics of long-
standing anthropological interest find a place here. The relation
of language to environment, both natural and social, in the sense
of elaboration of a code's capacity, especially via vocabulary, to
deal with snow, cattle, status, etc., as topics, is one. Another is
the relationship between the capability of a code, and the capa-
bilities of its users, in the sense of the Whorfian concern with
habitual behavior and fashions of speaking. In both cases there
must be refere$ce from the start to the distribution iir use of the
portion of the code in question, both among communicative events
and in relation to their other components. (The necessity of this
has been argued for the Whorfian problem above; on cultural
20                                        FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

focus, elaboration of vocabulary, and folk-taxonomy of semantic
domains, cf. the views on dependence on context of situation in
Brown [1958:255-58], Frake [1961:121-22], Gluckman [1959], Meil-
let [1906], and Service [I960].)
      With regard to participants, differential competence and per-
formance are salient concerns (cf. Gross 1973 mss. a and b; Hymes
1973b). Often this level and the preceding one are but faces of the
same coin, the formal structure of relations being grounded cul-
turally in judgments (and facts) as to capability, and circumstances
as to capability being dependent upon the structures of relations.
     The ethnography of communication deals in an empirical and
comparative way with many notions that underlie linguistic
theory proper. This is particularly so when linguistic theory
depends upon notions such as those of "speech community,"
"speech act," and "fluent speaker." How varied the capabilities of
speakers can be in even a small and presumably homogeneous
tribe is sketched incisively by Bloomfield (1927) in a paper that
deserves to be classic for its showing that such variation, including
possibilities of grammatical mistake, is universal. The range and
kind of abilities speakers and hearers show is an area largely
unexplored by ethnographers and linguists, but one of great import
both to cultural and linguistic theory. (I have tried to draw some
implications of a focus on the concept of speakers' abilities in
Hymes 1964a and ch. 3.)6

     6. The term "capability" is used with conscious reference to Tylor's
definition of culture (or civilization) as all those capabilities acquired by man
in society (1871: 1). I subscribe to the view that what is distinctively cultural,
as an aspect of behavior or of things, is a question of capabilities acquired
or elicited in social life, rather than a question of the extent to which the
behavior or things themselves are shared. The point is like that made by
Sapir (1916: 425) with regard to similarity among cultures due to diffusion,
namely, that the difference between similarity due to diffusion and similarity
due to independent retention of a common heritage is one of degree, rather
than of kind. The currency of a cultural element in a community is already
an instance of diffusion that has radiated from an individual.
     Sapir's point converges with the focus of grammatical theory on an
individual's ability to produce and interpret novel, yet acceptable, utterances.
The frequency and degree of spread of a trait is important, but secondary, so
far as concerns the criterion for its being a product of cultural behavior, as
having a cultural aspect. A sonnet, for example, is such a product, whether
or not it goes beyond a desk drawer, or even survives the moment of comple-
tion. In the course of the conduct of much cultural behavior, including verbal
behavior, it will not be known, or will be problematic to the participants,
whether or not some of what occurs and is accepted as cultural, has in fact
ever previously occurred, (cf. Hymes 1964a: 33-41). For many problems, it is
essential to single out for study phenomena shared to the limits of a com-
munity, or as nearly so as possible. For other problems, a group, family, per-
son, or the ad hoc productivity of adaptation to an event, will be the desired
focus. To restrict the concept of the cultural to something shared to the limits
of a community is an arbitrary limitation on understanding, of both human
beings and the cultural.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                       21


     Capacity varies with event, and with the states in which
participants, channels, etc., may be in the event, including the
values and beliefs of participants, as properties of their states
that help constitute events as communicative, and that determine
other properties. In part the question is one not of what a language
does for and to participants, their personalities, culture, and the
like, but of what participants, their personalities, and the like,
do for and to a language.
     Only by reference to the state of participants, moreover, does
it seem possible to introduce in a natural way the various types
of functions which communicative events may serve for them.
     There has been a bias in American linguistics, and in Amer-
ican extensions of linguistic methodology, favoring a "surface-
level" approach that stresses identification and segmentation of
overt material, and hesitates to venture far into inner structural
relations and ascription of purpose. (The bias perhaps reflects
the favoring of visual over acoustic space, the trust of the eye,
not the ear, that Carpenter and McLuhan [1960:65-70] find
characteristic of our society.) In Kenneth Burke's terms, there
has been a tendency to treat language and its use as matters of
"motion" (as if of the purely physical world), rather than as
matters of "action" (as matters of the human, dramatistic world
of symbolic agency and purpose) (cf. ch. 7). With all the difficulties
that notions of purpose and function entail, there seems no way
for the structural study of language and communication to engage
its subject in social life in any adequate, useful way, except by
taking this particular bull by the horns. The purposes, conscious
and unconscious, the functions, intended and unintended, per-
ceived and unperceived, of communicative events for their par-
ticipants are here treated as questions of the states in which
they engage in them, and of the norms by which they judge
them. (Those aspects of purpose and function that have to do with
feedback, exchange, response to violations of norms, and the


      The perspective sketched here has the same fulcrum as Sapir's "Why cul-
tural anthropology needs the psychiatrist" (1938) (cf. ch. 3). Sapir's insights
do not imply reduction of cultural behavior to psychiatric subject matter; he
himself explained ([1939] 1949: 579, n. 1):
         As some of my readers have from time to time expressed their dif-
   ficulty with my non-medical use of the terms 'psychiatry' and 'psychi-
    atric,' I must explain that I use these terms in lieu of a possible use of
    'psychology' and 'psychological' with explicit stress on the total per-
    sonality as the central point of reference in all problems of behavior
    and in all problems of 'culture' (analysis of socialized behavior). . . .
    'Personology' and 'personalistic' would be adequate terms but are too
   uncouth for practical use.
Sapir and Chomsky perhaps agree in considering linguistics to be ultimately
a branch of psychology, but clearly the kind of psychology each has in mind
is different.
22                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

like, are considered with the fourth aspect of the present frame
of reference, that of the activity of the system.)
      For ethnographic purposes, an initial "etic grid" for delineat-
ing and "notating" possible types of functions is needed, and it
does seem possible to provide one, by considering the possibil-
ities of focus upon each component in turn in relation to each
of the others. The grid so derived has proven adequate to accom-
modate the various schemes of functions, and of functional types
of messages, which have come to my attention. Ethnographic
work will of course test and probably enlarge and revise it, just
as experience of additional languages has enlarged and revised
phonetic charts. Literary, philosophical, and other schemes of
functions, and of functional types of messages, are also useful
as sources of insight and details. (It may prove desirable to un-
dertake a comparative and historical analysis of such schemes,
as "home-made models" from our own culture. Among reviews,
note Schaff 1962, Part 2, and Stern 1931, ch. 2.)
      It must be kept in mind that functions may prove specific
to individuals and cultures, and that they require specific identi-
fication and labelling in any case, even when subsumable under
broad types. The "etic grid" serves only to help perceive kinds
of functions that may be present, and possibly to facilitate com-
parison.
      Focus on the addressor or sender in relation to other com-
ponents entails such types of function as identification of the
source, expression of attitude toward one or another component
or toward the event as a whole, excogitation (thinking aloud),
etc. Such function may be of course intended, attributed, con-
scious, unconscious. Focus on the addressee or other receiver
entails such types of function as identification of the destination,
and the ways in which the message and event may be governed
by anticipation of the attitude of the destination. Persuasion,
appeal, rhetoric, and direction enter here, including as well the
sense in which the characteristics of the addressee govern the
other aspects of the event as a matter of protocol. Effects on
receivers may be of course intended, attributed, conscious, un-
conscious, achieved, frustrated. Focus on channels in relation to
other components entails such functions as have to do with main-
tenance of contact and controf of noise, both physical and psy-
chological in both cases. Focus on codes in relation to other
components entails such functions as are involved in learning,
analysis, devising of writing systems, checking on the identity
of an element of the code use in conversation, and the like. Focus
on settings in relation to other components entails all that is
considered contextual, apart from the event itself, in that any
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                              23


and all components may be taken as defining the setting of the
event, not just its location in time and space. Such context has
two aspects, verbal and nonverbal from the standpoint of speech,
kinesic and nonkinesic from the standpoint of body motion, and,
generally, for any one code or modality, context constituted for
a message by other messages within the same code or modality,
as distinct from context constituted by all other facets of the
event. Focus on message-form      in relation to other components
entails such functions as proofreading, mimicry, aspects of
emendation and editing, and poetic and stylistic concerns. Focus
on topic in relation to other components entails functions having
to do with reference (in the sense both of linguistic meaning
proper and denotation) and content. Focus on the event itself
entails whatever is comprised under metacommunicative types
of function. If the message is taken as subsuming all, or all the
immediately relevant, other components, then focus on the mes-
sage as surrogate of the whole event may be taken as entailing
metacommunicative functions ("the message 'this is play'
Russell's types, etc.; see Bateson 1963 on the importance of this
function).
     Common broad types of functions associated with each type
of focus can be variously labelled: expressive, directive, contact
(phatic), metalinguistic, contextual, poetic (stylistic), referential,
and metacommunicative are useful. The etic framework implied
here can be handled with pencil and paper for visual purposes
(and expanded also) by two devices, one of horizontal placement,
one of vertical placement, of components relative to each other.
In handling the five broad types of components of action used
in his analysis (Scene, Act, Agent, Agency, Purpose), Burke
devises various "ratios"; thus, the relation of Scene to Act is the
Scene-Act ratio, and can be represented as if a numerator over
a denominator: Scene/Act (Burke 1945). In explicating gram-
matical categories in terms of the components of speech events,
Jakobson (1957) discriminates speech events (Es) and narrated
events (En), and participants in each (Ps, Pn), expressing relations
with a diagonal; thus, the relation of the narrated event to the
speech event (involved in verbal categories) is expressed E n /E s .
Either device could be used to express all the possible combina-
tions and permutations of focus upon the relation of one com-
ponent of a communicative event to each of the others. Either
device is useful in explicating other logical and empirical schemes
of functions and functional types of messages in terms of a com-
mon denominator, a problem which is a converse in effect of
the usual problem of componential analysis. (There one proceeds
from etic grid to discover an emic system, here one is concerned
24                                    FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

to proceed from a possibly emic system to discover an etic grid.)
     Most of the functions and components noted above have
been discussed with examples of Jakobson 1960 and Hymes 1962.

                   ACTIVITY OF THE SYSTEM
     Information theory is one topic notably associated with
communication; cybernetics is the other. Having taken informa-
tion theory in its quantitative sense as pertaining to the third
aspect of the present frame of reference, we take cybernetics
as pertaining to the fourth. Studies concerned with the informa-
tion theory aspect of ethnographic systems of communication
are almost nonexistent, and the case is the same for studies
concerned with the cybernetic aspect. One can think in both
respects of unpublished work by John Roberts and of a few cel-
ebrated and isolated examples in the work of Levi-Strauss (1953)
and Bateson (1949; 1958) where cybernetic notions are applied.7
     The activity of the system is the most general aspect of the
four, and ultimately the one in terms of which it is necessary
to view the rest. For particular purposes, of course, any one
aspect, or part of one, can be segregated for analysis, and there
is much to be done in the ethnographic and comparative study
of every aspect and component. To take the channel component
as an illustration, there are few if any ethnographic studies to
compare with Herzog's multifaceted account of the system of
channels elaborated among the Jabo of Liberia, considering,
as it does, the structure of the code in each, the relation of code
and messages in each to base messages in speech, native cat-
egories and conceptions, social correlates, and circumstances of
use (Herzog 1945). There is a fair variety of reports of specialized
uses of the vocal channel, but the account of Mazateco whistle
talk by Cowan (1948) again is almost unique in providing a
technical linguistic base and ethnographic context that could
support controlled comparison. We have noted that paralinguistic
and kinesic investigations have but begun to be extended cross-
culturally, and attention to the sociopsychological context of atti-
tude toward use of a channel, or modality, for instance the voice
and gesture, such as Devereux (1949,1951) has shown in work with
the Mohave, is far to seek. Two general comparative studies (May
1956, Stern 1957) look toward historical interpretation in terms
of distribution and origins, but not toward controlled comparison
of structures and functions, perhaps because the available data

    7. Goodenough (1957b) introduces communication theory in the Shannon
sense into his critical review of an anthropological book on communication
(Keesing and Keesing 1956) that does not itself make use of such theory.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                            25


offers little encouragement. Stern's classification of speech sur-
rogates, derived from notions of communication theory, needs
clarification and extension to include writing systems, which
are logically comprised by the categories. As for the structural
and functional aspects of writing and literacy, empirical studies
of the diversity of the patterns that occur are few, and as for
contrastive studies of their absence, that of Bloomfield (1927) is
the only one known to me. Interpretations of the determinism of
particular channels, such as those of McLuhan (1962) and of
Goody and Watt (1963), and interpretations of the determinism
of media (channels) generally, such as are expressed in the
orientation of Carpenter and McLuhan (1960) and McLuhan
(1964), interesting as they are, seem oversimplified, where not
simply wrong, in the light of what little ethnographic base we
have. There is a tendency to take the value of a channel as given
across cultures, but here, as with every aspect and component
of communication, the value is problematic and requires investi-
gation. (Consider for example the specialization of writing to
courtship among young people by the Hanunoo, and to a bor-
rowed religion among the Aleut; and the complex and diverse
profiles with regard to the role of writing in society, and in in-
dividual communicative events, for traditional Chinese, Korean,
and Japanese cultures, with regard both to the Chinese texts
shared by all and to the materials specific to each.) To provide
a better ethnographic basis for the understanding of the place of
alternative channels and modalities in communication is indeed
one of the greatest challenges to studies of the sort we seek to
encourage. At the same time, such work, whether on channels or
some other aspect and component, profits from taking into ac-
count the complete context of the activity of the system of com-
munication of the community as a whole.
      It is with this aspect that the ethnographic study of com-
munication makes closest contact with the social, political, and
moral concerns with communication, conceived as value and a
determinant in society and in personal lives.

     The frame of reference just sketched can be summed up as
asking a series of questions: What are the communicative events,
and their components, in a community? What are the relation-
ships among them? What capabilities and states do they have, in
general, and in particular cases? How do they work?
     Some of the variety of current lines of work that can con-
tribute to, and benefit from, ethnographic study of communica-
tion can be briefly mentioned.
   Linguistic investigation of the abilities and judgments of appro-
26                                    FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

priateness of speakers, when pursued in a thoroughgoing way,
must lead into study of the full range of factors conditioning the
exercise of judgment and ability. The potential richness of studies
of socialization, enculturation, and child development in this
regard is manifest. The situation here is parallel to that with
regard to the abilities and judgments of adults. Work focused on
the linguistic code needs to be extended into concern with the
whole of the child's induction into the communicative economy
of its community. (Some notes and queries on this are advanced
in Hymes 1961b, 1962, 1964e; cf. ch. 3). The importance of concern
with the child is partly that it offers a favorable vantage point
for discovering the adult system, and that it poses neatly one
way in which the ethnography of communication is a distinctive
enterprise, i.e., an enterprise concerned with the abilities the
child must acquire, beyond those of producing and interpreting
grammatical sentences, in order to be a competent member of its
community, knowing not only what may possibly be said, but
also what should and should not be said.
     These studies bear importantly on work in fundamental
education and literacy, which raises problems of particular in-
terest; it can be a source of data and insight, and ethnographic
studies of communication can contribute to it. The various pur-
poses of educators, workers in literacy, translators, missionaries,
and applied anthropologists may be facilitated by prior ethno-
graphic study of the communicative economy with which they
are engaged; the same of course applies to teachers and schools
in our own society (cf. ch. 5).
      Ethnographic work not concerned primarily with communica-
tion may make a contribution through precision of focus and
detail. Thus one of the accounts of Metzger and Williams (1963:
218-19, 227-28) permits one to determine something of the place
of speech, as one communicative modality among others, in a
hierarchy of ritual means.8 With more such analyses one could
begin to have controlled comparisons. The study of folk tax-
onomies, and of ethnographic semantics generally, needs spec-
ification of communicative contexts if it is to achieve the implicit
goal of discovering the structures of whole vocabularies (cf.
Hymes 1964d, and ch. 4). The methods of ethnographic semantics,
in turn, are helpful in discovering kinds and components of com-
municative events.
     There is a somewhat different relation to the interest of

    8. Verbal means are more pervasive than tactile means, but a tactile
means, pulsing, holds the highest level alone; and where the two types of
means are combined, it is the verbal type, prayer, that a master curer may
delegate.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                            27


analytic philosophers in speech acts and modes of language use.
Studies in the ethnography of communication afford a necessary
ground for empirical testing of the adequacy beyond our own
society, or some portion of it, of logical and intuitive analyses of
types of act, such as promising, of conversational assumptions,
and the like. In turn, ethnography cannot but benefit from addi-
tional precision of concepts for etic and typological purposes.
     A similar relationship holds with work in paralinguistics,
kinesics, and other aspects of codes circumjacent to language in
communication. Ethnographic and comparative studies in the
context of communication are needed to extend the etic frame-
works, and to ascertain emic relevance amidst the wealth of
data that even a few minutes of observation can supply. In turn,
these investigations are needed to delimit the place and inter-
relations of modalities, spoken language being but one, in the
communicative hierarchy of a community, and as a basis for
interpreting the evolution of communication.
     The problems of the study of primate communication are in
principle the same as those of the ethnographic study of com-
munication in human communities. The importance of studies of
primate and other animal communication to help determine, by
comparison and contrast, the specific properties of human lan-
guage, and to help picture its evolutionary emergence, is well
known. Ethnographies of communication here play a complemen-
tary role, which has yet to gain recognition, since it tends to be
assumed^ that the functions and uses of human language are
constant and already known. Empirical questions, such as the
minimum role that language can play in the communicative sys-
tem of a small hunting and gathering community, and of the
adequacy of very minimal derived codes in closeknit communities,
are not taken into account. Extrapolations as to the relations
between code and communicative context at stages of human
evolution need a basis in comparative ethnography as well as in
formal comparison of codes. Not codes alone, but whole systems
of communication, involving particular needs and alternative
modalities, must be considered and compared. In general, to the
evolutionary approach to culture, ethnographic studies of com-
munication can contribute a framework within which languages
can be treated adaptively in ways which articulate with the study
of sociocultural evolution as a whole, and with microevolutionary
studies (cf. Hymes 1961a, 1964d, 1971d).
     What can be sketched now is but an outline of a future in
which, one can hope, ethnographic studies of communication will
be commonplace, and an ethnographic perspective on the engage-
ment of language in human life the standard from which more
specialized studies of language will depart.
Chapter 2

Studying the Interaction
of Language and Social Life



     Diversity of speech has been singled out as the hallmark of
sociolinguistics. Of this two things shoulcj be said. Underlying the
diversity of speech within communities and in the conduct of
individuals are systematic relations, relations that, just as social
and grammatical structure, can be the object of qualitative
inquiry.1
     Diversity of speech presents itself as a problem in many
sectors of life—education, national development, transcultural
communication. When those concerned with such problems seek
scientific cooperation, they must often be disappointed. There is
as yet no body of systematic knowledge and theory. There is not
even agreement on a mode of description of language in interac-

     1. This chapter is adapted from "Models of the Interaction of Language
and Social Life," in Directions in Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography of Com-
munciation, ed. by John J. Gumperz and Dell Hymes (New York: Holt, Rine-
hart, and Winston, 1972), 38-71. Many of the examples come from an exami-
nation of ethnographic data undertaken with support of the Culture of Schools
program of the Office of Education in 1966-67. I am greatly indebted to Regna
Darnell, Helen Hogan, Elinor Keenan, Susan Philips, Sheila Seitel, Joel
Sherzer, K. M. Tiwary, and my wife, Virginia, for their participation in that
work, and to Robert Conrad, Howard Hanson, Louis Kemnitzer, Robert Lit-
teral, Elmer Miller, J. David Sapir, and David and Dorothy Thomas, for dis-
cussion of examples from their field experiences. My work on the general
problem benefited also from a small grant in spring 1968 from the National
Institute of Mental Health; I want to thank Philip Sapir for his interest.

                                                                          29
30                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

tion with social life, one which, being explicit and of standard
form, could facilitate development of knowledge and theory
through studies that are full and comparable. There is not even
 agreement on the desirability or necessity of such a mode of
description.
      Bilingual or bidialectal phenomena have been the main focus
of the interest that has been shown. Yet bilingualism is not in
itself an adequate basis for a model or theory of the interaction
of language and social life. From the standpoint of such a model
or theory, bilingualism is neither a unitary phenomenon nor
autonomous. The fact that two languages are present in a com-
munity or are part of a person's communicative repertoire un-
derlain by a variety of different relationships may be of meaning
and use. Conversely, distinct languages need not be present for
the underlying relationships to find expression through linguistic
means (cf. chs. 4, 8).
      Bilingualism par excellence (e.g., French and English in
Canada, Welsh and English in North Wales, Russian and French
among prerevolutionary Russian nobility) is a salient, special
case of the general phenomenon of linguistic repertoire. No nor-
mal person, and no normal community, is limited to a single style
of speech, to an unchanging monotony that would preclude
indication of respect, insolence, mock seriousness, humor, role
distance, and intimacy by switching from one mode of speech to
another.
      Given the universality of linguistic repertoires, and of choices
among the forms of speech they comprise, it is not necessary
that the forms be distinct languages. Relationships of social
intimacy or of social distance may be signaled by switching be-
tween distinct languages [Spanish: Guarani in Paraguay (Rubin
1962, 1968)]; between varieties of a single language (standard
German; dialect), or between pronouns within a single variety
(German Du:Sie). Segregation of religious activity may be marked
linguistically by a variety whose general unintelligibility depends
on being of foreign provenance (e.g., Latin, Arabic in many com-
munities), on being a derived variety of the common language
 [Zuni (Newman 1955)], or on being a manifestation not iden-
tifiable at all (some glossolalia). Conversely, shift between vari-
eties may mark a shift between distinct spheres of activity [e.g.,
standard Norwegian: Hemnes dialect (see Blom and Gumperz
1972) or the formal status of talk within a single integral activity
[e.g., Siane in New Guinea (Salisbury 1962)], Latin in a contem-
porary Cambridge University degree ceremony (e.g., Cambridge
University Reporter 1969).
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                             31


      A general theory of the interaction of language and social
life must encompass the multiple relations between linguistic
means and social meaning. The relations within a particular com-
munity or personal repertoire are an empirical problem, calling
for a mode of description that is jointly ethnographic and linguis-
tic, conceiving ways of speaking as one among the community's
set of symbolic forms (cf. Cassirer 1944).
      If the community's own theory of linguistic repertoire and
speech is considered (as it must in any serious ethnographic ac-
count), matters become all the more complex and interesting.
Some peoples, such as the Wishram Chinook of the Columbia
River in what is now the state of Washington, or the Ashanti of
 Ghana, have considered infants' vocalizations to manifest a
special language (on the Wishram, see Hymes 1966b: on the
Ashanti, Hogan 1972—cf. ch. 4). For the Wishram, this language
was interpretable only by men having certain guardian spirits.
In such cases, the native language is in native theory a second
language to everyone. Again, one community may strain to main-
tain mutual intelligibility with a second in the face of great
differentiation of dialect, while another may declare intelligibility
impossible, although the objective linguistic differences are minor.
Cases indistinguishable by linguistic criteria may thus be now
monolingual, now bilingual, depending on local social relation-
ships and attitudes (discussed more fully in Hymes 1968b).
     It is common in a bilingual situation to look for specializa-
tion in the function, elaboration, and valuation of a language.
Such specialization is only an instance of a universal phenomenon,
one that must be studied in situations dominantly monolingual as
well. Language as such is not everywhere equivalent in role and
value; speech may have different scope and functional load in
the communicative economies of different societies. In our society
sung and spoken communication intersect in song; pure speaking
and instrumental music are separate kinds of communication.
Among the Flathead Indians of Montana, speech and songs with-
out text are separate, while songs with text, and instrumental
music as an aspect of songs with text, form the intersection.
Among the Maori of New Zealand instrumental music is a part
of song, and both are ultimately conceived as speech. It is inter-
esting to note that among both the Flathead and Maori it is super-
natural context that draws speech and music together, and makes
of both (and of animal sounds as well among the Flathead) forms
of linguistic communication. (These examples draw .on a study by
Judith Temkin Irvine (1968).) With regard to speaking itself, while
Malinowski has made us familiar with the importance of phatic
32                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

communication, talk for the sake of something being said, the
ethnographic record suggests that it is far from universally an
important or even accepted motive (see Sapir 1933a, SWES 16, 11).
The Paliyans of south India "communicate very little at all times
and become almost silent by the age of 40. Verbal, communica-
tive persons are regarded as abnormal and often as offensive"
(Gardner 1966:398). The distribution of required and preferred
silence, indeed, perhaps most immediately reveals in outline form
a community's structure of speaking (see Samarin 1965; Basso
1970). Finally, the role of language in thought and culture (Whorf's
query) obviously cannot be assessed for bilinguals until the role
of each of their languages is assessed; but the same is true for
monolinguals since in different societies language enters differen-
tially into educational experience, transmission of beliefs, knowl-
edge, values, practices, and conduct (see Hymes 1966b). Such
differences may obtain even between different groups within a
single society with a single language.
      What is needed, then, is a general theory and body of knowl-
edge within which diversity of speech, repertoires, ways of speak-
ing, and choosing among them find a natural place. Such a theory
and body of knowledge are only now beginning to be built in a
sustained way. It is not necessary to think of sociolinguistics as a
novel discipline. If linguistics comes to accept fully the sociocul-
tural dimensions, social science the linguistic dimensions, of
their subject matters and theoretical bases, "sociolinguistics" will
simply identify a mode of research in adjacent sectors of each.
As disciplines, one will speak simply of linguistics, anthropology,
and the like (see ch. 4). But, as just implied, the linguistics,
anthropology, etc., of which one speaks will have changed. Social
scientists asking relevant functional questions have usually not
had the training and insight to deal adequately with the linguistic
face of the problem. Linguistics, the discipline central to the study
of speech, has been occupied almost wholly with developing
analysis of the structure of language as a referential code.
      In order to develop models, or theories, of the interaction of
language and social life, there must be adequate descriptions of
that interaction, and such descriptions call for an approach that
partly links, but partly cuts across, partly builds between the
ordinary practices of the disciplines to answer new questions
and give familiar questions a novel focus. Such work is the
essence of what may be called the ethnography (and ethnology)
of speaking and communication, as an approach within the gen-
eral field of sociolinguistics. (On the relation between the ap-
proach and the field, see the footnotes to ch. 4).
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                   33


       THE CASE FOR DESCRIPTION AND TAXONOMY
     For some of the most brilliant students of language in its
social setting, the proper strategy is to select problems that con-
tribute directly to current linguistic and social theory. A primary
concern is relevance to particular problems already perceived as
such in the existing disciplines, although the modes of work of
those disciplines must often be transformed for the problems to
find solutions. Field studies in societies exotic to the investigator,
where strong control over data and hypothesis testing cannot
easily be maintained, are not much valued. A concern to secure
reports from such societies is thought pointless since it suggests
a prospect of endless descriptions which, whatever their quantity
and quality, would not as such contribute to theoretical discovery.
     My own view is different. I accept an intellectual tradition,
adumbrated in antiquity, and articulated in the course of the
Enlightenment, which holds that mankind cannot be understood
apart from the evolution and maintenance of its ethnographic
diversity. A satisfactory understanding of the nature and unity of
men must encompass and organize, not abstract from, the diver-
sity. In this tradition, a theory, whatever its logic and insight, is
inadequate if divorced from, if unilluminating as to, the ways of
life of mankind as a whole. The concern is consonant with that
of Kroeber, reflecting upon Darwin:
  anthropologists . . . do not yet clearly recognize the fundamental
  value of the humble but indispensable task of classifying—that is,
  structuring, our body of knowledge, as biologists did begin to
  recognize it two hundred years ago. [1960:14]
      Even the ethnographies that we have, though almost never
focused on speaking, show us that communities differ signifi-
cantly in ways of speaking, in patterns of repertoire and switch-
ing, in the roles and meanings of speech. They indicate differences
with regard to beliefs, values, reference groups, norms, and the
like, as these enter into the ongoing system of language use and
its acquisition by children. Individual accounts that individually
pass without notice, as familiar possibilities, leap out when juxta-
posed, as contrasts that require explanation. The Gbeya around
the town of Bossangoa in the western Central African Republic,
for example, are extremely democratic, and relatively uncon-
cerned with speech. There is no one considered verbally excellent
even with regard to traditional folklore. Moreover,
  Gbeya parents and other adults focus little attention on the speech
  of children. No serious attempt is made to improve their language.
  In fact, a child only uncommonly takes part in a dyadic speech
34                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

     event with an adult. . . . Among the Gbeya "children are seen and
     not heard." Finally, there appears to be very little interest in
     reporting how a person speaks. [Samarin 1969]
The Anang (Nigeria) received their name from neighboring Ibo,
the term meaning "ability to speak wittily yet meaningfully upon
any occasion."
          The Anang take great pride in their eloquence, and youth are
     trained from early childhood to develop verbal skills. This proverb
     riddle [not quoted here, but see discussion] instructs young people
     to assume adult duties and responsibilities as early as possible,
     even if doing so is difficult and unpleasant at times. As the vine
     must struggle to escape growing into the pit [the riddle], so must
     the child strive to overcome his shyness and insecurity and learn
     to speak publicly [the proverbial answer], as well as perform other
     adult roles. [Messenger 1960:229]
     Or, to consider the word and the sword, among the Arau-
canians of Chile the head of a band was its best orator, and his
power depended upon his ability to sway others through oratory.
Among the Abipon of Argentina no desired role or status de-
pended upon skill in speaking; chiefs and members of the one
prestigious men's group were selected solely on the basis of
success in battle. The Iroquois value eloquence in chiefs and
orators as much as bravery in war; the two are usually mentioned
together and with equal status. A chief could rise equally quickly
by either.
     Since there is no systematic understanding of the ways in
which communities differ in these respects, and of the deeper
relationships such differences may disclose, we have it to create.
We need taxonomies of speaking and descriptions adequate to
support and test them.
     Such description and taxonomy will share in the work of
providing an adequate classification of languages. If the task of
language classification is taken to be to place languages in terms
of their common features and differences, and if we consider the
task from the standpoint of similarities, then four classifications
are required. Languages are classified according to features de-
scended from a common ancestor (genetic classification), features
diffused within a common area (areal classification), features
manifesting a common structure or structures, irrespective of
origin or area (typological classification), and features of com-
mon use or social role, as koine, standard language, pidgin, etc.
(functional classification—see Hymes 1968c; Greenburg 1968:
133-35). The processes underlying the classifications (various
kinds of retention, divergence, convergence) all can be viewed in
terms of the adaption of languages to social contexts, but the
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                            35


forms of classification in which the dependence on social pro-
cesses can be most readily excluded (genetic, typological) are the
forms that have been most developed. Sociolinguistic research
reinforces the intermittent interest that areal classification has
received, and can properly claim the most neglected sector, func-
tional classification, the interaction between social role and fea-
tures of languages, for its own. The natural unit for sociolinguistic
taxonomy (and description), however, is not the language but the
speech community.
     Of course, sociolinguistic taxonomy is not an end in itself,
any more than is language classification. A taxonomy is not in itself
a theory or explanation, though it may conceal or suggest one.
There will indeed be a variety of taxonomies, answering to a va-
riety of significant dimensions, as well as taxonomies of whole
communities, societies, and social fields. (For a step in the latter
direction, see Ferguson 1966.) The work of taxonomy is a neces-
sary part of progress toward models (structural and generative) of
sociolinguistic description, formulation of universal sets of fea-
tures and relations, and explanatory theories. (I shall say some-
thing about each of these later.) Just the demonstration that the
phenomena of speaking are subject to comparative study may
help end the obscuring of actual problems by descant on the func-
tion of language in general, as in the recent examples of uncritical
praise and intransigent indictment of language, respectively from
Hertzler 1965 and Parain 1969. On "high and low evaluations of
language" as an integral part of the history of philosophy and
human culture, see Urban 1939:12, 23-32.


                            AN ILLUSTRATION

     As an indication of what can be done, as well as of how much
there is to be done, let me briefly consider the grossest, and most
likely to be reported, aspect of speech, quantity. Contrasts were
drawn already in antiquity, although amounting only to folk char-
acterization, as when the Athenian says to his Spartan and Cretan
interlocutors,
        But first let me make an apology. The Athenian citizen is
   reputed among all the Hellenes to be a great talker, whereas Sparta
   is renowned for brevity, and the Cretans have more wit than words.
   Now I am afraid of appearing to elicit a very long discourse out of
   very small matter. [Plato, Laws 64lE:423]2

    2. According to Sandys (1920, vol. 1:4), the noun philologia is first found
in Plato, and its adjective, philologi'a, is used in this passage to contrast "lover
of discourse" with "hater of discourse."
36                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

One could extract a dimension with three points of contrast, nam-
ing the types according to the dialogue (as kinship systems are
named after societies in which they are identified, Crow, Omaha,
and the like):
           i
     Dimension:        verbose           laconic             pithy
     Type:            ATHENIAN          SPARTAN            CRETAN

     A number of analytically different dimensions are probably
confounded within gross observations as to quantity of speech,
length and frequency of speech, and the like; and there are
qualitative characteristics vital to the interaction of language with
social life in the particular societies. Something of this appears in
the quotation from Plato, and becomes explicit in the following
contrast:
          ii
     Dimension:         voluble  reserved, reticent              taciturn
     Type:           BELLA COOLA     ARITAMA                    PALIYAN
      BELLA COOLA (British Columbia). Fluent, interesting speech
is valued, and a common, if not a requisite, part of social life.
Essential roles in ceremonial activity, and an important spirit
impersonated in the Kusiut initiation, had to have the ability to
talk constantly, keeping up a flow of witty and insulting remarks.
The ethnographer Mcllwraith found that if he could not joke with
them constantly, people lost interest. When groups talked, one
was sure to hear bursts of laughter every few minutes.
     ARITAMA (Colombia). People in Aritama are not much given
to friendly chatting and visiting. They are controlled and taciturn,3
evasive and monosyllabic.... This reserve . . . is not only displayed
toward strangers, but characterizes their own interpersonal con-
tacts as well. There is a font of ready answers and expressions, of
standard affirmations and opinions, and there is always, in the
last resort, the blank stare, the deaf ear or the sullen no se.. . . Such
behavior . . . leads frequently to a highly patterned type of confab-
ulation. [Reichel-Dolmatoff 1961:xvii]
      PALIYAN (south India). See previous quotation from Gard-
ner (1966). According to Gardner, the many hunting-and-gather-
ing societies of the world should be divided into two types; of one
the Paliyans are a perhaps extreme representative.

     3. Although the Reichel-Dolmatoffs use "taciturn" here of the Aritama,
the subsequent term "reserved" characterizes them well, while "taciturn" is
specifically apt for the Paliyans. As taxonomy and description develop, care-
ful explication of technical terms will be increasingly important. Note that
the three groups are also respectively "now-coding," "then-coding," and "non-
coding" (cf. n. 5).
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                             37


    The dimensions may, of course, apply within, as well as
between, societies, as to groups, cultural content, verbal style,
and situations. As to groups,
           iiia
      Dimension:        voluble                        taciturn
      Type:                             ARAUCANIAN
      Subcategory:        Men                          Women
     ARAUCANIAN (Chile). The ideal Araucanian man is a good
orator, with good memory, general conversationalist, expected to
speak well and often. Men are encouraged to talk on all occasions,
speaking being a sign of masculine intelligence and leadership.
The ideal woman is submissive and quiet, silent in her husband's
presence. At gatherings where men do much talking, women sit
together listlessly, communicating only ih whispers or not at all.
On first arriving in her husband's home, a wife is expected to sit
silently facing the wall, not looking anyone directly in the face.
Only after several months is she permitted to speak, and then,
only a little. Sisters-in-law do not speak much to each other. The
one means by which women can express their situation is a form
of social singing (ulkantun) in which mistreatment, disregard, and
distress can be expressed. The one approved role for a woman to
be verbally prominent is as shamanistic intermediary of a spirit
(Hilger 1957). (Silence is expected of a bride in her new home in
a number of cultures, e.g., traditional Korea. The restriction of
women's expression of grievances to certain occasions and a
musical use of voice also is widespread, as in Bihar, India.)
     As to situations,
     iiib
  Dimension:                           discursive reticent
                                       disclosure quotation
  Type:                             WISHRAM-WASCO CHINOOK
  Scene: (See discussion)
     WISHRAM-WASCO CHINOOK (Washington, Oregon). Reci-
tation of myths in winter, public conferral of personal name, and
disclosure of an adolescent guardian spirit experience upon
approaching death are three major communicative events. In each
event, discursive disclosure (of the myth as a whole, the identifica-
tion of name and person, or the verbal message of the vision)
comes only when an implicit relationship (of culture to nature,
person to reincarnated kin-linked "title," or persons to personal
spirit) has been validated. Each is part of a cycle—the annual
round of society, a cycle of reinstituting names of deceased kin,
an individual life cycle from adolescence to death. At other times
during the cycle there may be quotations (of a detail in a myth, a
38                                       FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

name in address, a song from one's vision in a winter spirit dance),
but the substance of the relationship must not be explicitly
stated. In each case of discursive disclosure the speaker is a
spokesman, repeating words previously said, this being one rule
that constitutes formal speech events. (See Hymes 1966b.)
     As to cultural content,
            iv
        Dimension:           verbal elaboration     verbal     sparseness
        Type:                    HID ATS A                   CROW

     HID ATS A (North Dakota). CROW (Montana). According to
Lowie (1917:87-88), 'The culture of the Hidatsa differs from that
of the Crow not merely by the greater number and elaboration of
discrete features but also in a marked trait of their social psychol-
ogy—the tendency towards rationalization and systematization."
Lowie illustrates the contrast in four domains: formal instruction;
accounting for cultural phenomena; individual interpretation and
conception of names, myths, and prayer; and kinship nomen-
clature. In each domain the Hidatsa use language to systematize
and stabilize the cultural universe to an extent greatly in contrast
to the Crow. (It was the Crow that Lowie knew more intimately;
hence his sense of greater Hidatsa elaboration is trustworthy). Of
particular interest here is the following:
          The Crow child . . . seems to have grown up largely without
     formal instruction. Even on so vital a matter as the securing of
     supernatural favor, the adolescent Crow was not urged by his
     elders but came more or less automatically to imitate his associ-
     ates. . . . With the Hidatsa everything seems to have been ordered
     and prearranged by parental guidance; the father repeatedly
     admonished his sons, at the same time giving them specific instruc-
     tions.4
       As to verbal style:
              v
         Dimension:           elaborate, profuse     restrained, sparse
         Type:                     ENGLISH                YOKUTS

    ENGLISH, YOKUTS (California). A contrast with regard to
the limits of acceptable use of syntactic possibilities has been

     4. As the initial quotation indicates, Lowie did not relate the contrast
explicitly to the role of language in social life. A major task and methodolog-
ical challenge is to go beyond superficial presence or absence of overt men-
tion of speech, in order to restate existing ethnographic analyses, wherever
possible, in terms of speaking, just as it is often possible to find in earlier
accounts of languages evidence permitting restatement in terms of contem-
porary phonological and grammatical models. Such restatement is more than
an exercise; it contributes to the range of cases for comparative studies.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                      39


drawn by Newman, who views each language from the standpoint
of the other. Sparseness and restraint are found to characterize
Yokuts narrative style as well (Gayton and Newman 1940).
     Work in societies, with the goals of taxonomy and descrip-
tive models in mind, is interdependent with detailed work in one's
own society. Each provides insight and a test of universality and
adequacy for the other. It has been suggested, for example, that
there is only a class-linked British relevance to Bernstein's socio-
logical model of elaborated vs. restricted coding, governed by per-
sonal vs. positional types of social control.5 While some Ameri-
cans indeed have misapplied Bernstein's two types to ethnic and
class differences in the United States, from the standpoint of tax-
onomy and description, the model takes on a new scope. It sug-
gests a set of universal dimensions, and possibly polar ideal types,
isolable and applicable to the description and comparison of situ-
ations and whole communities, as well as particular groups.
     Thus Margaret Mead has analyzed the Arapesh and Iatmul
of New Guinea as contrasting types of society in which the adult
patterns seem appropriately interpreted as personal and posi-
tional, respectively. In the ARAPESH type (which includes the
Andamanese, Ojibwa, and Eskimo), societies depend, for impetus
to or inhibition of community action in public situations, upon the
continuing response of individuals. The point of communication
is to excite interest and bring together persons who will then
respond with emotion to whatever event has occurred. In the
IATMUL type the societies depend upon formal alignments of
individuals, who react not in terms of personal opinions but in
terms of defined position in a formal sociopolitical structure.
     At the same time the comparative perspective extends the
model. Mead identifies a third type of society, such as that of
BALI, which does not depend on situations in which individuals
express or can be called upon to express themselves for or against
something, so as to affect the outcome regarding it, but which
functions by invoking participation in and respect for known
impersonal patterns or codes, and in which communicators act as
if the audience were already in a state of suspended, unemotional
attention, and only in need of a small precise triggering of words
to set them off into appropriate activity. Mead interprets the dif-
ferences as ones in which political feeling depends on "How do

     5. Elaborated codes are largely now-coding, and adaptive in lexicon and
syntax to the ad hoc elaboration of subjective intent, while restricted codes
are largely then-coding, and adaptive to the reinforcement of group solidarity
through use of preformulated expressions. Personal social control appeals to
individual characteristics, role discretion, and motivation; positional social
control bases itself on membership in categories of age, sex, class, and the
like. See Bernstein 1972; cf. n. 3).
40                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

I (and A, B, and C) feel about it?" (Arapesh); "How does my
group (their group) feel about it?" (Iatmul); and "How does this
fit in?" (Bali). Such a type as Bali seems appropriately labeled one
of traditional social control and communication. (Obviously, only
a subset of the societies lumped together as "traditional" by some
social scientists can be said to be so in a useful way.) (See Mead
1937, 1948; the latter article discusses Manus as well.) Keesing
and Keesing (1956:258) suggest Samoa as a type combining Iatmul
and Bali characteristics, but distinctive [Mead (1937) places it also
as a type intermediate between Iatmul and Bali], so that one
might have:
         vi
     Dimension:   personal    positional   traditional     positional,
                                                         traditional
     Type:        ARAPESH      IATMUL         BALI         SAMOA
                                                            ZUNI
     Comparative ethnographic examples show the need to separ-
ate sometimes the dimensions joined together in Bernstein's model.
Iatmul is a society with important development of oratory, which
might seem an instance of elaboration which should go with
personal control. If the oratory is then-coding, employing largely
preformulated expressions, there is, in fact, no discrepancy. Posi-
tional and personal social control do, however, crosscut then-
coding to define four types of cases, not just two. Cat Harbour,
Newfoundland, as described by Faris (1966, 1968), shows posi-
tional social control and restriction of personal expression in
speech and other normally scheduled activities. As in most
societies, there are certain situations marked as reversals of
normal conduct (e.g., legitimated stealing of food); and, as if to
compensate for plainness of life and to satisfy the great interest in
"news" of any kind, while remaining within normal restraints,
there has arisen a genre known as the "cuffer." A "cuffer" may
arise spontaneously, or someone may be asked to start one. It
consists of developing an intense argument over an unimportant
detail (such as how many men actually were lost in a boatwreck
some decades back); but to show personal emotional involvement
brings shame and exclusion. We thus find elaborated now-coding,
indeed, extensive invention, in a positional setting. There can be
then-coding in a situation of ad "hoc subjective intent as well, as
when Ponapeans arrive at the status of mutual lovers through
manipulating a long sequence of verbal formulas which allow for
role discretion at each step (Paul Garvin, pers. comm.), or when
a traditional saying is used precisely because its impersonal, pre-
formulated character grants role discretion to another that direct
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                             41


rebuke would not (e.g., the Chaga of Central Africa use proverbs
to children in this way).

               RELEVANT FEATURES AND TYPES
     The examples just presented show that it is essential to iso-
late the dimensions and features underlying taxonomic categories.
These features and dimensions, more than particular constella-
tions of them, will be found to be universal, and hence elementary
to descriptive and comparative frames of reference. This is not to
consider universal features and dimensions the only goal. Explan-
ation faces two ways, toward the generic possibilities and general
constraints, on the one hand (Chomsky's "essentialist" form of
explanatory adequacy), and toward the types that are historically
realized and their causes (an "existential" or "experiential" form
of explanatory adequacy), on the other. The heuristics of descrip-
tion require an etics of types as well as of elements, for insight
into the organization intrinsic to a case, as against a priori or
mechanical structuring of it.
   By both defining some universal dimensions of speaking and
proposing explanation within social theory of certain constella-
tions of them, Bernstein has shown the goal toward which work
must proceed. The total range of dimensions and of kinds of
explanation, to be sure, will be more varied. Indeed, the fact that
present taxonomic dimensions consist so largely of dichotomies—
restricted vs. elaborated codes, transactional vs. metaphorical
switching, referential vs. expressive meaning, standard vs. non-
standard speech, formal vs. informal scenes, literacy vs. illiteracy
—shows how preliminary is the stage at which we work. With
regard to ways of speaking, we are at a stage rather like that of the
study of human culture, as a whole, a century ago, when Tyler,
Morgan, and others had to segregate relevant sets of data, and give
definiteness and name to some of the elementary categories on
which subsequent work could be built (on Tylor, see Lowie 1937:
70-71; Tylor 1871, ch. 1).
     Like Tylor and Morgan, we need to establish elementary
categories and names. Among the Bella Coola of British Columbia,
for instance, there is a discourse style such that at the investiture
of an inheritor of a privilege validated by a myth, someone tells
a public audience kept outside just enough of the recited myth to
be convincing as to the validation, but not so much as to give it
away (knowledge of the myth itself being part of the privilege)
(Mcllwraith 1948). Among the Iatmul of New Guinea knowledge
of the correct version of a myth may also be proof of a claim, in
this instance to land and group membership. In public debate a
42                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

speaker refers to his myth in cliches that fragment the plot. In
this way "he demonstrates his membership in a group and at the
same time keeps outsiders in the dark as to the esoteric matrix
of the story" (Mead 1964:74). We lack a name for this recurrent
style. Identifying it would increase the chances that others will
notice and report it in ways that will lead to knowledge of the
conditions under which it occurs in various parts of the world.
     Anthropological contributions to this branch of comparative
research are almost nonexistent. Even a list of terms lacking care-
ful definition is to be noted (Keesing and Keesing 1956); careful
description and analysis of named concepts is remarkable
(Calame-Griaule 1965; Abrahams and Bauman 1971). There are
no books on comparative speaking to put beside those on compar-
ative religion, comparative politics, and the like. In the major
anthropological collection of data for comparative studies, the
Human Relations Area Files, information on ways of speaking is
only sporadically included and is scattered among several cate-
gories. Existing manuals and guides for ethnography, or for specific
aspects, such as socialization, largely neglect speech.
     The first break in this neglect is the pioneering field manual
prepared by a group at Berkeley (Slobin 1967). The manual has
already contributed to (and benefited from) the research of a
number of field workers. It is important to note that it is acquisi-
tion of the structure of language with regard to which the manual
can be most detailed. The linguistic code takes pride of place as
to topics, procedures, and specific questions and hypotheses, even
though the acquisition of linguistic codes is in principle recognized
as but part of the acquisition of communicative competence as a
whole. It is recognized that "before a description of the child's
language acquisition can be undertaken, the conventions of the
adult members of the group must be described" (Slobin 1967:161),
but it has not been found possible to make such description the
initial matrix of research, nor to show what such description
would be like, beyond sketching a conceptual framework with
illustrations.
      An ethnographic guide to the acquisition of speaking as a
whole has been drafted by a group initially at the University of
Pennsylvania, and an outline has been published (Sherzer and
Darnell 1972).
      The need for etics (Pike 1967, ch. 2) of terms and types, as an
input to description, is clear from the frequency with which field-
workers have let observations of great interest lie fallow, lacking
precedent and format for their presentation. There is need to show
 ethnographers and linguists a way to see data as ways of speaking.
At this juncture we are still attempting to achieve "observational
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                              43


adequacy" in the sense of being able adequately to record what is
there in acts of speech.
      For an adequate etics we of course most need field studies
of the sort the manual and guide just cited encourage. We can
also make use of ethnographic accounts not obtained with analysis
of speaking in mind, by a procedure that can be called "socio-
linguistic restatement" (see Hymes 1966b; Hogan 1972; Sherzer
1970). We must draw as well on the accumulated insight of all the
fields that deal with speech, rhetoric, literary criticism, and the
like. To be sure, the terminologies of rhetoric and literary criticism
fall short of the range to be encompassed. Terminology for ways
of speaking seems not to have developed much since the heyday
of rhetorical education in the Renaissance—the recent revival of
interest in rhetorical analysis indeed returns to the starting point
(see Joseph 1962; Lanham 1968; Sonnino 1968). But treatments
of verbal art of necessity draw distinctions and make assumptions
as to notions with which a descriptive model of speaking must
deal, as does much work in philosophy, most notably in recent
years "ordinary language" philosophy and the work of J. L. Austin,
John Searle, and others on "illocutionary acts," or performatives.
Several philosophers, psychologists, and literary critics, as well as
linguists, have proposed classifications of the components of the
functions served in them (Karl Biihler, Kenneth Burke, Roman
Jakobson, Bronislaw Malinowski, Charles Morris, C. K. Ogden
and I. A. Richards, B. F. Skinner, William Soskin, and Vera John).
Much is to be hoped from the growing interests of folklorists in
the analysis of verbal performance (see ch. 6). A systematic
explication of these contributions is greatly to be desired. These
lines of work provide concepts and insights from which much can
be learned, and for which a comparative ethnography of speaking
can perform anthropology's traditional scientific role, testing of
universality and empirical adequacy.
     In sum, just as a theory of grammar must have its universal
terms, so must a theory of language use. It can indeed be argued
that the notions of such a theory are foundational to linguistics
proper—see Hymes 1964a, where the theory is called "(ethno)-
linguistic." The fundamental problem—to discover and explicate
the competence that enables members of a community to conduct
and interpret speech—cuts deeper than any schema any of us
have so far developed.
     The primary concern now must be with descriptive analyses
from a variety of communities. Only in relation to actual analysis
will it be possible to conduct arguments analogous to those now
possible in the study of grammar as to the adequacy, necessity,
generality, etc., of concepts and terms. Yet some initial heuristic
44                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

schema is needed if the descriptive task is to proceed. What is
presented here is quite preliminary—if English and its gram-
marians permitted, one might call it "toward toward a theory."
Some of it may survive the empirical and analytical work of the
decade ahead.
     Only a specific, explicit mode of description can guarantee
the maintenance and success of the current interest in socio-
linguistics. Such interest is prompted more by practical and
theoretical needs, perhaps, than by accomplishment. It was the
development of a specific mode of description that ensured the
success of linguistics as an autonomous discipline in the United
States in the twentieth century, and the lack of it (for motif and
tale types are a form of indexing, distributional inference a pro-
cedure common to the human sciences) that led to the until
recently peripheral status of folklore, although both had started
from a similar base, the converging interest of anthropologists,
and English scholars, in language and in verbal tradition.
     The goal of sociolinguistic description can be put in terms of
the disciplines whose interests converge in sociolinguistics. What-
ever his questions about language, it is clear to a linguist that there
is an enterprise, description of languages, which is central and
known. Whatever his questions about society and culture, it is
clear to a sociologist or an anthropologist that there is a form of
inquiry (survey or ethnography) on which the answers depend.
In both cases, one understands what it means to describe a lan-
guage, the social relations, or culture of a community. We need
to be able to say the same thing about the sociolinguistic system
of a community.
     Such a goal is of concern to practical work as well as to
scientific theory. In a study of bilingual education, for example,
certain components of speaking will be taken into account, and
the choice will presuppose a model, implicit if not explicit, of the
interaction of language with social life. The significance attached
to what is found will depend on understanding what is possible,
what universal, what rare, what linked, in comparative perspec-
tive. What survey researchers need to know linguistically about
a community, in selecting a language variety, and in conducting
interviews, is in effect an application of the community's socio-
linguistic description (see Hymes 1970a). In turn, practical work,
if undertaken with its relevance to theory in mind, can make a
contribution, for it must deal directly with the interaction of
language and social life, and so provides a testing ground and
source of new insight.
     Sociolinguistic systems may be treated at the level of national
states, and indeed, of an emerging world society. My concern
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                             45


here is with the level of individual communities and groups. The
interaction of language with social life is viewed as first of all a
matter of human action, based on a knowledge, sometimes con-
scious, often unconscious, that enables persons to use language.
Speech events and larger systems indeed have properties not
reducible to those of the speaking competence of persons. Such
competence, however, underlies communicative conduct, not
only within communities but also in encounters between them.
The speaking competence of persons may be seen as entering into
a series of systems of encounter at levels of different scope.
      An adequate descriptive theory would provide for the analy-
sis of individual communities by specifying technical concepts
required for such analysis, and by characterizing the forms that
analysis should take. Those forms would, as much as possible, be
formal, i.e., explicit, general (in the sense of observing general
constraints and conventions as to content, order, interrelationship,
etc.), economical, and congruent with linguistic modes of state-
ment. Only a good deal of empirical work and experimentation
will show what forms of description are required, and of those,
which preferable. As with grammar, approximation to a theory
for the explicit, standard analysis of individual systems will also
be an approximation to part of a theory of explanation.

                      FUNDAMENTAL NOTIONS

     Among the notions with which a theory must deal are those
of ways of speaking, fluent speaker, speech situation, speech event,
speech act, components of speech events and acts, rules (rela-
tions) of speaking, and functions of speech.

Ways of    Speaking
     Ways of speaking is used as the most general, indeed, as
a primitive term. The point of it is the heuristic, or regulative,
idea, that communicative conduct within a community comprises
determinate patterns of speech activity, such that the communica-
tive competence of persons comprises knowledge with regard to
such patterns. (Speech is taken here as surrogate for all manifesta-
tions and derivations of language, including writing, song, speech-
linked whistling, drumming, horn-calling, etc.)
     Ways of speaking can be taken to refer to the relationships
among speech events, acts, and styles, on the one hand, and per-
sonal abilities and roles, contexts and institutions, and beliefs,
values, and attitudes, on the other. The vantage point taken here
is that of the first series of considerations (events, acts, styles).
46                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

An alternative focus on the whole of a community's ways of
speaking is possible from the vantage point of the second series
of considerations, or of some one part of the series. In effect, one
could consider the whole from the standpoint of persons, a
vantage point which would most closely fit Sapir's 'psychiatric*
perspective (cf. chs. 3, 10); from the standpoint of beliefs, values,
and attitudes, a vantage point which might bring out most saliently
the respect in which ways of speaking constitute symbolic forms;
or from the standpoint of contexts and institutions. This last
vantage point could support an alternative conception and name
for the focus of the descriptive enterprise, which might be
expressed as the study of the speech economy of a community
(cf. Hymes 1961a; I am indebted to my wife and to Richard
Bauman for discussion of this point).

Fluent   Speaker

     The aspect of ability that grammars are intended to model
presumably is connected with fluency; the kind of person whose
abilities are most closely approximated is presumably the fluent
speaker. Of course a person may have grammatical knowledge
and be unable to use it; but the thrust of linguistics has been
toward an image of a person who both has the knowledge and is
unimpeded in its use (cf. Chomsky 1965: 3). The difficulty for an
ethographer is that persons differ in ability, in life, if not in
grammars (cf. ch. 3). Even if one abstracts from individual differ-
ences, community differences remain. "Fluency" would appear to
mean different profiles of ability in different communities, and
indeed would seem not to be the most appropriate label every-
where for the abilities considered those of an ideal speaker
(-hearer). We know too little about community ideals for speakers
—the lack is great with regard to the complex makeup of Amer-
ican society itself—and too little about the role of such concep-
tions in acquistion of speech, in what goes on in schools and
jobs, in linguistic change. As illustrations earlier in this chapter
have shown, communities may hold differing ideals of speaking
for different statuses and roles and situations. Moreover, the
dimensions of ideal speaking may differ—"knowledge that" such
and such is the case in a language vs. "knowledge how" to accom-
plish something verbally; memorization vs. improvisation; vocal
carrying power and endurance vs. certain qualities of voice; etc.
Thus, normative notions of ability, as embodied in kinds of
speakers, must be part of ethnography. Knowledge of them is of
course indispensable background to study of actual abilities.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                              47


Speech Community

      Speech community is a necessary, primary concept in that,
if taken seriously, it postulates the unit of description as a social,
rather than linguistic, entity. One starts with a social group and
considers the entire organization of linguistic means within it,
rather than start with some one partial, named organization of
linguistic means, called a "language." This is vital because the
notion of "a language" can carry with it a confusion of several
notions and attributes that in fact have to be sorted out.
      The first confusion is between the notions of a speech com-
munity and a language. Bloomfield (1933), Chomsky (1965) and
others have in effect reduced the notion of speech community to
that of a language, by equating the two. The result is to make
"speech community" itself a redundant concept, having no part
to play in research, beyond honoring its definitional* foundations
with its nominal presence. Definition of a speech community in
terms of a language is inadequate to the bounding of commun-
ities, either externally or internally. Externally, the linguistic and
communicative boundaries between communities cannot be
defined by linguistic features alone (cf. Hymes 1968b). Forms of
speech of the same degree of linguistic difference may be counted
as dialects of the same language in one region, and as distinct
languages in another, depending on the political, not linguistic,
history of the regions. This is so in parts of Africa (Jan Voorhoeve,
pers. comm.), for example, and lies beneath the appearance of
linguistic neatness in Europe. Were the standard languages
removed from above them, a mapping of Europe's linguistic units
would look much more like native North America. With regard to
internal bounding of a community, two different conceptions have
been advanced. Many have implicitly assumed a "natural" unity
among members of a community, in virtue solely of identity, or
commonality, of linguistic knowledge; but no real community can
be accounted for as produced by merely mechanical "replication
of uniformity" (cf. Wallace 1961, and discussion of Marx on
Feuerbach in ch. 5). Bloomfield, and some others following him,
have postulated a quantitative measure of frequency of interac-
tion as defining a community. It is clear from work of Barth (1969),
Gumperz, Labov, Le Page, and others that definition of situations
in which, and identities through which, interaction occurs is
decisive. (Sociolinguistics here makes contact with the shift in
rhetorical theory to identification as key concept—(see Burke
1950:19-37, 55-59).
      This first and worst confusion is essentially a confusion
48                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

between a linguistic entity and a functional role, between an
object defined for purposes of linguistic inquiry and various
attributes of the counterpart of that object in social life. The
basic confusion as between a speech community and a language
manifests itself with regard to three attributes frequently associ-
ated with a "language," having to do with provenance of content,
intelligibility, and use.
      Sometimes different forms of speech are called by the same
language name (and a single speech community implied to exist)
because their historical provenance is seen to be substantially the
same. One speaks normally of the English language, and of
dialects of English, wherever forms of speech are found whose
contents, or resources, are basically derived] from the line of
linguistic tradition called "English." Sometimes communities are
said to have the same, or to have different, languages on the
grounds of mutual intelligibility between their principal forms of
speech, or lack thereof. Sometimes a form of speech is said to be
the "language" of a community, because it is the primary mode
of interaction (the "vernacular").
      One may unreflectingly associate all of these attributes with,
say, the "English" that is analyzed in current "linguistic theory."
Yet these three attributes do not necessarily coincide; taken seri-
ously as dimensions of forms of speech, they are found to sort
separately. Not all forms of speech derived from a common Eng-
lish source (a more or less common source, since the earlier dialect
diversity of English must not be overlooked) are mutually intelli-
gible; cf. Yorkshire and Indian English. Their uses vary consider-
ably around the world, from childhood vernacular to language of
aviation to bureaucratic lingua franca. Not all mutually unin-
telligible forms of speech are distinct languages. Pig Latin, for
example, derives from English by one or two operations; Hanunoo
and Tagalog speech disguise derive from ordinary Hanunoo and
Tagalog in more complex ways. Sometimes a derived form remains
intelligible within its community of origin, but reduces explicit
signalling to a point that conceals messages from others (Mazateco
whistle-talk, Jabo drum-signalling). Finally, not all primary forms
of speech are easily assigned to a single tradition, so far as at
least some groups are concerned—cf. the FrencH-suffused speech
of prerevolutionary Russian aristocracy, or the mixed Latin-
German of Luther's table talk. In general, forms of speech defined
in terms of use in a social role cannot be assumed to consist of the
resources of a single linguistic tradition. Thus the "language of
the demons" among Sinhalese conflates (a) Sanskrit, (b) Pali, (c)
 Classical Sinhalese, and (d) a polyglot mixture, according as to
 whether (a) Hindu or (b) Buddhist deities are invoked or men-
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                             49


tioned, or (c) origin myths are narrated, or (d) demons are directly
addressed and commanded (Tambiah 1968:177).
     Put another way, entities defined in terms of provenance are
distinct in crucial ways from questions of the content of linguistic
competence in a community. Consider further the dimension of
intelligibility. Sharing of grammatical knowledge of a form of
speech is not sufficient. There may be persons whose English I
could grammatically identify, but whose messages escape me. I
may be ignorant of what counts as a coherent sequence, request,
statement requiring an answer, situation requiring a greeting or
making a greeting anomalous, requisite or forbidden topic, mark-
ing of emphasis or irony, normal duration of silence, normal level
of voice, etc.; native American communities in which English
means of speech serve Indian modes of conduct afford many
instances. I may have no metacommunicative means or oppor-
tunity for discovering such things. Within our own community
or habitual group, the nonequivalence of knowledge of a form
of speech and knowledge of a way of speaking may not become
apparent, the two having been acquired and maintained together.
Communities indeed often merge a linguist's grammaticality with
an ethnographer's cultural appropriateness. Among the Cochiti
of New Mexico }. R. Fox was unable to elicit the first person sing-
ular possessive form of "wings," on the grounds that the speaker,
not being a bird, could not say "my wings," but became himself the
only person in Cochiti able to say it, on the grounds, his inform-
ant explained, that "your name is Robin."
     The nonequivalence of the two kinds of knowledge is more
likely to be noticed when a shared form of speech is a second
one for one or both parties. Sentences that translate each other
grammatically may be mistakenly taken as equivalent culturally,
as having the same status as speech acts, just as words that trans-
late each other may be taken as having the same semantic
function. There may be substratum influence, or interference
(Weinreich 1953), in the one as in the other. J. Neustupny has
coined the term Sprechbund 'speech area' (parallel to Sprachbund
'language area') for the phenomenon of shared features of speak-
ing across language boundaries. Thus, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Austria and southern Germany may be found to share norms of
greeting, acceptable topics of inquiry, what is said next, etc.
     If sharing of grammatical knowledge of a form of speech is
not sufficient, neither is sharing of knowledge of rules of speaking.
A Czech who knows no German may belong to the same Sprech-
bund (and get by in it with a certain tolerance and goodwill), but
not the same speech community, as an Austrian.
     The notions of Sprachbund and Sprechbund are oriented
50                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

 toward cultural patterns as attributes of communities. When we
 consider corresponding phenomena from the standpoint of per-
 sons, we see even more clearly that provenance and the dimension
 of use are quite distinct. Persons often command more than a
 single form of speech, of course, and may command knowledge
 of more than one set of norms as to speaking. The range of
 languages within which a person's knowledge of forms of speech
enables him to move may be called his language field. The range of
 communities within which a person's knowledge of ways of speak-
 ing enables him to move communicatively may be called his speech
field. Notice that the two are distinct. A scholar's language field
may not entail communicative participation for some of his
languages (the great French linguist Meillet is said to have spoken
 and written no language other than French, although he read
many); the kind of participation might be said to be in cultural
worlds, rather than, or only indirectly, in communities. Again,
one's command of a certain language (so identified by provenance
of its resources) may be particular to one's local community, so
that the command does not permit easy access to other com-
munities in which the same "language" is known. On the other
hand, the knowledge of speaking rules required to move within
a field larger than one's own community may be complemented
by quite minimal command of another form of speech, far less
than would be required for normal participation in the other
communities.
       Within the speech field must be distinguished the speech
network, a specific linkage of persons through shared knowledge
of forms of speech and ways of speaking. Thus in northern
Queensland, Australia, different speakers of the same language
 (e.g., Yir Yoront) may have quite different networks along geo-
graphically different circuits of travel, based on clan memberships,
 and involving different multilingual repertoires. In Vitiaz Strait,
New Guinea, the Bilibili islanders (a group of about 200-250
traders and potmakers in Astrolabe Bay) have collectively a
knowledge of the languages of all the communities with which
they have had economic relations, a few men knowing the lan-
guage of each particular community in which they have trading
partners. In sum, a personal language field will be delimited by a
repertoire of forms of speech; a personal speech field by a reper-
toire of patterns of speaking; and a personal speech network will be
the effective union of these two. In virtue of such a union, one may
be able to participate in more than one speech community.
       To participate in a speech community is not quite the same
as to be a member of it. Here we encounter the limitation of any
conception of speech community in terms of knowledge alone,
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                              51


 even knowledge of patterns of speaking as well as of grammar,
 and of course, of any definition in terms of interaction alone.
 Just the matter of accent may erect a barrier between participation
 and membership in one case, although be ignored in another.
Obviously membership in a community depends upon criteria
which in the given case may not even saliently involve language
and speaking, as when birthright is considered indelible. The
analysis of such criteria is beyond our scope here—in other
words, I duck it, except to acknowledge the problem, and to
acknowledge the difficulty of the notion of community itself.
Social scientists are far from agreed as to its use. For our purposes
it appears most useful to reserve the notion of community for a
local unit, characterized for its members by common locality and
primary interaction (Gumperz 1962:30-32), and to admit excep-
tions cautiously.
      A speech community is defined, then, tautologically but rad-
ically, as a community sharing knowledge of rules for the conduct
and interpretation of speech. Such sharing comprises knowledge
of at least one form of speech, and knowledge also of its patterns
of use. Both conditions are necessary. Since both kinds of knowl-
edge may be shared apart from common membership in a com-
munity, an adequate theory of language requires additional
notions, such as language field, speech field, and speech network,
and requires the contribution of social science in characterising
the notions of community, and of membership in a community.
      In effect, we have drawn distinctions of scale and kind of
linkage with regard to what Gumperz (1962) termed the linguistic
community       (any distinguishable intercommunicating group).
Descriptions will make it possible to refine a useful typology and
to discover the causes and consequences of the various types.

Speech   Situation

     Within a community one readily detects many situations
associated with (or marked by the absence of) speech. Such con-
texts of situation will often be naturally described as ceremonies,
fights, hunts, meals, lovemaking, and the like. It would not be
profitable to convert such situations en masse into parts of a socio-
linguistic description by the simple expedient of relabelling them
in terms of speech. (Notice that the distinctions made with regard
to speech community are not identical with the concepts of a
general communicative approach, which must note the differential
range of communication by speech, film, art object, music.) Such
situations may enter as contexts into the statement of rules of
speaking as aspects of setting (or of genre). In contrast to speech
52                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

events, they are not in themselves governed by such rules, or one
set of such rules throughout. A hunt, e.g., may comprise both
verbal and nonverbal events, and the verbal events may be of
more than one type.
     In a sociolinguistic description, then, it is necessary to deal
with activities which are in some recognizable way bounded or
integral. From the standpoint of general social description they
may be registered as ceremonies, fishing trips, and the like; from
particular standpoints they may be regarded as political, esthetic,
etc., situations, which serve as contexts for the manifestation of
political, esthetic, etc., activity. From the sociolinguistic stand-
point they may be regarded as speech situations.

Speech   Event

     The term speech event will be restricted to activities, or
aspects of activities, that are. directly governed by rules or norms
for the use of speech. An event may consist of a single speech
act, but will often comprise several. Just as an occurrence of a
noun may at the same time be the whole of a noun phrase and
the whole of a sentence (e.g., "Fire!"), so a speech act may be the
whole of a speech event, and of a speech situation (say, a rite
consisting of a single prayer, itself a single invocation). More often,
however, one will find a difference in magnitude: a party (speech
situation), a conversation during the party (speech evpnt), a joke
within the conversation (speech act). It is of speech events and
speech acts that one writes formal rules for their occurrence and
characteristics. Notice that the same type of speech act may recur
in different types of speech event, and the same type of speech
event in different contexts of situation. Thus, a joke (speech act)
may be embedded in a private conversation, a lecture, a formal
introduction. A private conversation may occur in the context of a
party, a memorial service, a pause in changing sides in a tennis
match.

Speech   Act

     The speech act is the minimal term of the set just discussed,
as the remarks on speech events have indicated. It represents a
level distinct from the sentence, and not identifiable with any
single portion of other levels of grammar, nor with segments of
any particular size defined in terms of other levels of grammar.
That an utterance has the status of a command may depend upon
a conventional formula ("I hereby order you to leave this build-
ing"), intonation ("Go!" vs. "Go?"), position in a conversational
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                             53


exchange ("Hello" as initiating greeting or as response, as when
answering the telephone), and the social relationship obtaining
between the parties (as when an utterance that is in form a polite
question is in effect a command, when made by a superior to a
subordinate). In general the relation between sentence forms and
speech acts is of the kind just mentioned: a sentence interrogative
in form may be now a request, now a command, now a statement;
a request may be mainfested by a sentence that is now interroga-
tive, now declarative, now imperative in form; and one and the
same sentence may be taken as a promise or as a threat, depend-
ing on the norm of interpretation applied to it (cf. ch. 9).
     To some extent speech acts may be analyzable by extensions of
syntactic and semantic structure, as commonly analyzed in lin-
guistics, but much of the knowledge that speakers share about the
status of utterances as acts is immediate and abstract, and having
to do with features of interaction and context as well as of gram-
mar.
      In terms of speech acts discourse may be viewed both para-
digmatically and syntagmatically; i.e., both in terms of sets of
speech acts among which choice can be considered to have been
made at given points, and as a sequence of such choices, or such
sets of possible choices. When the entirety of discourse is an-
alyzed in terms of speech acts as minimal unit, it becomes
necessary to recognize each sequential unit as complex, as per-
haps a bundle of features. It is not enough to place an act as, say,
 a promise or a threat; one will need to specify a speech act in
terms of several functional foci (see ch. 1), or several components
 (see below in this chapter). Perhaps the minimum number of foci
or components needing to be specified will be always at least
 three. In terms of functional foci, for example, that an act is
 (referentially) a threat, but (expressively) a mock threat, and
 (rhetorically, or in contact function within the course of an utter-
 ance) also a summons; in terms of components, that an act is in
 message content (topic), a threat; in key, mock; and in norm of
 interaction, a summons.

Components     of   Speech

     A descriptive theory requires some schema of the compon-
ents of speech acts. At present such a schema can be only an
etic, heuristic input to descriptions. Later it may assume the
status of a theory of universal features and dimensions.
     Long traditional in our culture is the threefold division be-
tween speaker, hearer, and something spoken about. It has been
elaborated in information theory, linguistics, semiotics, literary
54                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

criticism, and sociology in various ways. In the hands of some
investigators various of these models have proven productive,
but their productivity has depended upon not taking them literally,
let alone using them precisely. All such schemes, e.g., appear to
agree either in taking the standpoint of an individual speaker or
in postulating a dyad, speaker-hearer (or source-destination,
sender-receiver, addressor-addressee). Even if such a scheme is
intended to be a model, for descriptive work it cannot be. Some
rules of speaking require specification of three participants—ad-
dressor, addressee, hearer (audience), source, spokesman, address-
ees, etc.; some of but one, indifferent as to role in the speech
event; some of two, but of speaker and audience (e.g., a child);
and so on. In short, serious ethnographic work shows that there
is one general, or universal, dimension to be postulated, that of
participant. The common dyadic model of speaker-hearer speci-
fies sometimes too many, sometimes too few, sometimes the wrong
participants. Further ethnographic work will enable us to state
the range of actual types of participant relations and to see in dif-
ferential occurrence something to be explained.
      Ethnographic material so far investigated indicates that some
sixteen or seventeen components have sometimes to be distin-
guished. No rule has been found that requires specification of all
simultaneously. There are always redundancies, and sometimes
a rule requires explicit mention of a relation between only two,
message form and some other. (It is a general principle that all
rules involve message form, if not by affecting its shape, then by
governing its interpretation.) Since each of the components may
sometimes be a factor, however, each has to be recognized in the
general grid.
      1. Message form. The form of the message is fundamental,
as has just been indicated. The most common, and most serious,
defect in most reports of speaking probably is that the message
form, and, hence, the rules governing it, cannot be recaptured.
A concern for the details of actual form strikes some as picayune,
as removed from humanistic or scientific importance. Such a view
betrays an impatience that is a disservice to both humanistic and
scientific purposes. It is precisely the failure to unite form and
content in the scope of a single focus of study that has retarded
understanding of the human ability to speak, and that vitiates
many attempts to analyze the significance of behavior. Content
categories, interpretive categories, alone do not suffice. It is a
truism, but one frequently ignored in research, that how some-
thing is said is part of what is said. Nor can one prescribe in ad-
vance the gross size of the signal that will be crucial to content
and skill. The more a way of speaking has become shared and
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                 55


meaningful within a group, the more likely that crucial cues will
be efficient, i.e., slight in scale. If one balks at such detail, perhaps
because it requires technical skills in linguistics, musicology, or
the like that are hard to command, one should face the fact that
the human meaning of one's object of study, and the scientific
claims of one's field of inquiry, are not being taken seriously.
      Especially when competence, the ability of persons, is of con-
cern, one must recognize that shared ways of speaking acquire a
partial autonomy, developing in part in terms of an inner logic
of their means of expression. The means of expression condition
and sometimes control content. For members of the community,
then, "freedom is the recognition of necessity"; mastery of the way
of speaking is prerequisite to personal expression. Serious con-
cern for both scientific analysis and human meaning requires one
to go beyond content to the explicit statement of rules and
features of form.
      While such an approach may seem to apply first of all to
genres conventionally recognized as esthetic, it also applies to
conversation in daily life. Only painstaking analysis of message
form—how things are said—of a sort that indeed parallels and
can learn from the intensity of literary criticism can disclose the
depth and adequacy of the elliptical art that is talk.
     2. Message content. One context for distinguishing message
form from message content would be: "He prayed, saying \ . .' "
(quoting message form) vs. "He prayed that he would get well"
(reporting content only).
      Content enters analysis first of all perhaps as a question of
topic, and of change of topic. Members of a group know what is
being talked about, and when what is talked about has changed,
and manage maintenance, and change, of topic. These abilities
are parts of their communicative competence of particular im-
portance to study of the coherence of discourse.
      Message form and message content are central to the speech
act and the focus of its "syntactic structure"; they are also tightly
interdependent. Thus they can be dubbed jointly as components
of "act sequence" (mnemonically, A).
      3. Setting. Setting refers to the time and place of a speech
act and, in general, to the physical circumstances.
     4. Scene. Scene, which is distinct from setting, designates the
"psychological setting," or the cultural definition of an occasion
as. a certain type of scene. Within a play on the same stage with
the same stage set the dramatic time may shift: "ten years later."
In daily life the same persons in the same setting may redefine
their interaction as a changed type of scene, say, from formal to
informal, serious to festive, or the like. (For an example of the
56                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

importance of types of scene to analysis of speech genres, see
Frake's (1972) contrast of the Subanun and Yakan. Speech acts
frequently are used to define scenes, and also frequently judged
as appropriate or inappropriate in relation to scenes. Settings and
scenes themselves, of course, may be judged as appropriate or
inappropriate, happy or unhappy, in relation to each other, from
the level of complaint about the weather to that of dramatic
irony.
      Setting and scene may be linked as components of act situ-
ation (mnemonically, S). Since "scene" implies always an analysis
of cultural definitions, "setting" probably is to be preferred as
the informal, unmarked term for the two.
      5. Speaker, or sender.
      6. Addressor.
      7., Hearer, or receiver, or audience.
      8. Addressee.
      These four components were discussed in introducing the
subject of components, of speech. Here are a few illustrations.
Among the Abipon of Argentina -in is added to the end of each
word if any participant (whatever his role) is a member of the Ho-
cheri (warrior class). Among the Wishram Chinook, formal scenes
are defined by the relationship between a source (e.g., a chief, or
sponsor of a ceremony), a spokesman who repeats the source's
words, and others who constitute an audience or public. The source
whose words are repeated sometimes is not present; the address-
ees sometimes are spirits of the surrounding environment. In the
presence of a child, adults in Germany often use the term of
address which would be appropriate for the child. Sometimes
rules for participants are internal to a genre and independent of
the participants in the embedding event. Thus male and female
actors in Yana myths use the appropriate men's and women's
forms of speech, respectively, irrespective of the sex of the nar-
rator. Use of men's speech itself is required when both addressor
 and addressee are both adult and male, "women's" speech other-
wise. Groups differ in their definitions of the participants in
speech events in revealing ways, particularly in defining absence
 (e. g., children, maids) and presence (e.g., supernaturals) of par-
ticipation. Much of religious conduct can be interpreted as part
 of a native theory of communication. The various components
may be grouped together as participants (mnemonically, P).
      9. Purposes—outcomes.       Conventionally recognized and ex-
pected outcomes often enter into the definition of speech events,
as among the Waiwai of Venezuela, where the central speech event
 of the society, the oho-chant, has several varieties, according to
 whether the purpose to be accomplished is a marriage contract,
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                             57


a trade, a communal work task, an invitation to a feast, or a
composing of social peace after a death. The rules for participants
and settings vary accordingly (Fock 1965). A taxonomy of speech
events among the Yakan of the Philippines (analyzed by Frake
1972) is differentiated into levels according jointly to topic (any
topic, an issue, a disagreement, a dispute) and outcome (no par-
ticular outcome, a decision, a settlement, a legal ruling).
     10. Purposes—goals.     The purpose of an event from a com-
munity standpoint, of course, need not be identical to the purposes
of those engaged in it. Presumably, both sides to a Yakan litigation
wish to win. In a negotiation the purpose of some may be to
obtain a favorable settlement, of others simply that there be a
settlement. Among the Waiwai the prospective father-in-law and
son-in-law have opposing goals in arriving at a marriage contract.
The strategies of participants are an essential determinant of the
form of speech events, indeed, to their being performed at all (see
Blom and Gumperz 1972).
     With respect both to outcomes and goals, the conventionally
expected or ascribed must be distinguished from the purely situ-
ational or personal, and from the latent and unintended. The inter-
actions of a particular speech event may determine its particular
quality and whether or not the expected outcome is reached. The
actual motives, or some portion of them, of participants may be
quite varied. In the first instance, descriptions of speech events
seek to describe customary or culturally appropriate behavior.
Such description is essential and prerequisite to understanding
events in all their individual richness; but the two kinds of ac-
count should not be confused (see Sapir 1927a, SWES: 534, 543).
     Many approaches to communication and the analysis of
speech have not provided a place for either kind of purpose, per-
haps because of a conscious or unconsciously lingering behavor-
ism. Kenneth Burke's (1945) approach is a notable exception. Yet
communication itself must be differentiated from interaction as
a whole in terms of purposiveness (see Hymes 1964). The two
aspects of purpose can be grouped together by exploiting an
English homonymy, ends in view (goals) and ends as outcomes
(mnemonically, E).
      11. Key. Key is introduced to provide for the tone, manner,
or spirit in which an act is done. It corresponds roughly to modal-
ity among grammatical categories. Acts otherwise the same as
regards setting, participants, message form, and the like may
differ in key, as e.g., between mock: serious or perfunctory:  pains-
taking (cf. chs. 7, 9).
      Key is often conventionally ascribed to an instance of some
 other component as its attribute; seriousness, for example, may
58                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

be the expected concomitant of a scene, participant, act, code, or
 genre (say, a church, a judge, a vow, use of Latin, obsequies). Yet
there is always the possibility that there is a conventionally
understood way of substituting an alternative key. (This possi-
bility corresponds to the general possibility of choosing one
 speech style or register as against another.) In this respect, ritual
remains always informative. Knowing what should happen next,
 one still can attend to the way in which it happens. (Consider, for
 example, critics reviewing performances of the classical reper-
toire for the piano.)
      The significance of key is underlined by the fact that, when
it is in conflict with the overt content of an act, it often overrides
the latter (as in sarcasm). The signalling of key may be nonverbal,
as with a wink, gesture, posture, style of dress, musical accom-
paniment, but it also commonly involves conventional units of
speech too often disregarded in ordinary linguistic analysis, such
 as English aspiration and vowel length to signal emphasis. Such
features are often termed expressive, but are better dubbed sty-
listic since they need not at all depend on the mood of their user.
Revill (1966:251) reports, for instance, that "some forms have
been found which cannot [emphasis mine] be described as reflect-
ing feelings on the part of the speaker, but they will be used in
certain social situations" e.g., for emphasis, clarity, politeness
(mnemonically, K).
      12. Channels. By choice of channel is understood choice of
oral, written, telegraphic, semaphore, or other medium of trans-
mission of speech. With regard to channels, one must further dis-
tinguish modes of use. The oral channel, e.g., may be used to sing,
hum, whistle, or chant features of speech as well as to speak them.
Among the San Bias Cuna of Panama, different poetic or cere-
monial genres involve different uses of the voice: the historic&l-
political-religious genres and some varieties of curing are chanted;
the kantule or chiche festival variety is yelled or shouted; the
interpretations of the chief's spokesman, animal stories, some
curing, "advice" to newly married couples and to individuals who
have misbehaved, and sekrettos, are spoken (Sherzer and Sherzer
1972: 189; sekrettos are usually extremely short, meaningless
combinations of words, combining Cuna and other languages,
such as Choco, English, and/or Spanish). Two goals of description
are accounts of the allocation of channels in respect to genres and
events (cf. Sherzer and Sherzer 1972: 194-95), of their interde-
pendence in interaction (cf. Sherzer 1973), and of possible relative
hierarchy among them (cf. ch. 1, n. 8).
      13. Forms of Speech. Earlier discussion of the speech com-
munity dealt with the distinction between the provenance of lin-
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                59


guistic resources, and the mutual intelligibility, and the use, of
some organized set of them. Where common provenance of a stock
of lexical and grammatical materials is in question, one can easily
continue to speak of languages and dialects. Where mutual intel-
ligibility is in question, whether due to different provenance or to
derivation by addition, deletion, substitution, permutation from a
common set of resources, the term code is most appropriate; it
suggests decoding and intelligibility. Where use is in question, the
term variety has become fairly well established (Ferguson and
Gumperz 1960), especially for community-wide uses or use in
relation to broad domains; for situation-specific use, the British
term register has gained acceptance.
      The notion of register broaches a perspective that may be
called that of speech styles. We can understand the perspective
as applying to any and all organization of linguistic features, of
verbal means, in relation to a social context. The perspective is
general indeed, for while a grammar is usually referred to a "lan-
guage," a language may itself be considered from the standpoint
of style, as an expression of a historically continuous community
(cf. the Yokuts illustration earlier in this chapter, and Hymes
1961c, 1966b). The term "style" implies selection of alternatives
with reference to a common frame or purpose, and so can be
applied at any level of analysis. Having identified codes, varieties,
registers, or even community styles, one could still speak of per-
sonal styles with regard to any of them. It is not yet possible to
know whether some one level of choice will prove to be the most
 appropriate and useful for ordinary unmarked use of the term
 "style," and it may always be necessary to keep context of appli-
 cation clear. The great value of the notion is that it does insist that
 modes of organization of linguistic features, including the level of a
 "language," are not simply given, but are to be determined in
 relation to a community or other social context.
      A wholly general methodological approach to styles has been
 developed by Ervin-Tripp (1972), building on work of John Gum-
 perz. In brief, speech styles are defined by rules of co-occurrence
 (at whatever degree of delicacy), and are themselves subject to
 choice in terms of rules of alternation (see further in chs. 8 and
 10).
       "Forms of speech" suggests more readily organizations of
 linguistic means at the scale of languages, dialects, and widely
 used varieties [cf. Greenberg (1968:36) for use of "speech forms"
 in this sense], while "speech styles" more readily suggests an as-
 pect of persons, situations and genres. Both terms are capable of
 wholly general application, and "speech styles" has now a metho-
 dological basis as well. Still, "forms of speech" seems less likely
60                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

to be misconstrued at the present time, and has been adopted
here.
     Channels and forms of speech can be joined together as
means or agencies of speaking, and labeled            instrumentalities
(mnemonically, I).
     14. Norms of Interaction. All rules governing speaking, of
course, have a normative character. What is intended here are
the specific behaviors and proprieties that attach—that one must
not interrupt, for example, or that one may freely do so; that
normal voice should not be used, except when scheduled, in a
church service (whisper otherwise); that turns in speaking are to
be allocated in a certain way. Norms of interaction obviously
implicate analysis of social structure, and social relationships
generally, in a community (cf. chs. 3, 9). Little can be said, until a
number of ethnographic descriptions of communities in terms of
such patterns are available, since communities differ significantly
in this regard. Putative universals, whether logical or substantive,
would be specious, vacuous or too remote from conduct to be of
use at this point—thus, the conversational postulates associated
with the philosopher Grice do not fit Madagascar (E. Keenan,
pers. comm.).
      As an illustration of a norm regarding topic:

          The next morning during tea with Jikjitsu, a college professor
     who rents rooms in one of the Sodo buildings came in and talked
     of koans. "When you understand Zen, you know that the tree is
     really there."—The only time anyone said anything of Zen philos-
     ophy or experience the whole week. Zenbos never discuss koans or
     sanzen experience with each other. [Snyder 1969:52]

     15. Norms of interpretation. An account of norms of inter-
action may still leave open the interpretation to be placed upon
them, especially when members of different communities are in
communication. Thus it is clear that Arabic and American stu-
dents differ on a series of interactional norms: Arabs confront
each other more directly (face to face) when conversing, sit closer
to each other, are more likely to touch each other, look each other
more squarely in the eye, and converse more loudly (Watson and
Graves 1966: 976-7). The investigators who report these find-
ings themselves leave open the meanings of these norms to the
participants (p.984).
     The problem of norms of interpretation is familiar from the
assessment of communications from other governments and na-
tional leaders. One often looks for friendliness in lessened degree
of overt hostility. Relations between groups within a country are
often affected by misunderstandings on this score. For white
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                              61


middle-class Americans, for example, normal hesitation behavior
involves "fillers" at the point of hesitation ("uh," etc.). For many
blacks, a normal pattern is to recycle to the beginning of the
utterance (perhaps more than once). This black norm may be
interpreted by whites not as a different norm but as a defect. (I
owe this example to David Dalby.)
      Norms of interpretation implicate the belief system of a com-
munity. The classic precedent in the ethnographic analysis of a
language is Malinowski's (1935) treatment of Trobriand magical
formulas and ritual under the heading of dogmatic context (Mal-
inowski's other rubrics are roughly related to these presented
here in the following way: His sociological context and ritual con-
text subsume information as to setting, participants, ends in view
and outcome, norms of interaction, and higher level aspects of
genre; structure reports salient patterning of the verbal form of
the act or event; mode of recitation reports salient characteristics
of the vocal aspect of channel use and message form.)
      The processes of interpretation discussed by Garfinkel (1972)
including "ad hoeing" generally, would belong in this category.
These two kinds of norms may be grouped together (mnemon-
ically, N).
      16. Genres. By genres are meant categories such as poem,
myth, tale, proverb, riddle, curse, prayer, oration, lecture, com-
mercial, form letter, editorial, etc. From one standpoint the analy-
sis of speech into acts is an analysis of speech into instances of
genres. The notion of genre implies the possibility of identifying
formal characteristics traditionally recognized. It is heuristically
important to proceed as though all speech has formal character-
istics of some sort as manifestation of genres; and it may well be
true (on genres, see Ben-Amos 1969). The common notion of
"casual" or unmarked speech, however, points up the fact that
there is a great range among genres in the number of and explicit-
ness of formal markers. At least there is a great range in the ease
with which such markers have been identified. It remains that
"unmarked" casual speech can be recognized as such in a context
where it is not expected or where it is being exploited for partic-
ular effect. Its lesser visibility may be a function of our own
orientations and use of it: its profile may be as sharp as any
other, once we succeed in seeing it as strange.
      Genres often coincide with speech events, but must be
treated as analytically independent of them. They may occur in
 (or as) different events. The sermon as a genre is typically iden-
tical with a certain place in a church service, but its properties may
be invoked, for serious or humorous effect, in other situations.
 Often enough a genre recurs in several events, such as a genre
62                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

of chanting employed by women in Bihar state in India; it is the
prescribed form for a related set of acts, recurring in weddings,
family visits, and complaints to one's husband (K. M. Tiwary,
pers. comm.). A great deal of empirical work will be needed to
clarify the interrelations of genres, styles, events, acts, and other
components (mnemonically, G) (cf. Bauman 1972, Bricker 1973,
1974a, 1974b, Tedlock ms.).
     Psycholinguistic work has indicated that human memory
works best with classifications of the magnitude of seven, plus
or minus two (Miller 1956). To make the set of components mne-
monically convenient, at least in English, the letters of the term
SPEAKING can be used. The components can be grouped together
in relation to the eight letters without great difficulty. Clearly, the
use of SPEAKING as a mnemonic code word has nothing to do with
the form of an eventual model and theory. That the code word is
not wholly ethnocentric appears from the possibility of relabeling
and regrouping the necessary components in terms of the French
PARLANT: participants, actes, raison (resultat), locale,         agents
(instrumentalities), normes, to (key), types (genres).

Rules(Relations)   of   Speaking

     In discovering the local system of speaking, certain familiar
guidelines are, of course, to be used. One must determine the local
taxonomy of terms as an essential, though never perfect, guide. A
shift in any of the components of speaking may mark the presence
of a rule (or structured relation), e.g., from normal tone of voice
to whisper, from formal English to slang, correction, praise, em-
barrassment, withdrawal, and other evaluative responses to
speech may indicate the violation or accomplishment of a rule.
In general, one can think of any change in a component as a
potential locus for application for a "sociolinguistic" commuta-
tion test: What relevant contrast, if any, is present?
     The heuristic set of components should be used negatively as
well as positively, i.e., if a component seems irrelevant to certain
acts or genres, that should be asserted, and the consequences of
the assertion checked. In just this way Arewa and Dundes (1964)
discovered additional aspects of the use of proverbs among the
Yoruba: channel had seemed irrelevant (or rather, always spoken).
Pressing the point led to recognition of a change in the form of
proverbs when drummed, in keeping with a pattern of partial
repetition particular to drumming. Again, the status of participant
(user) as adult seemed invariant. Pressing the point by stating it
as a rule led to discovery of a formulaic apology by which a child
could make use of proverbs.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                     63


      Many generalizations about rules of speaking will take the
form of statements of relationship among components. It is not
yet clear that there is any priority to be assigned to particular
 components in such statements. So far as one can tell at present,
 any component may be taken as starting point, and the others
viewed in relation to it. When individual societies have been well
analyzed, hierarchies of precedence among components will very
likely appear and be found to differ from case to case. Such differ-
ences in hierarchy of components will then be an important part of
the taxonomy of sociolinguistic systems. For one group, rules of
speaking will be heavily bound to setting; for another primarily
to participants; for a third, perhaps to topic.
     We must bear in mind that the defining level may not be at the
detailed, fine-grained "micro" level of the texture of discourse
itself, but at the broad, "macro" level of major groups of compo-
nents. Thus, Bauman (1972), seeking to discover what sector of
speaking in a Nova Scotian community is esthetically marked by
people themselves, found that no specific linguistic or symbolic
features, genres, or performance skills or styles, were defining,
but rather a specific scene (340-41):
       What is apparently going on in the culture of the La Have
  Islanders is that within the whole range of speech situations mak-
  ing up the speech economy of the islanders, the session at the
  store is singled out as special, isolated from the others and
  enjoyed for its own sake, because talking there may be enjoyed for
  its own sake and not as part of another activity or for some
  instrumental purpose. In other words, the fact that this situation
  is set aside for sociability [my emphasis], pure and simple, makes it
  special.
One seems to have here an instance of poetic function, not in the
textural sense of Jakobson and others (cf. ch. 1), but in the dram-
atistic or dialectical sense of Burke (cf. ch. 7), the enjoyment of
symbolic resources for their own sake. One could state the defin-
ing relationship in terms of members of Burke's pentad (again cf.
ch. 1), here "Scene/Purpose" ratio, with the agency, talk, subor-
dinate. Of course one would still expect that some features of the
discourse in the general store would be specific and recognizable,
enabling a member of the community to identify a stretch of it as
the kind of talk that goes on there, and not elsewhere. The fea-
tures might not be consciously known, and might have to do with
turn-taking, pausing, pacing, resppnding, and other interactional
norms, more than with verbal detail, except insofar as (Bauman
suggests) the interactional basis of the setting may possibly induce
fuller performance realizations of yarns, which themselves are
told in a number of other places as well.
64                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

      Experimentation with the detailed formal statement of rules
of speaking has only recently begun. (An example is found in
Sherzer 1970.) When prose descriptions of events are so restated,
there can be a considerable gain in understanding of structure; or,
one might say, a considerable clarification of what one under-
stood to be the structure. The form of the event is disengaged, as
it were, from the verbal foliage obligatory in prose sentences, and
can be more readily seen. In order to compare events within a
society, and across societies, some concise and standard formats
are needed. Comparison cannot depend upon memorization or
shuffling of prose paragraphs vastly different in verbal style. And
it is through some form of formal statement that one can commit
oneself to a precise claim as to what it is a member of a society
knows in knowing how to participate in a speech act.
      It was explicit analysis of more formally defined events that
led Sherzer (1970) to notice features of the same sort in casual
mention by the source of an informal use of speech. More than
one mode of formal (explicit) statement obviously might be
attempted. The point is that to put analysis in such a format
forces one to confront what prose may let escape: Just exactly
what does one's information specify, and what does it fail to
specify? Sherzer's analysis is from the "syntactic" standpoint of
act sequence. Analysis is also possible from the standpoint of
categories of acts. Instances of types of acts can be seen some-
what as subcategorizations in the context of the event or partici-
pant. The meanings of acts can also be seen as entries in a com-
municative lexicon, where the familiar formulation X      (is rewrit-
ten, or realized, as) Y/ (in the context) W—Z, can be adapted to
read, X (has the value) Y/ (in the context) W—Z.

Functions of   Speech

      Such a mode of analysis permits formal treatment of many
of the acts of speech. The conventional means of many such
functions can indeed be analyzed as relations among components,
e.g., message form, genre, and key in the case of the - y form of
the accusative plural of masculine nouns in Polish, which has the
value "solemn" in the genre of poetry, and the value "ironic,
pejorative" in the genres of nonpoetic speech. Functions them-
selves may be statable in terms of relations among components,
such that poetic function, e.g., may require a certain relationship
among choice of code, choice of topic, and message form in a
given period or society.
      It would be misleading, however, to think that the definition
of functions can be reduced to or derived from other components.
Toward Ethnographies of Communication                                        65


Such a thought would be a disabling residue of behavior ideology.
Ultimately, the functions served in speech must be derived
directly from the purposes and needs of human persons engaged
in social action, and are what they are: talking to seduce, to stay
awake, to avoid a war. The formal analysis of speaking is a means
to the understanding of human purposes and needs, and their
satisfaction; it is an indispensable means, but only a means, and
not that understanding itself.


                              EXPLANATION

     Beyond description is the task of devising models of expla-
nation. The many kinds of act and genre of speech are not all uni-
versal; each has a history, and a set of conditions for its origin,
maintenance, change, and loss. All the questions that attach to
explanation in social science—questions of primacy of factors
(technology, social structure, values, and the like)v considerations
of areal patterning, diffusion, independent development, and
evolution, will impinge. If the kind of explanatory adequacy
discussed by Chomsky (1965) is recognized as "essential," i.e., as
concerned with what is internal to language, and beyond that,
internal to human nature, we can see the need for an "existential"
or "experiential" explanatory adequacy, a kind of explanation
that will link speaking with human history and praxis (Petrovich
1967:111-18, 126-27, 171-72; LeFebvre 1968:34, 45-46). To do
this is not only to see languages as part of systems of speaking but
also to see systems of speaking from the standpoint of the cen-
tral question of the nature of sociocultural order—a theory of the
maintenance of order being understood as implying a corre-
sponding theory of change, and conversely.6
     Each case, or each type of case, to be sure, may be valued in
its own right as an expression of mankind. My own work stems

     6. See Cohen 1968. His cogent, penetrating account takes explanation as
fundamental to theory and social order as central to what is to be explained
(pp. x, 16, ch. 2). Cohen speaks simply of "social order." I use "sociocultural
order" to make explicit the inclusion of symbolic or cognitive order (see
Berger 1967). On the relevance of sociolinguistics, note the introduction by
Donald MacRae (center p. x). On an adquate theory of linguistic change, see
Weinreich, Labov and Herzog 1968, especially pp. 100-101: "The key to a
rational conception of language change—indeed, of language itself—is the
possibility of describing orderly differentiation in a language serving a com-
munity . . . native like command of heterogeneous structures is not a matter
of multidialectalism or "mere" performance, but is part of unilingual linguistic
competence . . . in a language serving a complex (i.e., real) community, it is
absence of structured heterogeneity that would be dysfunctional" (101). The
conclusions (187-188) make clear that an adequate theory must be sociolin-
guistic and be based on sociolinguistic description.
66                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

in part from a desire to understand the meanings of language in
individual lives, and to work toward ending the frequent alien-
ation from human beings of something human beings have created
(see Berger 1967, ch. 1, especially pp. 12-13, and nn. 1, 2 and 11;
Lefebvre 1966: ch. 8, and 1968:72-74; and Merleau-Ponty 1967).
Individuating, interpretive, and phenomenological motives are
consistent with a concern for general, causal explanation. Each
case and type is valuable, enlarging and testing general knowl-
edge, and it is only with a general view of conditions and possi-
bilities that the value of individual ways of speaking can be accu-
rately assessed. Each case is an instance of the way in which
universal and particular functions of speech have taken life and
form, among the set of symbolic forms through which the mem-
bers of a community interpret and make their history.
      We require a widely ranging series of descriptions, whatever
the motives that severally produce them. Neither a descriptive
model nor an explanatory theory is convincing if it has not met
the test of diverse situations, of a general body of data. Recall
that Darwin's exposition of natural selection, and Tylor's (1871,
ch. 1) exposition of a science of culture, were convincing in part
for such a reason. We require some initial ordering of the divers-
ity, although the ordering need not be conceived as either histor-
ical or unique. Sociolinguistic description and taxonomy are joint
conditions of success for understanding and explaining the inter-
action of language and social life.
Part Two



The Status of Linguistics
as a Science


       Cooperating in this competition
       Until our naming
       Gives voice correctly,
       And how things are
       And how we say things are
       Are one.
                        Kenneth Burke,
                  Dialectician's Prayer
Chapter 3

Why Linguistics Needs
the Sociologist


                                       i

     Sociolinguistics  identifies an area of research, one whose
problems can be studied by members of a variety of disciplines.1
Nevertheless, the term "sociolinguistics" does pose the special
question of the relation between linguistics and sociology. It is
to that question that this paper is addressed.
     My title is adapted from Sapir (1938), as are some of my
words. A generation ago Sapir saw in another discipline a refer-
ence point from which to highlight certain limitations of cultural
anthropology. He wished to transcend a mode of analysis that
abstracted from variation ajjd persons. Today sociology is a
reference point from which one can highlight certain limitations
of linguistics, if one wishes to transcend again a mode of analysis
that fails in "taking account of the actual interrelationships of

     1. This chapter is adapted from the paper of the same title published in
Social Research 34 (4): 632-47 (1967), and I thank Peter Berger, then the editor,
for inviting me to submit it. The essay was written on the invitation of
Everett Hughes for session 67, "Sociolinguistics," of the 61st annual meeting
of the American Sociological Association, Miami Beach, Florida, September 1,
1966, and presented there; I am grateful to Murray Wax and Michael Micklin
for their discussion at that time, and to Immanuel Wallerstein for comment
later. The last paragraph of the original essay has been integrated with the
last paragraph of ch. 10 of this volume; the last paragraph of the present
chapter is based on that of Hymes 1969, together with a former n. 3.
                                                                              69
70                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

human beings" (Sapir 1938: 575). Sapir chose an example from
an earler scholar (Dorsey), that of the Omaha Indian, Two Crows;
I have followed him in using a similar example, that of the Meno-
mini, White-Thunder.

                                  II
     Until recently linguistics and sociology seemed miles apart in
the United States. Structural linguistics was conceived as a dis-
cipline which concerned itself little, if at all, with society. Its
province was rather to analyze those aspects of language which
belonged to the realm of form as such. There was little need to
ask questions which demanded a more intimate knowledge of
users of a language, speech acts, and speech communities, than
could be assumed on the basis of common experience or com-
mon assumption. The whole temper of linguistics was impersonal
and formal to a degree. In this earlier period of the American
science it seemed indeed almost intellectually indecent, or wrong
in principle, to obtrude observations that smacked of heterogene-
ity in descriptive result, through appeal to the users and uses of a
language. The assumption was that in some way not in the least
clearly defined as to method it was possible for the linguist to
arrive at conclusive statements which would hold for a given
"language" and its entire community as such. One was rarely in
a position to say whether such an inclusive analysis reflected in
fact a particular informant, perhaps a particular type of context,
topic, or style, or was a carefully tested generalization from study
of a full range of users and occasions of use.
     Perhaps it is just as well that no strict questioning of such
method arose. It must then (as it might now) discourage the
invaluable work of rescuing what one can of the structures of
obsolescent languages from one or a handful of survivors. It might
have impeded the development of the methods of formal analysis
that are indispensable to any study dealing with linguistic structure,
whatever its social referent. Perhaps, indeed, the entire complex of
assumptions characteristic of the formative period of American
structural linguistics was necessary to its success. By isolating
linguistic form as object of study; by implicitly picturing a simple
relation of one language uniform throughout a single community,
as basis for theory as to structure and function; by restricting
attention to the referential function upon which linguistic form
in the usual sense is based; by positing the functional equivalence
and essential equality of all languages—one rejected mistaken
evolutionary stereotypes, guaranteed the worth of the many un-
written and obsolescent languages whose diversity was capital
for scientific advance, and made for a time unthinkable the many
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                  71


sociological questions that might have distracted from the con-
quest of structure. (Here indeed is a first use for sociology in
linguistics: the sociology of knowledge applied to the develop-
ment of the profession and the ideological aspect of its theoret-
ical assumptions. For some notes on the subject, see Hymes (1966
ms., 1970a).
      From such a standpoint, what would one make of Bloom-
field's early sketches of individual differences in competence
among Menomini Indians of Wisconsin? Consider in particular
the sketch of White-Thunder (Bloomfield 1927: 395):

        White-Thunder, a man around forty, speaks less English than
   Menomini, and that is a strong indictment, for his Menomini is
   atrocious. His vocabulary is small; his inflections are often bar-
   barous; he constructs sentences of a few threadbare models. He
   may be said to speak no language tolerably.

Probably the case would be set aside as a perhaps interesting but
isolated observation; such cases were in fact never taken up as
a basis for theoretical concern.
      This is not the place to introduce anything like a complete
analysis of the meaning of such cases. The only thing that we
need to be clear about is whether an approach to language which
implicity assumes the irrelevance of such a case is in the long
run truly possible. There has been so much emphasis on the
autonomy of linguistic form, and, recently, on the image of the
native abilities of a child gaining for it a fluent knowledge of
its language almost spontaneously, that we should not blink at this
problem.
      Let us consider White-Thunder first as an individual case.
Some evidence of personality difficulty or unusual personal his-
tory, such as having survived in quasi-feral circumstances as a
child, might be invoked. One would then be regarding the case as
analogous to that of someone mute or deaf, whose linguistic
abilities had been affected by the fact. There might even be
evidence of a comprehension of the language, an intuitive knowl-
edge of it, that surpasses the poor performance which White-
Thunder displays in speaking. All such considerations have the
effect of taking the qualities of White-Thunder's use of Menomini
as accidental, so far as the language itself is concerned. Obviously
one would not choose White-Thunder as an informant, if at all
possible; but his limitations, however unfortunate, are a personal
misfortune; they say nothing about the language called Menomini.
      Bloomfield goes on to say of White-Thunder, however, that
"His case is not uncommon among younger men, even when they
speak but little English." In effect, then, White-Thunder's case
72                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

could become that of a generation, a generation that might go on
to become the sole users of Menomini. What would it mean for a
later investigator to report, "Menomini is a language no one
speaks tolerably?" Or, since there might be left no internal
standard of comparison, simply that Menomini is a language of
small vocabulary and of sentences constructed of a few thread-
bare models?
      Such a possibility goes against the grain of the common
assumptions of American linguists that languages are immune to
inadequacy, that their historical evolutions do not affect the essen-
tial equality and functional equivalence of all languages in their
communities; yet the possibility cannot be dismissed. Indeed, it
is likely the common case of the first generation or more of users
of a newly creolizing pidgin; and a Peruvian sociologist is now
investigating Indians who, so to speak, give up Quechua before
they learn Spanish (John Murra, pers. comm.).
      White-Thunder forces us to face the fact that for both the
individual and the community, a language in some sense is what
those who have it can do with it—what they have made of it,
and do make of it; and that in consequence, notable differences in
facility and adequacy may be encountered that are not accidental,
but integral, to the langauge as it exists for those in question. In
short, one must sharply distinguish between the potential infinite-
ness and equivalence of languages as formal devices and the
degree of finiteness and inequality, actual and existential, that
characterizes them among their users in the real world.
      To say this is not to reduce the actuality of White-Thunder's
Menomini to a mere list of what he may have been observed actu-
ally to say. No doubt his linguistic competence was deeper than
any particular set of sentences he had uttered; no doubt his vocab-
ulary and sentence models allowed him to say novel things, and
were capable of many sentences that may be considered to have
been unattested only accidentally. This sort of openness is uni-
versal for normal use of language. There is an openness, an
infinite potentiality of larger size, so to speak, however, that com-
prises novel things that a Menomini of White-Thunder's type
could not have said, even though the formal mechanism of Me-
nomini might have been brought to express them. Their absence
from a corpus would be a matter, not of accident, but of inability.
There is a fundamental difference, in other words, between what
is not said because there is no occasion to say it, and what is not said
because one has not and does not find a way to say it. For the
language to be used to say such things, the language must change.
      There is thus no inherent impossibility in an entire com-
munity for whom a language, or language as such, is an instrument
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                            73


inadequate or restricted in respect to communicative needs. In cases
such as White-Thunder's generation ways of saying things have
been lost. The changes in capacity, however, need not at all be in
such a direction. The history of many languages in recent cen-
turies or generations is one of change in respects that have
markedly enhanced the capacity of the languages and of groups
of their users. Notice also that drastic social change need not be
involved. Bloomfield refers the case of White-Thunder's genera-
tion to acculturation, suggesting that "Perhaps it is due, in some
indirect way, to the impact of the conquering language." It is
entirely possible, however, that in the ordinary course of their
history communities will come to differ in the degree and direction
in which they develop their linguistic means, and in the place
assigned such means in their communicative life.
     In sum, the competencies of users of a language, and thus
their language itself, may change, even though the differences may
not appear in the structure of the language within the limits of
the usual description. The same formal linguistic system, as usu-
ally described, may be part of different, let us say, sociolinguistic
systems, whose natures cannot be assumed, but must be investi-
gated.

                                         Ill

     What would one have needed to know about White-Thunder's
generation in order to describe the sociolinguistic system of which
it was part, in order to explain the process by which the change
of system came about? Bloomfield's sketches (pp. 394-96) give us
some clues. One must obviously begin, not with the Menomini
language, but with the speech community which comprises it,
English, and occasionally other languages. Social positions must
be specified, for the Menomini (like other communities) perva-
sively evaluate pronunciations, lexicon and grammar, and the
judgments of "good" and "bad" are dependent (according to
Bloomfield) ultimately on which persons are taken as models of
conduct, including speech. Types of use must be specified, for
Bird-Hawk (who spoke only Menomini, possibly also a little
Ojibwa) "spoke with bad syntax and meagre, often inept vocab-
ulary, yet with occasional archaisms" once he departed from
ordinary conversation. Styles of speech—overelegant, archaic,
emphatic or rhetorical, can\be distinguished. One can guess that
Menomini was perhaps being compartmentalized to certain do-
mains of use, as has been the case with the surviving Indian
languages of the American southwest.
     Such observations are incidental in Bloomfield's account. An
74                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

adequate understanding of the nature and changes of sociolinguis-
tic systems must have a systematic basis. The usual theory of
language and linguistics has not provided such a basis. The prac-
tice, method, and conceptualization needed is beginning now to
accumulate in the work of a small number of sociologists, psychol-
ogists, and linguists (e.g., Bernstein, Ervin-Tripp, Ferguson, Fish-
man, Goffman, Gumperz, Halliday, Labov, Lambert, Sacks, Stew-
art). Without elaborating upon the details of this work, let me
indicate something of the necessary nature of the sociological
contribution. I want to stress that there must develop a partially
independent body of method and theory—what might be termed
(adapting the title of a recent contribution to linguistics proper),
an integrated theory of sociolinguistic description. Let me try to
indicate why something less will not suffice.
     First, the addition of language as one more sociological vari-
able would not be enough. A linguistic variable may indeed prove
a useful indicator, say, of social class; but on this approach,
nothing has changed from the standpoint of the interests and
definitions of problems of sociology. Should other variables prove
better indicators in a given case, linguistic variables, reasonably
enough, fall by the wayside. A truly sociolinguistic approach, how-
ever, is interested in the relation of linguistic variables to group
membership for its own sake. If linguistic variables are not sig-
nificant markers of group membership in a given case, sociolin-
guistic theory will be interested precisely because such a case
may help disclose the circumstances* under which features of
language do and do not so function. Negative cases count.
     There is a complementary point to be made on the linguistic
side. Social variables have played a sporadic role in descriptive
linguistics, inasmuch as they have sometimes obtruded themselves
in the core of grammar, e.g., respect forms (honorifics) in Korean
and Japanese. When not obtrusive, such variables and functions
have not been sought out. Presumably, however, respect relation-
ships are universal to human society; perhaps they are always
expressed at least partially in speech. A sociolinguistic approach
will need to know how and when verbal means enter into respect
relationships in all types of society, so as to gain comparative
control over the dependence between the two. Obtrusive cases
such as the Japanese should come to be treated within a general
theory. (For exploratory work in this direction, see Tyler [1965].)
     Second, a grossly correlational approach will leave much of
the heart of the subject obscure. To be sure, much can be learned
from the facts of the distribution of languages and subcodes with
respect to other variables, and at all levels, from world and nation-
state to village and family. Ultimately covariation of related fea-
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                              75


tures will be a principal test of theories. It remains that language,
as Malinowski put it, is a mode of action, e^en if linguists and
sociologists have seldom described it as such; and in the study of
language as a mode of action, variation is a clue and a key, but it
is not just variation that is in question. To think so would be to
concede the assumption that structure is to be found only in lin-
guistic form. Two kinds of structure are in fact in question; the
traditional structural linguistic view sees structure in the speech
community as what Wallace (1961:26-27 and passim) has termed
"replication of uniformity"; sociolinguistics sees structure in the
speech community as what Wallace has termed "organization of
diversity." The most novel and difficult contribution of sociolin-
guistic description must be to identify the rules, patterns, pur-
poses, and consequences of language use, and to account for their
interrelations. In doing so it will not only discover structural rela-
tions among sociolinguistic components, but disclose new relation-
ships among features of the linguistic code itself.
     The heart of what one is after in descriptive sociolinguistics
is perhaps clearest from the standpoint of the socialization of the
child. Linguistic theory treats of competence in terms of the
child's acquisition of the ability to produce, understand, and dis-
criminate any and all of the grammatical sentences of a language.
A child from whom any and all of the grammatical sentences of
a language might come with equal likelihood would be of course
a social monster. Within the social matrix in which it acquires a
system of grammar a child acquires also a system of its use,
regarding persons, places, purposes, other modes of communica-
tion, etc.—all the components of communicative events, together
with attitudes and beliefs regarding them. There also develop
patterns of the sequential use of language in conversation, address,
standard routines, and the like. In such acquisition resides the
child's sociolinguistic competence (or, more broadly, communica-
tive competence), its ability to participate in its society as not only
a speaking, but also a communicating member. What children so
acquire, an integrated theory of sociolinguistic description must
be able to describe.
     Third, it will not do to begin with language, or a standard
linguistic description, and look outward to social context. A
crucial characteristic of the sociolinguistic approach is that it
looks in toward language, as it were, from its social matrix. To
begin with language, or an individual code, is to invite the limita-
tions of the purely correlational approach, and to miss much of
the organization of linguistic phenomena. Functions and contexts
of use join together what structural description by itself may leave
asunder, as has been suggested. The working assumptions of a
76                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

thoroughgoing sociolinguistic approach must in fact be three:
      1. A social relationship entails the selection and/or devising
of communicative means considered appropriate and perhaps spe-
cific to it.
      2. The communicative means will thus be organized in ways
not perhaps disclosed apart from the social relationship.
      3. The communicative means available in the relationship
condition its nature and outcome.
      It should be clear that a mechanical amalgamation of standard
linguistics and standard sociology is not likely to suffice. Studies
of groups usually treat speech as a medium through which to get
at other things; as we have seen, grammars usually abstract from
social variables. Neither normally attends to the patterning of
speaking as an activity in its own right. Adding a speechless sociol-
ogy to a sociology-free linguistics can yield little better than post-
hoc attempts at correlation between accounts from which the
heart of the relevant data will be missing. Useful inferences and
insights may sometimes be obtained, but descriptive studies,
 couched in terms that integrate linguistic into social variables
 from the start, are the only basis on which it will be possible to
progress. Some such studies are already available, as in the work
 of Blom and Gumperz (1972), Bernstein (1972), Labov (1973b), and
 others. Labov (1965, 1973a, b), for example, has shown how such
 an integrated approach is possible and necessary with regard to
 sound change and social dialect in New York City; the paper is of
 special importance for a sociolinguistic approach to linguistic
 evolution.

                                     IV
     The need for sociolinguistic descriptions may appear obvious
and important to a social science audience. Such is not yet widely
the case in linguistics. A decade ago American linguists, satisfied
generally with the available theory for description of language,
began to turn attention freshly to the use of linguistics in the
study of society. A thoroughgoing critique of that theoretical basis
has resulted in a new and ambiguous situation. While some lin-
guists are at work on sociological problems, the issues that domi-
nate linguistic discussion are almost wholly those of descriptive
theory. And the tendency to separate linguistic form from social
context has received renewed impetus from the insistence by the
leading theorist of the present day (Chomsky 1965: 3) that:

          Linguistic theory is concerned primarily with an ideal speaker-
     listener in a completely homogeneous speech-community, who
     knows its language perfectly, and is unaffected by such grammati-
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                  77


                                         TABLE 3.1
                                           Descriptive   Comparative
         Structure                          Invariance    Variation
         Use (Function)                     Variation     Invariance



                                         TABLE 3.2
                                           Descriptive   Comparative
         Structure                          Variation     Invariance
         Use (Function)                     Invariance    Variation


   cally irrelevant conditions as memory limitations, distractions,
   shifts of attention and interest, and errors (random or character-
   istic) in applying his knowledge of the language in actual per-
   formance.

The goal of explanation in linguistics is set as universal properties
of the human mind; the present interest and relevance of a socio-
linguistic perspective is rejected.
      There is underway, however, a long-term shift of emphasis
in American linguistics, such that the appearance of withdrawal
from sociological involvement may prove partial and temporary.
The shift can be loosely phrased as one from focus on structure
to focus on function—from focus on linguistic form in isolation
to linguistic form in human context.
      The pattern of the shift can be shown in terms of two fourfold
 tables. One dimension distinguishes description of a single case
 from comparative, or crosscultural, perspective. The other dimen-
 sion distinguishes the structure of language from its functions, or
 use. Much of what has been discussed can be seen as summarized
 here, and comment can be brief. (See Tables 3.1, 3.2.)
      Table 3.1 shows a distribution of emphases characteristic of
 structural linguistics as it developed during the 1930s and emerged
 into greater prominence after World War II. With regard to
 description of a single language, the point was to find the invari-
 ance, the homogeneous structure. As between languages, the
 expectation was to find diversity, or variation of structure—in
 some eyes, the greater the better. The use of language (speech) was
 not much attended and commonly seen as a realm of variation, a
 sort of ground to the figure of invariant form. Viewed compara-
 tively, languages were regarded as functionally equivalent, and
 the functions of language mentioned in universal (invariant) terms.
       A shift of emphasis, or a new pattern of emphasis, has shown
 itself first with regard to linguistic structure. As between lan-
78                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

guages, a renewed interest in typology and in universals has made
the emphasis there one of finding invariance. The context is pri-
marily a psychological one. With regard to description of a single
case, focus on invariance continues, but attention to complex
communities has established interest in social dialect, speech
levels, and the like sufficiently to speak of a growing emphasis
upon specifying varieties within a community and accounting for
their interrelationships.
     For the use and function of language, the context is primarily
sociological. The implication of the two tables is that with regard
to description of a single case there should be concern to find
invariance (a sociolinguistic system); and, as between cases, a con-
cern to find variation, or diversity, of use and function. Such
emphasis is indeed emerging.
     The general character of the differences between the two pat-
terns of emphasis, and again, of much of the present discussion,
can be summed up in another, more visible way, as shown in
Table 3.3 (which restates with contrasts points made in ch. 1). The
labels "structural" linguistics and "functional" linguistics are
appropriate in the sense that linguists commonly speak of linguis-
tic form as structure, and of function of language as a question of
use; but structural analysis of course involves questions of func-
tional relevance within the linguistic system, and functional anal-
ysis discloses structures of use, so that there are both structural
and functional aspects in fact to both. Thus the necessity of the
quotation marks.

                                 V

     The components of "functional" linguistics, like the compon-
ents of sociolinguistic description (e.g., such as mentioned for the
Menomini—community, values, role-models, types and occasions
of interaction, social change) are patently sociological in nature.
Yet they might be taken as anthropological, or social psycho-
logical as well. With regard to the former, indeed, one might rely
upon ethnographers and the long tradition of linguistic work in
anthropology for the success of the new pattern of emphasis. Why
sociology? The answer is in part that sociolinguistics needs all the
participation it can get; but in part the answer is that the nature
of the world in which sociolinguistic description will be done
points increasingly toward a major role for sociologists, if they
wish to take it. The specification of the social relationships that
provide the matrix for sociolinguistic description is increasingly
a matter, not only of roles, but of role conflict; of stratification;
ethnicity; sampling: covariation; in sum, of a kind of descriptive
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                                      79


                                         TABLE 3.3
                     COMPARISON OF FOCI IN "STRUCTURAL"
                        AND "FUNCTIONAL" LINGUISTICS
               "Structural"                                       "Functional"
1. Structure of language (code), as                Structure of speech (act, event), as
   grammar                                         ways of speaking
2. Use merely implements, perhaps                  Analysis of use prior to analysis of
   limits, may correlate with, what is             code; organization of use discloses ad-
   analyzed as code; analysis of code              ditional features and relations; shows
   prior to analysis of use                        code and use in integral (dialectical)
                                                   relation
3. Referential function—fully semanti-             Gamut of stylistic or social functions
   cized uses as norm
4. Elements and structures as analyti-             Elements and structures as ethnograph-
   cally arbitrary (in crosscultural or            ically appropriate ("psychiatrically" in
   historical perspective), or universal           Sapir's sense—cf. ch. 1, n. 6)
   (in theoretical perspective)
5. Functional (adaptive) equivalence of            Functional (adaptive) differentiation of
   languages; all languages essentially            languages, varieties, styles; these being
    (potentially) equal                            existentially (actually) not necessarily
                                                   equivalent
6. Single homogeneous code and com-                Speech community as matrix of code-
   munity ("replication of uniformity")            repertoires, or speech styles ("organiza-
                                                   tion of diversity")
7. Fundamental concepts, such as                   Fundamental concepts taken as prob-
   speech community, speech act, flu-              lematic and to be investigated
   ent speaker, functions of speech and
   of languages, taken for granted or
   arbitrarily postulated
On (1), cf. chs. 1, 2, 4; on (2), chs. 4, 7, 8, 9; on (3), chs. ,6, 7, 8; on (4), chs. 3, 7, 8,
9, and Hymes 1964a; on (5), chs. 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, and Hymes 1961,1971d; on (6), chs.
1, 2, 4; on (7), chs. 2, 4,10, and Hymes 1964a.


work, which, if ethnographic, allows no clear distinction between
social anthropology and sociology as its context. The work is
increasingly a matter of ethnography of settings, situations, events,
roles, groups, in complex societies of the sort typically studied by
sociologists. And not only does one find American sociologists
turning to work in other societies that is likely to involve them in
linguistic experience of the sort that may lead to sociolinguistics;
one also finds that the concepts necessary to a comparative and
evolutionary perspective in sociolinguistics are developed as much,
if not more, in the sociological tradition.
     Descriptive sociolinguistics in the modern world is insepa-
rable from encounter with social change. Indeed, for a systematic
theory to emerge, many phenomena now treated as diverse types
—acculturation, bilingualism, creolization, linguistic nationalism,
80                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

pidginization, standardization, construction of artificial languages,
vernacular education—must be seen as interrelated within the
history of European expansion and the emergence of a world his-
tory. The linguistic acculturation of the Menomini and the decline
of the English dialects are twin facets of the same process, which
has as other facets the growth of new dialects of English in India
and the Caribbean, no matter how separate the study of each of
these has been hitherto. And it is in the sociological tradition that
one finds the major precedent for the scientific study of European
social history, and for the comparative study of the relevant
insitutions.
      It may be said to sociology, as to each of the social science
disciplines, that various of its assumptions and claims are chal-
lenged by the phenomena of sociolinguistics, and that its own
mandate requires it to take them up. As a problem area, socio-
linguistics is not likely to become the possession of any one
discipline, and it may indeed be the case that it will emerge as a
generically social-science mode of linguistic description and
explanation, without respect to individual disciplines. If sociology
is not an exclusive partner with linguistics in the enterprise, how-
ever, it is still an indispensable one—in semantic analysis, for
example (cf. Mair 1935, chs. 4 and 9 of this volume, and the lines
of work reviewed in Kjolseth 1972 and Mehan 1972; as exemplars,
note Garfinkel 1972, Sacks, 1972, and Schegloff 1968).
      In general, the two major trends in the study of language
concern semantic structures and structures of language'use (cf.
Hymes 1964d), and the two converge in kinds of problems faced in
social research, especially in analysis of interaction. This is not to
say that serious partnership in dealing with such problems does
not make novel demands upon sociology. The social researcher,
whether using survey instruments (cf. Hymes 1970a) or analyzing
face-to-face interaction, confronts questions of referential and
social meaning, in choices of words and of language, variety, or
style, that may go beyond his or her usual practice. In this respect,
the sociologist Duncan has rightly put as his first methodological
proposition that statements about the structure and function of
symbolic acts must be demonstrated within the symbolic event
itself (Duncan 1968), and has compared sociology unfavorably with
literature and art, where analyses are constantly referred to data,
publicly accessible, that support them. The tradition of symbolic
interaction has remained mostly a theoretical gadfly within sociol-
ogy just because it has not taken the step from insistence on the
central role of language and symbolic acts to analysis of the
implicit form and textural detail through which that role is acces-
 sible.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                           81


      Some sociologists are taking this step, one which requires
linguistic knowledge and skills. The pitfalls are evident. One can
get linguistics wrong, conceptually, ending up with a linguistic
"model" that is not grammar, nor text analysis, nor good lexicog-
raphy. One can fail to connect sociology with linguistic reality
after all. Thus, Turner (1969) provides a sympathetic but sound
critique of the late }. L. Austin's work on certain types of verbs
called "performatives," which has stimulated so much of current
interest in speech acts. Turner shows that "performative" (speech
act) analysis applies generally to discourse, beyond performative
verbs as such, and that it has autonomy, as a level separate from
linguistic form; but his argument is entirely concerned with the
autonomy, not at all with the complex interdependence, of speech
acts in relation to the linguistic forms necessary to their realiza-
tion and real analysis. One is left with a sociology that can talk
about speech acts but not examine them. Strangely enough, one
can also fail to connect language with social reality. Some sociol-
ogists become so absorbed in words as to fail to renew their
relation to actual contexts. Admittedly, it is fascinating to dis-
cover the richness of speech, coming from a disciplinary back-
ground that has neglected it; but it is a bit absurd to treat
transcribed tapes of interaction as if they were the Dead Sea
 Scrolls. When a society is gone, we must glean all we can from
texts that remain, and contrary to some opinion, such work is
 arduous, disciplined, and often revealing. But again, it is a bit
 absurd to invent an amateur philology to deal with the life outside
 one's door. I have read elaborate analysis of verbal interaction
that failed to consider the other aspects of the parties' presence
 to each other, attributing to complexities of words what may have
depended on eye-contact; and imputations of intention and con-
 strual that neglected intonation (like many grammarians, to be
 sure) and that failed to consult or consider the interpretations of
the participants themselves.
      Let us hope that sociologists can extend their orientation and
 training to include linguistic skills, while not forgetting how to
interview and observe. If they can, their discipline can play a
major part in the general transition, now emerging, from philoso-
phies to ethnographies of symbolic forms.
Chapter 4

Social Anthropology,
Sociolinguistics and the
Ethnography of Speaking

     "Sociolinguistics" is the most recent and most common term
for an area of research that links linguistics with anthropology.1
"Ethnography of speaking" designates a particular approach. I
shall sketch the context in which the two terms have emerged,
then try to indicate the importance of the ethnography of speak-
ing, not only to the area of research, but also to linguistics and
social anthropology as disciplines.
     To argue the study of speech is likely to seem only a plea for
linguistics. To avoid that impression, I shall treat linguistics first,
and at greater length, arguing the need for ethnography there,

    1. This chapter is adapted from "Sociolinguistics and the Ethnography of
Speaking," in Social Anthropology and Linguistics, ed. Edwin Ardener (ASA
Monographs, 10), pp. 47-93 (London: Tavistock Publications, 1971). I want to
thank Dr. Ardener for inviting me to participate in the 1969 meeting of the
Association of Social Anthropologists, held at the University of Sussex, for
which this paper was first prepared, and to express my admiration for his
contribution to revitalization of linguistic work in anthropology. I should like
to thank Clare Hall, Cambridge, for the fellowship that made possible a
year of acquaintance with linguistics and social anthropology in Great
Britain in 1968-69, and the National Institute of Mental Health (US), and the
Guggenheim Foundation, for support of pertinent work. I benefited from
opportunities to discuss some of the matters raised here at the Universities
of Birmingham, Edinburgh, Leeds, London, Oxford, and York, and am par-
ticularly grateful to Roy Abrahams, Meyer Fortes, Esther Goody, Jack Goody,
Edmund Leach, Stanley Tambiah, and John Trim for their interest and
kindnesses at Cambridge.
                                                                             83
84                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

before broaching the complementary need for linguistics in social
anthropology. Behind both arguments stands a common concep-
tion of the study of speech.


                                    I


     Mixed terms linking linguistics with the social sciences, espe-
cially anthropology, are an old story. One can trace the use of
"ethnographic philology," "philological ethnology," "linguistic
anthropology," and the like from at least the middle of the nine-
teenth century. Until the second world war such terms were usu-
ally phrases—coordinate ("linguistics and ethnology"), genitive
("sociology of language"), adjectival ("sociological linguistics").
Only since World War II have one-word terms come to promi-
nence. Their form, their relative chronology, and their prevalence,
are revealing.
     The form of these terms—ethnolinguistics, psycholinguistics,
sociolinguistics—shows that it is linguistics, its concepts, methods,
and prestige, that has become central. (Hence "ethnolinguistics,"
not "anthropology of language," for a field of research; and "an-
thropological linguistics," not "linguistic anthropology," as the
prevalent term, even among anthropologists, for a subdiscipline.)
To be sure, Malinowski had, much earlier, spoken (1920:69) of
urgent need for an "ethnolinguistic theory" to help to elucidate
native meanings and texts, but neither the term nor the theory
received sustained attention. "Ethnolinguistics" first emerged into
prominence in the late 1940s, followed shortly by "psycholinguis-
tics" in the early 1950s, and by "sociolinguistics" in the early
1960s.2 The sequence reflects the successive impact of recent lin-
guistics, first on anthropologists, who had helped to nuture it,
then on psychologists, and, most recently, on sociologists.
     The currency of the term reflects, I think, a growing sense of
the importance, not only of linguistics, but also of problems of
language, and a hope for a combination of rigor and relevance in
their study. Interest in sociolinguistics, indeed, is far from being
a matter internal to academic disciplines. There are two main
sources of practical interest and support: the language problems of
developing nations (cf. Fishman, Ferguson, and Das Gupta, 1968),
and problems of education and social relations in highly urbanized
societies such as England and the United States. With respect to
both one is pretty much in the position of wanting to apply a
    2. This term also occurred at least a decade before it came into common
use (Currie 1952); cf. Wallis (1956).
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                      85


basic science that does not yet exist.3 The creation of this basic
science (whatever its ultimate label and affiliations) I take to be
the defining task of sociolinguistics, and the chief warrant for
the term.4
     A more general sort of social relevance is that of seeking to
transcend a long-standing "alienation" of language, and knowledge
about language. On this view, language and linguistics often stand
to human life in a relation parallel to that of goods and economics,
as analysed in the first book of Das Kapital. Marx's comments
on "fetishism of commodities," analysis of a human power and
creation made to stand over against man, and understood in cate-
gories divorcing it from its roots in social life, could be applied,
mutatis mutandi, to language. From this standpoint, the historical
origin of standard languages and linguistic study as instruments of
cultural hegemony (Hellenistic study of Greek, Indian of the San-
skritic Vedas, Chinese of the Confucian classics) is unwittingly
reinforced by the contemporary methodological canon of defining

      3. The need for such a scientific basis has provoked critical comment
(e.g., the inaugural address of Alisjahbana 1965).
     4. The practical relevance of sociolinguistics is a mixed blessing. It adds
the justification of social relevance to a development that has a logic and
importance within science itself; and work that is practically motivated can
bring to light and help to solve issues of theory (cf. Hymes 1971b with regard
to "disadvantaged" children). Research funds being scarce, and their sources
sometimes shortsighted, however, energies are too often diverted into provid-
ing materials for which there has not been the chance to develop a scientifi-
cally adequate basis.
      Practical concerns are sometimes associated with "macro," as distinct
from "micro," sociolinguistics. The distinction sometimes reflects different
priorities, and differences in professional origin. Some are attracted to work
on large populations, and national institutions and policies, as being of more
social relevance and theoretical importance. Others are attracted to work
with small communities and social interaction, as offering a greater prospect
of developing secure methodology and theory. Again, sociolinguistics is for
 some a new application of known social science; for others, an extension
 (and revision) of linguistics. The former may devise new questions and
 scales, the latter expand the scope of linguistic rules. Each may wonder about
the validity and rigor of the other.
      Obviously none of these differences need be one of principle. There are
 advances in method and theory to be made in the comparative study of larger
 social systems; rules of verbal interaction in a small community may be of
 immediate relevance for its teachers and schools. Policies and nationwide
 generalizations should be based on close knowledge of actual situations, just
 as local situations cannot be adequately understood in isolation. Use of
 quantitative and interview techniques presupposes close-grained qualitative
 analysis, and formal analysis of the sort congenial to linguists must come to
 terms with quantitative variables and social features. It remains that few have
 been able to balance practical relevance and scientific advance, and that
 perspectives that articulate the relations between "micro" and "macro"
 sociolinguistics are rare. (Several approaches are represented in papers by
 Albert, Bernstein, Fischer, Fishman, Garfinkel, Labov, and Roberts, in
 Gumperz and Hymes 1972).
86                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

linguistic theory as concerned only with an ideal speaker-hearer
in a perfectly homogeneous community, free from all limitations
of actual use. The effect is the same, closing off study of the social
realities of language by those most able to analyze their linguistic
dimension. From this standpoint, sociolinguistics has a contribu-
tion to make to what Wright Mills called the task of sociological
imagination, that of enabling men to understand their lives ade-
quately in terms of the true determinants of them; here the per-
spective provided by ethnographic and comparative studies,
although of little engineering pertinence, may be of great intellec-
tual importance. We have yet to gain the crosscultural perspective
on speech that we have on child-rearing, sex, religion. Both in lin-
guistics and in social science, the roles of language in human life
usually are assumed or asserted. Research that seeks the actual
ranges and kinds of meaning that speaking and languages have,
and the conditions that support or frustrate each, has hardly
begun.5
      Whatever one's conception of the relevance of sociolinguis-
tics, two things should be made clear about it and the terms on
which it is modelled. First, these terms do not designate three
disciplines, but rather problem areas that draw members of differ-
ent disciplines together. The problems and the participants over-
lap. Not only may scholars from different disciplines contribute
under the same one label, but also one and the same scholar may
in different contexts contribute under each of the three. The same
topic may appear under all three. (The issues raised by Whorf
have been discussed as "ethnolinguistics," "psycholinguistics,"
and "sociolinguistics" in turn.) In effect, the three terms mediate
between particular social sciences and linguistics, and, increas-
ingly, between linguistics and the social sciences as a whole.
Sociolinguistics, the last to emerge, and the one more suggestive
of social science as a whole, benefits from this trend, and tends to
displace the others, where their putative content is shared. It
remains true that there is more willingness to identify one's work
as "sociolinguistic" than to define oneself as a "sociolinguist."
      Second, the domain of such terms is subject to shifting defini-
tion of the disciplines between which they mediate. For something
like a generation, say, from Coral Gardens (1935) to Katz and
Fodor (1963), a technical study of a folk taxonomy might readily
     5. See, now, the development of this theme by Lefebvre 1966 (ch. 8, "La
Forme merchandise et le discours," esp. pp. 348 ff.). Thoughts of my own are
found in papers of 1961b, 1966c, and 1967a: 646. The analogy with Marx's
critique of economics was part of a prepared discussion of "Marxism and
Sociology" by I. M. Zeitlin, at a symposium of the Socialist Scholars Con-
ference, New York, September 1967. Cf. Barthes's notion of Vecriture (1953),
Bernstein (1964), Sherzer and Darnell (1972), and Hymes (1961, 1966b).
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                        87


have been labelled "ethnolinguistic." Today, given the renewed
legitimacy of semantics among linguists, such a study can be taken
as part of linguistics (cf. the excellent textbook by Lyons 1968).
Given the renewed attention to cognitive structures among anthro-
pologists, such a study can equally well be taken as part of social
anthropology. A similar fate may await sociolinguistics. Having
arisen to fill a gap, it may find itself absorbed from both sides. A
generation from now, one still may speak only of linguistics and
anthropology (and of sociology and psychology) when disciplines
are in question. Sociolinguistic, ethnolinguistic, and psycholin-
guistic will remain useful adjectives for kinds of research but their
corresponding plural nouns will be seen as having marked a tran-
sition.8
     If this should happen, it will be in the context of a linguistics
and a social anthropology in some respects radically recast, such
that adjacent sectors merge.7 I shall return to this prospect in the
conclusion. Let me emphasize what I mean by saying here that the
prediction would not be verified by increased cooperation between
linguists and anthropologists, in the field and after, although there
is of course much need for that. It would not be made true by
some ethnographers coming to do what some linguists. now do,
and conversely, although that is essential; or by investigations that
are jointly linguistic and ethnographic on just those occasions
when the special importance of a feature (linguistic or social) dic-


      6. It will, of course, remain possible to speak of ethnolinguistics as a
field in which progress can be gauged (Whiteley 1966: 154n.9), in so far as
one is speaking of a relation between linguistics and anthropology, exclusive
of other disciplines. This relation is most likely to remain specific for histori-
cal problems. Among social scientists, only anthropologists are likely to be
found proposing genetic relationships, reconstructing vocabularies, tracing
population movements and diffusion through loan-words, etc. It remains to
be be seen to what extent the extension of other social sciences to work in
areas conventionally anthropological (Africa, Asia) will lead to a sharing of
synchronic interests in language. When one wants to designate a branch of
anthropology parallel to "physical" and "social," "linguistic anthropology"
will continue to recommend itself.
      This discussion of terminology draws on Hymes (1966a), which goes into
greater detail from the standpoint of anthropology. Such, reflexive use of our
means for understanding other cultures—here, analysis of terminology—
seems to me essential. It tests our methods and our self-knowledge against
each other.
      7. This is not to define linguistics as part of anthropology (though some
linguists have done so), parallel to, but opposing, Chomsky's definition of
linguistics as a branch of cognitive psychology. Many branches of linguistics
 are hardly confined to being parts of either anthropology or psychology. Such
 statements are possible only if one ignores or denies part of linguistics itself,
 or moves to a level of abstraction remote from actual practice. For a view of
 the place of linguistics within a more general field, see Hymes (1968c, and
 cf. ch. 8, 177ff).
88                                       FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

tates intensive study, although of course one wants such work.
These things are needed, most obviously with regard to semantics.8
No amount of combination of disciplines as presently constituted,
however, asking just the questions each now normally asks, will
serve. The essence of the prediction is in the hope for disciplines
radically recast. It will become true only if linguistics and social
anthropology revise their conventional scope and methodology, so
that matters now let fall between them are seen as indispensable
to each.
      The multiplicity of terms, over the past century and more,
for the common interests of linguists and anthropologists suggests
a recurrent need, and a recurrent tension—a need met often by
ad hoc coinage, a tension persisting owing to failure to resolve
the relationship of the two fields in a form capable of sustained
growth. Just as practical problems require an as yet inchoate scien-
tific field, so do some of the tasks of linguists and anthropologists.
     8. As long realized, of course, and pointed out by Mair (1935) in criticiz-
ing "linguistics without sociology," and by J. R. Firth (1935), advocating
"sociological linguistics," in the same year as Coral Gardens also. A decade
later Nida [1945: 208, and in Hymes (ed.), 1964: 97] advocated a "combination
of analytical social anthropology and descriptive linguistics [as] . . . the key
to the study of semantics." Two decades later, Whiteley advocated the combi-
nation afresh in a valuable paper (1966). The reiteration suggests that a
commonsense principle has yet to become a commonplace of practice. This
interpretation would seem to be borne out by a sentence in a recent
Malinowski memorial lecture: 'Would not then an analysis of the words
used directly in the ritual advance this kind of interpretation further?'
(Tambiah 1968: 200, n.2.) That a social anthropologist should find it necessary
to propose this to his colleagues in the year 33 CG (after Coral Gardens)!
Especially since the very point is consciously important within the estab-
lished church of their own society. The Scottish church insists on an order
in the service the opposite of the English, because a fundamental point of
doctrine is involved (Buchanan, 1968: 143-44). The precise choice of words,
or even use of words at all, poses unresolved problems (Buchanan, 1968: 13,
21). Regarding a desire for a "definite association of the people" with the
preparation of the Table for the eucharist, one finds:
        "The fact that the laymen bring the elements to the Table . . .
   whether during a hymn or during silence, does not of itself convey any
   representative symbolism or include the congregation as a whole. The
   introduction of a formula can change that, but immediately words are
   introduced they seem to say too much. . . . Texts appropriate to gifts
   of money cannot of themselves say anything very helpful about the
   elements. Recourse is then had to symbolism; but . . . This is not to say
   that the Lambeth statement has had no effect on texts. The big effect,
   already noted, is in the "Accept us in him" terminology. This clearly has
   many years to run, as it comes not only in the LFA [Liturgy for Africans],
   but also in its derivatives EAUL [East African United Liturgy] and NZ
   [New Zealand Episcopal Liturgy]. It is a far less controversial form than
   open self-oblation, for it emphasizes both God's grace, and the mediation
   of it by Jesus Christ. But another decade may well show that this pharse-
   ology is a liturgical by-product of a late doctrinal formulation, and it may
   thus go back into the melting-pot, as Christians strive to find exactly
   what they do want to say at this point of the eucharistic prayer."
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                             89


Such a resolution requires changes in present ways of thinking
about and working with language in the two disciplines. By "eth-
nography of speaking" is meant work to bring about the change.

                                         II

      The issues are implicit in the term "ethnography of speaking"
itself. "Ethnography" has sometimes been considered "mere" de-
scription, not itself a theoretical task, but only fodder for one.
Often it has been taken as a part of the scientific division of labour
concerned with societies other than one's own. "Speaking" has
been regarded as merely implementation and variation, outside the
domain of language and linguistics proper. Linguistic theory has
mostly developed in abstraction from contexts of use and sources
of diversity. But by an ethnography of speaking I shall understand
a description that is a theory—a theory of speech as a system of
cultural behavior; a system not necessarily exotic, but necessarily
concerned with the organization of diversity.
     Let me now sketch what is entailed with regard to linguistics,
considering first the scope and goals of linguistic theory, then
issues of methodology.

The Scope of Linguistic           Description

     As a term for the activity of linguists that corresponds to
ethnography, I shall use simply "linguistic description." What por-
tion of language linguists describe, or attend to most carefully,
depends of course upon their theoretical outlook. The develop-
ment of linguistic description in this century must be seen in rela-
tion to the introduction of, and changes of foci for, the notion of
structure. The concern first was to secure recognition of the syn-
chronic state of a language as a legitimate object of scientific
study, as one indeed of theoretical importance and of precedence,
independently of practical, historical, cultural, or other considera-
tions. This goal is the culminating theme of Saussure's Cours de
linguistique g£n£rale (1916), the posthumous book regarded as the
starting-point of modern linguistics; it is assumed by Boas (1911)
(except that cultural considerations are important), and it is the
theme of Sapir's first theoretical essay (1912), developing into the
leitmotiv of his book Language (1921).
     To a great extent it was the conquest of speech sounds as an
area of pattern belonging to linguistics that gave structural lin-
guistics its impetus. (Sound had been the domain of phonetics as a
Naturwissenschaft,    only grammar the domain of linguistics, a
Geisteswissenschaft)    Internationally the area of concentration,
90                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

where battles of method and theory were first fought, thus was
phonology. In American linguistics Boas, Sapir, and Kroeber had
already criticized traditional conceptions of word structure;
Bloomfield (1933) generalized the notion of morpheme, and mor-
phology came to be intensively cultivated in the late 1930s and
the 1940s. Syntax came more to attention in the 1950s, and Chom-
sky (1957), building on work of Harris, made it the centre in a way
that radically challenged earlier work in phonology and morphol-
ogy as well. Semantics has become a major concern in the 1960s,
and in some hands in a way that would radically recast previous
work in syntax (including that of Chomsky). Very recently the
notion of sociolinguistic description has been advanced (Hymes
1967b), essentially as a synonym for "ethnography of speaking."
Here in one sense is the theme of this paper—that the next change
of focus for linguistic descriptions entails social description
(ethnography), and that with this change the process that began
with phonology and morphology will have come full circle—lin-
guistic description will find its own development to require, on a
new plane, considerations from which at first it sought to be free
(cf. ch. 8).9

                          Structure and     Freedom
      A principal issue is the relation seen between structure and
freedom, or, from another point of view, between structure and
human nature. To put it in grossly simplified form: in seeking
structure, Saussure is concerned with the word, Chomsky with the
sentence, the ethnography of speaking with the act of speech. That
is, for Saussure, the object of linguistic theory was language as a
structured social fact, and its sphere was the word. Combinations
of words in sentences (conventional phrases apart) were aspects
of speech, a matter of individual free creation in particular acts
outside the sphere of structure. Later linguists extended structural
analysis to the sentence, but structure was conceived as segmen-
tation and classification of occurrent forms. With Chomsky, both
(a) the scope of syntactic structure and (b) its relation to human
nature were reformulated.
      As to (a): beyond occurrent forms and distributional patterns
was a network of relationships, distinct from, yet basic to, them.
In part, Chomsky revitalized traditional conceptions, making them
explicit in a formal theory. In so doing Chomsky was carrying
further a logic in the recognition of linguistic levels that can be

     9. There were always some linguists who insisted on the social character
of linguistics, but without much effect on the character of linguistic descrip-
tion or the foci of attention.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                       91


traced from Sapir's "Sound Patterns in Language" (1925). Briefly,
the logic is this: a level (or component) of linguistic structure is
to be recognized when there appear systematically two one-many
relations (on 'pragmemic' level cf. ch. 1). Thus a sentence such as
"Visiting anthropologists can be amusing" may be ambiguous. A
single structure, so far as occurrent forms and relations are con-
cerned, it may yet express two different sets of underlying rela-
tionships. In one "anthropologist" is subject, in one object, of the
verb from which the gerund "visiting" derives. (Loosely, it is as
if the sentence derived in the one case from "Someone visits
anthropologist," and "It is amusing.") This is the relationship Syd-
ney Lamb calls "neutralization." Conversely, the same set of rela-
tionships may underlie a number of different sentences, e.g.,
"Visiting anthropologists can be amusing," "To visit anthropolo-
gists can be amusing," "It is amusing to visit anthropologists"; or
"It is amusing to be visited by anthropologists," "Anthropologists
who visit can be amusing," etc. This is the relationship Lamb calls
"diversification." Notice that in the last pair "anthropologists" is
object of a preposition ("by" in one case, subject of "be" in the
other, yet, fundamentally, subject of "visit" in both. The level of
underlying relationships in syntax is "deep structure." It is actu-
ally more abstract, more remote from the manifest forms (surface
structure), than these examples show.10
     As to (b): Chomsky also interpreted the relation of structure
to individual freedom and human nature. The deeper structures
discovered are not opposed to freedom, but its condition. The
child is conceived, not as passively learning linguistic patterns, but
as actively constructing a theory to make intelligible the scattered
and limited sample of speech that comes his way. Within a remark-
ably short period, from remarkably limited data, the child is seen
to acquire essential mastery of a finite device capable of producing
an infinity of sentences. These conditions of acquisition are argued
by Chomsky to necessitate postulation of a quite specific innate
basis (faculte de langage). Herein lies the "creative aspect of lan-
guage," the "rule-governed creativity," acquired and used largely

     10. If "deep structure" and "surface structure" are to be used as terms in
anthropology, any analogue to linguistic structure should be explicitly dis-
avowed, if some such formal, transformative relationship between levels is
not intended. In particular, it would wholly miss the point of Chomsky's
linguistic theory to regard deep structure as simply a more abstract set of
patterns of the same sort as the patterns of surface structure. The point is
that the levels of structure are related in a finite system of generative
principles. I should add that it is not necessary that the relation be expressed
in terms of a concept of "rule." (Some linguists, notably Lamb, maintain that
"rule" is inappropriate.) The points made here, as to linguistics and ethnogra-
phy, would still hold, whatever the manner of formulating the systematic
relations underlying sentences and acts of speech.
92                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

free of stimulus control, which permits a speaker to respond
appropriately to novel situations. For Chomsky, the ultimate pur-
pose of linguistic theory is to characterize this underlying ability.
     The goal of the ethnography of speaking can be said to be
to complete the discovery of the sphere of "rule-governed crea-
tivity" with respect to language, and to characterize the abilities
of persons in this regard (without prejudice to the specific bio-
logical basis of the abilities). In extending the scope of linguistic
rules beyond sentences to speech acts, and in seeking to relate
language meaningfully to situations, this approach, although com-
patible with Chomsky's goals, does critically recast certain of his
concepts, as well as reject his ignorance (blissful or willful) of the
relevance to questions of freedom and dignity of social science
research. 11 To see how this is so, let me consider two concepts
that Chomsky has made central to discussion, then discuss partic-
ular lines of linguistic research.

                     Competence     and     Performance

     Chomsky's work is a decisive step, not only in extending the
scope of linguistic theory, but also in redefining the nature of its
object. For "language" Chomsky substitutes "competence" defined
as a fluent native speaker's knowledge (largely tacit) of grammati-
cality—of whether or not putative sentences are part of his lan-
guage, and according to what structural relationships. The goal of
linguistic description is thus changed, from an object independent
of men, to a human capacity. Both changes (deep structure, human
capacity) are felt to be so great as to lead transformational gram-
marians to reject "structural linguistics" as a name for their work,
and to use it solely to describe other schools as predecessors.
From a social standpoint, transformational grammar might equally
well be seen as the culmination of the leading theme of structural
linguistics. To center analysis in a deep structure, one grounded in
human nature, is to fulfill an impulse of structural linguistics to
treat language as a sphere of wholly autonomous form. Such a
theory perfects and gives the ultimate justification to a study of
language at once of human significance and abstracted from actual
human beings.
     Chomsky's redefinition of linguistic goals appears, then, a half-
way house. The term "competence" promises more than it in fact

    11. It is indeed difficult to understand how the relevance of Lee 1959, for
example, or of contributions to the sort of outlook found in Hymes (ed.)
(1973), could have escaped attention. Social science is not all Skinnerian
behaviorism and counterinsurgency, as writings such as the chapter on
"Psychology and Ideology" (Chomsky 1973: 318-69) would seem to imply.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                 93


 contains. It is restricted to knowledge, and, within knowledge, to
knowledge of grammar. Thus, it leaves other aspects of speakers'
 tacit knowledge and ability in confusion, thrown together under a
largely unexamined concept of "performance" (cf. Chomsky and
Halle 1968: 373). In effect, "performance" confuses two separate
 aims. The first is to stress that competence is something under-
lying behavior ("mere performance," "actual performance"). The
second is to allow for aspects of linguistic ability which are not
grammatical: psychological constraints on memory, choice of
alternative rules, stylistic choices and devices in word order, etc.
The intended negative connotation of the first sense of "perform-
ance" tends to attach to the second sense; factors of performance
—and the theory must place all social factors here—are generally
seen as things that limit the realization of grammatical possibili-
ties, rather than as constitutive or enabling. In fact, of course,
choice among the alternatives that can be generated from a single
base structure depends as much upon a tacit knowledge as does
grammar, and can be studied as much in terms of underlying rules
as can grammar. Such things equally underlie actual behaviour as
facets of knowledge, and would be aspects of competence in the
normal sense of the term. On its own terms, linguistic theory must
extend the notion of competence to include more than the gram-
matical.
      The need of some such revision is being recognized within the
dominant trend in grammatical theory.12 What may not be accepted
at present is a need to complement its reductionist theoretical thrust,
and to revise its intuitive mode of practice. Chomsky's interest is
in moving from what is said to what is most abstract and ele-
mentary in grammar, and from what is social to what is innate in
human nature. That, so to speak, is but half a dialectic. A thor-
oughgoing linguistics must move in the other direction as well,
from what is potential in human nature, and elementary in a
grammar, to what is realizable and realized; and conceive of the
social factors entering into realization as constitutive and rule-
governed too. The present tendency is to ignore factors external
to grammar, or to treat them in the same way as formal grammar,
reducing most of their interesting features to the status of devia-
tions from a few hypothetically intuitive postulates. Need for
observant attention to people speaking, and in general, for the
services of ethnography and ethnology, is ignored.
      An ethnography of speaking approach shares Chomsky's con-
cern for creativity and freedom, but recognizes that a child, or

     12. In a conversation (July 1968), Chomsky remarked that the original
competence/performance dichotomy was inadequate, in reference to my
critique of it (Hymes, 1967 MS).
94                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

person, master only of grammar, is not yet free. Chomsky's attempt
to discuss the "creative" aspect of language use (Chomsky 1966)
suffers from the same difficulty as his treatment of competence.
The main thrust is independence of situation. Chomsky specifies
freedom from stimulus contol, infinity of possible sentences, yet
appropriateness of novel sentences to novel situations; but the
first two properties, and the grammatical mechanisms he con-
siders, can never account for appropriateness. A novel sentence
might be wildly inappropriate. Appropriateness involves a positive
relation to situations, not a negative one, and, indeed, a knowledge
of a kind of competence regarding situations and relations of sen-
tences to them. As with competence, so with creativity: I share
Chomsky's goals for linguistics, and admire him for setting them,
but they cannot be reached on his terms or by linguistics alone.
Rules of appropriateness beyond grammar govern speech, and are
acquired as part of conceptions of self, and of meanings associated
both with particular forms of speech and with the act of speaking
itself. (For a statement of the social import of human linguistic
capacity, revitalizing a long-standing thesis of Boasian anthropol-
ogy, see "Language and Freedom," ch. 9 in Chomsky 1973).
      The issue is especially clear with regard to education and
schooling. Chomsky's insistence on the universal capacity for lin-
guistic fluency is essential against the pervasive tendency to
blame the failures of a social system on its victims, but in itself
provides only a partial remedy.
      To say that children could be fluent and are not is poignant,
perhaps to invite drastic intervention techniques (some American
"authorities" advise taking black children from their mothers at
the age of six months). What is needed as well is a realization
that the standard of the schools is not the only standard, that more
than one system of speaking, each with rules, values, and satis-
factions and accomplishments of its own, is involved. Lower-class
black children in the United States, for example, are probably
much more sensitive to the aesthetic and interactional uses of
language than are many middle-class white children.
      In such respects a conception of linguistic theory concerned
exclusively with an ideally fluent speaker-listener in a perfectly
homogeneous community in theory, and in practice only with one's
own intuitions and formal logics, may unwittingly play into the
hands of those whose views about people the theory's exponents
would wish to reject. Not only are motivations and rules and
values for use neglected, but also the competence of which they
speak is unlocated, merely glossed with a conventional language
name, e.g., English. The entire theoretical potential of the formal
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                  95


system is imputed willy-nilly to all individual speakers. Such reli-
ance on one's own sense of communicative conduct can result in
unintended intellectual and social "imperialism," attributing paro-
chialisms to the rest of the society in the name of the frontiers
of theory. The difficulty is analogous to the circularity with which
Whorf moves between an imputed world-view and the linguistic
data (from one informant in New York City) from which the
world-view had been inferred. In fact, of course, similar bodies
of data are compatible with different underlying organization, and
degree of knowledge, in individual speakers. One serious diffi-
culty for some children in fact is that their speech is referred by
teachers to the same grammatical system as standard English. In
the case of West Indian and many American black children, it may
have a distinct history involving past creolization, so that a gram-
mar superficially similar may be importantly distinct (cf. Dillard
1968). In the case of many native American children, a distinctive
cultural tradition may inform their English discourse.
     An adequate approach must distinguish and investigate four
aspects of competence: (a) systemic potential—whether and to
what extent something is not yet realized, and, in a sense, not yet
known; it is to this Chomsky in effect reduces competence; (b)
appropriateness—whether       and to what extent something is in
some context suitable, effective, or the like; (c)        occurrence—
whether and to what extent something is done; (d)          feasibility—
whether and to what extent something is possible, given the
means of implementation available.
     The last three dimensions would have to be "performance"
in the system of Chomsky's Aspects (1965), but knowledge with
regard to each is part of the competence of a speaker-hearer in
any full sense of the term, and "performance" should be reserved
for a more normal, consistent meaning (see below). There is no
notice of occurrence in Aspects, or in most current linguistic
theory, but it is an essential dimension. Most linguists today scorn
quantitative data, for example, but Labov (1973a, b) has shown
that systematic study of quantitative variation discloses new kinds
of structure and makes possible explanation of change. In general,
this theoretical dimension provides for the fact that members of
a speech community are aware of the commonness, rarity, previ-
ous occurrence or novelty, of many features of speech, and that
this knowledge enters into their definitions and evaluations of
ways of speaking.13
    13. Conversation interaction may proceed in terms of awareness of
frequencies of features, as when Prague speakers are reported to move from
the phonology of standard Czech to that of conversational Czech by degrees.
96                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

      In terms of these dimensions, one can say of speech that it is,
for example, grammatical, awkward, overly formal, and rare, as
in the conversation of the American ambassador to the Court of
St. James in the TV film, "The Royal Family"; ungrammatical,
difficult, expressively appropriate, and individual, as in the speech
of Leontes in Act II of The Winter's Tale (Thorne, 1969); ungram-
matical, awkward, appropriate, and common, as in the bumbling
speech required of Burundi peasants before aristocrats (Albert,
1972); grammatical, easy, correct, and avoided, as indicated in
these remarks under "Dukes and Duchesses . . . Style of Address-
ing in Speech": though the necessity for using the full title would
generally be avoided . . . in conversation it is best to make as
sparing a use as possible of titles" (Titles and Forms of Address,
1967: 46).
      One must recognize not only knowledge, but also ability to
implement it, with respect to each of these dimensions, as a com-
ponent of competence in speaking. Especially, one must provide
for motivation and value.14 And, as indicated, the competence to
be attributed to particular persons and communities is in each
case an empirical matter. Transformational theory recognizes that
what seems the same sentence may enter into two quite different

Japanese are said to be able to identify foreigners who have learnt the
language formally because their speech is too correct (on quantitative aspects
generally, see now G. Sankoff 1974). Here belongs "the disitinction between
the merely and marginally possible and the actually normal: between what
one will accept as a hearer and what one will produce as a speaker" (Quirk
1968: 195). The category also allows the feature of social life summed up in
the medieval rubric, factum valet (Harold Garfinkel, pers. comm.): something
contrary to rule may be accepted, in fact done, e.g.:
        The prefix "The" is now by general custom uaed in addressing the
  daughters of dukes, marquesses and earls, e.g., "The Lady Jean Smith".
  Although it should therefore be used, the practice exists only by courtesy,
  and is not recognized as correct by, for example, the College of Arms
   (Titles and Forms of Address, 1967 edn: 45).
  14. The simplistic view of transformational generative grammar is that
competence is essentially a maturational unfolding. Many hold the equally
simplistic view that quantity of exposure should shape children's speech (a
view once put forward to explain linguistic change by Bloomfield, 1933). In
fact, of course, maturation and exposure both play some role, but identifi-
cation and motivation are equally fundamental (cf. Labov 1966, LePage 1969).
Many black boys use substandard speech, not through interference with
unfolding or lack of exposure, but as a sign of masculinity. Is it surprising
that black lower-class boys do not take white middle-class women teachers
as models? Non-standard-speaking children hear as much TV and radio as
other children, and their teachers all day. At Columbia Point School (Boston)
last summer, in a discussion in which teachers had raised just these
points, the one black mother present observed: "I've noticed that when the
children play school outside, they talk like they're supposed to in school;
and when they stop playing school, they don't."
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                97


sets of relations, syntactically; it must recognize the same thing
to be true, socially.
     Finally, the negative connotation of performance, as the real-
ization of knowledge and ability, must be replaced with recogni-
tion of its positive aspect as well. There are properties of perform-
ance, essential to the social role of speaking, that go beyond the
knowledge and ability referable to particular persons. In part
these properties are functions of the social organization of speech
(complementary of roles, etc.), in part they emerge in the actual
events of speech themselves (as when one speaks to a responsive
or a "cold" audience).15
     Such a perspective calls for a descriptive method, a methodo-
logical approach, different from that common in present linguis-
tics. Ch. 2 has outlined it from an ethnographic standpoint. To
indicate further what it would be like, let me consider some ways
in which linguistics itself is moving in the required direction.

Directions of Linguistic Description:    Dimensions of   Discourse

     In the present situation in linguistics the main frontiers of
relevant work have to do with extension of analysis of the organ-
ization of coherence of texts; beyond the force of speech acts to
the formation of conversations; beyond a chosen language to
choices among forms of speech; and beyond the referential func-
tion to functions that may be grouped together as stylistic. Each of
these extensions can be seen as involving kinds of knowledge and
ability, i.e., competence, on the part of members of a community,
and as entailing ethnographic analysis of speaking. These exten-
sions enrich the adequacy of linguistics, on both the syntagmatic
and paradigmatic planes, in terms both of sequences and of the
sets of features from which sequences are selected; but together
their effect is more than two-dimensional. Language can no longer
be taken as horizontal, as Bloomfieldian "discovery" procedures
might have had it, nor as derivationally vertical as Chomskyan
"recovery" procedures might have it, but only as the composite
 of many intersecting planes or sectors. A language is, so to speak,
multifaceted, and different aspects of its history and character are
illuminated with some of its faces, obscured with others.

    15. E.g. in a review of records by Joan Chissell (The Times Saturday
Review, 5 April 1969):
      "Stephen Bishop . . . in Beethoven's Diabelli Variations, a work
  which did much to make his name on the concert platform. Here, the
  daemonic, visionary Beethoven takes a bit longer to break out than when
  aided and abetted by audience reaction, but progressively Bishop's
  superb strength and discipline take fire."
98                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

                           Discourse:     Texts

       Chomsky has alluded to coherence (1968: 11), perhaps in
 response to the attention given to it by Halliday, Gleason, and
 others (coherence was not discussed in Chomsky 1965, despite the
 attribution of it here to a Cartesian view). Just as one has the
 ability to recognize a series of sentences as discourse, rather than
 an arbitrary list (Hasan 1968: 1). The ability depends in important
 part on properly linguistic features and is increasingly recognized
 as a necessary facet of investigation (cf. Danes 1964; Halliday
 1967). Three brief examples must suffice.
      Kiparsky (1968), for example, in a brilliant article explaining
 diverse Indoeuropean phenomena in terms of a single type of
 rule, conjunct reduction (by virtue of which the second occurrence
 of a feature may be omitted or expressed by an unmarked form),
 notes that the scope of such rules applies across sentences (p. 34,
n.4) and even across change of speakers in dialogue (p. 43). Gunter
 (1966) explicitly attacks the restriction of la langue to the sen-
 tence, and notes that the placement of accent cannot be explained
without the assumption that a given variety of a sentence signals
its own particular kind of relevance to its context. (By variety of
sentence is meant that a given sentence is in effect chosen from
among what another linguist, Henry Hiz, has called a battery.
There are paradigms not only of morphemes, but of sentences as
well.) The format of the usual transformational grammar is criti-
cized for obscuring the relation among the members of a paradigm
of sentence varieties. With particular reference to accent, Gunter
goes on to show that some placements in dialogue make nonsense
of it, others provide intelligibility; that in general one has a knowl-
edge of "context grammar" that enables one to tell whether a
sentence is relevant to what has just been said, or whether rele-
vance to an implicit (nonverbal) context must be sought; if the
former, what the connection is, and if the latter, what limits the
form and content of the nonovert must satisfy. (See Gunter's
article for detailed interpretation of English examples.) As a third
example, let me cite (Wheeler 1967), who found that his Siona
informants would allow variation in the enclitic chosen to mark
subject and object relations, where single sentences were involved,
but would stubbornly refuse to vary the presence or choice of
enclitic in texts. There was decidedly a fixed order for use or
nonuse of the markers, if a narration or dialogue was to be accept-
able, yet no clue within the sentence as to the rationale. Wheeler
discovered (partly with the aid of kinesic behavior on the part of
informants) that not one but two dimensions underlay the gram-
matical markers in question. The markers signalled both subject,
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                       99


object, or goal within the sentence, and degree of focus—emphatic,
normal, or none—within the discourse. This last, purely discourse,
function is indeed their primary function.
     The study of texts is of course familiar to linguists and eth-
nographers both; and transformational grammar itself began in
work of Zellig Harris in the early 1950s on certain recurrent prop-
erties of texts. The work cited above makes clear the development
of text analysis in terms of an extended understanding of the
competence of speakers. There is much to be learnt just from such
study of syntactic relations. At the same time, analysis must go
beyond purely linguistic markers. Much of the coherence of texts
depends upon abstract rules independent of specific linguistic
form, indeed, of speech. Such are the kinds of knowledge that the
sociologist Harvey Sacks analyzes as hearers' and viewers'
maxims. One such maxim in brief form is: if the first of two sen-
tences can be heard (interpreted) as the cause of the second, hear
it that way. Sacks (1972) uses the start of a children's story as
illustration: "The baby cried. The mommy picked it up." He notes
that we spontaneously take the mommy to be its mommy, and to
have picked the baby up because it cried, although neither rela-
tionship is stated (or implied by the underlying syntax).16
     A familiar example of structural analysis of texts is of course
the work of Levi-Strauss, Greimas, and others. From the stand-
point of an ethnography of speaking, such work has a comple-
mentary limitation: it has little or nothing to do with specific
linguistic form at all. This is not to deny the existence of narrative
structures independent of linguistic form, but to question that
their function can be validly inferred apart from a knowledge of
such form. In a Chinookan myth, for example, any translation,
     16. An entry from Pears Cyclopaedia (Barker, 1968-69) illustrates this
point, and a further one of some importance:
       "1901. Queen Victoria dies, Ian. 22. Trans-Siberian railway opened
  for single-track traffic."
  For many people, as for myself, this entry is momentarily humorous. One
can read it in terms of Sacks's maxim: post hoc, ergo propter hoc. The railway
opened for single-track traffic once (because) Queen Victoria had died. This
response reflects the fact that discourse, like syntax, has ambiguities, entail-
ing relation of a surface structure to more than one underlying structure.
Were only Sack's maxim applicable, there would be only a puzzling causal
relationship. Were only conventions of chronicle applicable, no relationship
except occurrence in the same year would be considered. The humour is in
entertaining the causal connection of narrative where one knows it is not
intended (conjuring up perhaps an image of Queen Victoria bodily blocking
the single track). Notice that the discourse rules are seen to be sensitive to
genre (narrative, chronicle). An important part of humor, and creative use of
language generally, is to be understood in terms of such conjunctive (simul-
taneous derivation, not selection of a single derivation, as in disambiguation).
Use of this resource of language seems to vary a great deal crossculturally,
and competence for it probably depends very much upon cultural context.
100                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

even an abstract, would make clear the presence of a structure,
"Interdiction: Interdiction violated," and imply that the outcome
(a murder) follows from the violation, as so often is found to be
the case. Analysis of the myth in terms of its specific development,
in Clackamas Chinook, discloses structures that place almost an
opposite significance on the myth. The myth is to be understood
in terms of a specifically Chinookan theory of myth (one requiring
constant moving back and forth between linguistic form and cul-
tural meaning for its discovery, as in the classic structural linguis-
tic principle of form—meaning covariation) such that it is here
not the violator, but the one who issues the interdiction, who, in
Clackamas terms, is culpable. Only through control of the original
linguistic form, moreover, is one able to discover that an inherited
plot has been shaped to express through imagery and style a
personal meaning, as well as to see that the terse myth has a unity
(see Hymes 1968b).
     The particular contribution of linguistics presumably will be
to explore to its limits the formally linguistic coherence of texts,
and, as in the work of Gunter, Labov, and some others, to explore
conversational interaction as well. The contribution of social
anthropology may be to explore the structure of conversational
interaction more directly and thoroughly, as part of ethnography,
and to insist on understanding discourse structures as situated,
that is, as pertaining to cultural and personal occasions which
invest discourse with part of their meaning and structure.17 There

     17. My understanding of these issues owes much to Kenneth Burke, who
has long insisted on analysis of language as the enacting of strategies to
encompass situations (see the title essay in his Philosophy of Literary Form,
1941). Burke has also pointed out the value of theology, as well as of poetics
and rhetoric, for the understanding of verbal action. In general, anthropology
has much to gain from the disciplines of rhetoric, literary criticism, and
textual interpretation. Both points are nicely exemplified in the parables of
Jesus. The early Church interpreted the parable allegorically; critical scholar-
ship freed them from that in the late nineteenth century, but form-criticism,
despite some insights, failed when it tried to treat them in terms of formal
distinctions not present in the original Aramaic folk-category (mashal).
Recent work has established the primacy of two considerations: recon-
struction of the original linguistic form (Aramaic), wherever possible, by
triangulation from the variant Greek, Syriac, and Hebrew renderings, and
reconstruction of the place of a parable in Jesus' career, as "uttered in an
actual situation . . . at a particular and often unforseen point . . . they were
preponderantly concerned with a situation of conflict" (Jeremias 1963: 21).
A major cause of misinterpretation was the tendency of Gospel writers and
the Church to take the parables as addressed to their own subsequent situ-
ation rather than as addressed (as was the case) to an immediate situation,
often to an opponent or doubting outsider. The parables are par excellence
instances of what Chomsky (1966) terms the "creative" aspect of language
use, an essential criterion of which he gives as appropriateness of new
sentences to novel situations; and they bring to the fore what Chomsky
omits, the dialectic relation. Chomsky analyses the grammatical conditions
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                    101


is as yet relatively little work that integrates both aspects. These
points bring us to a central concept, that of speech act.

                             Discourse:   Speech   Acts

     Some linguists, recognizing the significance of speech acts,
now wish to incorporate them into syntax, so that a sentence car-
ries with it in deep structure a performative verb, something like
"I ask you," "I tell you," and the like (normally deleted in overt
form). There is indeed evidence to support this approach in some
cases (McCawley 1968: 157), but as a general solution to the prob-
lem it is cumbersome and counterintuitive, and appears a last-
ditch effort to keep within the conventional boundaries of
linguistics. An approach that insists on the complex, abstract
knowledge of speakers with regard to other relationships quite
distinct from manifest form need not cling to a literal verbal
embodiment of acts of speech (as I argued in a letter to John Ross
as early as the summer of 1968). Some assertions, requests, com-
mands, threats, and the like are known to be such on the basis of
a knowledge, jointly, of the message-form and the relationship in
which it occurs. For example, the same sentence commonly serves
as a serious insult in some relationships and as a badge of inti-
macy in others.
     A related point—obvious, yet needing to be repeatedly men-
tioned—is that the rules that govern speech acts govern more than
single speakers and more than speech. As to single speakers, the
Sanskrit rule for conjunct reduction across interlocutors has been
mentioned. The constraining power of the second part of the
Summons-Response sequence in American English interaction has
been noted by Schegloff (1968), and many many analogues are to
be found in other societies. An example of expected "conjunct
replication" is reported by Jacobs (1940:130):

for sentences to be independent of control by a situation; the ethnography of
speaking investigates the conditions for sentences to define and change
situations.
   On the crux in Mark 4: 10-13, as to Jesus' own intention, Moule (1966:
149-51) defends the authenticity of the saying, but fails to deal with the
linguistic and contextual evidence for its being an interpolation here
(Jeremias, 1963: 13-18). Hunter (1964: 110-22) reviews the problem, adopting
Jeremia's solution. (All authors agree that the apparent meaning that the
parables are intended to prevent outsiders from understanding is wrong.)
The issue hinges on two conjunctions, the original Aramaic de, which can
mean 'who', whereas the NT Greek hina can mean only 'that', and the
original Aramaic dilema, to be taken (as rabbinical exegesis shows) as
'unless', not as 'lest'. The necessity of original text—pace Levi-Strauss, and
some of his followers—for accurate understanding of fundamental relation-
ships, the inadequacy of translations, could not be more clearly demonstrated.
102                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

  when the Coos were still living in their native area and villages,
  myths and possibly also narratives were told only in the winter-
  time, according to Mrs. Peterson; it was expected that the child
  auditors, if not older people, repeat in unison each phrase or sen-
  tence verbatim after the raconteur. "They kept right on telling it
  until the children got it right. They wanted them to have it right.
  They did not want them to get it mixed up and 'lie' when they told
  it." When folktales were told to an audience composed only of
  adults, that is, of persons passed puberty, just one of the auditors
  repeated each sentence verbatim following the raconteur. But this
  repeating of what the other person said is only an aspect of con-
  versational etiquette in general: the person spoken to usually if not
  always repeated verbatim what was said to him.

An especially nice example of both more than single speakers and
more than speech is found among the Haya of northern Tanzania
(Sheila Seitel, pers. comm.). When mentioning a quantity, a speaker
will say something such as "We saw this many of them, "holding
up a certain number of fingers. It is the listener who then says the
number. Again, rules for summoning in English in American
society subsume both verbal and nonverbal acts: "George!," a
telephone ring, a knock on a door (Schegloff 1968). By the same
principle that rejects compartments in syntax and phonology,
when unitary treatment of unitary phenomena is presented (Mc-
Cawley 1968: 166ff.), the boundary between verbal and nonverbal
features must be rejected, once sentences are studied as addressed
acts of speech.
     Within speech itself there is more to performances than per-
formatives, and more than logical presuppositions and postulates
too, interesting as these cynosures of attention in formal linguis-
tics are. As noted in ch. 2 with regard to speech acts, they com-
prise sets of features, in relation to functional foci or components
of speech events; and these sets require to be validated in relation
to the actual rules underlying communicative conduct in a com-
munity, and the verbal styles and strategies available to its partici-
pants. Formalisms can foreclose too soon. The first commandment
in the study of discourse must be: Let people surprise you, as to
what they can do, and what they can use to do it.
      Still, to consider discourse as situated is not to refer it to an
infinity of possible contextual factors, (cf. Friedrich 1972: 299, the
failure to develop a method beyond the handling of discrete
instances vitiated the influence of Malinowski's work.) Linguists
 and perhaps others do tend to imagine that when a door is opened
 on a level beyond the familiar, everything in the universe outside
will rush in. From the standpoint of the ethnography of speaking,
 there is in a community a system of speech acts, a structured
 knowledge accessible to the members of the community, and so,
to a great extent, to science.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                    103


                         Discourse:      "Code-switching"
     "Code-switching" has become a common term for alternate
use of two or more languages, varieties of a language, or even
speech styles. Studies of code-switching are important, because
bilingualism and bidialectalism are important, and because such
work necessarily breaks with an image of the notions of language
and speech community as identical.18 In such studies one finds
that the very question of what counts as unit or object of descrip-
tion in a community is dependent on ethnography. (See discussion
of speech community and forms of speech in ch. 2.)
     Just to locate the referent of its analysis, then, linguistics
must locate some particular body of judgments of acceptability
and kinds of knowledge with regard to the plurality of forms of
speech found in a community. For formal linguistics, the task may
be only a way of excluding some phenomena and of ensuring the
validity of those selected. For sociolinguistics and ethnography of
speaking, such an account of the repertoire of a community is an
essential framework. In this regard Denison (1968) provides a
valuable account of a trilingual community (cf. also Denison 1970).
He delineates thirteen factors involved in the selection of one or
the other of the three languages in the north Italian community of
Sauris (German, Italian, Friulian). These factors can be seen to be
ingredients of four or five general components of speech events:
situation (here, formality of the scene, home setting); genre (here,
sayings, written genre depends on relationship to what I would
term key—the attitude or spirit in which the act occurs, here,
spontaneity versus non-spontaneity); participants (here, capacities
and preferences of sender, receiver, auditor for a variety, plus age
and sex); and the act-sequence itself (here, shifts in topic, and the
variety of the preceding discourse).
     Selection and switching of forms of speech point beyond
themselves in two important respects. First, their description
requires, and helps to create, an adequate general framework for
the discovery and analysis of rules of speaking. In addition to the
components of speech events found pertinent in Sauris, choice of
     18. Compare the following remarkable statement (Chomsky 1973: 326-27):
"Consider, for example, the notion 'likelihood of producing a sentence of
English rather than Chinese'. Given a characterization of 'English' and
 'Chinese' by an abstract theory of postulated internal states (mental states,
if you like), it is possible to give some meaning to this notion—though the
probabilities being negligible under any known characterization of determin-
ing factors, will be of no interest for the prediction of behavior." Chomsky's
ignorance of linguistics, outside a narrow sector, become downright embar-
rassing at moments like this. He presumably intended the argument to apply
to any arbitrary pair of possible languages known by a person. In sweepingly
denying predictability to social science, he also denies it to millions of
multilingual people in whose lives and communities code-choice has a high
and valued degree of regularity (cf. e.g., Blom and Gumperz 1972).
104                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

form of speech may depend upon ends in view (e.g., Kaska Indians
in northwestern Canada switch to English to curse, Malagasy-
speaking peasants use French to drive their cows); the instrumen-
talities available in terms of channels and their use (oral, written,
singing, etc.); the norms of interaction holding between persons
(e.g., as to whether choice of the variety best known to an inter-
locutor is obligatory, ingratiating, or insulting, as implying that
he or she does not know some more prestigious variety); and
norms of interpretation (e.g., belief that the cries or calls of a
certain creature are in a certain code, requiring to be answered
in the same). Commonly rules for use of a form of speech will
involve a relationship among two or more components. Just these
two steps—identifying what can count as an instance of such a
component relevant to communication, and discovering the rela-
tions obtaining among components—are the initial steps of eth-
nography of speaking (and communication).
      Second, the dimensions and meanings found to underlie selec-
tion and switching of forms of speech are general. Social distance
is a dimension that underlies choice of Haitian French or Creole
in Haiti, of one among a hierarchy of languages in Nigeria (Hymes
1972d); choice of word in "pronouns of power and solidarity"
(Brown and Gilman 1960) and "pronominal breakthrough" (Fried-
rich 1972); use of phonological variables (Labov 1966); use and
construal of a verb affix (Swadesh 1933); choice of intonational
features and contours; and so on. This is not to say that means
different in character and scale do not condition different out-
comes and rules, but it is to say that they do not uniquely deter-
mine, do not control, them. The creative aspect of language use
involves a measure of freedom and diversity, cutting across com-
partments habitual to linguistics, in the selection and grouping
together of means. Early in the development of modern linguistics,
syntactic relations ("inflection," "incorporation," etc.) had to be
generalized beyond association with particular grammatical types
(cf. Boas 1911,, Kroeber, 1911,1916: 91-93, Sapir 1911, 1922: 52-54)
to universal features and dimensions. A similar need has been
recurrently recognized in semantic description (e.g., Jespersen
1924: 39-40, 45ff., Jakobson 1957, Fillmore, 1968). Sociolinguistic
description broaches such a need at the most inclusive level of all;
relations and dimensions, the organization and meaning of linguis-
tic features, have to be generalized beyond any one sector of
language, and indeed, beyond language itself.
      If pursued in a thoroughgoing way, then, the study of choice
among the forms of speech brings one to a novel starting-point,
which is to recognize that the fundamental organization of lin-
guistic features is into community-relative forms of speech, or,
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                             105


even more generally perhaps, speech styles. "Languages," "dia-
lects," "codes" are not equivalent to, but components of, these.
Whole-language choice is important and salient, but not in practice
or in principle fundamental. The true structure of choice of
linguistic means, of a theory of the creative aspect of their use,
lies deeper. Thus, shift in the provenance of linguistic means
(e.g., from German to Italian), while striking, goes together with
shift in any component of speaking, as prospective evidence of
underlying organization: shift between normal voice and whis-
pering, between direct and indirect address, between deliberate
and hurried tempo, between one topic and another, between one
proportion of stylistic features and another, etc. Here is the kind
of form-meaning covariation that is basic to sociolinguistics, the
sociolinguistic commutation test, as it were, corresponding to the
principle of contrast and nonrepetition basic to the relevance of
features in linguistics proper. Such work of course requires inti-
mate command of a community's linguistic resources and also
raises the question of stylistic perspective.

                       Discourse:        Stylistic   Perspective

     The concern of most work called stylistic is with literary or
other written texts, and the scope of the analysis is defined by
some principle of selection among elements given by linguistic
analysis. (Three selections of relevant work are Chatman and
Levin 1966, Steinman 1967, and Chatman 1970.) Such stylistics is
relevant insofar as selection entails a relation between linguistic
elements and contextual factors. It then points beyond itself in
the same two ways as "code-switching": the principles of selection
point to a general framework, and the kinds of dimensions and
meanings are general. Broadly conceived, indeed, stylistics can be
almost indistinguishable from ethnography of speaking (cf.
Guiraud 1961, "Conclusion"), although the ethnographic approach
must concern itself with speech styles generally in a community.
     Much of the work involving the notion of style, of course, is
not concerned with the general foundations implied by it. The
notion (or speech level) may be invoked only when some con-
textual factor inescapably intrudes into ordinary linguistic analysis
(as with men's and women's speech in some languages, age, status,
formality of context, or the like in others). Or "style" may be the
ready label for a dimension of variation in what is conceived as
a strictly linguistic problem, e.g., the "contextual styles" in Labov
1966, as a dimension specifically of socially motivated sound
change. Finally, style may be regarded as departures or deviations
from a standard or norm. In contrast to such work, stylistic per-
106                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

spective is taken here to apply to all of speech, that is, all of
speech is referrable to the set of styles in the repertoire of a per-
son or community; it is taken as bringing into view verbal ele-
ments not necessarily given by the usual linguistic analysis (so-
called "expressive," "emotive," "attitudinal," etc., elements—cf.
ch. 8); and it is taken as concerned with departures or deviations
from a norm only in those cases in which departure or deviation
is indeed the intention of the source (as it is with some writers
and speakers). In the vast majority of communities and cases, style
is understood rather as the arousal and accomplishment of expec-
tations, following the lead of Kenneth Burke (1931) in his essay on
"Psychology and Literary Form." It is such a perspective that is
taken to be implied as general foundation by the various particular
uses of the notion of style.
     From this standpoint, the identification of speech styles is a
vital descriptive task at the frontier of current linguistics. (For
statement of the basic descriptive concept, rules of co-occurrence,
see Ervin-Tripp 1972). Obviously speech styles do not exhaust
functional investigation of speech, which involves not only the
organization of linguistic means, but also the consequences of
their use. Nevertheless, knowledge of speech styles is essential
to complete discovery of the sphere of rule-governed creativity
with regard to language. It is often complex use of styles that
underlies individual acts that are creative in the sense of involving
unique meanings and mediations, and innovation with regard to
rules, or styles, themselves. (On unique mediation, cf. Tillich 1964:
56-57; on such innovation as a general human experience, cf. Wil-
liams 1960, part 1, ch. 1). By disclosing the conventional means
available and organized, one makes possible a clearer understand-
ing of the personal and transcendent (cf. Sapir 1927, Tillich 1964:
53-67).

Methodological   Summing-Up
     Clearly, much of what has been discussed from the starting-
point of linguistics could be approached from an ethnographic
starting-point as well. That is in keeping with the prediction that
an ethnography of speaking would represent a merging of the two
disciplines at certain points; and it is inescapable. The logic of
the discussion of linguistics has been to provide linguistic descrip-
tion with a necessary ethnographic base: to extend the scope of
linguistic description from an isolated sentence-generating single
norm to the structure of speaking as a whole, and to see descrip-
tion of speaking as situated and purposive. In short, to see larger
structure, and to see structure as dependent on explicit broader
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                            107


conceptions of function. But to have presented these matters from
an ethnographic starting-point would have involved a critique of
social anthropology, just as much as the presentation above has
been a critique of linguistics. If linguistics needs to look to the
foundations of its work, social anthropology needs to look to the
linguistic content. It perhaps has a special responsibility and oppor-
tunity to do so, and to this I now turn.

                                         Ill

     There are neglected kinds of knowledge to be made explicit
as goals of analysis in social anthropology as well. I shall be able
to mention only two examples, one having to do with members
of other cultures, one with those who study them.
     A few years ago Max Gluckman wrote on the importance of
gossip and scandal (1963). Among the groups taken as illustrations
(Elizabeth Colson's Makah, English fox-hunting aristocracy), know-
ing how to gossip was found to be essential. This case may be
taken to represent many ethnographic accounts, wherein some
such ability is noted.
     Consider what is entailed. Presumably it is not the case that
gossiping and speaking are the same, that all speech is gossip.
There must then be criteria for recognizing some speech as gossip,
as being better or worse at it, as making mistakes, and as learning
how. In short, members of the group presumably share a knowl-
edge, and have ways of acquiring it, that an ethnographer might
be expected to describe. Typically, ethnographers do not do so.
Ethnographic accounts are rife with terms that in fact denote
ways of speaking, though they are not always recognized to be
such. (For reconstruction of a contrast drawn by Lowie in this
respect between Crow and Hidatsa, see Hymes 1964b.) One may
be told that it is important, for men, say, to be good at a certain
way of speaking. Commonly it is impossible to tell what would
consist of an instance of the activity in question, or what being
good at it would be like. Members of the world's cultures pray,
curse, reproach, taunt, invoke, gossip, answer, instruct, report,
joke, insult, greet, take leave, announce, interpret, advise, preach,
command, inquire, duel verbally, etc., etc. At least they do so in
the language of ethnography. What they would be found to be
doing in terms of their own languages and cultures—or in terms
of a general theory and terminology of speech, one that was sys-
tematic, not an ad hoc adaptation from the ethnographer's culture
—it is seldom possible to tell. Sometimes who may or should
 speak, how, when, and where, to whom, can be glimpsed, but
 seldom in sufficient detail to permit explicit formulation.
108                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

   (Here is a respect in which linguistics has a lesson for ethnog-
raphy. If it does not direct its attention sufficiently to ethnographic
matters, in its own domain it is explicit and vulnerable. Linguists
write rules, or formalize relationships in data in other ways, and
study the conditions in which one or another formalization is to
be preferred, not to ape mathematics, but in order to do a decent
job of work. Rule-writing commits one in explicit terms, as to what
is being claimed and comprised. A good deal of the extension of
ethnography into knowledge of speech is probably best handled
by amplification of linguistic rules to comprise the ethnographic
factors. The attitude to take toward the formalisms involved is to
regard them simply as necessary book-keeping.)
      Straight lexicography would sometimes serve, as when there
is a specific verb stem for an act such as "to tell A in the presence
of B of the bad thing B has said of A" (Wasco Chinook). Transla-
tion itself, of course, would not suffice: "to pronounce" is the best
English gloss for Chinookan -pgna, but the specific constitutive
force of the latter comes out only in its use in ceremonies and
myths (cf. Hymes 1966b). To define the act concealed in the
Chinookan stem that can be politely rendered "to sing of someone
with whom one has slept" requires some knowledge of its place
among possible types of song. Investigation of the stem "to curse"
would lead one into intonation and social relationships; with a
minor exception (qalaq bay a, something like "darn you") there are
no words in the language that are curse-words or obscene in
themselves: cursing and obscenity depend on what is said, in what
way, to whom. Lexicography might stop with recording the only
Chinookan expression analogous to a European greeting (dan
miuxhulal, "what are you doing"); it would not itself lead one to
explore the absence (as in many Amerindian societies) of the
complex greeting patterns found in Africa, or to notice that com-
mon Wasco practice is not to greet someone who joins a group:
courtesy requires that one does not call attention to the newcomer
until he or she no longer is such—a practice in keeping with
another, that one can pay a visit simply by coming and need not
speak, if there is nothing more to convey. To pursue the analysis
of speech acts, then, involves one in ethnography with speaking
as its focus.
      It would be easy to respond that such ethnography might be
interesting but a luxury. In fact, I think it will prove both valuable
and in some respects indispensable. First of all, inquiry into
speaking—just into occasions in which speech is required, optional,
or prescribed—discloses patterns of importance in a culture.
Among Chinookans, for example, investigation of patterns of
expected speech and required silence discloses that certain scenes
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                           109


are defined as formal by the fact that an audience is addressed by
one whose words are repeated from another source, and that both
grammar and conduct reflect a belief that matters dependent on
the future, especially where relations with nature are concerned,
should not be spoken while still uncertain. The pattern unites a
number of practices, including the major ceremony in individual
life (conferring of a name), the central public ideological activity
(myth narration), and the major personal one (the guardian-spirit
quest). For each there is a period in which something said (pro-
nouncement of name, myth, guardian spirit's instructions) can be
quoted but not disclosed in full, and a point at which, having
been validated, the words are repeated in full. In terms of the
pattern, a number of isolated and puzzling items fall into place
(see Hymes 1966b). Again, attention to the interpretation put upon
infant speech may reveal much of the adult culture. Both Chi-
nookans and Ashanti believe that infants share a first language
not the adult one (on native theory, the "native language" is
always a second language). For Chinookans, the baby's talk is
shared with certain spirits, and shamans having those spirits inter-
pret it lest by "dying" it return to the spirit world from which it
came; the attempt is to incorporate the infant communicatively
within the community. Ashanti traditionally exclude infants from
a room in which a woman is giving birth, on the ground that an
infant would talk to the baby in the womb in the special language
they share, and, by warning it of the hardness of life, make it
reluctant to emerge and so cause a hard delivery. The evaluation
of spontaneous speech as intrinsically dangerous (and a pairing of
men: women: culture: nature, in this regard) is brought out in this.
Interpretations of the intent of first utterances—e.g., as an attempt
to name kin (Wogeo), to ask for food (Alorese), to manipulate
(Chaga)—may indeed be something of a projective test for a cul-
ture, as regards adult practices and the valuation placed on speech
itself.
      At the very least, then, analysis of speaking would enhance
ethnographies. Beliefs and practices with regard to children may
be an especially revealing area—one important for general theory,
since the usual commonplaces concerning the role of language in
the transmission of culture are patently inadequate to the great
empirical diversity as to what is and what is not, and how much
is, transmitted verbally. Some attention to speaking is in fact
essential to ethnography itself, if seldom consciously thought of
as part of one's analysis. In learning to get along with informants
and other members of a community, to obtain information and the
like, an ethnographer willy-nilly acquires some working sense of
the very things with which we are here concerned. He or she does
110                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

not normally make that working senpe an object of conscious
attention or reflection. (A number of times such patterns seem to
have come first to awareness in conversation about fieldwork.)
With respect, then, to what may be called the domain of interrog-
ative behavior, investigation of the sort proposed here would
entail no more than making one's own process of investigation
part of the object of study.
     In just this respect social anthropologists can make a vital
contribution to sociolinguistics and the ethnography of speaking,
while perhaps contributing to their own work, whatever its main
concern. A social anthropologist once posed the following prob-
lem: in a Mayan-speaking community in Mexico her questions
were typically responded to by a Mayan expression translatable
as "Nothing." She also noted that children's questions to parents
would receive the same answer. I am not sure how the ethnogra-
phy got done, or what solution was supposed to be drawn out of
a sociolinguistic hat, but clearly, it cannot be the case that mem-
bers of that Mayan community have no way of obtaining informa-
tion from one another. Presumably there are appropriate ways of
ascertaining things one does not already know from others who
know them, and circumstances in which those who know things
think it appropriate to tell them. I would suspect that a direct
question was interpreted as rudeness. (Speakers seem generally
to have and evaluate alternative ways of asking information and
giving commands.) In any case, facts such as these—that among
Araucanians it is an insult to be asked to repeat an answer, that
a prompt answer from a Toba means he has no time to answer
questions, that a Wasco prefers not to answer a question on the
day of its asking, that Aritama prefer intermediaries for request—
point to a sector of behavior that successful ethnographers pre-
sumably master, just as they master some command of the local
language. To make such matters the object of explicit attention
would serve the interests of social anthropology and sociolinguis-
tics both.
      There is a second area in which these two interests appear to
coincide, the study of kinship terms. Formal analysis of kinship
("componential analysis") has sometimes forgotten in practice
what it honors in theory, the need of an ethnographic approach
that treats verbal behavior as situated, as answers to explicit or
implicit questions, whose local status must be determined. Schnei-
der (1969) has brought this point forcibly home. He shows that
analyses of American English kinship terms have conflated two
separate questions: when asked as to relatives, American inform-
ants may understand either biological relationship (relationship at
all) or social relationship (relationship that counts). And he shows
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                           111


that the priority of terms of reference over terms of address is a
dogma at best, and empirically wrong in known cases. In these
respects Schneider's critique of componential analysis is at one
with the critique of linguistics made earlier in this paper. To his
points may be added the question of the setting of questions:
Tulisano and Cole (1965) observe that informants may use differ-
ent terms in introducing kin from those they use in responding to
ethnographers, and Murphy (1967) reports that the Tuareg use a
Sudanese system for explaining kin relations to nonkin, but an
Iroquois system in address and reference among kin themselves.
Conant (1961) has shown that systems of address may be more
revealing than systems of reference, and at the same time contain
other than kinship terms in the narrow sense, and Fischer (1964)
has taken a specific setting, the family, to show the significance of
patterns of address drawing upon several different domains (kin-
ship, pronouns, personal names).
      Social anthropologists are thus familiar in the area of kinship
with exactly the problems that the ethnography of speaking raises
about verbal form in general. The starting-point must be the pur-
poses and strategies of persons in situations: what terms, what
language indeed, what type of system even, are found in the data,
will depend on that. At the same time there is, perhaps, an exten-
sion of focus. The fundamental problem may be seen to be, how
do persons address each other? How are formally and compara-
tively distinct domains (personal names, kin terms, pronouns,
titles, nicknames) integrated in the service of address?
      One value of terms, or modes, of address as a focus is that it
makes so clear that the relation of linguistic form to social setting
is not merely a matter of correlation. Persons choose among alter-
native modes of address, and have a knowledge of what the mean-
ing of doing so may be that can be formally explicated. An
approach that has seemed successful with choice of speech level
in Korean address would be, briefly, as follows: a mode of address
(term, style, speech variety, whatever) has associated with it a
usual, or "unmarked," value—say, formality. Social relationships
and settings have associated with them usual, or "unmarked," val-
ues. When the values of the mode of address and the social
context match—when both, say, are formal—then that meaning
is of course accomplished, together with the meeting of expecta-
tions. When the values do not match—when, say, an informal
mode of address is used in a formal relationship or conversely—
then a special, or "marked," meaning is conveyed. The unmarked
and marked meanings are each defined by a particular rule or
relation, mapping the set of linguistic alternatives onto the set of
social relationships and settings. What the particular marked
112                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

meaning—deference, courtesy, insult, change of status—will be is
of course an empirical question, as are the options available to
the recipient (to overlook, acknowledge, take as irrevocable). Some
generalizations seem likely to emerge, e.g., that mappings of terms
onto categories higher and lower than normal matching have posi-
tive and negative import, respectively.
     I stress this point because there is a strong tendency to con-
sider the relation of linguistic form to setting only in terms of
one-to-one matching. The "rule-governed creativity" of speakers
is not so restricted. "Registers," for example, are not chosen only
because a situation demands them; they may be chosen to define
a situation, or to discover its definition by others (as when the
choice can be taken in two different ways, depending on the
relationship).
     In the study of interrogative behavior and modes of address,
then, social anthropologists would serve their own interests while
dealing with problems essential to an ethnography of speaking.
There are other respects in which the contribution of social anthro-
pology is essential, if it can be secured. I shall indicate four of
these.
     First, as noted above, analysis of the meaning of modes of
address requires knowledge of the "semantics" of social relation-
ships as well as of the semantics of verbal forms. Attempts to
deal with these problems from the standpoint of linguistic mean-
ings alone cannot succeed; nor can treatments in terms of contexts
alone. Each has structure of its own that is essential, but not suffi-
cient. There are ten features of use of second-person pronouns in
Russian, for example, according to Friedrich (1966), not two,
because ten are needed to account for switching and other aspects
of use. Yet this goes against the obvious fact (stressed by Einar
Haugen in discussion in the same volume) that the Russian pro-
nouns do essentially contrast on just the dimensions of authority
and intimacy. If the additional features are packed into the pro-
nouns, one obscures their semantic structure and leaves unex-
plained their varied efficacy in different situations. Nor would it
serve to displace the meaning onto the contexts alone (as Mali-
nowski's approach seemed in danger of doing); that way would lie
sheer confusion. The pronouns, like features of address and style
generally, have "an identificational-contrastive" value, to use the
term of Kenneth Pike (1967), essentially that of authority and dis-
tance versus absence of authority and closeness. The personal
relationships in which the terms are used have also their values
on these dimensions. The additional features seen as needed by
Friedrich contribute to defining the values of these situations. The
actual implications of pronoun use so nicely explicated by Fried-
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                                  113


rich arise from the interaction of the two sets of values, or mean-
ings (taking into account preceding discourse as part of situation).19
In short, semantics and ethnography of speaking simply are not
possible without social anthropology.
     Second, it is essential for sociolinguistics, and ethnography
of speaking as its part, to explain the absence as well as the
presence of phenomena, and their differential elaboration. To take
up again the example of men's and women's ways of speaking:
one needs accounts of cases where there is little differentiation as
well as of cases where there is much; of cases where grammar is
affected and where it is not, in order to explain, if possible, why
the cases where sex is marked in grammar occur. It is not, then,
that intrusion of a social feature into grammar is unimportant;
rather, it represents a particular linguistic means of implementing
a universal function of speaking. An adequate sociolinguistic the-
ory must have something to say about such relationships (cf. Tyler
1965, for a suggestion with regard to one such relationship). In
consequence, one cannot ask for the study of such phenomena
only when they are salient and central to a language or society—
one needs the full range of cases. (And it would be just the other
side of the same error to do as some have suggested, to study such
phenomena under the heading of "marginal linguistics" in just the
cases where they are not central.)
     The point applies to linguistic marking of social status, of
knowledge and responsibility, and any other feature of anthropo-
logical interest.20 Anthropologists have tended to point to obliga-

  19. Cf. Gluckman (1959), where two or three Barotse terms for property
concepts serve complex judicial proceedings, through interaction with a
complex vocabulary for relationships among persons.
  20. Missionary linguists may be specially interested in the conditions in
which a language gives grammatical status to a major theological category,
such as kerygma. The development of an approach to language as situated
action, as against a purely semantic and formal approach, parallels, if much
less successfully, the development of a view of theological interpretation as
directed to kerygma, the proclamation of the Church as an act (and of
Christ, indeed, in some writing, as a word-event) for which one takes
responsibility, as against mere acceptance of institutional authority and
credal propositions. The distinction is grammatical in Siona (Wheeler 1967).
One mode-aspect indicates awareness of the circumstances of the action of
a verb, as opposed to non-awareness (definite:indefinite), and association
with them, as opposed to no responsibility for them (involvement:non-
involvement). Wheeler (1967: 71-73) translated Bible narrative in the
"definite involvement" mode; informants then, and most Siona still, retold
it as they would a myth, or another person's experience, in the "indefinite
non-involvement" mode, "but a few have accepted the Scripture as God's
personal communication to them and narrate it to others in the definite
involvement mode" (p. 73). Cf. Ebeling (1966, ch. I, III (2), VI (3)); Kasper
(1969: 29-32, 42n.l., 47-51); Richardson (1961, ch. 5, ch. 6: 126 ff.), from
Lutheran, Catholic, and Episcopalian standpoints, respectively.
114                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

tory grammatical categories and terminological elaboration as
direct expressions of a society. Here, as elsewhere, there are
always two possibilities, and no general rule to decide between
them in advance: the particular trait may be directly expressive,
or it may be compensatory. Thus, Trukese personal names empha-
size individuality, Nakanai names social relationships—both are
compensatory, on Truk to secure some measure of individuality
amidst pressing social obligation, on Nakanai to remind ambitious
individuals of social obligations (Goodenough 1965). One might
refer to this as the "Chinese music principle," agitated music
accompanying quiet action, quiet music agitated action, in classical
Chinese drama (I owe the example to Kenneth Burke's account of
an experience with the musician Henry Cowell). Moreover, a lan-
guage is never a direct inventory of a culture, but always a selec-
tive metalanguage. The circumstances, and a theory, of linguistic
explicitness ought to be a major problem uniting linguistics and
social anthropology.
      Third, a matter related to the preceding two, it is essential to
sociolinguistics and the ethnography of speaking to develop an
adequate theory of the kinds of speech acts and the dimensions
of speech forms, both as a basis for analyses and as a result of
them. The familiar task of anthropology—of providing compara-
tive perspective—is especially needed here. In a sense this task
could be described as that of providing a truly comparative rhet-
oric, drawing on, but transcending and establishing on a different
basis, the insights of rhetoric and poetics in his own civilization.21
In this respect the problem parallels that which confronted lin-
guistics in reconstructing the basis of grammatical and phono-
logical concepts in the light of the languages of mankind as a
whole, and that which confronted social anthropology in recon-
structing adequate dimensions for the understanding of kinship,
the family, marriage, and the like. To cite two examples of kinds
of problem:
     1. Among the Iatmul, a speaker cites a myth in terms of exo-
teric cliche's, fragmenting its plot, in manifesting the correct
knowledge that proves a kin claim to land while keeping outsiders
in the dark. In contrast, among the Cashinaua of Brazil (Ken Ken-
singer, pers. comm.) the citation of a myth in dispute calls for
verbal exactitude (whereas the ordinary narration may be inter-
rupted, adapted to circumstances, etc.). What are the varieties of
speech acts found with regard to the social function of myths?
Where are they found? And how can their occurrence be
explained?
    21. Cf. ch. 7 and Burke (1950: 43): "We are not so much proposing to
import anthropology into rhetoric, as proposing that anthropologists recog-
nize the factor of rhetoric in their own field."
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                               115


     2. Basil Bernstein has pioneered in the recognition of diverse
varieties of speech within a single community, and with regard to
England he has distinguished elaborated and restricted codes.
Ethnographic data indicate that the three dimensions linked to
these types sort separately: "now-coding" versus "then-coding,"
personal versus positional social control, elaboration versus limi-
tation of verbal form. Thus two Quakers, both remarkable men,
are described as follows:
        G's style has some sparkle at particular points, but, for the
   most part, it is unexciting. B, on the other hand, rose to great
   heights which enabled him to produce memorable and quotable
   prose. If G was asked why individual worship was insufficient,
   and therefore social worship required, his natural tendency was to
   quote the Bible, leaving the matter there, but B could invent an
   appropriate figure of speech. . . . G, to our ears, sounds pious,
   using largely predictable phrases, but B's expressions often have a
   startling freshness. [Trueblood, 1960:146-47]
G was in fact a preacher of great influence through the eastern
and southern United States. Trueblood ascribes the difference in
part to B's being more nearly original in his thought. Neither social
control nor limited verbal form seems involved. Again, among the
Chaga, a proverb, an instance of then-coding par excellence, is
used just because the personal feelings and motives of a child
are taken into account: rather than speak directly to the child,
a proverb is used to call attention indirectly to the matter for
which he is at fault. Again, in a Newfoundland village, the genre
of "cuffing" is precisely an elaboration of verbal form, where, in the
absence of actual news and controversy, argument over a past
occurrence is carried on, but with the rule that personal involve-
ment and feeling disqualify a participant. Faris (1966: 247) reports
that there was marked reaction to his own attempts to gossip or
attempt the technique of the "cuffer," and anxiety that, as a
"stranger," "my information was personal and not the formalized
and routinized communication of local people." (Faris notes that
he did not persist in "cuffing" attempts, but more from lack of
sufficient skill than from community reaction.) Further, whole
communities may seem to contrast on the personal .'positional
control dimension (Arapesh and Manus, according to Mead 1937)
in the handling of speech and communication, but a third inde-
pendent type may also occur (Bali, according to Mead). The occur-
rence and interrelations of these features and dimensions, and
possible related others, badly need crosscultural investigation.
     Fourth, social anthropologists have been concerned to explain
the role and meaning of religion, kinship, myth, etc. As have lin-
guists, they have tended to take the role and meaning of speech
for granted, to note only that it is everywhere important. But it
116                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

is not everywhere important in the same way, to the same extent
or purpose. Communities vary grossly in the sheer amount of
talk, in the place assigned to talk in relation to touch or sight, in
trust or distrust of talk, in the proportion and kinds of roles
dependent on verbal skills (cf. ch. 2). While any one instance of
these phenomena is likely to seem familiar, when two or more
are seen to contrast—e.g. that the Bella Coola chatter incessantly
whereas Paliyan men after the age of forty talk almost not at all
(Gardner 1966)—one begins to see a problem for comparative
analysis. The place of speaking in human lives has hardly begun
to be understood in the ways in which anthropologists would seek
to understand the place of other aspects of life. With religion,
kinship, and the like, one at least can argue in the light of data
from many ethnographic accounts. For speaking, the ethnographic
accounts are still mostly to come.

                                 IV

     Ethnography of speaking, as sketched above, would be a lin-
guistics that had discovered ethnographic foundations, and an
ethnography that had discovered linguistic content, in relation to
the knowledge and abilities for use of knowledge (competence)
of the persons whose communities were studied. "Sociolinguis-
tics," it was said, is a term of a type that mediates between
disciplines. Its currency reflects general recognition that inherited
disciplinary boundaries do not suffice, their unity being as much
social as intellectual. In the study of man, as in Christian churches
and radical movements, once-vital distinctions seem about as per-
tinent to present needs as disputes between medieval baronies.
We can no longer believe wholeheartedly in disciplines with
exclusive claims on levels of reality or regions of the world. The
institutionalizations that confront us appear as obstacles as often
as they do as aids. Pursuing a problem, or a student's training, one
continually finds the unity of both fragmented among disciplines
and faculties.
      Still, I do not think that the answer is to create new disci-
plines, even though sociolinguistics may have in it the makings
of one. What is needed is opportunity to combine the kinds of
training and knowledge required to pursue sociolinguistic prob-
lems, in short, flexibility in institutional structures. Whether the
center be a faculty of linguistics or anthropology or sociology, a
school of English, or some of these jointly, is secondary, and
depends on local conditions and initiatives. What is primary,
given recognition of the field, is the means to pursue it.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                          117


     Anthropology has here a special opportunity and, one might
say, even responsibility. Of the sciences concerned with men, it
has the closest and fullest ties with linguistics. In principle it
already recognizes linguistic research as part of its concern, and
already includes some acquaintance with language and linguistics
in its training. The required combination of training in linguistics
and in social analysis can perhaps be effected under the aegis of
anthropology more readily than under any other. (Important here
also is the humanistic aspect of anthropology, its ties with atten-
tion to texts and verbal art.) There being a social need for such
training, anthropology would enhance its recognized relevance in
sponsoring it. And insofar as the internal unity and direction of
anthropology are in question, it may be fair to say that problems
of the sort described in this paper could be one center of unity,
a new one that would be yet in some respects but a renewal of
some of anthropology's oldest concerns at the center of contem-
porary social and scientific problems.
Chapter 5

Bilingual Education:
Linguistic vs.
Sociolinguistic Bases

     Bilingual education is a sociolinguistic subject par excellence.1
The skills of linguists are both necessary and insufficient. The
role of linguistics in research on bilingual education may seem to
be a matter only of application of a linguistics already given. The
contrary is the case. Research on bilingual education requires a
kind of linguistics not yet fully constituted. The use of linguistics
in such research challenges linguistics to develop conceptual and
methodological tools able to deal adequately with the place of
speech in human life—with the place of actual speech competen-
cies in actual lives.
     A goal of education, bilingual or other, presumably is to
enable children to develop their capacity for creative use of lan-
guage as part of successful adaptation of themselves and their
communities in the continuously changing circumstances charac-
teristic of contemporary life. And linguistics indeed has already
addressed itself to this goal, as witnessed by the concern within
descriptive theory for the "creative aspect of language use"

    1. This chapter was first published in the Bilingualism and Language
Contact: Anthropological, Linguistic, Psychological Aspects, and Sociological
Aspects, Report of the 21st annual Round Table, ed. by James E. Alatis
(Monograph Series on Languages and Linguistics, 23) (Washington, D.C.:
Georgetown University Press, 1970), pp. 69-76. An abstract and remarks
directed to the context of the occasion have been omitted; the concluding
three paragraphs and last footnote have been added to round out the argument.

                                                                         119
120                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

(Chomsky 1965,1966) and the recognition of the role of the child's
first language long advocated by many linguists and anthropolo-
gists. In both respects, however, linguistics falls short until it is
able to deal with ways of speaking in relation to social meanings
and situations, until, in short, the starting point of description is
not a sentence or text, but a speech event; not a language, but a
repertoire of ways of speaking; not a speech community defined
in equivalence to a language, but a speech community defined
through the concurrence of rules of grammar and rules of use.
      The leading view of the nature of linguistic competence and
creativity has been dubbed "Cartesian linguistics" (Chomsky
1966), not as a historically exact label, but in recognition of a
direction given to theory of language in the period following Des-
cartes by an emphasis on the nature of mind as prior to experience,
and an analytic, universalizing, reconstituting methodology (cf.
Cassirer 1955, ch. 1, "The Philosophy of the Enlightenment"). In
similar vein, one may dub a subsequent tradition of thought
'Herderian linguistics' (Hymes 1970a), not as a historically exact
label, but in recognition of a direction given to theory of language
in the period following Herder (1744-1801) by an emphasis on
language as constituting cultural identity (cf. Barnard 1965: 117,
118, 142), and on a methodology of sympathetic interpretation of
cultural diversity sui generis—Herder coined the German verb
einfiihlen—if within a larger universal framework. (The two tra-
 ditions might be labeled "Enlightenment" and "Romantic," but the
individual names perhaps are better, in that they less imply two
mutually exclusive periods, or simple uniformity within each.)
       "Cartesian" and "Herderian" approaches have contributed
 much to our knowledge of language. In the past the differences
 between the two approaches have been salient, but here what
 matters most is what they have fundamentally in common: isola-
 tion of a language as the object of linguistic description; equation
 of a language with a speech community (or culture); taking of the
 social functions of language as external, given, and universally
 equivalent; restriction of study of the structure of language to
 units and relations based on reference.
       The emergence of sociolinguistics is in important part a
 response to social needs; but as an intellectual stage in the history
 of linguistics, the recent history of sociolinguistics can be seen as
 a response to the hegemony of Cartesian and Herderian assump-
 tions, first, by critical analysis of the assumptions themselves, and,
 secondly, by effort to replace them. Just as Boas, Sapir, Bloom-
 field, Pike, and others can be seen as concerned to develop
 concepts and methods adequate to the description of all languages,
 so the current work of Ervin-Tripp, Fishman, Gumperz, Labov, and
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                              121


others can be seen as concerned to develop concepts and methods
adequate to the description of speech communities. And where
Boas, Sapir, Bloomfield, Pike, and others had to empty some con-
cepts of normative or ethnocentric content (e.g. "inflection,"
"incorporation" vis-a-vis compounding), extend some (e.g. mor-
pheme), and invent others (e.g. phoneme), with regard to grammars,
so have contributors to sociolinguistics today the task of empty-
ing, extending, and4nventing with regard to the identification and
organization of ways of speaking.
     The concern with competence and creativity in Chomsky's
Cartesian linguistics is an advance toward sociolingistics, but, on
analysis, an advance more nominal than real. To make competence
central, rather than la langue, to reconcile the sphere of creativity
with that of structure, does focus discussion on actual human
beings and their abilities, and regard them as acquirers and
shapers of culture, rather than merely as "culture-bearers." Just
such a transformation "was projected for anthropology and lin-
guistics by Sapir in his last writings (see discussion in Hymes
1970b and ch. 7). But whereas Sapir turned attention to "living
speech," understood as requiring that received categories be recon-
sidered within the matrix of social interaction, Chomsky's "Car-
tesian" linguistics seems a cogent, thoroughly thought out perfec-
tion of the impulse to the autonomy of language that spurred so
much of structural linguistics and in an earlier stage, Sapir
himself. From origin as possibly a physico-chemical accident
to the assumptions of wholly fluent use free of situation in a
homogenous community, any dependence of language on social
interaction and adaptation is excluded.
      In effect, Cartesian linguistics reduces "competence" to knowl-
edge of grammar, "performance" to behavior, and "creativity" to
novelty. Those concerned with linguistic aspects of education and
with sociolinguistic theory must thank Chomsky for making com-
petence and creativity central to linguistic theory, but must recon-
struct the concepts for themselves.2
      Indeed a sociolinguistic critique of the conception of language
made explicit in Cartesian linguistics is markedly parallel to the
critique by Marx of Feuerbach, from whom he learned, but whose
limitations he had to transcend. By substituting "he" (or "Car-
tesian linguistics") for "Feuerbach," and "linguistic" for "reli-
gious," one has a remarkably applicable statement:

       He resolves the linguistic essence into the human essence.
   But the essence of man is no abstraction inhering in each single

    2. Chomsky's treatment of "competence," "performance," and "creative
aspect of language use" is discussed in more detail in ch. 4.
122                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

  individual. In its actuality it is the ensemble of social relationships.
       He, who does not go into the criticism of this actual essence,
  is hence compelled:
         (1) to abstract from the historical process and to establish
             linguistic intuition as something self-contained, and to
             presuppose an abstract—isolated—human individual;
         (2) to view the essence of man merely as "species," as the
             inner dumb generality which unites the many individuals
             naturally (i.e. not socially).
                                           [Easton and Guddat 1967: 402]
I do not think one can abandon some conception of a generic
human nature (human essence), as the thesis might be taken as
saying; but the man for whom Chomsky's competence and theory
is a model is indeed an isolated man in the abstract. There is
nothing to be said about men (or women).
      Cartesian and Herderian linguistics differ most obviously with
regard to the place of differences among languages. There is not,
to be sure, a complete opposition. The most celebrated early figure
in the Herderian tradition, W. von Humboldt, was concerned with
universals as well as specific difference, as were Boas, Sapir, and
Whorf later. Indeed, what Herder, von Humboldt, and Goethe are
linked by is a conception of form that links the individual and
universal. The notion of form is linked to that of creativity and
individuality both, so that in contrast to the Cartesian sense of
particularity and uniqueness of personality (language, culture) as
negative limitation, such limitation is seen as positive. It is not
the absence of universality, but realization of a universal power.
The universal finds realization only in the actuality of the particu-
lar; form is truly acquired only through the power of self-formation
(Cassirer 1961: 20-25). (On this development, see Cassirer 1950:
224-25, 252; 1955: 32-36; 1961: 20-26. On von Humboldt as having
found his way into the study of language through his concern with
the characterization of individuals and individual peoples, see
Lammers 1930 and Leroux 1958: 69, n. 2).
      Chomsky treats von Humboldt in terms of his continuity with
the general approach of the Enlightenment; he acknowledges but
omits much of that aspect of von Humboldt which, according to
Cassirer, is his distinctive achievement. He follows von Humboldt
in concern with the universal power, but neglects von Humboldt's
understanding of form as something not given, but historically
emergent and acquired. 3 The treatment of von Humboldt is in
keeping with the treatment of competence and creativity.
    3. One might argue that transformational generative grammar ought by
rights to be especially concerned, as was von Humboldt, with individual
form. By establishing that marked departures from universal, or natural,
features and relations entail costs, it is able to recognize the great extent to
which languages, or rather their speakers, pay such costs, and to appreciate
the power of the sociohistorical forces that motivate such payment.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                          123


     The Herderian approach, as developed by von Humboldt, is
indeed the approach needed in sociolinguistics. The focus, how-
ever, must be changed from a language as correlate of a people, to
persons and their ways of speaking. The inadequacy of a mono-
lingual approach has long been recognized and, indeed, no one
has ever denied the obvious facts of multilingualism, the preva-
lence of linguistic diversity in the world. The difficulty remains
that in informal thought one tends to fall back on the Herderian
model of one language, one people, one culture, one community—
the Hopi and their language, etc., (on the persistence of "savage
anthropology" of this sort, see Fontana 1968), because we are only
beginning to have sociolinguistic models and taxonomies adequate
to thinking in terms of multilingual situations. But, as the work of
Gumperz, Labov, and others has shown, more than plurarity of
languages is involved.
     First of all, what counts as a language boundary cannot be
defined by any purely linguistic measure. Attitudes and social
meanings enter in as well. Any enduring social relationship or
group may come to define itself by selection and/or creation of
linguistic features, and a difference of accent may be as important
at one boundary as a difference of grammar at another. Part of the
creativity of users of languages lies in the freedom to determine
what and how much linguistic difference matters. The alternative
view, indeed a view often taken, conceals an unsuspected linguis-
tic determinism. (For a recent issue of this sort, involving the
notion of ethnic unit and mutual intelligibility, cf. Hymes 1968b.)
     Secondly, speech communities cannot be defined in terms of
languages alone in another respect. A person who is a member of
a speech community knows not only a language but also what to
say. A person who can produce all and any of the sentences of a
language, and unpredictably does, is institutionalized. For some
range of situations, itself to be empirically determined and per-
haps varying significantly across communities, a competent mem-
ber of the speech community knows what to say next. And speech
rules may be shared across language boundaries, not only in
space but also through time. The Ngoni of Africa, for example,
mostly no longer speak Ngoni, but use the language of the people
in Malawi whom they conquered. However, they use it in Ngoni
ways, ways whose maintenance is considered essential to their
identity. Analagous situations obtain in some American Indian
communities in the use of English.
     In general, both theory and relevance to education require
that one break with the equation between a named language and
 a functional role. Beyond cognitive differences possibly attrib-
utable to differences of language, there are cognitive differences
due to differences in speaking. There is interference not only
124                                    FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

between phonologies and grammars, but also between norms of
interaction and interpretation of speech. One must take the van-
tage point of the person acquiring competence in speech in a com-
munity, and discover the number and organization of ways of
speaking that result.
     In sum, there is no quarrel with the Cartesian concern for
universals and the human mind. There is much concern with the
Herderian stress upon individuation and emergent form. Only the
focus of theory arid description changes, from rules of language
to rules of speaking. It is the latter that are fundamental, embrac-
ing the former as one constituent. And an understanding of rules
of speaking is indispensable to understanding failures and to
increasing success in bicultural education.4
     I should not end with the implication that the contribution is
all in one direction, from sociolinguistics to education. Work in
bicultural education, and in education generally, is important to
the development of sociolinguistics. Scientific and practical inter-
ests in understanding of ways of speaking coincide, and indeed,
the practical interests may not only contribute to, but shape the
future of the subject. For one thing, linguists are indispensable
to the work that is needed, but what some of us argue on linguistic
grounds may be advanced on practical grounds with greater effect.
Concern with education, more than concern with theory, may
cause linguists to recognize how far brave talk about the nature
of language and of mind is from being of use to the minds and
languages of children; how far intuitions of relationships and
contexts are from being adequate to the relationships and settings
of discourse in classrooms and communities.
     Again, those who are "native" to the contexts of communica-
tion in communities and classrooms are indispensable sources of
insight into the features, and organizations of features, of speech,
that matter there. And change can be accomplished only if the
participants in classrooms become participants in the ethnography
of the speaking in classrooms. No sociolinguistic finding, however
valid, can be effective if merely published, announced, or even
imposed, if on persons who misunderstand and resist it.
     In sum, theoretical considerations call linguistics to become
a social science; social considerations call linguistics to become a
community science. Concern with education may be the key to the
realization of this vocation.
    4. Philips 1972 is an outstanding demonstration of this point. The
present paper was in origin an introduction to the first version of her paper
(Philips 1970); see now the revised conclusion in Philips (1972). The
volume containing her revised paper has an introduction (Hymes 1972b) in
which I develop the theme of this and the remaining paragraphs in detail;
the entire volume is relevant.
Chapter 6

The Contribution of Folklore
to Sociolinguistic Research



     The folklorist is accustomed (inured might be the word) to
having some other discipline, such as linguistics, pointed out to
him as important to folklore. 1 1 should like to point out the impor-
tance of folklore for work in linguistics. Certain lines of folkloristic
research, I maintain, are essential to the progress of the trend in
linguistic research called "sociolinguistic."
     What is the task of sociolinguistic research? It is, in my view,
to lay the foundations for an adequate understanding of the place
of language in social life. But have not a good many scholars been
about that task for a considerable period of time? Very partially,
and very inadequately. The plain fact is that speech, the true
nexus between language and social life, has been largely neglected.
It has not been studied in its own right.
     Linguists have observed speech but have systematically

     1. This chapter is adapted from the paper of the same title published in
the Journal of American Folklore, 84 (331): 42-50 (1971) as part of an issue on
"Toward new perspectives in folklore" with Richard Bauman as special
editor. The issue has also been published as a book, Toward New Perspec-
tives in Folklore, ed. by Ame'rico Paredes and Richard Bauman (Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1971). The paper was read at the annual meeting
of the American Folklore Society, Atlanta, November 7, 1969, and I should
like to thank the program chairman, Dan Ben-Amos, for inviting me to
participate. I should like to dedicate this chapter to my teacher, Stith
Thompson, with whom I first studied the ethnography of folklore.

                                                                           125
126                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

analyzed just those aspects of it that have answered to problems
of formal grammar. They have abstracted from speech as a struc-
tured activity. Social and expressive aspects of speech have been
attended to only when they have intruded inescapably into gram-
mar. One can hardly characterize personal pronouns, for example,
without noting that certain pronouns identify the role of speaker,
others that of hearer, or even that the same pronoun may be plural
or singular in reference, depending on social relationships. But a
more exact or general study of the rules governing the interaction
between participants in speech events has been left aside.
     Anthropologists and other social scientists have used the data
of speech, but typically they have abstracted from its linguistic
characteristics. They have usually gone straight through the form
of speech to get at its content, what speaking is presumed to be
about. They may discuss the importance of a verbal genre, such
as myth or gossip. Almost never do they specify what one would
need to know to recognize an instance of a verbal genre or to
perform it. They do not characterize the ways in which what is
said is a function of how it is said.
     Exaggerating the situation perhaps to an unfair extreme, we
may say that from linguists we have grammars, in terms of which
(in principle) everything grammatical that a language permits can
be said; but in terms of which any particular thing is as likely as
any other, whether it be nonsense, a greeting, a chemical formula,
a quotation from the Gettysburg Address, a proposition, or an
answer to a question that has not been asked, and in any style or
none. From anthropologists we have ethnographies, in terms of
which (in principle) what the members of a community do can be
understood; but only if one subscribes to the implicit convention
that they do it in silence, or that when they greet, command,
request, promise, gossip, insult, pray, narrate, announce, invoke,
curse, wheedle, orate, glaver, or dispute, the fact that they are
doing one or the other has nothing to do with the way it is said.
In short, linguists have abstracted from the content of speech,
social scientists from its form, and both from the patterning of
its use.
     It might seem that little of importance is at stake; a certain
kind of information slips away between the two approaches—that
of grammar and that of ethnography—but nothing consequential.
In my view, quite the opposite is the case. We shall not be able
to have a theory that accounts for the meaning of language in
different lives and cultures, that can deal with the many linguistic
problems of the contemporary world, until we examine this "slip-
page" and reconstruct the study of language from its vantage point
—that of the actual functioning of language.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                             127


      The situation has not been seen for what it is partly because
we are accustomed to generalize statements as to the functions of
language, commonplaces as to the great importance of language in
general. These commonplaces do us a disservice. Praising language
in general, they obscure the need to study just what functions it
does have in particular cases. They lead us to act as though
language has the same functions in every community (indeed,
that all languages have the same functions and that each com-
munity has just one language having these functions). The facts
are otherwise. Hockett (1958: 535), for example, generalizes, "The
story-teller must be a fluent and effective speaker. . . ." But among
the Gbeya of Central Africa no one is regarded as skilled in narra-
tion (Samarin 1969: 323). Malinowski (1923) has stressed "phatic
communion," talking for the sake of talking. The Wishram Chinook
of the Columbia River take just the opposite view; one does not
talk when one has nothing that needs to be said (personal field-
work). Sapir (1933a) has written of the tendency to fill up one's
world with language; but among the Paliyans of south India, by
the age of forty men are reported to speak almost not at all, and
a communicative person is regarded with suspicion (Gardner
1966). Often one reads of the role of language in the transmission
of culture, the social heritage, but among many peoples the great
bulk of adult roles and skills are transmitted nonverbally.
      It has often been said that language is an index to or reflection
of culture. But language is not simply passive or automatic in its
relation to culture, even where there is only one language to con-
sider (much of the world of course being multilingual). Speaking
is itself a form of cultural behavior, and language, like any other
part of culture, partly shapes the whole; and its expression of the
rest of culture is partial, selective. That selective relation, indeed,
is what should be interesting to us. Why do some features of a
community's life come to be named—overtly expressible in dis-
course—while others are not? Why do communities differ in the
extent to which language, or a language, serves this function of a
"metalanguage" to the rest?
      To speak of the functional importance of language, or of folk-
lore, has sometimes been a way of saying something nice about
the subject without getting down to cases. Such statements seem
to recommend study of the subject; but after all, if the most impor-
tant general conclusion is already known, why go to the trouble?
When one speaks of language or folklore as an index or reflection
of culture, it may be that one is trying to persuade the student of
culture in general that our special study is relevant—it fits. But
this sort of argument presupposes that culture is not to be found
in the special subject, and when analyzed it defeats its own intent.
128                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

If language or folklore is a simple reflex of culture, there is no
reason other than personal predilection for the serious student of
culture to consider it further. "Oh yes," he would be able to say
(having studied a culture apart from its language or folklore), "if
you examine the language (or folklore) you will find that it fits."
     From the standpoint of a serious interest in language and
folklore as aspects of culture, the ways in which each is partly
autonomous and partly a self-governing factor in the life of a
community are precisely what make their study necessary. The
ways in which language and folklore differ in function from one
community to another are the most revealing. Indeed, a case in
which a language or a body of folklore is not important, or not
important in a particular way, is important to scientific theory.
Such a case contributes to explanation of the conditions that
govern importance.
     A considerable list could be given of the ways in which com-
munities differ with regard to. the functions of language—the
amount, frequency, and kinds of speech that, are typical; the valu-
ation of speech with respect to other modes of communication;
and the valuation of different languages and ways of speaking.
Just as it is not possible to speak glibly of the function of myth
(or of any other folkloristic genre), since it is necessary to investi-
gate its functioning in the particular community, so with genres of
speech generally and language itself.
     To build a systematic theory we require what I have called
"ethnographies of speaking." How does folklore contribute to this
goal? Ultimately in many ways, but most immediately, I think,
with respect to the concepts of performance and of genre.
     The term "performance" has come into prominence in recent
folkloristic research. In the most ambitious and challenging effort
so far to integrate linguistic and social aspects of a folkloristic
genre with a descriptive model and explanatory theory, Lomax
(1968: 155-61) refers to "the performance orientation of the
research." He treats performance situation, rules of performance,
and particularly five levels of performance style in song. Abrahams
(1968) states that "what is needed is a method which would
emphasize all aspects of the esthetic performance," and has devel-
oped (1970b) a pioneering analysis of "gossip as performance."
Ben-Amos (1967, 1971: 5) writes that "the performance situation,
in the final analysis, is the crucial context for the available text."
     It would not be correct to say that there is an agreed definition
of "performance" among these or other authors; but there is, I
think, a common thrust. Lomax focuses his use of "performance"
upon the norms governing relations among performers, singling
out the following as the primary conditions of any performance:
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                               129


        1. The size of the vocal group, one or many
        2. The interplay, if any, between the leader and the chorus
        3. The degree of dominance of the leader, if any
        4. The level of organization within the group
The five levels discovered in his research are designated as "inter-
locked," "simple social unison," "overlap," "simple alteration,"
and "solo and explicit." The relation of performer to audience is
implicitly defined, ranging from no distinction—all present in the
group participating in performance—to solo—necessarily defined
by the presence of others who are not performing (Lomax 1968:
155-61).
      Abrahams (1968: 144-45; see also Abrahams 1970a, 1971) has
a somewhat different focus, one linking the notion of performance
as a structured event to performance as stylized behavior. When
he specifies the components of the esthetic performance as "per-
formance, item, and audience" he seems to have in mind a struc-
tured event, entailing reciprocity (mutual participation between
performer and audience as the general focus), with the stylized
behavior of the performer also designated "performance" in a
more specific sense. Such usage of a term on two levels of gen-
erality is common in science as well as in daily life; compare the
use of "grammar" both for the general object of linguistic descrip-
tion and for a component of it distinct from phonology.
      Ben-Amos argues for a redefinition of folklore, as concerned
not with things, but with a communicative process. In delineating
his conception, he stresses, as do Lomax and Abrahams, a relation
between performer, esthetically marked (stylized) material, and
audience. Dundes (Arewa and Dundes 1964), on the other hand, has
shown the difference between knowing folklore materials and
knowing how to use them, and has shown ways to study folklore as
communication in terms of rules of use (see also Ben-Amos 1969).
      The essential element common to all these approaches is the
 movement from a focus on the text to a focus on the communica-
tive event. The term "context" takes on a new meaning, or new
 force in this regard. To place a text, an item of folklore, in its
 context is not only to correlate it with one or more aspects of the
 community from which it came. Or if that is what "context"
 means, then the new direction goes beyond a merely "contextual"
 approach. It is not content to take folkloristic results on the one
 hand and results of other studies on the other, each independently
 arrived at, and then to try to relate the two after the fact. It wishes
 to study the relation between folkloristic materials and other
 aspects of social life in situ, as it were, where that relation actually
 obtains, the communicative events in which folklore is used.
      This concern is precisely parallel to the motivation of socio-
130                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

linguistic research into the ethnography of speaking. The theo-
retical failure of past attempts to relate language and culture has
resulted from just such a lack. In discussing language and culture,
one was discussing grammars and ethnographies from which the
essential ingredient in which the relation exists—speaking—was
missing. Adequate theories of the place of folklore, as of language,
in social life must be based on studies of use.
     So far only a convergence of approach has been sketched, one
to which, indeed, some of the early writing on the ethnography of
speaking has already contributed (see the review by Hendricks
1967). It can be maintained, indeed, that folklore is a special case
of the ethnography-of-speaking approach. Whatever one's view
on that, my concern here is that folklore has a special contribution
to make. The study of stylized genres in communicative events
has a critical role to play because it can direct attention to essen-
tial features of language that are now neglected or misconceived
in linguistic theory. Let me briefly indicate how this is so.
     From its beginnings early in this century, modern linguistics
has slighted the study of the use of language. Ferdinand de Saus-
sure's twin conceptions of la langue and la parole have commonly
been interpreted to mean that linguistics had for its object only
la langue, and that that was the exclusive domain of structure.
There have been notable exceptions (men like Sapir and Jakob-
son), who have thought through a broader, dynamic approach to
language; but the main trend in linguistic theory has been as
described. Recently Noam Chomsky has substituted the terms
"competence" and "performance" for de Saussure's la langue and
la parole. Nominally the substitution is an important advance.
"Competence" and "performance" imply abilities and actions,
rather than as "language" does an object of study abstracted from
human beings and their behavior. The improvement, however,
has remained merely nominal.
     Here is the rub. In studying verbal performance, both in socio-
linguistics and folklore, we need to be able to specify the verbal
means employed. Linguists must contribute their skills, yet the
dominant trend in linguistics today is in quite the opposite direc-
tion. The skills that are mostly taught and cultivated in linguistics
are those for unravelling the logical properties of syntax and
semantic relations internal to language conceived as an idealized
norm, used only for referential utterances. Judgments as to the
acceptability of utterances are sought intuitively, not from use in
the community. The model of explanation is to relate diverse utter-
ances to a common underlying source in the basic structure of a
language, and perhaps to a deeper source in the human brain.
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                             131


There is little attention to the skills that would disclose the social
properties of syntax, semantics, and phonology as used in situa-
tions. There is little or no awareness of a direction of explanation
that would relate an underlying structure to the conditions for
selection of the alternative ways of saying it. Most of all, there
is no adequate conception of language as having organization
beyond the sentence—and even the text—in terms of speech acts
and speech events.
      There is indeed a good deal of work on discourse and style,
but when all is said and done, it will only have arrived at a point
already recognized in folklore as a limit to overcome, the text iso-
lated from context. Moreover, the main thrust of such work is to
seek relations beyond or larger than the sentence, through the
distribution of elements already identified within the sentence.
There is little or no attention to aspects of language that are
obvious and essential to folkloristic research—features of empha-
sis and expressivity not part of the referential organization of the
language, organization of features into coherent styles, or ways of
speaking, that cut across the compartments of the ordinary gram-
matical description; organization of speech into acts in ways that
are independent of the sentence as a unit, now comprising more
than one sentence, now occurring within a sentence. For example,
the same insult (serious or jocular) conveyed by the first of two
sentences: "You're a bastard. Do you know what you've done?"
Or a sentence part: "You bastard, do you know what you've
done?" And by an intonation, alone with the words: "Do you
know what you've done?"
      Such are the strengths of trained incapacity that it is difficult
 to get many linguists even to see the existence of such phenomena,
 let alone to admit their relevance. Elsewhere I have tried to show
 the necessity of attending to such matters within linguistics itself
 and developed a critique of the notions of "competence" and "per-
 formance" that stand in the way of such attention (see chs. 4, 7).
 There is no opportunity to go into these arguments in detail here
 or to present evidence indicating what consideration of language
 from the new standpoint would be like. I should like simply to
 summarize some of the ways in which folkloristic research both
 challenges and is challenged by the linguistic outlook described
 above.
       1. Chomsky's attitude is rather neoplatonic. Competence is an
 ideal grammatical knowledge: performance, the use of language,
 is largely an imperfect falling away. Folklore recognizes the use of
 language as a positive accomplishment, and not only in literature
 with a capital L but in the verbal art of ordinary people and com-
132                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

munities. Folklore, par excellence, understands the normal use of
language as drawing on kinds of knowledge and organization that
are parts of "competence" beyond the purely grammatical.
     2. Chomsky's idealization of the "fluent speaker-user" in a
homogeneous community makes the object of linguistics implicitly
an abstract individual. There is nothing for linguistics to study
that is not part of, or product of, the knowledge of such an indi-
vidual. In its analysis of performance, folklore recognizes the
differentiation of knowledge and competence within a community
with regard to speaking; it recognizes the structure that obtains
beyond the individual in the norms of interaction of communica-
tive events; and it recognizes the emergent properties of such
interactions, both normally and as specific to particular perform-
ances (as when an audience is "warm" or "cold").
     3. Chomsky's conception of the "creative aspect of language
use" reduces "creativity" to novelty. This indeed is the focal point
of his theoretical impact on linguistics—a conception of linguistics
as concerned with explaining the use of language as an indefinitely
large number of new sentences. As alluded to in the preceding
section, this approach cannot accomplish its own goal, that of
explaining the occurrence of novel sentences that are accepted as
appropriate, since its linguistics accounts only for the novelty of
the sentences, not for their appropriateness. Appropriateness is a
relation between sentences and settings, and the settings must be
analyzed as well. Moreover, creativity may consist in the use of
an old sentence in a new setting just as much as in the use of a
new sentence in an old setting. More than any other discipline,
folklore is in a position to develop the implications of this fact in
a general theory of the "creative aspect of language use." Only
with the aid of folklore can we hope to understand the meaning
of language in social life and in comprehensive terms. For the
role of language is not only to enable persons to adapt to new
situations with novel utterances but also to do so with familiar
utterances. We have to explain familiarity as well as novelty of
utterance. We have to account for what people wish to or must
say again. I apologize for emphasizing something that is well
known to folklorists; my excuse is that it is ignored in linguistics.
     4. Linguists who concern themselves with such matters tend
to work from grammar, from what is familiar to what is unfa-
miliar. Experience shows, I think, that such an approach is not
sufficient. It consists in seeking additional organization and func-
tion for familiar elements and structures. In fact, some of the
organization of linguistic means can only be discovered by start-
ing with higher level functions and contents, such as acts and
genres. There is no internal linguistic makeup that would lead one
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                           133


 to group together "See you later, alligator," "Ta Ta," "Au revoir,"
 "Don't take any wooden nickels," "Glad you could come," and
"I'm going, I'm going," as leave-takings or "Hi" and "Well, I'll be
a son of a gun, if it isn't Sid Mintz" as greetings. Moreover, any
social relationship or event tends to develop an organization of
verbal means (perhaps some innovation of means) specific to
itself. By working from the usual grammatical description of a
language, one would never arrive at many of the features and
relationships detectable to a folklorist working toward language
from the analysis of a communicative event.
      5. The perspective and sensitivity of the trained folklorist is
requisite to recognizing what goes on in speech in yet another,
quite general way. There is, of course, the matter of recognizing
well-known traditional materials and genres. It must strike a folk-
lorist as odd indeed that a major work on the English language
(Chomsky and Halle 1968) can discuss the internal organization of
"This is the cat that caught the rat that stole the cheese" without
mentioning the internal rhyme (cat, rat), let alone noting the exist-
ence of a traditional way of chanting it. More vital is the fact that
even if the performance is identified with stylization, rather than
with behavior, there is a continuum, not a dichotomy. In many
communities, as Abrahams points out, almost all public verbal
behavior will be stylized. Here I must go beyond one possible
implication of Ben-Amos' statement that "Folklore . . . is a social
interaction via the art media and differs from other modes of
speaking and gesturing" (1967; 1972: 10). I think the folklorist has
a contribution to make, not just to one mode of speaking, but to all.
      What is folklore? Forgive me for raising this fundamental
question just towards the end of a paper, but let me consider it in
respect to two kinds of criteria that seem of great interest today.
One approach is to define folklore in terms of the study of genres,
the other to define folklore in terms of the study of communicative
behavior with an esthetic, expressive, or stylistic dimension. In
my opinion all of speaking is to be approached as having an
 organization in terms of ways of speaking, and thus as manifesta-
tions of a community's repertory of acts and genres of speech.
 There is no speech that is not an instance of some such act and
 genre. Again, I think that all speech is to be approached as having
 an esthetic, expressive, or stylistic dimension. The stylistic and
 referential are interwoven and interdependent in all of communi-
 cation. Obviously there are degrees here, both of organization and
 of esthetic or expressive quality, and folklorists will be most con-
 cerned with the more highly organized, more expressive end of the
 two continua. But because the ethnography of speaking can be
 said to have as its goal a view of the speech of a community as
134                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

ways of speaking, and as always conventionally expressive, it is
of the greatest importance to have the contribution of those who
are best trained to attain this goal in any discipline. If linguistics
has certain necessary skills to contribute to folklore, there are
certain necessary skills that folklore has to contribute to linguistics.
      The contribution of folklore to sociolinguistic research may
provide a special opportunity for the development of folklore
itself. A linguist cannot help reflecting that the two fields were in
much the same situation earlier in this century in the United
States. Both linguistics and folklore were interdisciplinary activi-
ties, contributed to by students of English, modern languages, and
anthropology. Although it attained a separate professional asso-
ciation and its own journal much later than folklore, linguistics
burgeoned rapidly following World War II, while folklore did not.
The rapid development of linguistics was due, I think, to the
development of an autonomous methodology, that of structural
linguistics. The new methodology provided for the discovery of
new kinds of units and organization in language. The analysis of
verbal performance in terms of genres and expressivity may now
offer folklore a similar opportunity.
Chapter 7

The Contribution of Poetics
to Sociolinguistic Research


      Language as symbolic action1 is for those for whom linguistics
is linked to poetics and rhetoric, and to insights that can be gained
from study of the workings of words and motives in significant
texts.
      The author is not concerned with recent trends in linguistics.
The present book (15), does cite Sapir, and an essay exploring the
ways in which the notion of words as the signs of things can be
reversed (359-79) is reprinted from Anthropological        Linguistics;
Boas is cited in an ethnographic connection; and I am mentioned
for a suggestion as to the interpretation of the novel Nightwood,
and for an ethnographic anecdote that led to publication of the
paper just cited (243, 360); but the gap is patent in Burke's state-
ment that his essays are intended to exemplify "a theory of lan-
guage (as symbolic action), a philosophy of language based on that
theory, and methods of analysis developed in accordance with the
theory and the philosophy" (vii). Burke's insights and style of
exposition and evidence, moreover, are rooted in literature—in
assimilation of major works of Western tradition, on the one
     1. This chapter was first published as a review of Language as Symbolic
Action: Essays on Life, Literature, and Method, by Kenneth Burke (Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1966), in Language 44:
664-69. Page references for the Burke volume are given in parentheses in the
text. I want to thank the editor, William Bright, for giving me the oppor-
tunity to write about Burke in this Journal.

                                                                        135
136                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

hand, and intimate acquaintance with the rise of modern American
literature, on the other. The range and originality are impressive,
but to many linguists the enterprise will seem wholly foreign.
Thus the essay on the origin of language (419-79) is concerned,
not with formal universals, but with the^principle of the negative
as a distinctively human trait embodied in language (recalling
Whitehead's reported challenge to Skinner to explain language by
explaining the statement, "There is no black spider on this table").
      Nevertheless, underlying parallels can be found between
Burke's work and recent trends in linguistics, and there are possi-
bilities of convergence of the two. Indeed, it would seem that
Burke has been first in the field, commonly enough by a genera-
tion, with regard to standpoints toward language that recent lin-
guists take to be recent on the American scene. He is still ahead of
us in some respects. It is worthwhile to place the man, and see
what he is up to.
      As user of language, Burke is a recognized poet; author of an
early collection of short stories and an admired novel (1932) just
reprinted (the preface and text adumbrate the motives of his turn
to generic concern with language); and, since the beginning of the
thirties, writer of essays, reviews, and books that have found
audience among political scientists, sociologists, social psycholo-
gists, and anthropologists, as well as students of literature (cf. his
dissection of the verbal techniques used for scapegoating, 1957:
164-88), and "Freud and the analysis of poetry," 1957:221-50). A
great autodidact and trenchant nonconformist, with but one year
of college, he has become a major and honored figure in American
literary life, yet has maintained autonomy of life style and thought,
never closed off from the sources of his own experience.
      By principal profession, Burke is a literary critic, but of a
special sort. His concern with symbolic motivation and linguistic
action in general has led him beyond literary criticism. That fact
has opened him to attack from other critics (for such attacks, and
Burke's response, see 480-506); but it is also the measure of his
seriousness and of the interest of his goals to those concerned
with, to quote Chomsky (1957:102), "some more general theory
of language that will include a theory of linguistic form and theory
of the use of language as subparts." Let me single out certain
features:
      1. Since the thirties, Burke (e.g., 1941) has waged war against
the inadequacy of mechanistic, empiricist, anti-"mentalist" ap-
proaches in the human sciences. The point is drawn in terms of a
distinction between motion and action, the latter comprising the
symbolic dimension of human motives and behavior.
      2. Rather than reject earlier insights in the name of modernity
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                              137


 or science, Burke has sought to assimilate and build on traditional
rhetoric, poetics, and dialectic (cf. 306).
      3. Burke asserts that, to establish the forms of symbolic
action, one needs cases sufficiently stable to be methodically
observable, and sufficiently complex and mature to be representa-
tive. The primary object of study thus is taken to be an idealized,
normative one—the definitive literary text, abstracted from per-
formances and posited as unified (homogeneous). Results obtained
from such study can be applied to the more fluctuant and obscured
world of daily action (1955:264-65, 274-75).
      4. Analysis must first of all be formal, that is, within the
realm of what Burke terms "poetics," the analysis of a work or
genre in and of itself, in terms of the working out of principles
and interrelationships internal to it as a structure (486-87, 496-97;
1958:61), as apart from concern with expression of character
("ethics"); persuading or moving of an audience ("rhetoric"); and
provision of information, or universal resources of verbal place-
ment, symbolic action ("grammar," or dramatistic grammar—1945;
here, 59-60). "Poetics," "rhetoric," "ethics," and "grammar" are
the four categories into which Burke divides his project here (28).
It is revealing to trace (in Burkean fashion) the recurrence of
"pure(ly)" and "sheer(ly)" as modifiers in contexts where the
formal is in question, either to the intrinsic characteristics of a
given work (poetics) or the characteristics intrinsic to some set
of verbal resources generally—in either case, apart from contex-
tual considerations. I have traced them with forms of formal (19,
221, 296, 494), grammar (329, 388), linguistic (221, 408, 419, 461),
terministic (18, 250), technical (92); cf. also 25, 29, 91, 92. In terms
of Burke's own motives, these modifiers are an almost perfect
marking of his concern to delimit and insist upon such a domain
of study.
      5. Analysis must be explicit in two respects: (a) it must make
explicit the principles (underlying structure, rules) that are only
implicit for the originators of texts studied (33; cf. discussion of
 "derive," 85-87, 117, and of "prophecy after the event," 36-37,
 75, 81, 85); (b) it must explicitly define the structural type ("lit-
 erary species") of the work, i.e. give an adequate formal definition
with corresponding rules (42-43, 223-25). Burke's finest instances,
perhaps, are those (1951a) of the lyric, the Platonic dialogue, and
 Joyce's Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; see also his para-
 digm (1951b) for Othello.
      6. Analysis of particular works and forms must both make
 use of and seek further to disclose universal characteristics of
 symbolic action (formal, substantive). Such universals are seen as
 intrinsic to human nature (cf. 20-23, 53, 73-74, 149, 152, 158, 182,
138                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

189, 253, 296, 409, 494-96; in Aristotelian fashion, man's nature is
seen as including participation in a social order). Indeed, it is
Burke's concern for a sort of explanatory adequacy that has
opened him to one kind of attack from narrower critics, namely,
that of devising modes of analysis applicable to all texts, not just
to those considered good.
      7. The tactics of the method can be described as a kind of
discourse analysis built upon a concordance of key terms. Key
terms are not mechanically found. Three articles—1941 (the title
essay), 1954, and 1958 (60-61)—give practical guidance. An essen-
tial part is played by the analytic concepts and suggested recur-
rent or universal elements of the general theory; these, together
with examples of analysis, are found developed throughout his
critical works (1931,1935,1937, 1941, 1945, 1950, 1961). Key terms
are traced for features of placement, substitutability, and co-
occurrence ("subcategorization," selection) proper to them in the
given work (establishing underlying symbolic interrelationships
and the motivational structure on which they rest). The formal
logic of the work is sought: its sequential development (why the
parts are in precisely that order and no other), and the transforma-
tions that govern the motivational development (Burke uses the
term, 1950:10-13; here 134-35, 180, etc.). For Burke, underlying
motivational structures are to a completed work rather like under-
lying semantic structure to a complex sentence.
      These features show parallels, but something also of the clear
differences between Burke's work and current linguistic theory.
Burke calls his perspective "dramatism" (53ff., 366-69; an article
appears in the new International Encyclopedia of the Social Sci-
ences, 1968). The title, and the terminology in which it is imple-
mented, express his belief that the necessary foundation and unity
of the human sciences lies in study of language and thought as
situated modes of action, that is, as motivated in origin and dra-
matic (dialectic) in form (1957:87-100). It follows that understand-
ing of structure requires understanding of function, or purpose
 (1957:62-63, 245-47); every text must be treated as a strategy for
 encompassing a situation (1957:3, 93). Thus, if Burke is for "action"
 as against "motion" (mechanistic and behavioristic reductions), he
is also for the complex scope of a "dramatic" model of human
 action as against models that reduce it to any single or unbal-
 anced set of motives, such as restriction of concern to the informa-
 tional and referential functions, as is the case with much linguistic
 theory at the present time (1957:121-44; cf. Hymes 1964a).
      Two implications are of particular relevance here. Both can
be approached through the notion of language expressed in
 Burke's definition of his book's purpose (cited above) and in its
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                            139


title. In brief, the notion of language and the linguistic is taken to
include reference to (1) the general symbolic resources involved
in use of language, and (2) the plurality of modes of action
(motives, functions) that use of language may constitute. A tracing
of Burke's use of the words "language," "linguistic," and "gram-
mar" shows this. On the one hand, while the terms include and
sometimes specify sounds, words, and syntax (e.g., 467), much
more commonly they are a way of insisting upon goal-directed
symbolic activity as intrinsic to human nature (language being
the case par excellence), and of referring to such activity as under-
lain by universal symbolic operations that in part might be, and
occasionally are, called dialectic (299, 372). On the other hand,
the "intrinsic" satisfactions, or functions, of languages (of "sym-
bol-using," 1958:57, 61) are at least four; and designation (naming,
reference) plays a small part beside unfolding of form (poetics),
inducement to action (communication, persuasion), and expres-
sion. More particularized analysis of components of speech acts,
functions, and their interrelations is given in Burke 1945, and
throughout his other books. One significant list of speech acts is
that in the preface to his novel (1966:xii-xiv), wherein he describes
discovery of his motives for writing it as "to want to lament,
rejoice, beseech, admonish, aphorize, and inveigh."
      Thus, for Burke the organization and selection of linguistic
resources in verbal performance (action) is underlain by kinds of
symbolic competence that transcend linguistic competence in its
present technical sense. An extension of the notion of kinds of
competence underlying linguistic performance is necessary in any
case, if the convergence in outlook between much of modern
ethnography and transformational grammar is to be recognized
and made fruitful. Linguists would seem to have no good reason
to want to deny ethnographers the right to be "mentalists," or to
try to insist that ethnographers must henceforth approach pat-
terns of language use on only, say, Skinnerian terms, rather than
continue to see them as reflecting underlying sociocultural (sym
bolic) competence.
      Furthermore, if linguistic performance is equated to all use of
language, then it is not seen by Burke as adulteration of ideal
competence (cf. Katz 1967:144), but often as accomplishment,         a
creative coping with situations that may entail emergence of new
levels of structure, to which terms such as "underlying," "com-
pleting," "transcending" can be applied. If "linguistic perform-
ance" is restricted to particular behavioral manifestations; or if
it is articulated so as to provide for use of linguistic competence
in the accomplishment of verbal art; or if verbal accomplishment
is taken as based on additional kinds of competence beyond the
140                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

linguistic—or, finally, if linguistic competence itself is extended
beyond the grammatical and semantic—then the apparent conflict
would dissolve. In the interim Burke would undoubtedly observe
(45-57) that a restricted terminology restricts the adequacy of
possible observations and understanding.
      The revival of interest in the ethnography of symbolic forms
(myth, ritual, song, chant, dance, and the like, and the subtler
forms of daily life), and the analysis of patterns of language use,
linked with a desire to emulate linguistic methodology, prom-
ises development of work from which a truly comparative
"rhetoric" and "poetics" may yet emerge. I should not misrepre-
sent Burke's place with regard to such work. Especially when
working in another culture, the linguistically trained student of
symbolic forms will face problems, and set goals, for which Burke
provides no specific guide. Yet such linguistic ethnography will
impoverish itself if it does not build on the insights accumulated
in the tradition that Burke extends and enriches. Differences of
terminology and style aside, there is in it, to use words of a well-
known linguist, much that is substantially correct and essential
to any adequate account of language.
      Some final remarks on the book. It is organized in terms of
(I) five summarizing essays, (II) particular works and authors, and
(III) further essays on symbolism in general. Particular studies
deal with Coriolanus (in I), Antony and Cleopatra, Timon of
Athens, the Oresteia, Faust (both parts), Emerson's Nature, Kubla
Khan, A Passage to India, Nightwood, Theodore Roethke, and
William Carlos Williams. Kant's ethics comes in for analysis in III,
the terministic screen of psychoanalysis in I. Some essays seem
classics of their kind—I would single out the essays on the strate-
gies of Shakespeare's plays, especially Coriolanus, and that on
Emerson's Nature. This last essay contrasts the two kinds of
transformation: dramatic catharsis in the plays (through symbolic
sacrifice, victimage), and dialectical transcendance in Emerson's
essay. The development of the contrast would seem to relate to
two motives that emerge strongly in the book (cf. 97). In the
Shakespearean essays, Burke's well-known sensitivity to implica-
tions of works for social tension and social order is still brilliantly
present, but is complemented by heightened emphasis on biologi-
cal components of symbolic expression, especially "the thinking
of the body" (he is marvelous on Mallarme', 308-43), on the one
hand, and on formal thoroughness, transcendence, and the pure
play of symbolic prowess for its own sake. (Several essays end
with mention of thoroughness—carrying out the full implications
of a form or set of terms.) Indeed, the book can be said to be
pervaded by interrelations of the term poetic(s) as pure or sheer
The Status of Linguistics as a Science                         141


act: (a) as department of study, i.e. as analysis of a work in and
of itself (496-97), and in terms of internal consistency and inter-
relationships required by its own nature (486-89, 221); (b) as an
office (purpose) of speech, either in the narrowly Ciceronian sense
of entertaining, or the wider sense, introduced by Burke, of the
self-consistent and self-developing (see 1958:60-61, and this book,
139, 146, for the links); (c) as fundamental motive of man ("the
sheer exercise of 'symbolicity' (or 'symbolic action') for its own
sake, purely for the love of the art" (29)), so that in one recent
essay, not included here (1958), all functions of language become
derivative of the poetic motive as intrinsic pleasure in language
use. One suspects a personal dialectic of transcendence here.
Part Three



Linguistics as Sociolinguistics

But General Forms have their vitality in Particulars, & every
Particular is a Man, . . .

 Tor Empire is no more, and now the Lion & Wolf shall cease'

               William Blake, Jerusalem, ch. Four, section 91;
                                       America: A Prophecy
Chapter 8

Linguistic Theory and
Functions in Speech


  The late Uriel Weinreich (1966: 399) observed:

  Whether there is any point to semantic theories which are account-
  able only for special cases of speech—namely humorless, prosaic,
  banal prose—is highly doubtful.

     The purpose of this chapter is to generalize Weinreich's state-
ment, and to remove the qualification: linguistic theories account-
able only for such cases of speech cannot be consistently justified.1
I shall try to bring out the plurality, priority, and problematic
(empirical) status of functions in speech.

    1. This chapter is based in "Linguistic Theory and the Functions of
Speech," in International Days of Sociolinguistics/ Giornate internazionali
di Sociolinguistica, 111-44 (Rome [: Istituto Luigi Sturzo, 1970]). The original
paper appears in Italian in the same volume (145-71) with the title "Teoria
linguistica e le funzioni della lingua," and in Czech in Slovo a Slovesnost :
Gasopis pro otazky teorie a kultury jazyka 31(1): 7-32 (1970), with the title
"Lingvisticka' teorie a promluvove' funkce" (translated by FrantiSek DaneS)
(Praha: Ceskoslovenska Akademie VSd). I am indebted to the Istituto Luigi
Sturzo for inviting me to take part in its Second International Congress of
Social Sciences, September 15-17, 1969, in Rome; to its secretary, Dr. Ughi,
for his kindnesses; to Frantisek DaneS, Norman Denison, Paolo Fabbri, John
Gumperz and Gillian Sankoff for their comments at the conference, and
Virginia Hymes, William Labov, and Joel Sherzer for their comments later;
and to David Sapir in whose home in Philadelphia the paper for the Congress
was completed with the aid of some of his and his father's books.

                                                                            145
146                                    FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

      In speaking of "functions," I do not intend to raise here the
many issues that attach to the notion of "functionalism" in the
social sciences, and, more generally, in the philosophy of the
sciences and humanistic disciplines. I use the term first of all
because its use by the Prague School has associated it with the
perspective developed here, and because it does seem the appro-
priate general term for a necessary idea. In their methodological,
reflections on worlds of human knowledge, scholars such as Ernst
Cassirer and Kenneth Burke have found the question of function,
and, in human action, the question of the function known as pur-
pose, indispensable. That the burden of proof lies with the advo-
cate of the relevance of concern with such questions in linguistics
today, does not reflect the nature of language, but the limitations
of current linguistics. The burden of proof ought to be, and I
believe will come to be, on those who think that linguistics can
proceed successfully without explicit attention to its functional
foundations.
      I do not try to say here what functions speech has overall or
in particular communities. I try only to show that, whereas lin-
guists usually treat language in terms of just one broad type of
elementary function, called here "referential," 2 language is in fact
constituted in terms of a second broad type of elementary function
as well, called here "stylistic." Languages have conventional fea-
tures, elements, and relations serving referential ("propositional,"
"ideational," etc.) meaning, and they have conventional features,
elements and relations that Are stylistic, serving social meaning.
Substantive functions, in the sense of human purposes in the use
of speech, employ, require, and indeed give rise to characteristics
of both kinds. A general study of language comprises both, and
even a study seeking to limit itself to what is referentially based
cannot escape involvement with what is not. Involvement with
stylistic function, and social meaning, reveals that the foundations
of language, if partly in the human mind, are equally in social
life, and that the foundations of linguistics, if partly in logic and
psychology, are equally in ethnography (cf. Hymes 1964a: 6, 41).
      The term "function" is so readily misunderstood in linguistics
today that I should explain something I do not intend. In many
minds, the term "function" in the study of language has become


     2. "Referential" seems to be the most convenient term. It is of course
distinct from denotation, and understood as entailing an intensional concep-
tion of meaning. I reserve "meaning" for the import of a form or utterance
generally (cf. Firth 1935). To equate "meaning" with grammatical and lexical
meaning, as ordinarily analyzed, is a reduction, indeed, one might say, a
category mistake. (Cf. Jakobson 1957, 1965 on indexical and iconic meanings
in language).
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                  147


associated with behaviorism as espoused by B. F. Skinner. It
should be clear that the appeals to knowledge, creativity, and even
freedom and liberation (chs. 4, 10) in this book bring my approach
under Skinner's obloquy. A commitment to an ethnographic
"mentalism," however, does not require one to avert one's eyes
from functions, just because Skinner has written about them (cf.
Hymes 1964e). The trouble with Skinner is not that he writes of
such things as "mands," but that, lacking linguistics, he has no
way to specify and analyze the features and relationships to
which such terms point. Thus, a "mand" is an utterance that
elicits goods, services, information—one might want to recognize
a category of this type, but one would want to warrant it too, as
part of a valid system of speech acts, and determine its identifying
and contrastive features in speech. (For a sociolinguistic use of
the notion of "mand," see Ervin-Tripp 1972: 245). Skinner may
make a convenient target, for discrediting interest in functions
generally; perhaps that is his latent function in current contro-
versy (cf. Chomsky 1973, ch. 7). Most linguists should be sophis-
ticated enough not to be misled by such tactics. One does not have
to choose between "mands" and "minds."
      It is indeed something of a contradiction, an irony at least,
that we have today a general linguistics that justifies itself in
terms of understanding the distinctiveness of man, but has nothing
to say, as linguistics, of human life. The voice is the voice of
humanism, of a rationalist idealism; the hand, one fears, is the
hand of mechanism. I want to insist that willingness to take func-
tions for granted, as given, as unproblematic for linguistic practice
and theory, is ideological and self-serving. Such a posture enables
linguists to credit themselves with studying "language," when
they only make models of logic and grammar. Linguistics cannot
claim to be a science of language without constituting itself on
an adequate functional foundation, as the present chapter seeks
to show.

                          GETTING AT GRAMMAR
Accepting       Sentences
     For many linguists, a description is intended to account for
all, and only, the grammatical sentences of a language. Such an
account abstracts from hesitations, interruptions, incompleteness,
errors. The point, of course, is not only to exclude such sentences,
but also to explain their excluded status. It is success in only a
weak sense just not to provide for such sentences. It is success in
a strong sense to show why the grammar provides for other kinds
of sentence and for the kinds excluded. Now, a grammar can
148                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

readily illuminate the fact that syntactic jumbles (The a which
hurry horse magnificently two) are not grammatical. It cannot
illuminate the status of hesitations, interruptions, unfinished sen-
tences, and certain kinds of errors, but only say that they are not
its business. It is embarrassing at the very outset for a grammar,
conceived as illuminating speakers' abilities, to be able to explain
nicely mistakes that speakers almost never make (one really has
to concentrate to invent a nice syntactic jumble), and to have
nothing to say about "mistakes" that speakers make all the time—
"mistakes," indeed, that are often the proper "mistake," so to
speak, to make.
     A description that takes as its criterion acceptable sentences
must account for hesitations, interruptions, stops in mid-sentence,
and errors, that are appropriate to a situation or a style. A gram-
marian really has to do so also; he or she has to get at his or her
intuitive judgments of grammaticality through the surrounding,
more immediately intuitive, network of judgments of acceptability.
     Acceptability, of course, has a social dimension, as just indi-
cated, and has to do with genres, norms of interaction, and social
meanings and stylistic features, quite in addition to the considera-
tions of feasibility in mental processing in terms of which it has
been discussed (Chomsky 1965). Consider, for example, a Burundi
peasant, who, when speaking to an aristocrat, must bumble verb-
ally in a culturally prescribed manner (Albert 1972), or a Surinam
black, whose fellows will admire him if he speaks Dutch with
grammatical and lexical correctness, but resent his airs if his pro-
nunciation is correctly Dutch as well (Eersel 1971). Quite gen-
erally, to complete a certain sentence, to speak without hesitation,
to speak with perfect grammaticality, can, under certain condi-
tions, be offensive.
     Description cannot be restricted to fully "semanticized" sen-
tences, if the semantic import and structure of some parts of
sentences is to be understood, and if all the conventionalized units
and relations in sentences are to be analyzed. In American society
"Would you like to bring me the paper?" commonly asks the
addressee's wishes—"like" has referential force. For some Ameri-
cans, and commonly in England, "like" does not, and "Would you
like" is a politeness formula. Americans and Britons experience a
fair amount of mutual interference in this regard, Britons finding
many American requests (e.g., "Cup of coffee") tersely rude, and
even refusing to honor* them, while Americans may find British
requests annoyingly indirect or elegant. Americans who adapt to
British habits while abroad may have some difficulty on return,
as when my daughter Alison asked in Philadelphia, "May I have
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                  149


one of those candies, please?" and the clerk replied, "Sure, honey,
I'll sell you anything you want."
      Surface structure of sentences, in other words, is not to be
taken at face value—not only because of underlying syntactic
relationships, as grammarians now fully recognize, because of
Chomsky's work, but also because the surface structure itself is
not just a matter of grammatical formatives. It is a matter of
formatives of two types, both grammatical, but one "referential,"
the other "stylistic." To use an example from Sydney Lamb: if a
secretary, answering the phone, asks "May I say who's calling?,"
an appropriate answer is not just "Yes." As an act of speech, the
immediate constituents of the sentence are something like [Polite-
ness formula] + [Operational element]; the question asked is
"Who's calling?" The status of "May I say," and the dependence
between an appropriate answer and "Who's calling," are part of
a speaker's linguistic competence, even if one restricts the "com-
petence" to grammatical knowledge (as I do not, of course—ch. 4).
The principled investigation of such phenomena makes social
factors inescapable in grammatical analysis.
      Further as to the status of elements such as "May I say." It
is a familiar fact that lexical elements and phrases, if they grow in
grammatical function, may lose their earlier lexical force in their
new paradigmatic relationships; thus, in English "keep" and "get"
now mark continuate and inceptive aspect in sentences such as
"Keep going" and "Get going," not "retain/obtain possession of"
something called "going." Just so, lexical elements and phrases,
if they grow in grammatical function in a social or stylistic sense,
may lose their earlier lexical force in their new paradigmatic rela-
tionships. The two processes are quite parallel, if not identical:
it is the difference in the function that has drawn the linguist's
attention to the referential cases and not the others.
      One may find a particular process only partly accomplished—
one of the sources of diversity in judgments of sentences. I myself
find "May I say" "semi-grammaticalized," as it were, so that I
often reply to the sentence in both interpretations, with "Yes"
and my name. In the United States "Thank you" has commonly
the force of expressing thanks for something received. In England
"Thank you" may be said by a cab driver as he opens the door to
let a passenger out, and even by a host handing a guest a plate at
the dinner table. The expression seems to be more of a polite
acknowledgment, an abstract marker of junctures of interaction
with a guest (or customer), and to have gone part of the way
toward the pole of repetitive acknowledgement represented by
Japanese "hai" and "dozo." (Though it may be that the English
150                               FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

cases cited are analogous to French "merci," differing from the
American expression in features of context toward which thanks
is directed; here, not the immediate transaction, but the relation-
ship of longer duration now being acknowledged at its salient
point of transaction. The need for ethnographic study of inter-
action is clear in either interpretation.)
      Every language has a great many such elements, internally
(morphologically) uninteresting perhaps, and uninteresting too,
perhaps, syntactically, through lack of apparent interdependence
with referential grammatical categories. Indeed, such elements are
seldom presented in descriptions (but compare the long interesting
list of 50 or more in Sapir's Takelma grammar, 1922). An ordinary
grammar can only list and gloss them, even so, if it does not take
into account the contexts and function in terms of which they
have contrastive relevance. Analysis in terms of speech acts, such
as summons, may however show such elements to have syntag-
matic and paradigmatic properties (cf. Schegloff 1968), and so may
analysis in terms of interconnection with intonation in expressive
function (cf. Seiler 1962, Van Hoik 1962). It may be that a more
comprehensive approach to familiar grammatical categories within
ordinary syntax would have to deal with such particles and
expressions as well. In many sentences in languages such as
Wasco Chinook and Warm Springs Sahaptin, for example, an
initial particle, such as Wasco ani'or add, has not only its own
local force, but a scope which comprises and colors the rest of
the sentence to follow, as to mood. It in effect defines the inter-
pretation of what follows, disambiguating in advance. Initial
position for elements defining mood over the scope of what fol-
lows may be widespread, even universal.
      Consider also proper names in vocative sentences. They are
more than arbitrary in reference, as Le'vi-Strauss (1958) has
brought to attention, and as the inspired Tightness of the names
invented for The Lord of the Rings by Tolkien abundantly demon-
strates; they have internal structure, have social meaning (cf.
Hymes 1966b), have semantic invariants (Franklin 1967), and
phonological or other markers (cf. Smith 1969). When viewed
from the standpoint of address, in relation to social groups and
settings, they enter into contrastive sets, among themselves, and
with forms from other domains (pronouns, kin terms, titles, zero
—cf. Fischer 1964), demonstrating again that recognition of social
function brings recognition of new structure, transcending con-
ventional compartments.
      These are elements of neglected structure within sentences,
which social meaning and stylistic function bring into view. It is
being increasingly recognized that the single sentence is itself an
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                    151


 arbitrary boundary (cf. ch. 4 on discourse), generalizations being
lost if the sentence is the limiting unit. Let us add that if it is
essential to consider how a grammatical feature may be expressed
now in a single sentence, now across sentences, it would be arti-
ficial to consider only the larger scope, and not the differences in
social and stylistic meaning between both realizations. Conjoining
of structures, as distinct from their disjunction, is not just a larger
sphere of syntactic operation; it opens up an additional sphere of
significant choice.
      If grammatical rules are pursued to the full extent of their
application, moreover, more than grammar must be analyzed. As
has been pointed out in earlier chapters, the very formal depend-
encies of a sentence in relation to a preceding sentence may also
be found in relation to a nonverbal context (cf. ch. 4, citing Water-
house 1963, Gunter 1966, Schegloff 1968). Further, the status of a
sentence, its features as a request, a command, etc., of course
differ according to the social relationship and situation. Thus the
film "The Royal Family" shows Queen Elizabeth II beginning a
morning's work at her desk in Buckingham Palace by saying over
the intercom, "Do you think you could bring up those papers I was
looking at yesterday?" In all these respects, an analysis of sen-
tences, of the scope of their formal relationships, requires a coor-
dinated analysis of social meaning. Each aspect of structure and
meaning disclosed enters into judgments of acceptability, and
perforce, grammaticality.
      Many linguists may wish to ignore, or relegate to another day,
such relationships and meanings. As the above examples indicate,
and as work of Labov (1966) in New York City demonstrates in
detail, one will miss linguistic structure that way. Even more, one
will not be able to establish the limited structure that one seeks.
Postal (1964) and others, for example, have based analysis of the
reflexive pronoun in English on the assumption that the occur-
rence of the same proper name as both subject and object of a
sentence must refer to two distinct persons. "Paul admires Paul"
must be concerned with two different Pauls. (I owe this example
to Werner Winter's discussion of the problem at the Conference
on Linguistic Method organized by Paul Garvin, Los Angeles 1966).
Many American speakers agree, however, that the two "Pauls"
may be the same person. I have heard in spontaneous conversa-
tion such a sentence as "But you have to remember, Ben looks
 after Ben." About 1951, the following could be seen painted bn a
wall at Harvard: "Pitirim loves Pitirim" (Philip Curtin, pers.
 comm). Such cases must be dealt with.
      It is hardly satisfactory to invoke differences of "dialect"
 here, or ad hoc in other cases of apparent difference of opinion as
152                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

to the acceptability of a sentence. There seem always to be differ-
ent "dialects," and "dialects" that differ for different examples, in
the audiences of linguistic papers in recent years. Notice that as
soon as there are two such disputed examples, there are four pos-
sible "dialects": that of those who accept both proffered examples,
that of those who reject both, and the two of those who accept
one, reject one. (Thus, some of those who reject "Ben looks after
Ben" might be among those who do not think that a noun marked
( + feminine) can also be marked ( + agent) with certain verbs of
sexual activity in English (Dong ms.); others might be among those
who think such a noun can be so marked; and so on). As the
number of disputed examples increases, the number of theoreti-.
cally possible "dialects" increases as the power of 2. The actual
groupings are no doubt fewer than the number of disputed exam-
ples would lead one to calculate; 5 disputed cases probably do not
evidence 32 dialects. No doubt there are interconnections and
contextual factors. The point is that one must know what they are.
     The failure to find consensus, to find generally convincing
examples, for crucial points, brings present practice and theory to
an impasse. One does not wish to retreat to analysis of a corpus,
a supposed "idiolect," or to arbitrary methodological canons. One
intends to analyze English, not some uncertainly located variant
of English; more than that, one proposes to analyze something
that is somewhere, by someone, known. The contradiction between
intended theoretical scope and restrictive methodological practice
becomes ever more glaring and frustrating.
     The way out of the impasse would be to recognize, first, as
Jakobson has long maintained, that a language is a "system of
systems." That is to say, it is not enough to recognize a multiplic-
ity of forms of speech and to abandon hope of uniting them, or
diverse analytical topics, into a common theory, as some formal
linguists appear to be doing. There is indeed a certain practical
wisdom and significant precedent for abandoning a general theory
that proves a Procrustean bed. J. R. Firth concluded in such a
spirit [1935] 1957: 29): "Unity is the last concept that should be
applied to language. . . . There is no such thing as une langue une
and there never has been."
     But this is to neglect the possibility of a unified theory from a
social, rather than grammatical, standpoint. Noting that "the
London group is in virtual accord with the group of Prague" (in
taking a functional approach that recognizes both the diversity
and conventionality of forms of speech), Vachek (1959) rejected
Firth's conclusion as one to which only "stubborn nominalists
could subscribe." He argued that "all the existing varieties of
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                   153


English can be said to be mutually complementary with regard to
 the types of social situation in which a speaker of English may
find himself placed" (1959: 109). Just so some linguists have
defined "register" as a functional variety in one-to-one relation
with a defining situation. Such "mutual functional complementari-
ness" saves the unity of a language (see the discussion of the
similar tactic taken by Pike later in this chapter); but it repeats
on the level of variety and situation the same error so long made
on the level of language and community (see ch. 2). The mapping
between means and contexts is not in principle one-to-one; that
is indeed a cardinal tenet of the sociolinguistic perspective of this
book. It is precisely the contrastive relevance of varieties within
the same situation, the possibility of alternation and choice within
the same situation, that defines the relevance of the rules of
co-occurrence obtaining within them, and provides for their social
meaning. It is such a complex unity, having to do with repertoires
in relation to situations, persons, and communities, that answers
to a conception of language as a "system of systems." (This para-
graph is elaborated from Hymes 1961d.)
      Such a complex unity provides for the fact that the functions
served in a language, and warranting its elements and relation-
ships, are social, or stylistic, as well as referential, and that what
appear as "deviations," "violations," "variations," or "dialects"
from the standpoint of only the latter function may appear as
choices within the more complex system of rules. "Ben looks after
Ben," for example, may be taken to be marked for stylistic effect.
If not dismissed, but analyzed together with "John looks after
himself," the desired analysis of the latter is empirically saved, and
the equally valid force of the former explained. The cases with
"-self" manifest a widespread regularity in English, and it is no
part of the purpose of a sociolinguistic approach to discard such
regularities; the purpose is rather to place such regularities within
a more adequate analysis of the relation between sound and mean-
ing in English (and languages generally).
      In general, then, the sentences that trouble syntactic analysis
are subject to interpretation and selection in the first instance on
the dimensions of social context and speech style. The two dimen-
sions have long been noted (e.g., Kenyon 1948), but in its initial
advances into syntax, recent American grammatical theory seemed
able to ignore them. It can do so no longer, if it is to have other
than an ad hoc, arbitrary base. If it is possible to isolate judgment
of grammaticality from the more general judgment of acceptabil-
ity, this can be done only if the contextual and stylistic dimensions
of judgment are known.
154                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

Being Sensitive to Context

     Grammarians have often enough taken dimensions of context
and style into account, but commonly in an ad hoc and unprinci-
pled way. That is, discovery of the nature of grammatical elements
and relations has often depended upon discovery of social condi-
tions for their use. In analyzing Siona, for example, Wheeler (1967)
was unable to account for speakers' indifference to choice among
certain forms in individual sentences, yet their rigorous insistence
on consistent selections in discourse (this being a good example
of grammatical regularities missed if only the sentence is analyzed,
as noted in ch. 4). Nonverbal and other contextual information
brought out that the forms were selected on two simultaneous
dimensions: voice, and relative focus. Another set of important
categories, mood-like in character, required considerable ethno-
graphic inquiry to establish their defining properties: definiteness
vs. indefiniteness of the knowledge reported, and responsibility,
involvement, commitment vs. their absence, in relation to it.
Mothers, for example, discuss their own children with the one
category, the children of others with the other.
     In this admirably explicit account, rich in interesting detail,
Wheeler makes clear a common practice of linguists: knowledge
of the social contexts governing the selection of grammatical fea-
tures is obtained in order to define the categories, but then aban-
doned, except for the residue of a relatively abstract category
label. Two terms of a relationship are necessarily studied but
only one is formally described.
     Aaron Cicourel has related a particularly telling instance of
this practice. In a linguistics class analyzing Indonesian, the
informant was regularly relied upon to supply social meanings and
cultural knowledge which would permit the linguistic analysis to
proceed, but the meanings and knowledge were themselves ex-
cluded from the description. In other words, the description was
to make explicit only part of the knowledge that the native
speaker indicated he needed in order to speak grammatically. The
linguist in charge of the class was determining the relevance of
data, not by the goal of explicating the native speaker's knowl-
edge of language, but by the goal of writing what would be con-
sidered a proper grammar by professional colleagues. Such
instances clarify the ideological status of claims that grammatical
analysis is concerned with something that can be properly called
"competence."
     Sometimes features of context, especially attributes of one
or more participants in the speech event, force attention to them-
selves. Sometimes simply status as addressor or addressee is
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                155


involved, as in the definition of pronouns and other "shifters"
 (Jakobson 1957) or in the statement of a rule (such as the con-
junct reduction in Sanskrit that applies across change of inter-
locutor in question and response). Sometimes generic features of
participants are involved, as when different indicative and impera-
tive paradigms (the surface result of several intersecting phono-
logical rules) are selected in Koasati (Haas 1944), according to
whether the addressor of record is male or female. (Men use
female forms when quoting the speech of women in tales, and
conversely, so the features are part of common competence;
indeed, children are corrected for them, according to their sex.)
In Yana words have one phonological shape when the addressor
and addressee are both adult males, another (shortened and
altered) otherwise. (Both styles are thus part of the competence
of men, and the entire lexicon marked accordingly.) Sometimes
more limited status is involved, as when in Abipon all words add
-in if any participant to a conversation is a member of the Hocheri
(warrior society) (Sherzer 1970), or in Ainu, where several pro-
nouns are plural, or singular, plus respectful, according to the
relative age-grades of the addressor and addressee (Hattori 1964).
Relationship between participants is also entailed when a Hindu
sentence such as ve desereth ke larke the "He (they) Dasharath
of son(s) was (were)" is ambiguously singular or plural, depend-
ing upon the respect relationship between addressor, addressee,
and person spoken of (Jain 1969: 94).
      Such features usually are treated as marginal. Once used in
order to define grammatical meanings, or to save the referential
unity of alternative shapes, they are ignored. The rest of the data
is not examined for further elements and relationships governed by
the features now unavoidably invoked. In sum, such features are
treated in an ad hoc, rather than a principled way. Often enough
a prose comment would suffice, or the implicit formalism of paren-
thetic glosses and annotations, such as "(man speaking)," "(woman
 speaking)," "(said to children)," "(respect form)." Some scholars
have indeed begun-to introduce the requisite social features for-
mally into the contexts in which linguistic forms are generated.
      Now, the methodology of context-sensitive grammar normally
requires features used in contexts to have been previously intro-
duced. (Chomsky and Halle 1968: 384 decide not to make this a
formal condition, but observe that their own practice has followed
it; others have in fact given it as a requirement). Insofar as this
canon is followed, any analysis that requires social features in
the contexts of forms is evidence of the need for a prior analysis
of the social features.
      Some scholars have already grasped this point with regard to
156                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

the selection of features in terms of styles or genres of discourse
(cf. Bloomfield and Newmark 1963: 70-71, 85-86, 245, and DeCamp
1970). Explicit analysis, let alone differentiation and interrelation
of the features and dimensions, has hardly begun. The point, of
course, is that designation of discourse features as governing
contexts cannot be ad hoc, and requires analysis of what consti-
tutes contrasting styles, genres, in the community in question.
      Recently a need has been recognized to identify lexical ele-
ments as native or foreign, or of specific provenience, e.g., Romance
or Greek in English, French or English in Mohawk (Chomsky and
Halle 1968, Postal 1968). Standard dictionaries, of course, go
farther, identifying forms according to several social dimensions.
Webster's Third International Dictionary, for example, incor-
porates regional provenience, level (substandard, but not hyper-
correct), technical genre (mostly by subject, such as music, cricket,
mineralogy, Semitic grammar), style (slang, but not literary and
such, so that e'en, e'er are unlabelled), and currency (obsolescent,
archaic, as defined by date of most recent attestation). Leonard
Bloomfield once observed that even in a small nonliterate com-
munity the dimension of level would require one "to annotate
almost every item of the grammar, and many of the lexicon" (1927,
cited from Hymes [ed.] 1964: 395, regarding Menomini). The point
again is that annotations, and dictionary features, require an
analysis of the terms that enter into them.

Using Appropriateness    Creatively

     To insist that analysis of social meaning has priority is not
to impose an arbitrary requirement, or conduct a critique that
linguistic practice can afford to ignore. Such analysis is required
by what some regard as an essential goal, justifying much else,
namely, to illuminate the "creative aspect of language use"
(Chomsky 1966). A defining property of this aspect is response to
novel situations with sentences that are both novel and appro-
priate. The crux of the matter is that ordinary grammatical analy-
sis may explain the possibility of novel sentences (not all novel
sentences, if stylistic features are neglected), but a novel sentence
may be inappropriate, bizarre or uninterpretable. Appropriateness
is a relation between sentences and contexts, requiring analysis
of both. Indeed, creative language use is often not a matter of a
novel sentence, or a novel context either, but of a novel relation.
Sentence and context may be familiar; the use of one in the other
may be what is new.
     Contextual rules probably can account for a great deal of the
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                               157


appropriateness of discourse (more generally, relations, however
modelled, since nothing depends on the relations being expressed
in a certain rule-format), given analysis of contexts as well as of
linguistic forms. For example, the dimension of social distance
appears to be universal in languages, as in social life, connected
with a series of related meanings, such as informality-formality,
intimacy-respect, equality-authority, private-public. Let me take
informality-formality for illustration. In the paradigm of greeting
forms in American English, "Hi" could be specified as [-formal!.
Its use in a context defined or interpreted as [ — formal] would be
unmarked. Such a matching of the values, or social meanings, of
forms and contexts can be taken as one manifestation of appro-
priateness, in a narrow sense of the term. Often of course the
values of form and context do not match, as when a [-formal]
form, such as "Hi" is used in a context defined or intepreted as
[ +formal]; such a relation is marked. It may of course also be
appropriate, in a somewhat broader sense of the term, a sense
more adequate to the competence and creative ability of persons.
Marked uses are often judged the appropriate uses to employ.
They may define an attitude, signal a change in social relationship
(as in what Friedrich 1966 calls "pronominal breakthrough"), be
a way of accomplishing many things, by way of humor, irony,
insult, praise. Much of appropriateness in this broader sense can
be analyzed then in terms of (1) a set of alternative linguistic
forms; (2) a set of contexts (specified in terms of participants,
etc.); (3) unmarked values (social meanings) of forms and contexts;
(4) a set of relations between forms and contexts.
      To give briefly a few examples: a common, perhaps universal,
phenomenon is for one and the same term to be "fighting words"
in some contexts, a badge of intimacy in others (cf. Swadesh
1933). In all societies there are age-graded terms for persons. If
unmarked usage is to refer to a person by the term for the cate-
gory in which, by age, he or she belongs, then derogation can be
expressed by referring to a person by a term for the category
below that to which, by age, he or she belongs (calling a man
"boy," a boy "big baby"). Praise can be expressed by referring to
a person by a term for a category above that to which, by age, he
or she belongs (short of decrepitude) (calling a boy "young man,"
 an infant "little man"). (Such a pattern is found among the
Klamath Indians of southern Oregon). The set of terms and the
 set of social categories remain constant. What contrast are the
 relations between them, that is, the rule, operation, or mapping
 relating one to the other.
      In large part the kind of analysis adumbrated here only makes
158                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

 systematic and formally accountable familiar observations, of the
 sort dealt with by Metcalf in his study of German modes of
 address. Thus (Metcalf 1938: 43): "Ihr was not uncommonly
 employed for 'symptomatic' purposes where a different type of
 address would be expected under normal circumstances."
 The essential thing is that the present analysis locates the
 kinds of import summed up as "symptomatic" in a different place,
 not in subcategorization of the form (e.g., "distancing" Ihr, "dis-
 courteous" Ihr (Metcalf 1938: 44—the quotation marks are his),
but in alternative relations between form and context, and the
 social meanings involved. The present analysis avoids the tend-
ency to invent pseudo-homonyms, investing individual forms with
meanings that are really relational properties (e.g., "literary Du,"
"emotive Du"), when the form simply contrasts on a single dimen-
sion (here, with Sie on the dimension of social distance), but is
made to bear the contrastive relevance of properties of genre,
voice, social relationship, and the rules connecting it with them.
The analysis also avoids the opposite tendency to obscure the
structure of context by attributing all social meanings mechani-
cally to it.
      Such analysis of course does not exhaust the meaning, or
import, of what is said. Contextual rules of the sort discussed are
really context-selective rules, allocations of forms and contexts,
and not in themselves fully sensitive to the ways in which col-
lection and contextualization of forms may augment meanings,
such that the whole is more than the sum of the parts. (J. Peter
Maher calls this property of collocations investiture]. And there
are of course also emergent meanings, as when unexpected con-
currence of two or more relations, intended or imputed, produces
humor, irony and other effects. Further, the full meaning depends
upon additional characteristics of what is present, done and said
—intonation, tone of voice, gesture, and local norms of interaction
and interpretation, such as whether an addressee has, or does not
have, the option of ignoring a putative insult, or as when, by
responding "You must be joking," one conveys that joking is not
the apparent interpretation. Such creative aspects of language use
seem to require even more clearly an analysis of social meanings
and social contexts. One may not need to know all the contexts
and categories of a community to discern the essentials of its
patterns in these regards, but one must know the dimensions on
which contexts and categories c6ntrast. For linguists who take
the creative aspect of language use seriously, the difference be-
tween linguistic and sociolinguistic description will tend to
disappear.
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                       159


                  FINDING AND USING UNIVERSALS
Finding     Universals
      The need for a functional approach can be seen from a some-
what different vantage point, that of universals in a general theory
of language. The principle to be applied is an extension of one
stated by Ferdinand de Saussure. De Saussure argued the neces-
sity of including lexicon in the description of language, as well as
grammar, because a given category might be expressed in the one
sector in one language, and in the other in another. For a general
theory to deal with such categories, its descriptive base would
have to include both sectors. The same logic applies to stylistic
features and social meanings, alongside those that are referential,
and in a way applies more completely. A certain category may be
expressed within the effective scope of a referential description
in one language, but be expressed outside that scope in another;
moreover, conversely, a certain feature may express a category
within the effective scope of description in one language, but also
express it (or another category) outside that scope in another
language. In both respects, true universal properties of language
will be missed, if description is not extended to the scope of two
types of function, rather than restricted to one. Let me consider
first some instances having to do with sound patterns.

                                  Sound Patterns
    Despite its great interest in universals, recent transformational
generative phonological theory remains explanatorily inadequate
because of its restriction to "referential" function. The restriction
appears most seriously in an argument such as the following with
regard to labiovelar stops in some West African languages (Chom-
sky and Halle 1968: 298).

       Since clicklike suction is clearly an independently controllable
  aspect of the speech event, the data just cited establish suction as
  a separate phonetic feature, regardless of the fact that apparently
  in no language are there contrasting pairs of utterances that differ
  solely in this feature.

       The data are taken from Ladefoged (1964: 9), and refer to Late
(without the suction) and Yoruba (with it). Ladefoged in fact con-
trasts more generally many Guang languages (e.g. Late, Anuin) to
Yoruba, Senadi, Ibibio, Idoma, Bini and some others on the articu-
l a t o r features in question (1964: 9-11; in some of the languages
a third factor enters).
160                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

     Chomsky and Halle, like most linguists, conceive of con-
trastive relevance solely as serving the function of reference
between forms within a language. On this basis, the additional
articulatory trait in Yoruba, Bini, and other languages is only an
unmotivated local habit. Matters need not be left there, if social
function is recognized.
     There is first of all the possibility of contrast with forms not
in the language. Native speakers of Yoruba are in fact astonished
if a nonnative speaker produces these stops with the ingressive
suction. Native speakers of Bini (which shares this feature with
Yoruba, but with an additional difference at closure) also distin-
guish native: nonnative speakers in this way. Generative phonol-
ogy now marks lexical items for language identity for other
purposes, and it also employs a convention of treating elements
as marked for the category to which they belong, e.g., a noun as
marked ( + Noun). It would seem a simple extension to treat the
forms of language as normally marked (+Yoruba), ( + Bini), etc.
A pronunciation of labiovelar stops in Yoruba without the ingres-
sive velaric movement or suction does not indicate a change in
the referential marking of forms; but a phonological marking as
(—Yoruba). Second, there is stylistic function within a language.
In Bini (the only language for which I have information) velaric
suction enters into the system of emphasis in the language. (For
information on the perception of native: nonnative pronunciation,
I am indebted to J. David Sapir and Miss Becky Aghe'yisi; for the
information on stylistic use, to Miss Aghe'yisi and Dan Ben-Amos.)
     All independently controllable phonetic features should be
regarded as functional. The point is simply that there is more than
one kind of function for phonetic features to have.
      The relation between the phonetic features of particular lan-
guages and linguistic universals is misconceived on another score,
if social, or stylistic, function is not taken into account. Chomsky
and Halle (1968: viii) explain their attention to English stress con-
tours on the grounds of light shed on "linguistic theory" (universal
grammar). Neglect of aspiration in English is explained on the
same ground. English aspiration, in point of fact, is a perfect
example of a feature that does have relevance for general theory.
It has contrastive relevance, not in reference, but social meaning.
(Such features may be grouped together as "stylistic" as distinct
from "referential"). Strong vs. weak aspiration of an initial stop
is a conventionally recognized way of conveying emphasis,
whether for reasons of metalinguistic clarification, conveying of
attitude, self-expression, or whatever. The contrast strong: weak
aspiration of initial stop is available as a diacritic of social mean-
ing, just as the contrast voiced: nonvoiced is available as a dia-
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                     161


critic of referential meaning. (Cf. velaric suction in Bini, glottaliza-
tion in Siuslaw (Hymes 1966c: 336), and many other cases.)
      Furthermore, aspiration is probably contrastively relevant in
every language. Probably it is a universal, not only as a matter of
inventory, but as a matter of functional relevance. In some lan-
guages it distinguishes lexical forms (e.g., Hindi); in others, uses
of the same form (English). It is perhaps universally part of the
normal linguistic competence of speakers and hearers. From a
more adequate standpoint, then, descriptively one establishes all
the conventionally recognized contrastive phonetic features of a
language and community. One investigates membership in the
universal list of potentially relevant features, membership in the
list of features factually relevant in all languages, and the function
(referential, stylistic) in which features are relevant. (What is sty-
listic in a given context cannot at the same time be referential,
although the same feature may serve different functions in differ-
ent contexts.) From the standpoint of general theory, in other
words, one has to do with four lists. The list of features potentially
relevant is not in fact changed so far: aspiration, vowel length,
labiovelar (see below) and the like are already present in it,
although of course functional investigation of this sort may
enlarge the list, by finding independently controlled features used
only stylistically (such as the Yoruba, Bini, et al. ingressive velaric
suction appears to be). (The possibility of such a feature having
once had referential function, or gaining it, is of course always
present.) There is next the list of features empirically found to be
relevant just in referential function; the list of features empirically
found relevant just in stylistic function; and the list of features
found relevant in either or both. It may be, of course, that the
second and third lists will prove to be small, almost empty. If so,
the importance and pervasiveness of stylistic function will be
inescapably demonstrated. In any case, such an approach will
make possible understanding of the hierarchy among sounds with
respect to degree of universality.
     The explicit development of such an approach will bring out
the interest of features, and forms containing them, otherwise
perhaps overlooked or merely itemized in individual languages.
Typological and areal statements may be put into a new light.
Thus, one would think offhand of West Africa as a characteristic
area for labiovelar stop consonants (Kpelle, etc.); that is of course
because they are prominent in referential status in languages of
the area. It now becomes of interest to look for stylistic use of
labiovelar stop consonants in areas in which these sounds are not
reported referentially. What might seem an odd or unnoticed fact
 of incidental distribution in the kiksht dialects of Chinookan be-
162                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

comes of general interest. (I am indebted to Michael Silverstein for
discussion of the kiksht phenomenon). A labiovelar stop complex is
attested in Clackamas Chinook only in an emphatic form of the
stem for "large" (itself already augmentative—see below on sym-
bolism in stem-initial position in these dialects); cf. -qaith -qbaiti
(the latter form is from Jacobs 1959: 301, line 4), and in Wasco
only in what Wascos consider the only intrinsically cursing word,
qalaqbaya. (The latter form is not wholly analyzable, but elements
of the shapes qala-, qana-, gwala-, etc. are found derivationally
initially in stems with a general sense of augmentation. The word
is said by Wascos to have no meaning (apart from its insulting
force); it is in a sense pure phonesthematic poetry. The rarity of
the sounds is fitting to the uniqueness of the word. (Wascos can
curse in Wasco, but apart from this word they do so by saying
what they mean; they have no other lexical items inherently
imprecatory.)
     Such functions of phonetic features have of course been taken
into account, when they could not be ignored, and even seized
upon as a special trait of certain languages, as is the case with
aspects of social meaning. The Chinookan kiksht dialect Wasco
(equivalent to the Wishram of the published literature) is fairly
well known for augmentative-diminutive symbolism in conso-
nants, especially in stem-initial position. The pertinent facts are
briefly these. Voicing is not referentially contrastive in stops,
except in stem-initial position. Some stems have inherently voice-
less, others inherently voiced, initial stops. Some! stems have
initial stops whose voicing alternates, depending on phonological
rules that operate in other positions as well. A good many stems
(mostly nouns) with an inherently voiceless initial stop may never-
theless appear with a voiced initial stop, to express augmentative
meaning. (There are other alternations, but this is the one of con-
cern here). There may also be glottalization (with voiceless stop)
to express diminutive meaning. Thus, one can have i-chikchik
'truck wagon' : i-jikjik 'large truck' : i-tsfiksfik 'little truck' (change
of sh to diminutive s enters into the picture also).
      The occurrence of voicing in a stem-initial stop hence is
ambiguous, as a surface feature. It may represent inherent (refer-
ential) voicing, or augmentative (stylistic) voicing. The native
speaker knows which is which, and indeed, the case is a telling
one for the necessity of the kind of relation between grammatical
and phonological sectors that transformational generative theory
has developed; but what the native speaker knows comprises two
kinds of functions, or meanings. He also knows that only some,
not all, of the stems of the language are marked for this kind of
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                  163


 alternation, and that the diminutive is the more common of the
 two directions of alternation,
      Cases such as the Wasco open up another aspect of the prob-
 lem of linguistic universals. Sapir (1915; SWES 195) found that
 "the writer himself feels, or thinks he feels, the intrinsically
 diminutive or augmentative value of certain consonant changes
in Wishram," as do I; glottalization for diminutive, voicing for
 augmentation, and s for diminutive, sh for augmentation, seem
right. For some time, to be sure, modern linguistics has largely
avoided the question of a crosscultural basis for the relationship
between sounds and meanings, when it did not condemn it. The
arbitrariness of the relation between sound and meaning was
stressed, to the exclusion of other considerations as "unscientific,"
"subjective," etc. The case was made from a comparative, "ethno-
logical" perspective, series of words having much the same deno-
tation, but no apparent sameness of shape, being cited, e.g., horse :
cheval : Pferd : loshad : misatim : (i)kiutan (English : French :
German : Russian : Algonquian : Wasco). The facts of cross-
language universals and near-universals, however, have been
pressed with increasing vigor in recent years, by Durbin, Friedrich,
Jakobson, Samarin, Swadesh and others; there are some earlier
references in Hymes (ed.) 1964f: 225, 282. Fischer (1965), for exam-
ple, has proposed a universal basis for the selection in two related
Pacific languages of opposing terms of a morphophonemic alterna-
tion as the stylistically unmarked member (relating the choice to
contrasting cultural values and attitudes toward language; cf.
Fischer 1972).
      A language may still surprise us: in Warm Springs Sahaptin,
reduplication can be used to mark the diminutive (Virginia Hymes,
pers. comm.), where one might think that the opposite, augmenta-
 tion, would be found. Such cases warn against hasty postulation
 of universals, and the need for precise inquiry into the cultural
norms of each community. Universality may lie a little deeper, and
have more complexity, than experience of only a few languages
 may tempt one to assume. We greatly need to have "phonesthe-
 matic" description, as it were, become a standard part of accounts
 of languages, so that the full range of phenomena of felt phonic
 appropriateness can be taken into account. The phonological sur-
face of vocabulary is no merely arbitrary representation, from the
 standpoint of members of a community, who acquire it, not as
practitioners of ethnological comparison, but in a milieu of inter-
 dependence of shapes and meanings. From an ethnographic stand-
point, appropriateness of sound to meaning is a daily, pervasive
part of the life of language. Certainly there is abundant reason to
164                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

believe that patterns for the selection of forms appropriate to
meanings can be persistent and pervasive in the history of a lan-
guage community (cf. Guiraud 1967 with regard to French; Mar-
chand 1959 and Smithers 1954 with regard to English). Languages
often differ in the apparent proliferation of such phenomena, and
in their direction and location in the system, and we greatly need
to develop adequate typologies (cf. Ullmann 1953 for a start) and
areal profiles, as well as specific descriptions. It may be that con-
vincing universals can be established in this aspect of language
more readily than with regard to formal syntax, and more con-
vincingly explained, in relation to the makeup of the human mind,
and, also, body, as well as of the world. Ultimately research in
this area must include paralinguistic and kinesic features; here I
emphasize what is inescapable within linguistics itself. For a bril-
liant account of an impasse caused by neglect of phonesthematic
relationships, see Bolinger 1950, especially section 14, "Creativity,"
and the conclusion. Bolinger's analysis of the interplay of produc-
tive referential morphology, descriptive etymology (the term is
from F. W. Householder, Jr.), and inherited and developing phones-
thematic relationships, remains pertinent to the analysis of gram-
matical formatives today, and, by implication, any attempt to
handle all of the detectible patterning in a language from the
standpoint of a single function and format.)3
     In sum, a principled approach to such phenomena cannot
restrict itself to cases in which they intrude inescapably into the
usual grammatical description, as in Chinookan stem-initials. In
Chinookan, indeed, the interdependence of two elementary lin-
guistic functions, the referential and stylistic, is reflected in the
fact that a phone type [ae], solely stylistic in most dialects, has
become referential in a few names and in color terms in one
(Wasco). This instance of sound change is accurately explainable
only against a background of description of both kinds of func-
tion and element in the language (see the valuable discussion in
Samuels 1972).
              Functionally Related Features     Generally
     The preceding paragraph has expressed a logic that is com-
mon in its application to all features of language, and that indeed
is a theme of this entire book. We have dealt with it in earlier
chapters in relation to forms of speech, code-switching, speech-
styles, and speech acts (chs. 2, 4), showing that the analysis of
each implicates a general descriptive framework and meanings
and relations part of a general theory. Whereas usual practice

    3. The preceding two paragraphs draw upon Hymes 1956, the beginning
of Hymes 1960, and the conclusion of Hymes 1972e.
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                    165


 treats something social or stylistic, when inescapably intrusive, in
 an ad hoc way, a principled approach, recognizing that the plural-
 ity of functions served by linguistic structures is fundamental to
 them, would find in the intrusion something requiring to be pur-
 sued and generalized to the investigation of all languages, and of
the nature of language as a whole.
      Consider pronouns briefly. They should be a favored sector
for a generalized study of social meanings, particularly of the
entailment of roles and characteristics of participants in speech,
since their character as "shifters" (Jakobson 1957) makes such
roles inescapably part of their analysis, and such characteristics
frequently intrude (sex gender, for example). Such has not been
the case. In recent formal linguistics some theoreticians have
analyzed pronouns almost out of existence, their integrity as fac-
tors in speech eviscerated. Even the structural status of the com-
ponents defining pronouns has tended to remain conventional and
ethnocentric to the European tradition. It appears, for example,
that the category of personal pronouns must be taken as having,
not three, but four basic members, defined by the possible com-
binations of presence or absence of reference to speaker, and
presence or absence of reference to hearer. Our familiar "first per-
son" is of course [ +speaker, —hearer], our "second person"
[-speaker, + hearer], and our "third person" [-speaker, -hearer].
There is also a "fourth person," the inclusive person, defined as
[ +speaker, + hearer], and in a language such as Aymara of Bolivia
it is explicitly treated the same as the others, taking a plural in
exactly the same way (cf. Hymes 1972e). (Such a case shows that
there is still a good deal remaining to be explored in the "surface"
structures of languages, incidentally, most formal theory recently
having tended to take them for granted, or ride roughshod over
them).
      Sapir's 1915 article on "Abnormal Types of Speech in Nootka"
remains a classic introduction to the general subject of person-
implication in languages, and Jakobson's invention of a method
for specifying person-implication of verbal categories (1957)
remains largely undeveloped by others (but cf. Hymes 1961c.)
 (Sapir's title is unfortunately misleading, in that his article is not
restricted to Nootka, and the types of speech are not in themselves
abnormal, but expressions of Nootka judgments of the "abnormal"
character of various dialect groups and kinds of person).
      Let us consider further the component of sex gender. When it
appears in personal pronouns (almost always in "third person"
pronouns, Tunica being a rare exception in making it in the "sec-
ond person"), it is treated matter of factly. Our English pronouns
 ("he," "she" etc.) are that way. When it appears in obligatory
166                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

elements of word-classes, as in nouns in German, French, Russian,
or Wasco, it may attract some interest, and debate as to the
extent to which it is referentially active and real, some preferring
to stress the arbitrary cases, others insisting on the conversational
and poetic realities. When sex gender appears, not as a morphemic
component, but as an implicit dimension for the selection of alter-
nate morphemic shapes or word-forms), not themselves marking
gender, it is singled out as "men's and women's speech," even
though in important part it acts like pronouns and noun-classes,
both men and women keeping it straight, and employing both
when telling stories, as in Koasati. Invoking the complementary
distribution of the alternates, with respect to sex roles, saves the
simplicity and referential unity of the description.
     To judge from the linguistic literature, then, there are certain
languages that have the interesting property of sex-gender in
pronouns and even in nouns. (Nineteenth-century classifiers of
languages sometimes thought this so impressive a property of
language as to divide the world between those languages with it
and without it). There are a few languages, mostly American
Indian, mostly obsolescent or extinct (Gros Ventre, Koasati, Yana),
in which a few or many forms differ according to sex-role of
speaker (and sometimes hearer). To leave the matter there is tanta-
mount to postulating that such a fundamental property of social
life as sex role has no verbal expression in most of the world.
     The mistake is rather like that of nineteenth-century scholars
who essentially took the makeup of the verb as the basis for a
typology of languages as wholes, or of scholars who would seek
to understand case relations on the basis only of languages in
which such relationships take the form of nominal affixes. The
error is to take a part for the whole, and to identify an underlying
function with a particular manifestation. Just as with syntactic
relations and meanings, so also with social relations and meanings
in languages: one must be able to start with the underlying, uni-
versal features and ask where and how they are expressed. One
would start with the assumption that sex role finds verbal expres-
sion (as the possibility of mimicry attests), and ask where and
how—if not in morphemes, or alternants of morphemes or word-
forms, then perhaps in characteristic intonations, lexical selec-
tions, initial particles, syntactic choices, discourse structures.
Only on the basis of descriptions of this kind can one arrive at a
general theory. Some linguists, misled by the cases in which a
social meaning, or function, appears as a peculiarity of certain
languages or regions, have called such matters "marginal," and
marginal they remain, of course, if language continues to be
treated as if it were organized only around the function of refer-
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                  167


 ence. The fact remains that the range of ways, and the extent to
 which, meanings such as sex role find verbal expression must be
known, if there is to be an accurate inventory of the meanings
universal to languages, and explanation of the forms they take in
specific cases.
      The logic of pursuing what is intrinsic to a given language, so
that it opens up a parameter of general linguistics, is comple-
mented by another, the logic of pursuing what is extrinsic to a
given language, so that it also opens up a parameter of general
linguistics. In this chapter I have concentrated on the first logic,
in the hope of making what may appear obvious into something
inescapable. A general functional approach on jointly linguistic
and ethnographic bases, must nevertheless consider the second,
complementary logic of inquiry as well.
      The notion of "functions" is often taken to be entirely exter-
nal. Linguists analyze what language is, structure, so to say, and
others may then analyze what language does, i.e., function. There
is an important element of truth in this viewpoint. Consider the
use of a language to conceal information from parties ignorant
of it, as with the use of Navaho interlocutors to transmit military
messages in the World Wars, or the decision of immigrant parents
not to teach their native language to their children, so that they
can retain it for private communications among themselves.
Nothing specific to the structure of the language is involved, but
only the fact that certain persons know it and others do not. There
are many such phenomena, and it is fair to put as a criterion of
relevance to linguistic analysis, as does Greenberg (1968: 133),
that use be found to have consequences for the content and
organization of languages.
      There is an important sense, then, in which one might dis-
tinguish between functions of language (properties extrinsic to
the analysis of language itself), and functions in language (prop-
erties intrinsic to the analysis of language).
      Let us call such functions as can be entirely extrinsic to the
makeup of a language uses of it. The heart of the matter is that we
will not be able to understand uses, if we should assume that some
uses can be set aside as always extrinsic. There is reason to think
that the relation between the makeup of a language and a use is
problematic, requiring to be determined. Take concealment. It may
 be accomplished extrinsically, by use of a language, any language,
 known to the communicating parties and not to those from whom
 they wish to conceal what they say. It may be accomplished also
 by one or another creative aspect of language use that affects lan-
 guage intrinsically. The resources of a language may be selected
 in such a way as to prevent others from comprehending (veiled
168                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

 allusion may become a conventional genre, and even an art; par-
ents often invoke such a method, so that it becomes a recognizable
style, in archness of intonation as well as in lexical selection). Or,
the resources of a language may be augmented, through the inven-
tion of a code or form of speech disguise (Conklin 1959), such that
operations of substitution, addition, deletion, and permutation give
rise to novel word-shapes.
      If one is concerned to understand the workings of conceal-
ment in language, then, one has to consider a range of cases, from
purely extrinsic use to intrinsic uses. Explanation of extrinsic use
would involve the availability of a second language known to
some and not to others, how such a means of communication was
at hand; explanation of intrinsic use would involve the motivation
for, but also the mechanism of, specific organizations, and even
inventions, of linguistic means. In short, if we are willing to set
aside some uses as just (extrinsic) uses, others are associated with
what appears to be a creative aspect of language use, quite analo-
gous to the provision of novel sentences for situations requiring
them; one has here to do with provision of novel styles and
derived codes.
      A general type of use, then, such as concealment, is not just
a problem to the social scientist or student of modes of communi-
cation. Insofar as it involves a creative aspect it becomes a prob-
lem in linguistics. The analysis of some languages will require
identification of styles or codes made use of for concealment, if
only to set them apart. (An English grammar that treated pig-Latin
forms indiscriminately with others would be rather awkward.) If
linguistic theory is to be more than a theory of the minimal form
of grammars, then one will have to consider the factors that cause
concealment to take the form of choice of language in some cases,
choice of means within a language in other cases, and invention
of novel means in yet others.
      Again, consider hatred or avoidance, as a social meaning that
one language may come to have for users of another. After World
War II, German has had that meaning for some in Holland. That
in itself is a wholly extrinsic fact. But German and Dutch are of
course related languages, and the Dutch attitude may come to
have intrinsic consequences, with speakers aware of features of
both languages favoring features, and directions of change, in
Dutch that make it less like German, rather than more. (Many
Dutch speakers take pride in details of pronunciation, such as the
fricative sound corresponding to the 'ch' in words spelled like
"Scheveringen," the first three letters corresponding to [sx-], not
to 'sh-', as a German in wartime trying to pass as a Dutch speaker
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                   169

might think. In Puerto Rico after World War II some speakers
began to disfavor the hitherto prestigeful Castilian sound 'th,'
because it had become associated with the influx of Americans
who had been taught it in the States. Attitudes, in other words, may
appear to be an extrinsic factor, and certainly are studied as such
by many social scientists. Yet social meanings, even if caused con-
tingently, become a factor in subsequent change within a language
—Cf. Labov's important studies on social causes of sound change
(1973a, 1973b). Labov's focus on a classic linguistic problem of
change unfortunately leads him to underestimate grossly the per-
vasiveness of social meaning in language; a useful complement is
found in Blom and Gumperz 1972, where the focus is on mainte-
nance of distinctive phonological features.
     Most linguists would probably grant the intrinsic effects of
use most readily with regard to such types as standard languages,
Creoles and pidgins. The available set of categories for types of
language in this regard, unfortunately, is too gross and ad hoc to
be adequate. It has grown up through recognition of one or
another social role, in this or that circumstance, but little has been
done to establish a complete and comparable set of categories.
The overlap among such categories as koine, lingua franca, creole,
literary language, vernacular, etc., from the standpoint of a single
language (say, Sranan Tongo) shows that it is necessary to analyze
such categories in terms of underlying dimensions, and combina-
tions of features. Moreover, one must generalize these dimensions
and features, the processes and functions which they designate,
and investigate them with regard to all languages, not just the
salient representative cases. The processes of simplification and
complication of surface structure, for example, and of reduction
and expansion of content, and restriction and extension in scope
of use, together serve to define the parameters of pidginization
and creolization of languages (cf. Hymes 1971 e), but they are not
limited in occurrence to pidgins and Creoles, nor always com-
present. They need to be examined in other kinds of case as
well, in relation to the needs they serve. Again, the four community
functions of separatism, integration, prestige, and frame of refer-
ence, postulated for standard languages by some Czech linguists
(cf. Garvin 1959) are not limited to standard languages, nor always
compresent, and need to be examined in other kinds of case as
well (cf. Hymes 1966b).
     The generalization of such processes and functions to all
languages, investigation of the form they take in languages gen-
erally, will help explain past and ongoing change, and present
makeup of languages, since, even where the origin of the process
170                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

or function is external, there are internal consequences. This
challenge will be welcome, of course, only insofar as the goals of
linguistic theory are taken to include explanation of the makeup
of languages, as well as of that part of their makeup attributable to
a generically human mind.

Using   Universals
      As formulated by Chomsky (1965), the search for universals
is a search for "explanatory adequacy." Adequacy of explanation
consists of justifying the form of particular grammars by what is
universal in language, and, one hopes, innate in the human mind.
The use of universals, then, is to decide among possible alterna-
tive grammars, and to shed light on a facet of human nature.
      Description and theory of the sort advocated in this chapter
will of course also entail universals, having to do with stylistic
features, elements, and relationships, and social meanings (some-
thing of this has just been suggested with regard to phonology).
The universals will have the same uses, constraining choice among
alternative grammars, and shedding light on a facet of human
nature. There will be another use as well. Chomsky's mode of
explanation can be termed "essential"; there is an "existential"
or "experiential" mode of explanation as well. The point of the
first is to explain diverse expressions by finding a unity among,
or behind, them. The point of the second is to explain the exist-
ence of diversity.
      Notice that the diversity of languages ought to be surprising
to a theory that considers human beings to be "programmed," as
it were, to realize universals involuntarily, and that considers
departure from universals in languages to involve "costs." The
universal acceptance of such "costs" ought to cry out for explana-
tion. There must be powerful forces at work, other than innate
ones, to account for the variety of structures that languages do
display. Discovery of underlying connections does not really
explain the diversity after all. It adds underlying connections, but
it does not (as some seem to assume) erase or make trivial the
specific realities. Put another way: if one is truly interested in the
creative aspect of language use, one ought to take an interest in
what is created. It is rather as if a student of music, having ana-
lyzed a synthesizer, satisfied himself that it could produce any
sound wanted or usable in music, and left to others interest in
music itself.
      If we are to understand at all the role of language in human
life, we cannot merely postulate it, we must investigate it. To
investigate it, we need to understand the full set of verbal means
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                  171

available to persons, to members of a speech community. Broadly
speaking, a community's verbal means are to be understood as
the product of three interacting factors: provenance—the     histori-
cal tradition(s) within which means have been inherited; human
nature—the universal constraints on means due to the character
of mankind as a species, the nature of the human mind being a
major, but not exclusive part; the powers and limits of hearing,
the capacity of the organs used in speech, noncognitive dimensions
of human nature, all play a part; and use—the purpose to which
verbal means are put.
     The interaction of these factors determines the creation and
organization of verbal means in terms of functions in speech,
which is our main concern here. There is a further point to be
made, however, and an important one, regarding functions of
speech. As has been noted with regard to the speech community
(ch. 4), a common mistake has been made through much of the
course of linguistic theory, in that function has been equated with
structure, functional invariance being taken for granted. Thus
Whorf's type of linguistic relativity, concerned with the organi-
zation of linguistic means into fashions of speaking, took for
granted that diverse fashions of speaking had all the same func-
tion, namely, to express and shape cognitive orientation. While
Whorf's work to develop semantic description and characteriza-
tion of languages must be applauded, his functional assumption,
shared by others, cannot stand. One and the same fashion of
speaking may have quite different cognitive consequences, depend-
ing on the circumstances of its acquisition, and its place in the
linguistic repertoire of a person and a community (cf. Hymes
1966b). Similarly, Chomsky takes for granted that the organiza-
tion of linguistic means in a formal grammar can be called "com-
petence," and attributed to speakers as knowledge possessed by
them. Just as with Whorf's fashions of speaking, however, the
relation between an analysis of linguistic data, in and by itself,
and actual properties of persons, is problematic. Whether it is
world-view, or common competence, inferences from linguistic
analysis require ethnography. The plurality of possible functional
statuses makes a functional perspective necessarily prior, if we
are to say something about persons, as well as languages.
     The use of universals, then, is not to extricate language, as
abstract mind, from human history, but to enrich our understand-
ing of history. The abstract potentialities of language, the indubi-
table common properties of all languages, the contingencies of
interactions among kinds of provenance, human nature, and kinds
of use—one seeks to weave such things into a general theory of
172                                       FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

language, because people themselves are never abstract mind, but
participants in specific communities, changing, and in need of
change.

                            GRAMMAR AGAIN
      Most linguists probably regard social and stylistic matters as
lying beyond grammar, and as more complex than grammar. I have
argued that grammar is perhaps more complex and difficult, when
pursued to the point of fine detail. Grammar appears to be the
simpler matter only when its abstraction from stylistic and social
matters is taken for granted. A "taxonomic" grammar that stops
with the patent uniformities of a language can be done on the
principles, excluding social factors, of Chomsky (1965), but not a
grammar that engages the actual knowledge and abilities of speak-
ers. When the reasons for excluding social factors are critically
examined, and when one realizes that such factors cannot be
consistently excluded, any attempt to deal with them in a prin-
cipled way begins to make formal grammar appear to be, not the
first, but the last step, in linguistic description and theory.4 The
first step appears as ethnography of speaking, specifically, de-
scription of organization of linguistic means in styles of speech
in terms of the functional matrix of speaking in a community.
      To say this is tantamount to conceiving linguistics itself as
sociolinguistic in nature, and this is indeed the conclusion to
which I believe one must come. It does not follow that linguistics
has no other nature—formal models, psycholinguistic experiments,
philological analyses, comparative reconstructions, etc., remain
unchallenged, as avenues of insight. I do conclude that linguistics,
as a descriptive discipline, as a descriptive, empirical discipline—
and no school of thought disputes that it is partly such—finds it-
self on the threshold of a sociolinguistic conception of itself. I
have argued that it is essential to linguistics that it cross over the
threshold; that development is equally essential to what is now
considered "sociolinguistic" research, Sociolinguistic research
cannot develop independently of linguistics. Although some prob-
lems require a minimum of linguistic training (studies of alterna-
tion between two grossly distinct languages, for example), gen-
erality and explanation cannot be achieved on so limited a basis

     4. Cf. the still relevant observations of Ferguson (1963: 116): "the successes
of the past decades were most spectacular in the treatment of limited corpora
of homogeneous data. . . this kind of language material represents only the
exceptional situation, the special case, . . . an adequate theory of linguistics
. . . must be able to cope with the complex reality of interpenetrating styles,
dialects and languages extending out both in social space and time."
Linguistics as Sociolinguistics                                   173


(cf. ch. 4 on "code-switching"). A sociolinguistic inquiry must be
prepared to identify any feature of speech, for any feature may
prove to have relevance to a general dimension of social meaning.
Scholars of various backgrounds may master linguistics suffi-
ciently to put it to use, and such mastery should be encouraged;
it may indeed contribute additional skills and insights. But there
must also be participation of linguists, to provide training, and
for training to be effective, the participant linguists must regard
it as relevant to linguistics itself. In any case, sociolinguistics
cannot be simply a use of the results of linguistic descriptions,
but must itself be in part a mode of linguistic description. Its
linguistics must not be secondhand or second best.
      Some linguists may grant the general argument, yet hold back,
from a false impression of what explicit attention to the func-
tional matrix of language entails. In proposing to add something,
a new approach is often misunderstood as proposing to add every-
thing imaginable; calling for some change, it may be mistaken as
intending to change all. (It may mistake itself in these respects).
But though the ultimate consequences of a sociolinguistic ap-
proach may be far-reaching, the immediate consequences are to
carry forward, and to give a principled basis to, concerns already
arising within linguistics itself. Bloomfield's view that the progress
of semantics required scientific analysis of everything denotable
has been recognized as mistaken (cf. Haugen 1957, Weinreich
1963). It is equally mistaken to think that sociolinguistic descrip-
tion must wait upon, or immediately entail, a complete sociology.
Linguistic description does come to need specific knowledge of
the natural and social worlds of the users of language, but the
relationship is dialectic, not passive. Pursuit of linguistic analysis
brings into focus the particular cultural knowledge and social
relationships from whose standpoint the organization of linguis-
tic means must be viewed, as much as does ethnography. Speech
styles, verbal repertoires, and rules of speaking may appear a
vasty deep, but they are in fact finite. Their strangeness (em-
pirically, in a given case, and in nature, for many linguists) should
not be confused with absence of structure.
      To reiterate: the descriptions we need cannot just make use
of the results of independent linguistic descriptions of the ordinary
 sort. It is a counsel of permanent insolvency to say that socio-
linguistic description (or its nominal equivalents) must wait upon
 the perfection of formal grammatical theory (as in Chomsky 1965)
or concern itself with a subset of the output of an ordinary gram-
 mar (as in Werner 1966). As we have seen, the structures dis-
 closed by a functional perspective entail novel elements and re-
 174                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

  lationships, an organization of sounds, form, and meanings that
 partly cuts across, and goes beyond, ordinary grammar. Socio-
 linguistics must be itself a mode of linguistic description.
        Sociolinguistic inquiry will not succeed, will not make its
 potential contribution to either science or society, if it does not
 realize itself as a mode of description. What such a mode of
 description will be like has been adumbrated in earlier chapters
 (esp. chs. 2 and 4), and earlier in this chapter; more is said in the
 remaining chapters (chs. 9, 10). As a development out of linguis-
 tics, the leading concerns of such a mode of description can be
 said to be with speech styles, defined by rules of co-occurrence,
 and with the relations of use underlying their contrast and oc-
 currence with respect to each other, defined by rules of alterna-
 tion (see further in ch. 10). As a development within ethnography,
 the leading concern can be said to be to establish the functional
 matrix of speaking in a community. The two developments merge
 in rules of alternation, that is, relationships of use.
       It is vital to understand and act on this last point. It will
never be enough to extend the scope of linguistic description by
recognition of stylistic features and elements and patterns, and
social meanings, if such recognition amounts only to additions to
grammar in the conventional mold. There must be recognition of
a new principle of description, a novel foundation for the organiza-
tion of linguistic means. If I go on about this point, it is because
the notion of such a principle, in the sense of a novel mode of
organization of linguistic means, has been broached several times
in linguistics, and yet has never been carried through. Always the
conception of such a principle has stopped short of a break with
ordinary grammar, remaining dependent upon it.
       From the standpoint of semantic organization, Whorf (1941:
92) wrote:
       They (cognitive orientations mediated by language) do not
  depend so much upon any one system [e.g., tense or nouns—
  Whorf's italics] within the grammar as upon the ways of analyzing
  and reporting experience which have become fixed in the language
  as integrated 'fashions of speaking' and which cut across the typ-
  ical grammatical classifications, so that such a 'fashion' may
  include lexical, morphological, syntactic, and otherwise systemat-
  ically diverse means coordinated in a certain frame of consistency.

Had Whorf lived (he died before publication of the essay), he
might have developed his notion of "fashions of speaking" as a
mode of description of what can be called "cognitive styles" (cf.
Hymes 1961c), although his previous statements of the design of
a grammar, from a semantic standpoint, do not themselves show
this.
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                         175


     Whorf wrote from within the effort in the Sapir tradition in
the 1930s to develop more adequate semantic analyses of basic
categories. At the end of a succeeding decade, the major methodo-
logical statement of American linguistic description mentioned
without regard to cognitive function (Harris 1951:10):

   . . . differences in style or fashion of speech, in respect to which
   whole utterances or even discourses are consistent. Although dif-
   ferences of style can be described with the tools of descriptive
   linguistics, their exact analysis involves so much detailed study
   that they are generally disregarded.

      While there are meritorious exceptions, it is fair to say that
Harris' description has remained accurate, across dramatic
changes in approach within grammar itself. Stylistic features and
their social meanings have been considered only when inescap-
ably intrusive in grammar proper, conceived as based on referen-
tial function. It is not, one must add, that the need of "detailed
study" has frightened linguists away; it is hard to imagine that
stylistic description could be more detailed than ordinary gram-
mar has become. The explanation for neglect of the possibility
correctly and fairly stated by Harris must lie in the persistence
of an assumption about the nature of organization, of structure,
in language that made the possibility seem not a real one, or at
least not a relevant one. Pike (1967: 186) presents a telling
example:

        Failure to see that meanings can vary non-emically within a
   morpheme has led to some conclusions different from those
   reached here. Note Bloch: 'According to our assumptions, if a verb
   that belongs to a given conjugation differs in meaning or connota-
   tion, however slightly, from a verb with a phonemically identical
   base that belongs to another type, the verbs are different mor-
   phemes; the shine whose preterit is shined is a different verb from
   the shine whose preterit is shone and by the same argument the
   show whose participate is shown is a different verb from the show
   whose participle is showed' [references omitted here]; also: The
   form n't is best regarded as a separate morpheme, not as an alter-
   nant of the full form not. The two forms contrast, at least stylis-
   tically and in their connotations, in such phrases as I cannot go : I
   can't go     ' [Pike continues:] It is to Nida that we are indebted for
   the first major suggestion towards the solution of this problem in
   terms of submorphemic variation in reference to the sociolinguistic
   environment. . .; he uses the same approach to avoid Bloch's con-
   clusions that /haev, hev, ev, v/ [i.e., variants of have] are distinct
   morphemes....

Notice that sociolinguistic environment is introduced only to avoid
the unpalatable results of rigorously carrying through a principle
176                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

that both parties share, namely, that there is only one, undifferen-
tiated kind of contrastive relevance and basis of linguistic struc-
ture. Sociolinguistic considerations are used only as context for
treating perceived differences in meaning as variants, conditioned,
and below the level, or within the level, of referential units (mor-
phemes). The considerations are introduced ad hoc, and are not
provided for in principle or systematically investigated. Bloch,
moreover, was half right; the forms do contrast. Nida and Pike
were half-right too, of course; the contrast is not one between
morphemes. Nida and Pike save the referential appearances, the
unity and integrity of the morphemes, but neither approach grasps
the admitted differences of meaning as evidence of a second kind
of contrastive ("emic") relevance, underlying structure too.
      This limitation persists to the uttermost threshold of break-
through into an adequate functional conception. One might ex-
pect that Pike's views of the nature of meaning (cf. Pike 1967,
section 16.5, p. 609), of the systemic nature of la parole (13.81, p.
536), and of a language as a system of systems, as against a
"monosystemic nonfield view" (15.336, p. 597) would lead to the
kind of conception presented in this chapter. To some extent,
such is the case; cf. his treatment of contrastively relevant ways
of speaking with regard to phonological features (8.441, p. 311;
8.61, p. 323; 13.81, p. 536; 13.85, p. 543), and his recognition of
them in morphology (6.56, p. 160; 15:2, p. 582; 6.91, p. 186—this
last having been discussed just above). And in constructing a
matrix to show the sectors of language, and the dimensions deter-
mining differences in regard to them, Pike does include a fourth
column, "Stylistic (Systemic)" among the latter (see Table 3,
"Trimodal breakdown of emic classes of syntagmemes", 11.44,
pp. 463-64). He does not, however, have a fourth row with the
set of sectors determined. There the trimodal schema (phonology,
grammar, lexicon) is preserved. (I almost imagine that if only
Christian theology and Western culture had conceived of a quad-
rune Gocl, Pike, to whom the correspondence between trinity and
trimodal is significant, would surely have founded a decade or
two ago the descriptive approach that is advocated here).
      The connection between linguistic organization and social
life is broken at this point. Style does not link linguistic features
with social life through a novel mode of organization; rather, it
encloses linguistic features within grammar. Styles are conceived
as "nonsimultaneous congruent systems" (p. 132), their features
as "locally-free but systematically-conditioned variants" (8.441,
p. 311), i.e., as sources of variation recognized in order to treat
phonemes (morphemes, etc.) as unitary on a higher level (that of
"hypercongruent system" (8. 6., p. 323). Thus, when meanings in
addition to the straightforwardly referential are considered, (16.6,
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                  177


pp. 610ff.), Pike resorts to a dichotomy between "segmental" and
"subsegmental" meanings (as seen in discussion of Bloch). The
former ("denotational") are explicitly articulated, discussable by
speakers; the latter are considered to be vague dispositions, form-
ing the "background unarticulated field within which articulate
meaning takes place" (p. 611). The treatment in this regard of the
example of Bloomfield's child, who says "I'm hungry" to avoid
going to bed, as subsegmental, rather than as an opening into
pragmatic analysis of speech acts, is indicative (cf. ch. 1 on this
example). The concluding chapter, "The Context of Behavior"
(ch. 17), does not carry forward the methodology of the opening
chapters, where verbal and nonverbal behavior were to be inte-
grated in the analysis of integral events. It falls back on parallels
and analogues between linguistic systems and social systems,
analyzed disjointly. The trimodal schema for meanings (subseg-
mental meanings complementing supra- and plainly segmental
meanings), and the trimodal schema for structure (phonology,
grammar, lexicon) are preserved, at the expense of articulating
the actual relations between linguistic form and social context.
The crucial failure, that leads to a conclusion so in contradiction
to initial intention, is the failure to find a method of description
that actually does lead linguistics into context. And one way to
describe the failure is to say that styles are recognized insofar,
as they are results of rules of co-occurrence, among linguistic
features, and even among linguistic features and contextual fea-
tures, but no further; they are not investigated as themselves a
form of organization of language subject to contrast within
contexts.
     It does not suffice if styles are recognized as an aspect of
organization in grammar, but are treated solely as successive
modifications of an ordinary grammar, established without refer-
ence to ethnographic validation of stylistic relationships. Such an
approach invites an a priori and arbitrary interpretation of stylis-
tic relationships, and amounts to a formalization of the view of
style as departure and deviation (cf. ch. 4). Thus, Wescott (1962:
61-62) identifies and labels seven styles in the West African lan-
guage, Bini, in terms of successive additional modifications of the
form of words due to speech tempo. The unmodified form is called
"ceremonious," followed by "deliberate, slow, ordinary, rapid,
hurried, slurred." The modifications may be correctly observed,
and the criteria invoked are clear cut, but Wescott remarks:


       By native speakers little note is taken of speech-tempo—
   except in the oblique sense that ceremonious speech is often said
   to sound "Ishan" and slurred speech "Yoruba" (two other lan-
   guages in the region).
178                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

In other words, besides the median "ordinary," presumably, speak-
ers appear to discriminate only two poles among the other six
postulated levels of style.
     Again, Klima (1964) discriminates four English styles in terms
of extensional rules accounting for differences in phrase struc-
ture and order of transformations that affect the marking of case
in pronouns. As with Wescott, the criteria are wholly internal to
the grammar; the concern is to find the formally most economical
statement of the relations between "systems" or styles.
     In each case (Wescott, Klima) one form of grammatical state-
ment in a single domain is taken as a norm, and other phenomena
are treated as successive departures. The reality of the styles to
speakers of the language is not validated (though it is labelled by
Wescott); the social meaning of styles, and rules governing choice
among them, are not investigated. To investigate these things, of
course, would appropriately test the validity of the postulated
styles. The test might confirm them, of course; it might also indi-
cate that the styles present in the community cut across particular
domains of grammar and phonology. The net effect of the "suc-
cessive departures" approach is the same as with Pike's "en-
velope" analysis of style, the difference being that Pike saves the
referential unity of ordinary description by invoking complemen-
tary distribution, whereas in these cases it is saved in terms of
formal derivation.
     The kind of conception of style that is required has been
broached, to be sure, by Joos (1959), who makes it the specific
condition of stylistic analysis that it crosscut the usual compart-
ments of a grammar. Joos, however, did not follow up his concep-
tion with any indication of an empirical approach to the identifica-
tion and analysis of styles. It has been left for scholars working
within a sociolinguistic approach (Gumperz and Ervin-Tripp, see
ch. 10) to do this. Much more remains to be done. And if the step
into ethnography is essential, the consequences will be carried
back into the formal analysis of syntax itself, as the next chapter
seeks to demonstrate.
Chapter 9

Syntactic Arguments and
Social Roles:
Quantifiers, Keys,
and Reciprocal vs. Reflexive
Relationships
     Much recent work in linguistics has recognized the neces-
sity of taking into account characteristics of context, especially
of the participants in discourse (e.g., Firth 1935; Gunter 1966;
Halliday 1970; Hymes 1964a: 38, 1964b: 3, 1970: 130; Jakobson
1957, 1970; Labov 1970, section 4; R. Lakoff 1969, 1972, 1973;
Nida 1945; Pike 1967: sections 1.4, 2.73; Sapir 1933 (SWES 11-2);
Tyler 1966; Wheeler 1967; Whiteley 1966).1 In sociology the work
of Harold Garfinkel, Erving Goffman, Harvey Sacks, Emanuel
Schegloff and others has shown the necessity of taking in account

     1. This chapter was first published as "Syntactic Arguments and Role
Relationships: Are There Some of the Latter in Any of the Former?" in
a book that is being edited by E. Polome', M. Jazayery, and W. Winter (The
Hague: Mouton and Co., n.v., forthcoming). It was also distributed as Work-
ing Paper Number 7 in the series, Texas Working Papers in Sociolinguis-
tics (Austin: Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, 1972). The
title has been revised here to indicate the main notions dealt with, and
the last part of the exposition has been recast. In contributing to this Fest-
schrift for Arch Hill (Professor of English at the University of Texas) I
thought of a seminar on literature and linguistics he helped conduct, and in
which I sat, as a student in both the Linguistic Institute and School of Letters
that summer. I was grateful to him for associating the rigor of linguistics with
the richness of language, at a time, some twenty years ago, when application
of linguistics to literature seemed frighteningly mechanistic to many literary
scholars, and suspiciously unscientific to many linguists.

                                                                            179
180                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

characteristics of discourse itself. These two directions of re-
search have increasingly converged, but not quite joined. For the
linguist, analysis of social relationships is typically informal, a
matter of ad hoc contexts (but cf. Fought 1972 on Goffman's no-
tion of with). For the sociologist, analysis of texts is typically
informal, a matter of ad hoc content (but cf. certain observations
of Schegloff 1968, and Goffman 1971 on remedial interchange).
     I shall try to show that more explicit consideration of social
relationships, as an aspect of semantic analysis itself, may con-
tribute to the understanding of both the presuppositions under-
lying sentences and the values underlying social relationships.
     Consider the following four English sentences:
        1. If you eat some candy, I'll whip you.
        2. If you eat any candy, I'll whip you.
        3. If you eat some spinach, I'll give you ten dollars.
        4. If you eat any spinach, I'll give you ten dollars.
These sentences are taken from Robin Lakoff's article, "Some
Reasons Why There Can't Be Any some-any Rule" (1969: 609-10).
The first pair constitute (4a), the second pair (4b), in her dis-
cussion.
     Lakoff abstracts her argument as follows:
       Semantic notions—such as presupposition, speaker's and
  hearer's beliefs about the world, and previous discourse—must be
  taken into account in a complete treatment of the distribution of
  some and any in conditional, negative, and interrogrative sen-
  tences. Syntactic conditions alone will not account for the fact
  that, in certain sentence types, the two forms occur with
  different meanings. [608]
     Lakoff's point is that the two sentences in each of these and
other pairs differ in meaning, yet the only surface difference be-
tween the members of each pair is that one has the quantifier
some, and the other any. She proceeds to infer that in certain
types of sentences the choice between some and any depends on
factors other than the superficial syntactic configuration in which
the quantifier is found.
           In questions of certain types, the use of some implies that the
      speaker hopes for, or at least anticipates a positive answer; the
      use of any implies the expectation of a negative answer, or at least
      a neutral feeling on the part of the speaker. (E.g., "Who wants
      some beans?": "Who wants any beans?") [609]. In conditions . . .
      cases like 4a and 4b . . . are not real conditions; they are, rather,
      threats or promises. In these, again, the emotional bias of the
      speaker comes into play, in the choice between some and any.
      A threat goes with any, since usually someone threatens someone
      else to prevent an undesired action; a promise goes with some,
      for a similar reason. [612]
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                           181


   The four sentences of concern here are interpreted in these
words:

        In 4a, the first sentence [1] could, I think, only be spoken to
   someone who wanted to be whipped. The speaker in the second
   sentence [2], which is much more normal, makes the assumption
   that the hearer does not want to be whipped: this is a punishment.
   With any, the interpretation of the sentence is that the speaker
   does not want the hearer to eat the candy. Hence it matches up
   correctly with the apodosis, a threat of punishment. With some,
   the interpretation is that the speaker wants the hearer to eat the
   candy; hence the apodosis can't be interpreted as punishment. The
   sentence can be interpreted as meaningful only if there is an
   implication of perversion on the part of one of the persons
   involved.
        In 4b, on the other hand, just the opposite is true. The first
   sentence [3] is the normal one; it assumes that the person ad-
   dressed wants ten dollars, as most people would, and is offering
   [sic: being offered?] a reward for doing something the speaker
   wants him to do. In the second sentence [4] the only possible
   interpretation is that, for some reason, the person addressed does
   not want to receive ten dollars, and that this sentence is a threat,
   parallel to the second sentence of 4a [611].

      We have, then, two "normal" sentences and two sentences
(1, 4) whose acceptance is taken to strain somewhat the imagina-
tion.
      To many readers (and hearers) of English, sentence 4 will ap-
pear normal quite without strain, not as a threat, but as a promise:
It is so unlikely that you will eat spinach that I feel entirely safe
in promising you ten dollars if you do. Such sentences are com-
mon. We might dub them the "I'll eat my hat" type.
      More generally, it is not the case that the meaningfulness of
1 requires an implication of perversion, and that the only possible
interpretation of the addressor's assumption about the addressee
in 4 is that the latter does not want ten dollars. Beyond the fac-
tor of SPEECH ACT PRESUPPOSITION, involving the status of
a sentence as something like a promise or threat (or a guarantee
or a warning), there is an additional factor of social meaning,
which may be called KEY, involving whether in its conventional
intention the sentence is to be taken as mock or at face value.2
And the working out of the implication of key as a factor leads
to recognition of yet another factor of social meaning, which has
to do with the internal role relationships in terms of which a

     2. Harvey Sacks has recently stressed the fundamental importance of this
factor (cf. Labov 1970: 82, n. 44). I first learned it from Ray Birdwhistell and
the writing of Gregory Bateson. As seen below, the notion of "sincerity"
itself seems to require further discrimination.
182                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

sentence is construed. As we shall see, more than one such con-
struction is possible.
     As to key: notice that the contrast does not seem to be quite
the same thing as a contrast between insincere and sincere (Searle
1969:62). The speaker is not taking responsibility for having an
intention, in both the insincere and the mock case, but in the
latter (unlike the former) the speaker is not purporting to have
the intention. The contrast mock: face value thus appears to cut
across insincere: sincere. Further, Searle makes the status of an
utterance as promise independent, or neutral, with regard to sin-
cerity or insincerity; the latter contrast is a question of actual
intention—of motive, in Skinner's terms (1971). Insincere promises
are promises nevertheless, because of what they purport (of their
conventional intention, in Skinner's terms). Sincerity conditions,
then, as a matter of actual intentions and states, are at a step
removed from the essentially cultural analysis in which we, like
Lakoff, Searle, and Skinner, are engaged. The interpretation of an
utterance as mock or face value, on the other hand, seems in-
separable from, and indeed indispensable to, the analysis of
speaking as customary behavior. (Cf. Hymes 1967: 24, 1972: 62—
although in those papers "serious" was used for conventional in-
tention, and hence ambiguously in retrospect, given specialization
of the term "serious" now to motive.)
     Notice also that terms such as "promise" and "threat" can
only be applied informally here. One might speak instead, or also,
of "guarantee" and "warning." (I owe awareness of this point to
Bruce Fraser.) In the absence of a fully worked out analysis of
the English taxonomy of speech acts in this domain, we cannot
be sure whether the availability of a terminological distinction
reflects a difference in speech act, as such, or additional aspects
of meaning, having to do with topic, context, style level, etc. And
of course we should not expect any language, including English,
to be a perfect metalanguage for itself, in this or any other respect.
This is a principal reason why an independent sociological analy-
sis of conventional acts is essential. Linguistics cannot itself,
through analysis of the "folk analysis," or "homemade model,"
embodied in a language's terminology for speech acts, expect to
discover the existence and nature of all the acts performed in a
community through speech.
     Because of the additional factor of key, the two "nonnormal"
sentences (1, 4), then, may be either a threat or a promise, a warn-
ing or a guarantee, or the like. Each sentence may have either a
mock or a face value and a positive or negative component. In
other words, it is not only that sentences differing only in a single
quantifier may yet differ in meaning. Sentences that do not differ
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                  183


at allt i.e., that have one and the same surface structure, are sus-
ceptible of at least two contrasting readings. In keeping with a
standard form of argument (e.g., re "Flying planes can be dan-
gerous"), the present case would seem to demonstrate that KEY
 (as conventional intention, not necessarily actual motive—cf.
Skinner 1970, 1971), is a necessary part of the schema of interpre-
tation underlying sentences. The interdependence of two broad
types of function, or meaning, would seem to apply here as else-
where in the analysis of language.
     The reasoning behind this conclusion can be presented more
clearly if we adopt a format for restating the relevant features of
the sentences in question. Let X represent the protasis or condi-
tion of a sentence (e.g., "If you eat some candy"), and let Y repre-
sent the apodosis or conclusion (e.g., "I'll whip you").
     Lakoff's analysis of the four sentences can now be given as
the following four interpretations:
        1. Addressee wants Y, Addressor wants X.
        2. Addressee does not want Y, Addressor does not want X.
        3. Addressee wants Y, Addressor wants X.
        4. Addressee does not want Y, Addressor does not want X.
      In this respect, of course, there are but two types of sentences
(1, 3) and (2, 4). The further distinction in terms of "normal"
(2, 3) vs. "abnormal" (1, 4) depends on some and any in relation
to the customary wants of the participants and their community.
      A somewhat more elaborate description of the interpretation
of the sentences will help bring out the implications of key and
role:
         1. If you do something I want, I'll do something you want.
         2. If you do something I don't want, I'll do something you
            don't want.
         3. If you do something I want, I'll do something you want.
         4. If you do something I don't want, I'll do something you
            don't want.
      Notice now that the relation between participants (addressor,
addressee), here you, I; condition and consequence (protasis,
apodosis), here X, Y; and distribution of positive and negative
evaluation, here want, not want, is permutable. In particular, the
places of X and Y can be reversed. In terms of the format given
first above, one may have, not only interpretations 1-4 above, but
an addition.
         1'. Addressee wants X, Addressor wants Y.
         2'. Addressee does not want X, Addressor does not want Y.
         3'. Addressee wants X, Addressor wants Y.
         4'. Addressee does not want X, Addressor does not want Y.
184                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

In terms of the format given second above, one may have not
only (1-4) above, but in addition the interpretations:
       1'. If you do something you want, I'll do something I want.
       2'. If you do something you don't want, I'll do something I
           don't want.
       3'. If you do something you want, I'll do something I want.
        4'. If you do something you don't want, I'll do something I
            don't want.
      For the purpose of this argument it has been assumed that
some takes only positive senses (excluding "negative") and that
any takes only negative senses (excluding "positive"), as Lakoff
implies. (Nor are possible questions as to the scope of the syn-
tactic analysis itself considered.) Let us assume, as does Lakoff,
that the normal cultural assumption or presupposition is that
eating candy is positive, eating spinach negative, and that being
whipped is negative, receiving ten dollars positive.
      We have then two forms of interpretation for each of the
sentences. With regard to 1, If you eat some candy, I'll whip you,
interpretation 1 (If you do something I want, I'll do something
you want) yields a mock promise. It is contrary to presupposition,
as it were. It suggests that the addressee does not like candy and
does like being whipped, and/or that the likelihood of either act
is slight. In speech the mock promise would require intonation
and voice quality suggesting mutual ingratiation. Interpretation 1'
(If you do something you want, I'll do something I want) yields a
face-value threat. It is in accord with presupposition. It fits the
assumption that the addressee likes candy, but not being whipped,
and further suggests that the addressor does not want (his?) candy
eaten, or does not want the addressee to eat (too much?) candy
(sweets?) (before dinner?), and would be willing to punish.
      With regard to 2, If you eat any candy, I'll whip you, in-
terpretation 2 yields a face-value threat, in accord with presup-
position just as 1'. Interpretation 2' yields a mock threat, contrary
to presupposition, just as 1, that to be carried off in speech would
require intonation and voice qualities appropriate to the sugges-
tion of mutual disinclination (of the addressee to eat candy, of
the addressor to mind enough to punish for it)—i.e., If you eat
candy (but you don't like candy), I'll whip you (but I don't
like/wish to whip you).
     With regard to 3, If you eat some spinach, I'll give you ten
dollars, interpretation 3 yields a face-value promise, in accord
with presupposition. It suggests that the addressee does not like
spinach (indeed, some people do, but we are restricting ourself
to cultural stereotypes for the moment), but would like to receive
ten dollars; it suggests that the addressor wants some spinach
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                    185


 eaten (by the addressee?), and, possibly, would not casually part
with ten dollars. Interpretation 3' yields a mock promise, contrary
to presupposition. It suggests that the addressee likes spinach
 (contrary, at least to stereotype), but would not mind ten dollars;
possibly, it suggests also that the addressor is not particularly in-
terested in having the addressee eat spinach, and in any case is
eager to seize on any pretext for giving ten dollars (to the addres-
see?). In speech it could be carried off with intonation and voice
qualities suggesting prospective mutual satisfaction.
      With regard to 4, If you eat my spinach, I'll give you ten
dollars, interpretation 4 yields a mock threat, contrary to presup-
position, that could be carried off in speech with intonation and
voice qualities appropriate to mutual disinclination (here, to have
spinach eaten, and to receive ten dollars). Interpretation 4' yields
a face-value promise, in accord with presupposition.
     In summary,
        1. Mock promise
        1'. Face-value threat
        2. Face-value threat
        2'. Mock threat
        3. Face-value promise
        3'. Mock promise
        4. Mock threat
        4 / Face-value promise
     Thus, the cases judged a nonnormal promise (1) and a threat
(4) respectively, are found instead to be interpretable as instances
of the speech act contrary to that to which they were assigned.
(Assuming a constant set of presuppositions is preserved—to
change the set of presuppositions of course would require us to
change the analysis of all the sentences, "normal" as well as
nonnormal.)
      All this is not to say that each interpretation is equally likely.
Indeed, something along the lines of marked and unmarked mean-
ings, or interpretations, can be discerned. This has been indicated
in the remarks on intonation, although it must be remembered that
normal intonation is itself an ingredient of meaning and interpre-
tation. The key to the marked and unmarked interpretations would
seem to involve what can be called a reciprocal vs. a reflexive
construction of the role relationship between participants. Inter-
pretations 1-4, of the type "If you do something I (do/don't) want,
I'll do something you (do/don't) want" can be called reciprocal;
interpretations 1 - 4 ' of the type "If you do something you (do/don't
want, I'll do something I (do/don't) want" can be called reflexive.
      Notice first that reciprocal and reflexive interpretations do
not coincide with the status of a sentence as a speech act (threat,
186                                           FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

promise) or with the key of a sentence (mock, face-value). The
two types of interpretation are distributed equally among both
types of act and both kinds of key. Thus, threats comprise both 2, 4
and 1', 2' while promises comprise both 1, 3 and 3', 4'. Mock
cases comprise both 1, 4 and 2', 3', while face-value cases comprise
both 2, 3 and 1', 4'.
      The two types are also of course distributed equally overall
with regard to the two quantifiers; any is found in both 2, 4 and
2', 4', and some in both 1, 3 and 1', 3'. There is nevertheless a differ-
ence between the two types of interpretation with regard to
quantifiers. The reciprocal cases are entirely any in the case of
threat, and entirely some in the case of promise, whereas the
reflexive cases are divided, with the mock threat having any, the
mock promise some, but the face value threat some, the face value
promise any.
      These relationships can be seen in the following diagram:

                   THREAT                                           PROMISE



                                                      A                                   „
      Reciprocal             Reflexive               Reciprocal               Reflexive

   FV        Mock       FV          Mock          FV        Mock         FV         Mock



  any         any      some         any         some        some        any         some

                            V        2'           3             1            4'          3'

     A further difference between the two types of interpretation
can also be found in relationships involving the two parts of each
sentence. If we consider the two quantifiers to have positive and
negative values, following Lakoff (1969: 613), and indicate them
with + and —; if we contrast the two types of act themselves,
marking threat as - and promise as + ; and if we mark the predi-
cates of positive condition (eat candy) and positive consequence
(receive ten dollars) with + , and the predicates of negative con-
dition (eat spinach) and negative consequence (be whipped) with
—, then the values for the several sentences could be entered at
the bottom of the diagram given above, as follows:

        2          4            V        2'      3          1           4'          3'
      + -      - +          + -      + -        - +       + -          - +        - +

     A more useful arrangement, for our immediate purpose, is to
align the values as follows, giving first culturally assumed values
for the predicates of the protasis and apodosis, then the value for
the quantifier, then the value for the speech act.
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                             187


                                       RECIPROCAL
            Protasis        Apodosis      Quantifier   Speech act
               +                              +           + (Mock promise)
1
               +
2                                                         — (Face-value threat)
3                                  +          +           + (Face-value promise)
                                   +
4                                                         - (Mock threat)

                                       REFLEXIVE
            Protasis        Apodosis      Quantifier   Speech act
                                             +
1'             +                                          — (Face-value threat)
               +
2'                                                        - (Mock threat)
3'                                 +          +           + (Mock promise)
4'                                 +                      + (Face-value promise)

With the reciprocal interpretations, the relationships are rather
straightforward. The quantifier and the act have invariably the
same value (some with a promise, any with a threat). The quanti-
fier has invariably the same value as the predicate of the apodosis
(consequence), when the key value is face value, and the same
key as the predicate of the protasis (condition) when the key is
mock.
      With reflexive interpretation, the relationships are more
complex. The quantifier and the act have the same value only when
 the key is mock (any with threat in 2', some with promise in 3').
In these cases the quantifier has the same value as the predicate of
the apodosis, in contrast to what obtains with the reciprocal
interpretation. When the key is face value, the quantifier and the
act have opposite values (some with threat in 1', any with promise
in 4'). In these cases the quantifier has the same value as the predi-
cate of the protasis, again in contrast to what obtains with the
reciprocal interpretation.
      The invariant relationships under the two interpretations can
be summarized formulaicly, letting Pro = Protasis, Apo- Apodo-
sis, Q=Quantifier, SpA = Speech Act, F V = F a c e value, and M =
Mock. Under the reciprocal interpretation, Q=SpA, and Q - A p o /
FV, Q=Pro/M (or, if Q=Apo, then the key is FV, and if Q=Pro,
then the key is M). Under the reflexive interpretation, it is not the
quantifier, but the apodosis that covaries exactly with the speech
act, so that Apo = SpA, and Q=SpA/M, Q =£Spa/FV (or, if Q = S p A ,
then the key is M, and if Q=£SpA, then the key is FV).
      The "paradigmatic" or "field" appproach being followed here
(cf. Levi-Strauss 1963: 18)—the approach, really, of all serious
structuralism—can be pushed further, as I shall now indicate, but
the results approach the uninterpretable, so long as evidence is
confined to the manipulation of sentences on a page or in a mind.
With just such data, the approach is useful for the generation of
188                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

a full set of possibilities, but inadequate to determine their inter-
pretation. For that, observation and analysis of actual conversa-
tion in spontaneous settings is required.
      With that caution, notice now that the values of the protasis
and apodosis (condition and consequence) need not be fixed in
opposition, as + - , or - + . One can consider sentences in which
both values are + , and sentences in which both values are
Thus, in terms of the reciprocal interpretation, one can have:
[ + + ] 5. If you eat some candy, I'll give you ten dollars.
             [If you do what I want (which is conventionally + ) , I'll
                do what you want (which is conventionally + ) ]
         6. If you eat any candy, I'll give you ten dollars.
             [If you do what I don't want (conventionally + ) , I'll do
                what you don't want (conventionally + ) ]
[      ] 7. If you eat some spinach, I'll whip you.
             [If you do what I want (conventionally - ) , I'll do what
                you want (conventionally —)].
         8. If you eat any spinach, I'll whip you.
             [If you do what I don't want (conventionally - ) , I'll do
                what you don't want (conventionally —)]
      In terms of the reflexive interpretation, one can have the same
surface sentences, and, as underlying descriptions, the counter-
parts:
[ + + l 5'. [If you do what you want (which is conventionally + ) ,
                 I'll do what I want (which is conventionally + ) ]
         6'. [If you do what you don't want (conventionally + ) , I'll
                do what I don't want (conventionally + ) ]
[      ] 7'. [If you do what you want (conventionally - ) , I'll do
                what I want (conventionally —)l
         8'. [If you do what you don't want (conventionally —), I'll
             do what I don't want (conventionally —)]
Charted along the same lines as before:
                            RECIPROCAL
                Protasis      Apodosis        Quantifier    Speech Act
      5            +              +               +
      6            +              +
      7            +              —               +
      8

                             REFLEXIVE
      5'           +              +               +
      6'           +              +
      T            -              -                +

      8'
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                    189


      But how to interpret these formal possibilities in terms of
speech act and key?
      If the invariant relationships previously noted should hold
for these sentences, then, under the reciprocal interpretation,
where Q = SpA, one would take 5 and 7 as Promise, and 6 and 8
as Threat. But no automatic reading of key would be possible.
Q=Apo, yes, as in cases of FV, but also Q=Pro, as in cases of M.
(One could have taken Q = Apo/FV, but Q^Apo/M, in which case
all these reciprocal cases would be FV, since Q is never not equal
to Apo. That seems contrary to interpretations available for cer-
tain of the sentences, as suggested below, and contrary to expec-
tations as to the general availability of contrast in key.) Without
consideration of other aspects of the message, then, ambiguity
results. On the other hand, under the reflexive interpretation,
where Apo = SpA, one would take 5' and 6' as Promise, and 7' and 8'
as Threat. Moreover, key is interpretable. Where Q=SpA, as in
5" and 7', the key is M, and where Q ^ S p A , as in 6' and 8', the
key is FV.
     In the cases of reciprocal interpretation, perhaps key can in
fact be interpreted in terms of the positive or negative values of
the predicates, so that 5 would be a Face-Value Promise in a tone
of mutual ingratiation: you like eating candy, and I like giving
away ten dollars—recalling lines in W. H. Auden's For the Time
Being; A Christmas Oratorio (1945: 459) to the effect that "I like
committing crimes; God likes forgiving them; Really, the world is
admirably arranged." 7 would be a Mock Promise, in a tone of
mutual disinclination or arrant improbability: you are as loth to
eat spinach, which I do not want you to do, as I am loth to whip
you, which you don't want me to do. 6 would be perhaps a Mock
Threat, perhaps in a tone such as "If you are so naughty as not to
resist the temptation to eat candy (a very likely event, since chil-
dren such as you like candy), I shall just have to give you ten
dollars, whether you like it or not—(ha ha)." 8 is perhaps a Face-
Value Threat, perhaps in a tone such as "It may be highly unlikely
that you would do something so unpleasant as to eat spinach, but
if you do eat any spinach, perhaps just because I've told you not
to, I'll whip you, just because I've told you not to." Here we
obviously are extending ourselves beyond what the machinery
suggested in this paper can take formally into account, although
not beyond what, one hopes, further exploration of conversation
will make it possible to take formally into account. Let us sum up
the status of the additional sentences, 5-8 and 5 - 8 ' , letting gloss-
ing of the latter go by, and then return to the question of marked-
ness by way of conclusion.
190                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

      The additional sentences are as follows:
         5. Face-Value Promise
         6. Mock Threat
         7. Mock Promise
         8. Face-Value Threat
         5'. Mock Promise
         6'. Face-Value Promise
         7'. Mock Threat
         8'. Face-Value Threat
      Lakoff's intepretations involved a predisposition to take
 construal in terms of reciprocal roles as normal and exclusive. A
 predisposition to take sentences at face value is also reflected. Her
 normal cases (2, 3} have just these two characteristics. The other
 two cases (1, 4) cause difficulty because the reciprocal interpreta-
 tion is imposed upon them without consideration of the possibility
 of contrast in key.
      Predisposition to interpret such sentences in terms of recip-
 rocal roles probably is common in the United States and perhaps
throughout English-speaking speech communities. Predisposition
 to take sentences at face value seems to me less common—the
 mock interpretation of 4 occurred to me immediately upon sug-
 gestion of difficulty with it, and I suspect that the mock : face
value contrast is likely to occur readily to many others. I suspect,
 then, that adequate research would show that the reciprocal role
interpretation is the common, unmarked one, but also that inter-
pretation of sentences as mock, as well as at face value, is also
likely.
      We are dealing, of course, with cultural definitions of situa-
tion. Lakoff's point that interpretations depend upon cultural defi-
nitions opens up the possibility of different cultural definitions. It
seems likely that communities may differ with regard to the likeli-
hood or acceptability of a contrast between mock and face-value
interpretation, in general and in regard to types of situation. Per-
haps the personal communities of Lakoff and myself differ in this
regard, at least within the situation of considering syntactic exam-
ples. In any case, her analysis makes clear that interpretation of
such sentences depends upon cultural definitions of rewards and
punishments, so that what is face value in one group need not be
in another. Once the door is opened to contrast in key, one can
see the need to determine not only such cultural definitions, but
also norms for styles of speech. Mock utterances may be expect-
able in one group, even stereotyped to the point of losing any
special force, and so rare in another group as to be momentarily
uninterpretable as such in the flow of ordinary discourse. Much
work in the ethnography of speaking is needed on these points.
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                  191


       With regard to the mock : face value dimension, then, there
 is a respect in which the mock cases appear more complex, more
 marked, if only in the recurrent need to invoke an appropriate
 intonation or other support of the intended interpretation. Still,
 vocal features comment upon the relationship between an overt
 sentence and its presuppositions in all cases, and, as has been
 suggested, it may be necessary to consider "neutral" intonation
 as but one choice within a set of appropriate intonations, the
 entire set being the proper object of analysis. Speech styles in
 relation to settings have to be considered as well, and in some
 cases, it may be the face-value interpretation of an utterance that
 requires special support. In sum, it will not be surprising to con-
 clude that mock interpretations are generally more marked, but
 it is dangerous to start with that conclusion, and to get them aside
 as "departures," "deviations," or the like. Much that is normal
 and natural in speech would then be missed or misperceived.
       The second respect in which one kind of interpretation is
 more complex is far more uncertain. The fact that in cases where
 the speech act is to be taken at face value, the value of the quan-
tifier is in contrast to that of the act (1', 4'), whereas in cases
 where the quantifier does have the same value as the act (2', 3'),
the act is to be taken as mock; the fact that apodosis and face
value go together in value under the reciprocal interpretation, but
not under the reflexive interpretation—these things suggest that
the reflexive interpretation is indeed set off as less likely, requir-
ing more support for its occurrence, and is therefore in a sense
marked. A further point in this regard is that LakofFs initial obser-
vation that any with a negative sense is appropriate to a threat,
some with a positive sense to a promise, is sustained insofar as
three out of four threats (in cases 1-4, l / -4 / ) have any, three of
four promises some. The exceptions help to suggest a scale of
"naturalness." Reciprocal appears more "natural" than reflexive
(entirely any in threats, entirely some in promises). Within reflex-
ive interpretations, the mock cases would perhaps be more "natu-
ral" than the face value cases (any in threat, vs. some, and some
in promise, vs. any). A reciprocally interpreted threat or promise
would be unmarked; a reflexively interpreted mock threat or
promise somewhat marked; a reflexively interpreted face-value
threat or promise most marked and most in need of support for
its successful interpretation.
       Finally, it may say something about the assumptions that
users of language make about role relationships to find that threats
and promises are naturally construed in terms of reciprocity; but
it may also say something to find that a construal in terms of what
has been called here reflexivity also does exist. And it would be
192                                      FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

desirable to investigate the relationship between these two types
of construal in other communities.
     We are familiar with the type of linguistic relativity that finds
in grammar indications of assumptions about the makeup of the
world and how it is known. Current work in linguistics and
sociolinguistics is beginning to suggest that one may find in gram-
mar evidence of assumptions about the makeup of the social
world, and of the rights and duties to be expected and exchanged
there.3 This would be a second type of linguistic relativity, with
its universalistic as well as its particularistic side (as was the case
with the linguistic relativity of Boas, Sapir, and Whorf), and with
a constructive as well as critical role to play.4

     3. I owe this idea to the stimulation of conversations with Erving
Goffman, but he is not responsible for it.
     4. In Hymes 1966 I developed the critical role of a second type of
linguistic relativity, but did not state the positive role, even though the last
section of the paper implicitly exemplified it.
     Field research by Elinor O. Keenan and Judith T. Irvine has brought the
positive relation between linguistic and social relationships to precise focus
(see their contributions in Baumari and Sherzer 1974). Comparative study of
a relation between speech styles and types of society was advocated by
Jacobs (1945: 6-7). Recent work with Regna Darnell, Joel Sherzer and others
on a guide to research has brought the idea into view on a more general
basis (see Darnell 1972, ch. 2). Of current models of grammar, the functional
approach of Halliday (1970, 1973) would seem to have the most to contribute.
Chapter 10

The Scope of Sociolinguistics




    The term "sociolinguistics" began to gain currency about ten
years ago.1 The subsequent decade has seen a great deal of activity.
There have been general symposia (e.g. Bright 1966, Lieberson
1966, Istituto Luigi Sturzo 1970, Ardener 1971, Smith and Shuy
1972); symposia on major topics (e.g. Gumperz and Hymes 1964,
Macnamara 1967, Fishman, Ferguson and Das Gupta 1968, Hymes
1971c, Whiteley 1971, Rubin and Jemudd 1972, Cazden, John and
Hymes 1972); notable major research efforts (e.g. Fishman 1966,
Labov 1966, the several surveys of East African countries, Le
Page's survey in British Honduras, Labov's U. S. Regional Survey) ;
the launching of working papers (e.g. Berkeley's Language and

     1. This chapter was presented as the concluding address of the 23rd
Annual Round Table at Georgetown University in March 1972, and pub-
lished in Sociolinguistics: Current Trends and Prospects, Report of the 23rd
Annual Round Table, ed. by Roger W. Shuy (Monograph Series on Lan-
guages and Linguistics, 25) (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press,
1972), pp. 313-33. It was also distributed as Working Paper Number 9 in the
series, Texas Working Papers in Sociolinguistics (Austin: Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, 1972). The relation of the work of Ervin-
Tripp to that of lohn Gumperz was unfortunately omitted from the pub-
lished text, but is noted here; a few minor revisions have been made.

                                                                        193
194                                 FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

Behavior Laboratory series, and now the series out of Texas, and
the Georgetown series); books of readings, increasingly specific
to the field (e.g. Hymes 1964, Fishman 1968, Giglioli 1972, Gum-
perz and Hymes 1972, Fishman 1972b); textbooks (e.g. Burling
1969, Pride 1970, Fishman 1970, Fishman 1972a); even a series of
collected papers of the middle-aged who find themselves senior
scholars (Greenberg 1971, Ferguson 1971, Gumperz 1971, Haugen
1972, Fishman 1972b, Lambert 1972, Ervin-Tripp 1973), as well as
Bernstein (1972); and specific journals, one more applied in orien-
tation (La Mundo Lingvo-Problemo),       one more theoretical (Lan-
guage in Society).
      Where do we now stand? To what point have we gotten? In
some ways, very far. In one fundamental regard, I think, simply
to a threshold.
      Energetic activity and prolific publication need not warrant
confidence in the scientific worth of what is done. We are all
familiar with the gap that can exist between public concerns and
the competence of scientists. Sociolinguistics is nourished in
important part by the obvious relevance of much of its subject-
matter, joining other academic fields in which concern for educa-
tion, children, ethnic relations, governmental policies, find expres-
sion. But the importance of the questions is no guarantee of the
value of the answer. Indeed, one can wonder if research funds are
not commonly ways of finding employment for sons and daughters
of the middle class, while avoiding confrontation of the real prob-
lems; perhaps what is needed is not research but substantial doses
of money, love, and democratic participation. In a society which
expects to organize bureaucracies and to retain scholars to min-
ister to whatever is defined as a national need, sociolinguistics
might drift indefinitely, profuse and shallow, "a mile wide and an
inch deep."
      I take it that most of us aim higher than that. We see a scien-
tific as well as a practical need. If relevance to social problems
were not recognized, sociolinguistics research would still be
needed for the sake of an adequate theory of language. Some of
what is done under the heading of "sociolinguistics" may be justi-
fied only in the sense that something is better than nothing, when
need is great. But in the present state of sociolinguistics, I would
maintain three things: (1) the scientific as well as the practical side
 of linguistics stands in need; (2) the scientific and practical needs
converge; and (3) the past decade has seen steps taken which do
bring us to the threshold of an integrated approach to linguistic
 description. As to (1), witness the current disarray with regard to
 arguments in syntax and semantics, and with regard to the place
 of semantics, intonation, and indeed phonology and lexicon in a
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                    195


model of grammar itself, as issues of empirical adequacy and
 validity are pressed against the dominant "intuitionist" approach,
and as other, contextually-oriented traditions of work are gradu-
ally reinvented or grudgingly rediscovered. As to (2), note that
findings as to the organization of variation and the structure of
speech acts, both issues central to linguistic theory, contribute to
the scientific basis of which successful practice stands in need,
while patent facts of practical experience (e.g., the organization of
linguistic features in terms of verbal repertoires, the role of social
meaning as a determinant of acceptability and the " creative aspect
of language use," the effects of personal identity, role, and setting
as constraints on competence) point to severe limitations of pres-
ent linguistic theory and motivate efforts to overcome them. As
to (3), if we take "integrated" to encompass the structure of sen-
tences within the structure of discourse, of referential meaning
within the meanings of speech acts, and of dialects and languages
within the organization of verbal repertoires and speech communi-
ties, then we can both see a convergence implicit in much of the
best recent work and envisage a unity to which it can arrive.
      To explain this view of the state of sociolinguistic research,
I must say something about its goals.

                      GOALS OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
     The term "sociolinguistics" means many things to many peo-
ple, and of course no one has a patent on its definition. Indeed not
everyone whose work is called "sociolinguistic" is ready to accept
the label, and those who do not use the term include and empha-
size different things. Nevertheless, three main orientations can be
singled out, orientations that can be labelled: (1) the social as well
as the linguistic; (2) socially realistic linguistics; (3) socially con-
stituted linguistics. Let me characterize each of these orientations
in relation to conventional linguistic theory.
     1. The social as well as the linguistic. Here may be placed
ventures into social problems involving language and the use of
language, which are not seen as involving a challenge to existing
linguistics. American linguistics does have a tradition of practical
concerns—one can mention Sapir's semantic research for an inter-
national auxiliary language, Bloomfield's work in the teaching of
reading, Swadesh's literacy work, the "Army method" of teaching
foreign languages. The salient examples today involve American
cities and developing nations, and concern problems of education,
minority groups, and language policies. For the most part this
work is conceived as an application, lacking theoretical goals, or
else as pursuing theoretical goals that are in addition to those of
196                                    FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

normal linguistics, or perhaps even wholly unrelated to them.
When "sociolinguistics" serves as a legitimizing label for such
activity, it is, as said, not conceived as a challenge to normal lin-
guistics; linguists who perceive such a challenge in the label tend
to echew it.
     2. Socially realistic linguistics. This term is apt2 for work that
extends and challenges existing linguistics with data from the
speech community. The challenge, and indeed the accomplishment,
might be summed up in the two words, "variation" and "validity."
A salient example is the work of William Labov, whose orientation
toward linguistics is represented in such papers as "The Study
of Language in its Social Context" (1970) and "Methodology"
(1971) (see now Labov 1973a, b). The expressed theoretical goals
are not distinct from those of normal linguistics, e.g., the nature of
linguistic rules, the nature of sound change, but the method of
work, and the findings, differ sharply. Here might also be put work
which recognizes dependence of the analysis of meaning and
speech acts on social context (e.g., R. Lakoff 1972, 1973).
     Both of these orientations are thriving, here at this meeting
and elsewhere. Less developed, but representing, I think, the funda-
mental challenge to whose threshold we have come, is socially
constituted linguistics.
     3. Socially constituted linguistics.3 The phrase "socially con-
stituted" is intended to express the view that social function gives
form to the ways in which linguistic features are encountered in
actual life. This being so, an adequate approach must begin by
identifying social functions, and discover the ways in which lin-
guistic features are selected and grouped together to serve them.
Such a point of view cannot leave normal linguistic theory unchal-
lenged as does the first orientation, nor limits challenge to reform,
because its own goals are not allowed for by normal theory, and
cannot be achieved by "working within the system." A "socially
constituted" linguistics shares the practical concerns of other
orientations; it shares concern for social realism and validity; but
even if it could wait for the perfection of a "linguistic theory" of
the normal sort, it could not then use it. Many of the features and
relationships with which it must deal would never have been taken
up in a "theory" of the normal sort. (That is why, indeed, "lin-
guistic theory" of the normal sort is not a "theory of language,"
but only a theory of grammar.) A "socially constituted" linguistics
is concerned with social as well as referential meaning, and with

    2. I owe this term to Maxine Bernstein, in whose dissertation in progress
I encountered it.
    3. Or, as heard and repeated by one linguist at Georgetown, socially
reconstituted linguistics.
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                  197


language as part of communicative conduct and social action. Its
task is the thoroughgoing critique of received notions and prac-
tices, from the standpoint of social meaning, that is, from a func-
tional perspective. Such a conception reverses the structuralist
tendency of most of the twentieth century, toward the isolation of
referential structure, and the posing of questions about social
functions from that standpoint. The goals of social relevance and
social realism can indeed be fully accomplished only from the
standpoint of the new conception, for much of what must be taken
into account, much of what is there, organized and used, in actual
speech, can only be seen, let alone understood, when one starts
from function and looks for the structure that serves it.
      I have given examples to support this thesis in other chapters
(chs. 4, 6, 8) and will offer only a few. Let me merely mention that
from a comprehensive functional standpoint, a phonetic feature
such as aspiration appears a true phonological universal, special-
ized to referential function in some languages, and to stylistic
function in others, hence not of indifference to general theory in
its role in English, as Chomsky and Halle (1968:viii) would have
it; recognition of a social-identifying function motivates an inde-
pendently controllable articulation otherwise left unintelligible
(Chomsky and Halle 1968:298; cf. ch. 8; the status of a sentence as
a speech act depends upon the rights and obligations, roles and
statuses, of the participants; unless one extends the rules govern-
ing a verbal summons in English to include nonverbal acts (a
knock, a telephone ring), a significant generalization is lost (Scheg-
loff 1968); similarly, the function of deixis in San Bias Cuna is
 served by a set of forms that includes lip-pointing (Sherzer 1973);
speech probably serves to mark sex-role and status in every com-
munity, but linguists have hitherto discovered it only when intru-
sive in a normal grammatical description; some consistent ways of
 speaking make use of the resources of more than one language,
e.g. the Dutch of Surinam blacks, which should be grammatically
 and lexically standard, and phonologically creole (Eersel 1971); in
some communities distinct languages can be described as lexically
distinct with a common grammar and phonology—Kupwar ap-
proaches this, according to Gumperz and Wilson (1971); the
 semantic structure represented by a choice of pronoun in one
community may be expressed by a choice of dialect in another,
 and choice of language in still a third, so that analysis of function
from a universal standpoint cannot stay with one part of language,
 or even within the category, language. In sum, if our concern is
 social relevance and social realism, we must recognize that there
 is more to the relationship between sound and meaning than is
 dreamt of in normal linguistic theory. In sound there are stylistic
198                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

as well as referential features and contrasts; in meaning there is
social as well as referential import; in between there are relation-
ships not given in ordinary grammar but there for the finding in
social life.
     From this standpoint, what there is to be described and
accounted for is not in the first instance a language (say, English),
but means of speech, and, inseparably, their meanings for those
who use them. The set of conventional resources available to a
competent member of a community can be so described. As we
have seen, this set of resources is more extensive than a single
norm, grammar, or language; nor can the nature of its organization
be given in those terms. Yet it is this set of resources with which
one must deal, if "linguistic theory" is to become synonymous
with "theory of language."
     It is not that phenomena pointing to a more general concep-
tion of the relationship between sound and meaning have not long
been noted, and often enough studied with insight and care.
Expressive language, speech levels, social dialects, registers, func-
tional varieties, code- and style-switching, are familiar and essen-
tial concepts; the interlocked subjects of stylistics, poetics, and
rhetoric have flourished in recent years. Anything that can be
accomplished in theory and method for a socially constituted lin-
guistics must incorporate and build on that work, which has done
much to shape what I say here. But the tendency has been to treat
such phenomena and such studies as marginal or as supplementary
to grammar (cf. ch. 8). (Certainly that has been the tendency of
grammarians.) The hegemony of grammar as a genre, and of the
referential function as its organizing basis, has been preserved.
Whereas the essence of a functional approach is not to take func-
tion for granted, but as problematic; to assume as part of a uni-
versal theory of language that a plurality of functions are served
by linguistic features in any act and community; to require vali-
dation of the relationships between features and functions, and
of their organization into varieties, registers, ways of speaking,
ethnographically within the community; and to take functional
questions, a functional perspective, as having priority, that is, as
being fundamental, both in general theory and in specific accounts,
to whatever can be validly said as to structure, competence, uni-
versal, etc. (cf. Hymes 1964a).
     Such a perspective was present in the structuralism of the
period before World War II (cf. Jakobson 1963, Firth 1935, and
below), and has never been wholly lost. In Anglo-American circles
it has begun to come to the fore in work under the aegis of socio-
linguistics in recent years. Salient examples include the work of
Labov (1966, 1970, sect. 3) on "sociolinguistic structure," of Gum-
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                       199


 perz (1964) on verbal repertoire, of Bernstein (i972) on codes, of
 Fishman on domains (1966), of Denison (1970) and Le Page (1969)
 on multilingualism, and of Ervin-Tripp (1972) on sociolinguistic
 rules.4 What is important here is the element in each work that
 contributes to a general methodological perspective. Such work
 goes beyond the recognition and analysis of particular cases to
suggest a mode of organization of linguistic features other than
that of a grammar. The common implication, which I want to
draw, emphasize, and elaborate, is, in its weaker form, that
such alternative modes of organization exist; and, in its stronger
form, that one or more such alternative modes of organization may
be fundamental.
      There is a second point, linked to the first, and owing its full
recognition to much the same body of work: a conception of the
speech community not in terms of language alone (especially not
just one language, and a fortiori, not just one homogeneous lan-
guage).
      Although they would find the wording odd, many linguists
might accept a definition of the object of linguistic description as:
the organization of features within a community. From the present
standpoint, the wording is not odd, but vital. The two points just
stated in negative terms can now be put positively.
      1. The organization of linguistic features within a speech
community is in terms of ways of speaking within a verbal reper-
toire.
      2. Membership in a speech community consists in sharing one
(or more) ways of speaking.
      From this standpoint, the usual linguistic description identi-
fies a part (not the whole) of the linguistic features, resources,
verbal means, of a community, and says little or nothing about
their actual organization. Grammar indeed originated as a peda-
gogical and literary genre, and has been revitalized as a logical
one; neither its traditional nor its mathematical pedigree is much
warrant for taking it for granted that it is the form in which speech
 comes organized in use. Psychologists and psycholinguists have
recently discovered and begun to build on recognition of this fact,
with regard to the organization of language for production, recep-
 tion, and acquisition. Those of us interested in the existence of
 social facts and customary behavior must build on it too. Classical
 antiquity did not stop with grammar, but went on to rhetoric—
 cf. Marrou (1965) 1964, part two, chs. VII, X, and part three, chs.

     4. Note also the relevance of the multifunctional approach to grammar
itself being developed by Halliday (1970:336, 1971). The development of my
own understanding of these questions can be traced in papers of 1961, 1962,
1964. 1967. 1970b. 1970c. 1971a. 1971b.
200                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

V, VI. So should we, but without the normative, exclusionary bias
that has dogged the genre of grammar throughout its history, and
in a thoroughgoing, reconstructing way.
      What is the nature of such a reconstruction, of a method of
description adequate to the goals of a socially constituted linguis-
tics, as just stated? Briefly and broadly put, "the task is to identify
and analyze the ways of speaking in a community, together with
the conditions and meanings of their use. In sociolinguistic
description, the first application of the commutation test is to ways
of speaking" (ch. 8). In what way is a person speaking? What is
the set of such ways? And the contrastive as well as identifica-
tional meaning of each? Within ways of speaking, commutation
will further discover two mutually implicated modes of meaning,
the "referential" and "social." There is the systemic invariance
in terms of which two utterances of "fourth floor" are repetitions,
the same utterance, and there is the contrast in virtue of which
 they may be different (see Labov 1966 on style-shifting in New
York City department stores with respect to "repetitions" of utter-
 ances with post-vocalic constriction). Conversely, there is the
contrast by which utterances of "third floor" and "fourth floor"
may differ in what they convey (as to location), and there is the
systemic invariance in terms of which they are repetitions, con-
veying the same meaning (as to social position and speech com-
munity identification). It is not obvious, is it, after all, that the
energies of linguistics should be devoted entirely to the signals
that tell where things can be bought in department stores, and not
 at all to the signals that tell where the people in department
stores have come from, are now, and aspire to be?
      The principle of mutually implicated modes of meaning holds
for underlying relationships as well as overt utterances—sentences
 the same in "referential" basic structures may be contrastive in
social/stylistic meaning, and conversely, as any reflective writer has
 occasion to know.5 In sum, the often stated foundation of linguistic

      5. Notice that to attempt to handle all modes of meaning in one gram-
matical framework ends by dissolving structure and making the actual
organization of both kinds of meaning difficult and even impossible to
discern (cf. Jacobs and Rosenbaum 1971:viii-ix): "the importance of express-
ing semantic insights has come to overshadow the criterion of expressibility
within a formalizable rule." The very point of discovering the organization
of linguistic features in the service of stylistic and social meaning is an
argument for keeping distinct and precise the ways in which language is
not organized for such a function. For some linguists it may be sufficient to
express semantic insights, rather than to maintain "the initially indispensable
desire for explicit precision that Chomsky inherited from structuralism"
(Jacobs and Rosenbaum 1971:viii), but it would be a fatal disservice to the
standpoint advocated here if the expression of social and stylistic semantic
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                             201


theory, that in a speech community some utterances are the same,
differing only in "free" variation, that the goal of theoretical expla-
nation is to account for what counts as contrast, what does not,
has perhaps served the development of linguistics well in its
purely "referential" interpretation. One bird of function in the
hand, so to speak, may have been preferable to entering the bush
to cope with two. But, to elaborate the figure, it appears that
neither bird will fly without the other, even that neither is itself
a whole bird. To pursue the figure no doubt too far, the bird in
the hand proves to be a featherless monopter, to be restored only
out of the ashes of conventional grammar. The true foundation of
theory and method is that in a speech community some ways of
speaking are the same, that some of the persons talk the same
way (see Hymes 1973a, 1974).
     A community, then, is to be characterized in terms of a rep-
ertoire of ways of speaking. Ways of speaking are to be character-
ized in terms of a relationship between styles, on the one hand,
and contexts of discourse, on the other. The formal concept under-
lying speech styles is what Ervin-Tripp (1972), building on work
of John Gumperz, has called rules of co-occurrence. The formal
concept of relating speech styles to contexts of discourse is called
by her rules of alternation. The speech styles defined by rules of
co-occurrence draw on the linguistic varieties present in a com-
munity, from whose resources they select and group features in
sometimes complex ways. The relationships dubbed "rules of
alternation" are in the first instance considerations of appropriate-
ness, and of marked and unmarked usage.
     Ervin-Tripp's delineation of these two concepts is a culmina-

insights were regarded as warrant for scrapping structuralist inheritance and
explicit precision. In this regard the grammatical analyses of Harris, Hiz,
Chomsky and some others are more useful than recent attempts that in
effect dissolve the many purely syntactic regularities that do exist. The
transformationalists are right to reject the extreme to which some American
structuralists went, such that one exception could disprove a universal. But
have they not fallen into the same fallacy with the principle that one excep-
tion can disprove a level? The fact would seem to be that Chomsky is right
that there are many syntactic regularities which are independent of the
exceptions that motivate generative semantics, and which appear unmoti-
vated from the latter standpoint. It is also true that others are right that there
are many phonological regularities that are independent of the exceptions
that motivated "systematic phonemics," and that appear unmotivated from
the latter point of view (witness the awkward efforts to recapture an under-
standing of canonical forms by "conspiracies"). The very plain truth is, as
 Sapir said, that "grammars leak," and that the major sectors of a language
 (grammar): phonology, lexis, syntax, comprise patterns and habits which can
have rather autonomous histories—in chronological and social time and
space.
202                                FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

tion of the quest in linguistics throughout this century for adequate
descriptive concepts, concepts that would be formal and universal
to all languages, yet concretely valid in application to each. This
history can be traced in American linguistics from discussion
early in the century as to grammatical categories (e.g., incorpora-
tion, compounding, inflection] by Boas, Sapir, and Kroeber, through
the generalization of the terms "phoneme," "morpheme," and "dis-
tinctive features," to the discovery of transformational relation-
ships. The notion of speech style, as a mode of organization of
features cutting across the standard sectors of phonology, gram-
mar, and lexicon, has indeed been advanced a number of times
(Whorf 1942:92, Harris 1951:10, Joos 1959, Pike 1967:463-4), but
not really generalized as a perspective for the analysis of a speech
community, and always stopping short of the decisive step taken
by Ervin-Tripp, which is to recognize speech styles themselves as
the elements of a further system of rules. The recognition of this
fact is comparable in nature and importance to the recognition of
transformations (as rules operating on rules). The study of the
structure of relationships among speech styles opens up the possi-
bility of a generative approach; and it makes the study of social
meaning as embodied in roles, activities and situations integral
to the explanation of the meanings of the speech styles themselves.
What Friedrich (1972) had shown with regard to "pronominal
breakthrough," meaning emergent from the interaction of pro-
nominal and contextual meanings, is here generalized as a method-
ology.
     Many of you will be quick to note that linguistics does not
itself command analysis of social role, activities, and situations.
Of this, two things can be said. First, such analysis is necessary.
There really is no way that linguistic theory can become a theory
of language without encompassing social meaning, and that means
becoming a part of the general study of communicative conduct
and social action (see ch. 9). Second, this step is dictated by the
development of linguistics itself. Having begun its structural
course at the far side of meaning, with a focus on phonology, lin-
guistics has proceeded through successive foci on morphology,
syntax, semantics, and now performative and speech acts. There
is no way to analyze speech acts adequately without ethnography;
no language is a perfect metalanguage for the acts that can be
performed with it. The study of speech acts can indeed be a center
of a socially constituted linguistics; but its own logic broaches
the general study of the vocabulary of action, in communities and
in social science. Again, if we take seriously Chomsky's implicit
call for linguistics to concern itself with the "creative aspect" of
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                 203


language use, and with the basis of the ability to generate novel,
yet appropriate sentences, we again are forced into analysis of
setting as well as syntax. For appropriateness is not a property of
sentences, but of a relationship between sentences and contexts.
This holds a fortiori for the property of "creativity," whether
saying something new in a familiar setting, or something familiar
in a setting that is new. At every turn, it almost would seem, lin-
guistics is wrestling with phenoma, and concepts, that turn out to
entail relationships, only one pole of which is within linguistics'
usual domain. The true generalizations can never be captured
except from a perspective that encompasses both poles.
      One way to bring out this point is to say that a socially con-
stituted linguistics has as a goal a kind of explanatory adequacy
complementary to that proposed by Chomsky. Chomsky's type of
explanatory adequacy leads away from speech, and from lan-
guages, to relationships possibly universal to all languages, and
possibly inherent in human nature. It is an exciting and worth-
while prospect. The complementary type of explanatory adequacy
leads from what is common to all human beings and all languages
toward what particular communities and persons have made of
their means of speech. It is comparative and evolutionary in a
sociocultural, rather than a biological, sense. It sees as in need of
explanation the differential elaboration of means of speech, and
of speech itself. At a surface level it notices gross contrasts in
speech activity, from great volubility to great taciturnity; gross
contrasts in elaboration of message-form; gross contrasts in the
predominance of traditional and of spontaneously encoded utter-
ance; gross contrasts in the complication, or simplification, of the
obligatory surface structure of languages themselves. These con-
trasts, and the typologies to which they point, no doubt find their
explanation at a deeper level. Rules of conduct in relation to roles
and settings; the role of a language—variety in socialization or in
boundary-maintenance; values, conceptions of the self, and beliefs
as to the rights and duties one owes to others as fellow members
of a community, all will be found to have a place. The general
problem, then, is to identify the means of speech and ways of
speaking of communities; to find, indeed, where are the real com-
munities, for language boundaries do not give them, and a person
or a group may belong to more than one—to characterize communi-
ties in terms of their repertoires of these; and through ethnography,
comparative ethnology, historical, and evolutionary considerations,
become able to explain something of the origin, development,
maintenance, obsolescence, and loss of ways of speaking and
types of speech community—of the face speech wears for human
204                                  FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

beings before they learn that it is language, a thing apart, and the
property of linguists.6
      This complementary goal of explanatory adequacy comes not,
it must be admitted, from the internal logic of linguistics, but from
an external aspiration. Chomsky's goal of explanatory adequacy,
to be sure, would seem to owe much to his own concern to under-
stand the human mind and to revitalize rationalist philosophy. He
has made his concern an effective goal for many in linguistics,
philosophy, and psychology (cf. Dingwall 1971). The concern that
motivates explanation directed toward ways of speaking and
speech communities may or may not find a similar response. This
concern, put .simply, is with human liberation. The goal of a sec-
ond type of explanatory adequacy is necessary if linguistic
research is to serve that human goal.
      Consider the present stance of linguistics, as reflected perhaps
in the response of many members of the Linguistics Society of
America to suggestions of racial inferiority. Many linguists, like
many anthropologists, believe that no group of human beings is
innately incapable of the highest achievements of civilization.
They have much reason so to believe. And they speak out. What
they can speak to is the potential equality of all human groups.
Neither their theory, nor their liberalism, quite prepares them to
speak concretely to actual inequalities. Difference itself is offen-
sive. The scientific equality of all languages was declared early in
the century, and for most scientists, that continues to suffice. But
means of speech are what their users make of them; they have
been put to different ends, in differing circumstances, and some-
times been caught up in the ends and circumstances of others. No
minister of education in a developing nation is of the view that
anything can be said and read in any language. That it could be,
were there time, money, and intent, does not speak to the actual
situation. And quite apart from situations that suggest judgments
of inferiority, it is simply the case that a certain language, or
speech itself, has meant and been made to mean different things
in different communities. The general observations on the func-
tions of language, typically on the manifold marvelousness of lan-
guage, found in texts are trash. We hardly know in any systematic
way what communities have made of language.
      If linguistic research is to help as it could in transcending the
many inequalities in language and competence in the world today,
it must be able to analyze these inequalities. In particular, a prac-
tical linguistics so motivated would have to go beyond means of
speech and types of speech community to a concern with persons,

    6. I am thinking here of "The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret
Thereof," section 4, ch. I, part I, book I, of Das Kapital.
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                  205


and social structure. If competence is to mean anything useful (we
do not really need a synonym for grammar), it must refer to the
abilities actually held by persons. A salient fact about a speech
community, realistically viewed, is the unequal distribution of
abilities, on the one hand, and of opportunities for their use, on
the other. This indeed appears to be an old story in mankind, and
even a cursory look at the globe discloses definition of women as
communicatively second-class citizens to be widespread. When,
where, and what they may speak, the conceptions of themselves
as speakers with which they are socialized, show again and again
that from the community point of view, they at least are not "ideal
speakers," though they may on occasion be ideal hearers.
     Beyond the structure of ways of speaking, then, is the ques-
tion of explanation, and beyond that, the question of liberation.
This is not a simple matter, and I cannot say much about it now
except to observe that some seemingly attractive views have hid-
den pitfalls. Simply to overcome restrictions is not enough, for a
community in which everyone could say anything might have no
one listening. To overcome "restricted," context-dependent codes
is not enough, for, as the German sociologist Habermas has been
pointing out (and as Sapir did before him), human life needs
some areas of symbolic interaction and communication in which
much can be taken for granted. Simply defending "restricted"
codes is not enough, for the explicitness of the "elaborated,"
context-independent code may be needed to analyze publicly and
so transform the existing order. (See "A Critique of Compensatory
Education" in Bernstein 1972.)
     The goal of explanatory adequacy with regard to speech com-
munities as comprising ways of speaking, will, I suppose, be quite
enough for most linguists to consider, let alone to accept. Yet, I
believe, if linguistics is to realize its potential for the well-being
of mankind, it must go even further, and consider speech com-
munities as comprising not only rules, but also sometimes oppres-
sion, sometimes freedom, in the relation between personal abilities
and their occasions of use.


                      THEMES OF SOCOLINGUISTICS

      If we associate "sociolinguistics" with "socially constituted
linguistics," then there are a number of themes, or indeed slogans,
for a sociolinguistics of the scope just sketched. There are of
course the seven points made earlier (in chs. 1 and 3). We can
partly generalize, partly elaborate them with another seven here.
(If this were a political movement, or a Chinese banquet, we might
put them on banners about the walls).
206                                     FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

     1. Linguistic theory as theory of language, entailing the organi-
zation of speech (not just of grammar).
     2. Foundations of theory and methodology as entailing ques-
tions of function (not just of structure).
     3. Speech communities as organizations of ways of speaking
(not just equivalent to the distribution of the grammar of a lan-
guage).
     4. Competence as personal ability (not just grammatical
knowledge, systemic potential of a grammar, superorganic prop-
erty of a society, or, indeed, irrelevant to persons in any other way).
     5. Performance as accomplishment and responsibility, inves-
titure and emergence (not just psycholinguistic processing and
impediment).
     6. Languages as what their users have made of them (not just
what human nature has given).
     7. Liberte, Egalite', Fraternite of speech as something achieved
in social life (not just postulated as given as a consequence of
language).

               THE SCOPE OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
     What, then, is the scope of sociolinguistics? Not all I have just
described, but rather, that part of it which linguists and social
scientists leave unattended. The final goal of sociolinguistics, I
think, must be to preside over its own liquidation. The flourishing
of a hybrid term such as sociolinguistics reflects a gap in the dis-
position of established disciplines with respect to reality. Some-
times new disciplines do grow from such a state of affairs, but the
recent history of the study of language has seen the disciplines
adjacent to a gap themselves grow to encompass it. Some can
recall a generation ago when proper American linguists did not
study meaning, and ethnographers had little linguistic method. A
study of meaning in another language or culture (say, grammatical
categories or kinship terms) could qualify as "ethnolinguistic"
then. Today, of course, semantics is actually pursued in both lin-
guistics and ethnography, and a mediating interdisciplinary label
is unnecessary; "semantics" itself will usually suffice.
     Let us hope for a similar history for "sociolinguistics." In one
sense, the issue again is the study of meaning, only now, social
meaning.7

     7. The two main facets of "social" meaning can be identified as "inter-
personal" and "textual," following Halliday 1970. That is, the facets of mean-
ing involved with nonlinguistic context (the participants in the speech act
and their interaction in that setting), on the one hand, the facets involved
with the linguistic context, on the other. I put "social" in quotes because it,
like some other common terms for this aspect of language, seems to me to
apply to all of meaning. All of meaning is social in basis and may take part
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                            207


     What are the chances for such a history to be written, say,
from the vantage point of the year 2000 A.D.? To see, in retrospect,
the flourishing of "sociolinguistics" as a transitional stage in the
transformation of linguistics and adjacent social science disci-
plines to encompass what I have called "socially constituted lin-
guistics"? The chances, I think, are quite uncertain.
     Clearly recognition of the gap, and advocacy of a perspective
to overcome it, are not enough. The future historian will notice
that there were "efforts towards a means-end model of language"
between the two world wars flakobson 1963). And in the literature
of that period, he will find in the writings of another of the five
or six great linguists of the century such statements as the fol-
lowing:

        The true locus of culture is in the interaction of specific
   individuals and,, on the subjective side, in the world of meaning
   which each one of these individuals may unconsciously abstract
   for himself from his participation in these interactions. [1932,
   SWES 515]
        For it is only through an analysis of variation that the reality
   and meaning of a norm can be established at all, and it is only
   through a minute and sympathetic study of individual behavior in
   the state in which normal human beings find themselves, namely
   in a state of society, that it will ultimately be possible to say things
   about society itself and culture that are more than fairly con-
   venient abstractions. [1938, SWES 576]
        It is not really difficult, then, to see why anyone brought up
   on the austerities of a well-defined science must, if he is to main-
   tain his symbolic self-respect, become more and more estranged
   from man himself. [1939, SWES 580]
        The very terminology which is used by the many kinds of seg-
   mental sciences of man indicates how remote man himself has
   become as a necessary concept in the methodology of the respec-
   tive sciences. . . . In linguistics, abstracted speech sounds, words,
   and the arrangement of words have come to have so authentic a
   vitality that one can speak of 'regular sound change' . . . without
   knowing or caring who opened their mouths, at what time, to
   communicate what to whom. [1939, SWES 578, 579]
        As we follow tangible problems of behavior rather than
   selected problems set by recognized disciplines, we discover the
   field of social psychology. [1932, SWES 513]
         The social psychology into which the conventional cultural
    and psychological disciplines must eventually be resolved is re-



in stylistic effect as well. Similarly, "cognition" and "ideational," for what is
often called "referential," should not imply that no cognition or thought is
involved in expression of social identity, attitude, stylistic consistency or
verbal art. Still, "social" often will conveniently identify Haliiday's "inter-
personal," and "stylistic" either his "textual," or simply nonreferential status
of features.
208                                   FOUNDATIONS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS

   lated to these paradigmatic studies as an investigation into living
   speech is related to grammar. I think few cultural disciplines are as
   exact, as rigorously configurated, as self-contained as grammar,
   but if it is desired to have grammar contribute a significant share
   to our understanding of human behavior, its definitions, meanings,
   and classifications must be capable of a significant restatement in
   terms of a social psychology which . . . boldly essays to bring
   every cultural pattern back to the living context from which it has
   been abstracted in the first place . . . back to its social matrix.
   [1934, SWES 592-93, 592]

     These quotations are from the writings of Sapir's last years,
when he began to rethink the nature of language, culture, and
society from a standpoint he sometimes called "psychiatric," or
"social psychology," and which today we might more readily label
the standpoint of social interaction, or communicative conduct;
the standpoint, as I would see it, of sociolinguistics.
     Obviously Sapir's intellectual lead did not prevail, after his
death in 1939, although its influence can be traced in many quar-
ters. Such a fact must humble expectation. A decade ago (when
the introduction to my book of readings was written] I did ven-
ture to predict:

       It may be that the development of these foci of interest
  (semantic description, sociolinguistic variation) will lead historians
  of twentieth-century linguistics to say that whereas the first half of
  the century was distinguished by a drive for the autonomy of
  language as an object of study and a focus upon description of
  structure, the second half was distinguished by a concern for the
  integration of language in sociocultural context and a focus upon
  the analysis of function. (1964b :11)

     Ten years later, we are, I think, only at a threshold. Whether
we pass over and occupy the land will depend crucially upon the
commitment of those who have the essential skills, especially
linguists. For a criterion of the field I envisage is that it is a lin-
guistics, a functionally oriented, more adequate linguistics, that
has at last realized itself as a social science. Perhaps in this respect
there will be in the year 2000 A.D. three main branches of linguis-
tic science: psychological, sociological (these two answering to the
two directions of explanatory adequacy), and the traditional and
indispensable work oriented toward specific languages, language
families, and language areas. With regard to the sociological
branch of the three, there are many reasons within theoretical lin-
guistics today why it appears a necessary step. But holes in a
scientific pattern, like those in a phonological one, may go long
unfilled. Perhaps as much or more will depend on practical as on
scientific concern. It may not have been accidental that it was the
Linguistics as Sociolftiguistics                                      209


1930s that saw Sapir's concern with personal meaning and social
interaction. Perhaps socially concerned linguists in the coming
decade will discover wisdom in Chairman Mao Tse-tung's remark
(1952:7):

        If you want to know a certain thing or a certain class of
   things directly, you must personally participate in the practical
   struggle to change reality, to change that thing or class of things,
   for only thus can you come into contact with them as phenomena;
   only through personal participation can you uncover the essence
   of that thing or class of things and comprehend them.

      Certainly it is a sociolinguistic perspective, uniting theory and
practice, that is most appropriate to a vision of the future of man-
kind as one in a world at peace. There are three ways of seeking
unity in the phenomena of language. One has been to seek a unity
of origin in the past. Comparative-historical linguistics, linguistics
oriented toward individual languages and language families, can
discover and maintain such unities; indeed, it has had positive
effect in that regard (Matthew Arnold pointed to the Indoeuropean
unity of the English and Irish, Sir Henry Maine to that of England
and India, as warrant for overcoming prejudice and accepting
brotherhood). A second way has been to seek a unity of under-
lying structure, a timeless or continuing origin, so to speak, in
the present. Structural and psychologically-oriented linguistics
can point to this. A third way is to seek the origins of a unity in
the future—to see the processes of sociolinguistic change that
envelop our objects of study as underlain by the emergence of a
world society. It is a sociolinguistic perspective that naturally and
inevitably considers mankind, not only as what it has been, and
is, but also as what it is becoming. Linguistics as sociolinguistics,
if it will, can envisage and work toward a unity that is yet to come.
Bibliography


Abrahams, R. D. 1968. Introductory remarks to a rhetorical theory of
        folklore. Journal of American Folklore 81: 143-158.
          1970a. Rapping and capping: black talk as art. In Black America,
        ed. J. F. Szwed. New York: Basic Books.
          1970b. A performance-centered approach to gossip. Man 5:290-301.
         . 1972. The training of the man of words in talking sweet
         Language in Society 1: 15^30.
Abrahams, R. D., and Bauman, R. 1971. Sense and non-sense in St.
        Vincent: speech behavior in a Caribbean community. American
        Anthropologist 73: 762-772.
Alatis, J. E. 1970. Bilingualism and language contact: anthropological,
        linguistic, psychological aspects, and sociological aspects. (Mono-
        graph series on language and linguistics, 23.) Washington, D.C.:
        Georgetown University Press.
Albert, E. 1972. Culture patterning of speech behavior in Burundi, (with
       special attention to 'rhetoric,' 'logic,' and 'poetics.') In Directions
       in sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes, pp. 73-105.
       New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Alisjahbana, S. T. 1965. The failure of modern linguistics in the face of
       linguistic problems of the twentieth century. Kuala Lumpur: Uni-
       versity of Malaya.
Ardener, E. C„ ed. 1971. Social anthropology and language. ASA mono-
       graphs, 10. London: Tavistock.
Arewa, E. O., and Dundes, A. 1964. Proverbs and the ethnography of
       speaking folklore. In The ethnography of communication, eds.
       J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes. pp. 70-85. (American Anthropologist
       66 (no. 6, part 2).) Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological
       Association.
Auden, W. H. 1945. For the time being: a Christmas oratorio.
Barker, L. M., ed. 1968-69. Pears cyclopedia. 77th edn. London: Pelham
        Books.
Barnard, F. M. 1965. Herder's social and political thought. From enlight-
        enment to nationalism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
212                                                         BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barth, F. 1969. Ethnic groups and boundaries. In The social organization
       of culture difference, ed. F. Barth. London: Allen and Unwin.
Barthes, R. 1953. Le degre zero de Vecriture. Paris: Le Seuil.
Bartholomew, G. A. Jr., and Birdsell, J. 1953. Ecology and the proto-
       hominids. American Anthropologist 55: 481-498.
Basso, K. 1970. To give up on words: silence in the Western Apache
       culture. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 26: 213-230.
Bateson, G. 1949. Bali: the value system of a steady state. In Social
       Structure: Studies presented to A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, ed. Meyer
       Fortes. New York: Oxford University Press.
       . 1958. Naven. 2nd edition. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
       . 1960. Minimal requirements for a theory of schizophrenia.
       A.M.A. Archives of General Psychiatry 2: 477-491.
       . 1963. Exchange of information about patterns of human be-
       havior. In Information storage and neural control, eds. W. Fields
       and W. Abbott. Springfield: Charles C. Thomas.
Bauman, R. 1972. The La Have Island general store. Sociability and
       verbal art in a Nova Scotia community. Journal of American
      Folklore 85: 330-343.
Bauman, R. and Sherzer, J., eds. 1974. Explorations in the ethnography
        of speaking. New York and London: Cambridge University Press.
Ben-Amos, D. 1967. Folklore: the definition game once again. Paper read
        at the meeting of the American Folklore Society, Toronto, 1967.
        (Revised and published as Ben Amos, 1971.)
         1969. Analytical categories and ethnic genres. Genre 2: 275-301.
       . 1971. Towards a definition of folklore in context. Journal of
       American Folklore 84: 3-15.
Berger, P. 1967. The sacred canopy. New York: Doubleday.
Bernstein, B. 1964. Elaborated and restricted codes: Their social origins
       and some consequences. In The ethnography of communication,
       ed. J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes, pp. 55-69. Washington, D.C.:
       American Anthropological Association.
       . 1972. Class, codes and social control, I: Theoretical papers.
       London: Routeledge, Kegan Paul.
Birdwhistell, R. 1960. A look at evolutionary theory in the light of recent
        developments in communication research. In Report of the 9th
       round table meeting, ed. W. A. Austin, pp. 149-155. Washington,
       D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Blom, J-P„ and Gumperz, J. 1966. Some social determinants of verbal
       behavior, ms.
        . 1972. Social meaning in linguistic structures: code-switching in
       Norway. In Directions in sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz and
       D. Hymes, pp. 404-434. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Bloomfield, L. 1927. Literate and illiterate speech. American Speech 2:
       423-439. (Reprinted in Language in culture and society, ed. D.
           Hymes, pp. 391-396. New York: Harper and Row.)
Bibliography                                                           213


       . 1933. Language. New York: Holt.
Bloomfield, M. WM and Newmark, L. 1963. A linguistic introduction to
       the history of English. New York: Knopf.
Boas, F. 1911. Introduction. In Handbook of American Indian languages,
       ed. F. Boas, pp. 1-83. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.
Bolinger, D. 1950. Rime, assonance, and morpheme analysis. Word 6:
       117-136.
Bricker, V. 1973. Three genres of Tzotzil insult. In Meaning in Mayan
       languages, ed. M. S. Edmonson, pp. 183-203. The Hague: Mouton.
       . 1974a. The ethnographic context of some traditional Mayan
       speech genres. In Explorations in the ethnography of speaking,
       ed. R. Bauman and J. Sherzer. New York: Cambridge University
       Press.
           1974b. Some cognitive implications of informant variability.
        Language in Society 3(1): 69-82.
Bright, W., ed. 1966. Sociolinguistics. The Hague: Mouton.
Brown, R. 1958. Words and things. Glencoe: The Free Press.
Brown, R., and Gilman, A. 1960. The pronouns of power and solidarity.
       In Style in language, ed. T. A. Sebeok, pp. 253-276. Cambridge,
       Mass.: The Technology Press.
Buchanan, C. O. 1968. Modern Anglican liturgies. London: Oxford
       University Press.
Burke, K. 1931. Counterstatement. New York: Harcourt Brace. (Re-
       printed, Chicago: Phoenix Book P14,1957.)
        . 1932. Towards a better life. New York: Harcourt Brace. (Re-
       printed, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966.)
       . 1935. Permanence and change: an analysis of purpose. New
       York: New Republic.
       . 1937. Attitudes toward history. New York: Editorial Publications.
          1941. The philosophy of literary form: studies in symbolic action.
        Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. (Revised, New
       York: Vintage, 1957.)
        . 1945. A grammar of motives. New York: Prentice-Hall. (Reissued
       by University of California Press.)
       . 1950. A rhetoric of motives. New York: Prentice-Hall. (Reissued
       by University of California Press.)
       . 1951a. Three definitions. Kenyon Review 13:173-192.
       . 1951b. Othello: an essay to illustrate a method. Hudson Review
           4:165-203. (Also in Hyman 1964a: 152-195.)
       . 1954. Fact, inference and proof in the analysis of literary
       symbolism. In Symbols and values: an initial study (Thirteenth
       Symposium of the Conference on Science, Philosophy and
        Religion), pp. 283-306. New York: Harper. (Also in Hyman 1964b:
       145-172.)
        . 1955. Linguistic approach to problems of education. Fifty-fourth
        Yearbook of the National Society for the study of education, part
214                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

       I, pp. 259-303. Chicago.
       . 1957. The philosophy of literary form. Revised ed. New York:
       Vintage.
       . 1958. The poetic motive. Hudson Review 11: 54-63.
       . 1961. The rhetoric of religion: studies in logology. Boston:
       Beacon. (Reprinted, University of California Press, 1970.)
       . 1968. Dramatism. International encyclopedia of the social sci-
       ences 7: 445-452. New York: Macmillan.
Burling, R. 1969. Man's many voices. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
       Winston.
Calame-Griaule, G. 1965. Ethnologie et langage. La parole chez les
       Dogon. Paris: Gallimard.
Carneiro, R. L. 1964. The Amahuaca and the spirit world. Ethnology 3:
      6-12.
Carpenter, E., and McLuhan, M. 1960. Explorations in communication.
      An anthology. Boston: Beacon Press.
Cassirer, E. 1944. An essay on man. An introduction to a philosophy of
      human culture. New Haven: Yale University Press. (Doubleday
      Anchor Book, 1953.)
      . 1950. The problem of knowledge. Philosophy, science and his-
      tory since Hegel. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      . 1955. The philosophy of the enlightenment. Boston: Beacon
      Press. (Princeton University Press, 1955; German original,
      Tiibingen, 1932.)
      . 1961. The logic of the humanities. New Haven: Yale University
      Press. (German original, Goteborg, 1942.)
Cazden, C., John-Steiner, V., and Hymes, D., eds. 1972. Functions of
      language in the classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.
Chatman, S., ed. 1970. Literary style: a symposium. London: Oxford
      University Press.
Chatman, S. and Levin, S., eds. 1966. Essays on the language of litera-
      ture. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Cherry, E. C. 1961. On human communication. A review, a survey and a
      criticism. New York: Science Editions.
Chomsky, N. 1957. Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton.
      . 1965. Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
      Press.
      . 1966. Cartesian linguistics. New York: Harper and Row.
      . 1968. Language and Mind. New York: Harcourt, Brace and
      World.
      . 1973. For reasons of state. New York: Pantheon.
Chomsky, N., and Halle, M. 1968. Sound pattern of English, New York:
      Harper and Row. ,
Cohen, P. S. 1968. Modern social theory. London: Heinemann.
Bibliography                                                         215


Conant, F. P. 1961. Jarawa kin systems of reference and address.
        Anthropological Linguistics 3 (2): 1-33.
Conklin, H. 1955. Hanunoo color categories. Southwestern Journal of
        Anthropology 11: 339-344.
        . 1959. Linguistic play in its cultural context. Language 35:
       631-636. (Reprinted in Language in culture and society, ed. D.
       Hymes. New York: Harper and Row.)
       . 1962. Lexicographical treatment of folk taxonomies. In Problems
       of lexicography, eds. F. W. Householder and S. Saporta, pp.
       119-141. (Publication 21 of the Indiana University Research Center
       in Anthropology, Folklore and Linguistics.)
       . 1964. Ethnogenealogical method. In Explorations in cultural
       anthropology, ed. W. Goodenough, pp. 22-55. New York:
       McGraw-Hill.
Cowan, G. 1948. Mazateco whistle speech. Language 24: 280-286.
Craig, D. 1971. Education and Creole English in the West Indies: Some
       sociolinguistic factors. In Pidginization and Creolization of
       Languages, ed. D. Hymes, pp. 371-392. London: Cambridge Uni-
       versity Press.
Currie, H. 1952. A projection of socio-linguistics: The relationships of
        speech to social status. Southern Speech Journal 18: 28-37.
Danes, R. 1964. A three-level approach to syntax. Travaux linguistiques
       de Prague 1: 225-240.
Darnell, R., ed. 1972. Prolegomena to typologies of speech use. (Texas
       Working Papers in Sociolinguistics, Special Number) Austin:
       Department of Anthropology, University of Texas.
Darnell, R., and Sherzer, J. 1972. A field guide to the study of speech
       use. In Directions in sociolinguistics, eds. J. Gumperz and D.
       Hymes, pp. 548-554. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
DeCamp, D. 1969. Toward a formal theory of sociolinguistics. Unpub-
       lished ms.
       . 1970. Is a sociolingustic theory possible? In Report of the 20th
       round table meeting, ed. J. E. Alatis, pp. 157-168. (Monograph
       series on language and linguistics 22.) Washington, D.C.: George-
       town University Press.
       . 1972. Toward a generative analysis of a post-creole speech
       continuum. In Pidginization and creolization of languages, ed.
       D. Hymes, pp. 349-370. London: Cambridge University Press.
Denison, N. 1968. Sauris: a trilingual community in diatypic perspective.
       Man (n.s.) 3 (4): 578-592.
       . 1970. Sociolinguistic aspects of plurilingualism. Proceedings of
       the International Days of Sociolinguistics, pp. 255-278. Rome:
       Istituto Luigi Sturzo.
Dennis, W. 1940. The Hopi child. Charlottesville: University of Virginia
       Press.
216                                                         BIBLIOGRAPHY

Devereux, G. 1949. Mohave voice and speech mannerisms. Word 5:
       268-272.
       . 1951. Mohave Indian verbal and motor profanity. In Psycho-
       analysis and the social sciences. Vol. 3, ed. Geza Roheim. New
       York: International Universities Press;
Dillard, J. 1968. The creolist and the study of Negro non-standard
       dialects in the United States. In Pidginization and creolization of
       languages, ed. D. Hymes, pp. 393-408. London: Cambridge Uni-
       versity Press.
Dingwall, W. 0., ed. 1971. A survey of linguistic science. College Park,
        Maryland: University of Maryland, Linguistics Program.
Dong, Q. P. ms. A note on conjoined noun phrases.
Duncan, H. D. 1968. Symbols in society. New York: Oxford University
       Press.
Easton, L., and Guddat, K. H., eds. 1967. Writings of the young Marx on
       philosophy and society. Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
Ebeling, G. 1966. Theology and proclamation: a discussion with Rudolf
       Bultmann. London: Collins.
Eersel, C. 1971. Prestige in choice of language and linguistic form. In
       Pidginizaton and creolization of languages, ed. D. Hymes, pp.
       317-322. London: Cambridge University Press.
Eggan, D. 1943. The general problem of Hopi adjustment. American
       Anthropologist 45: 357-373.
Ervin-Tripp, S. 1964. An analysis of the interaction of language, topic
       and listener. In The ethnography of communication, eds. J. J.
        Gumperz and D. Hymes, pp. 86-102. Washington, D.C.: American
       Anthropological Association.
        . 1972. On sociolinguistic rules: alternation and co-occurence. In
        Directions in sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes,
       pp. 213-250. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
        . 1973. Language acquisition and language choice. Selected and
       introduced by A. S. Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Faris, J. 1966. The dynamics of verbal exchange; a Newfoundland
        example. Anthropologica 8: 235-248.
        . 1968. The lexicon of 'occasions' in Cat Harbour: some com-
        ments on the cultural validation of ethnographic descriptions.
        Man (n.s.) 3: 112-124.
Ferguson, C. A. 1963. Linguistic theory and language learning. In
        Report of the 14th Round Table, ed. R. J. DiPietro, pp. 115-124.
        (Monograph Series in Languages and Linguistics, 16.) Washing-
       ton, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
        . 1966. National sociolinguistic profile formulas. In Sociolinguis-
        tics, ed. W. Bright, pp. 309-315. The Hague: Mouton.
        . 1971. Language structure and language use. Selected and intro-
        duced by A. S. Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Ferguson, C. A., and Gumperz, J. J., eds. 1960. Linguistic diversity in
Bibliography                                                         217


        South Asia: studies in regional, social and functional variation.
         (Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore, and Linguistics, Pub-
        lication 13; International Journal of American Linguistics 26
        [3], part III.) Bloomington: Indiana University Research Center.
Fillmore, C. 1968. The case for case. In Universals in linguistic theory,
        eds. E. Bach and R. Harms, pp. 1-88. New York: Holt, Rinehart
        and Winston.
Firth, J. R. 1935. The technique of semantics. Transactions of the philo-
        logical society, pp. 36-*72. London.
Fischer, J. L. 1964. Words for self and other in some Japanese families,
       in The ethnography of communication, eds. J. J. Gumperz and
       D. Hymes, pp. 115-126.
       . 1972. The stylistic significance of consonantal sandhi in Trukese
        and Ponapean. In Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography
        of communication, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes, pp. 500-511.
Fishman, J. 1966. Language loyalty in the United States. The Hague:
       Mouton.
     —., ed. 1968. Readings in the sociology of language. The Hague:
       Mouton.
    —. 1970. Sociolinguistics. Rowley, Mass.: Newbury House.
       . 1972a. The sociology of language. Rowley, Mass.: Newbury
       House.
        . ed. 1972b. Advances in the sociology of language. 2 vols. The
       Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J., Ferguson, C., and Das Gupta, J., eds. 1968. Language prob-
       lems of developing nations. New York: Wiley.
Fock, N. 1965. Cultural aspects of the "oho" institution among the
       Waiwai. Proceedings of the 36th International Congress of Ameri-
        canists (1964), pp. 136-140. Copenhagen: Munksgaard.
Fontana, B. 1968. Savage anthropologists and unvanishing Indians
       in the American Southwest. Paper read before the 67th annual
       meeting of the American Anthropological Association. Seattle,
       Washington.
Fought, J. 1971. Review of Relations in public, by E. Goffman. Language
         in Society 1(2): 266-271.
Frake, C. O. 1961. The diagnosis of disease among the Subanun of
       Mindanao. American Anthropologist 63:113-132.
       . 1962a. Cultural ecology and ethnography. American Anthropolo-
       gist 64: 53-59.
        . 1962b. The ethnographic study of cognitive systems. In Anthro-
       pology and human behavior, eds. R. Gladwin and W. C. Sturde-
       vant, pp. 72-85. Washington, D.C.: Anthropological Society of
       Washington.
        . 1964. A structural description of Subanun 'religious behavior.'
        In Explorations in cultural anthropology, ed. W. H. Goodenough,
       pp. 111-129. New York: McGraw-Hill.
218                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY

       . 1972. Struck by speech: The Yakan concept of litigation. In
       Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communica-
        tion, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes, pp. 109-129.
Franklin, K. 1967. Names and aliases in Kewa. Journal of the Polynesian
        Society 76: 76-81.
Friedrich, P. 1966. Structural implications of Russian pronominal usage.
        In Sociolinguistics, ed. W. Bright, pp. 214-253. The Hague:
        Mouton.
        . 1972. Social context and semantic feature: the Russan pro-
        nominal usage. In Directions in sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz
        and D. Hymes, pp. 272-300. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
        Winston.
Gardner, P. 1966. Symmetric respect and memorate knowledge: the
        structure and ecology of individualistic culture. Southwestern
       Journal of Anthropology 22: 389-415.
Garfinkel, H. 1972. Remarks on ethnomethodology. In Directions in
        sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes, pp. 309-324.
Garvin, P. 1951. The standard language problem: concepts and methods.
        Anthropological Linguistics 1(2): 28-37. (Reprinted in Hymes 1964f.)
Gayton, A. and Newman, S. 1940. Yokuts and Western Mono myths.
        (University of California Publications, Anthropological Records,
       5). Berkeley and Los Angeles.
Giglioli, P. P., ed. 1972. Language and social context London: Penguin.
Gluckman, M. 1959. The technical vocabulary of Barotse jurisprudence.
       American Anthropologist 61: 743-759.
       . 1963. Gossip and scandal. Current Anthropology 4: 307-315.
Goodenough, W. 1956. Residence rules. Southwestern Journal of Anthro-
       pology 12: 22-37.
       . 1957a. Cultural anthropology and linguistics. Report of the 7th
       round table meeting, ed. P. Garvin, pp. 167-173. Washington,
       D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
        . 1957b. Review of Keesing and Keesing 1956. Language 34: 24-29.
       . 1961. Formal properties of status relationships. Paper read at
       the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association,
       November 16. Philadelphia. (Published in The relevance of models
        for social anthropology, ed. M. Banton. London: Tavistock publi-
        cations and Praeger, 1965.)
        . 1965. Personal names and modes of address in two Oceanic
       societies. In Context and meaning in cultural anthropology, ed.
       M. Spiro, pp. 265-276. New York: Free Press.
Goody, J., and Watt, I. 1963. The consequences of literacy. Comparative
        Studies in Society and History, 5: 304-345.
Greenberg, J. 1948. Linguistics and ethnology. Southwestern Journal of
       Anthropology 4: 140-148.
       . 1968. Anthropological linguistics. New York: Random House.
Bibliography                                                         219


       . 1971. Language, culture and communication. Selected and intro-
       duced by A. S. Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Gross, L. P. 1973a. Modes of communication and the acquisition of
       symbolic competence. In Communications, technology, and social
       policy, eds. G. Gerbner, L. Gross, and W. Melody. New York:
       Wiley.
       . 1973b. Art as the communication of competence. Social Science
       Information. The Hague: Mouton.
Guiraud, P. 1961. La stylistique. Third edition. Paris: Presses Uni-
       versitaires de France.
       . 1967. Structures etymologiques du lexique frangais. Paris:
       Librairie Larousse.
Gumperz, J. J. 1962. Types of linguistic communities. Anthropological
       Linguistics 4(1): 28-40.
       . 1971. Language in social groups. Selected and introduced by
       A. S. Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Gumperz, J. J. and Hymes, D., eds. 1964. The ethnography of communi-
       cation. Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological Association.
        (First issued as American Anthropologist 66(6), part 2).
        , eds. 1972. Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of
       communication. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Gumperz, J. J., and Wilson, R. 1971. Convergence and creolization. In
       Pidginization and creolization, ed. D. Hymes, pp. 151-167. Lon-
       don: Cambridge University Press.
Gunter, R. 1966. On the placement of accent in dialogue: a feature of
        context grammar. Journal of Linguistics 2:159-179.
        . 1972. Intonation and relevance. In Intonation, ed. D. Bolinger,
    pp. 194-215. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books.
Haas, M. 1944. Men's and women's speech in Koasati. In Language in
        culture and society, ed. D. Hymes. New York: Harper and Row.
Habermas, J. 1970. Toward a theory of communicative competence. In
        Recent Sociology no. 2: Patterns of communicative behavior, ed.
        H. P. Dreitzel, pp. 114-148. New York: Macmillan.
Hall, E. 1959. The silent language. New York: Doubleday.
Halliday, M. A. K. 1967-68. Notes on transitivity and theme in English.
        Journal of Linguistics 3: 37-81, 199-244; 4: 179-215.
        . 1970. Functional diversity in language as seen from a considera-
        tion of modality and mood in English. Foundations of Language
        6: 322-361.
        . 1971. Linguistic function and literary style: an inquiry into the
        language of William Golding's The inheritors. In Literary style:
        A symposium, ed. S. Chatman. London: Oxford University Press.
         (Also in Halliday 1973:103-140).
        . 1973. Explorations in the functions of language. London: Edward
        Arnold.
220                                                         BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hallowell, A. I. 1964. Ojibwa ontology, behavior and world view. Primi-
        tive views of the world, ed. S. Diamond, pp. 49-82. New York:
        Columbia University Press.
Harrah, D. 1963. Communication: a logical model. Cambridge, Mass.:
        MIT Press.
Harris, Z. 1951. Methods in structural linguistics. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.
Hasan, R. 1968. Grammatical cohesion in spoken and written English.
        London: Longmans.
Hattori, S. 1964. A special language of the older generations among
        the Ainu. Linguistics 6: 43-58.
Haugen, E. 1957. The semantics of Icelandic orientation. Word 13:
        447-460.
        . 1972. The ecology of language. Selected and introduced by A. S.
        Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Hendricks, W. O. 1967. On the notion 'beyond the sentence'. Linguistics
       37: 12-51. (Reprinted in his Essays on Semiolinguistics and verbal
       art. The Hague: Mouton', 1973.)
Hertzler, J. 0.1965. A sociology of language. New York: Random House.
Herzog, G. 1945. Drum-signalling in a West African tribe. Word 1:
       217-238.
Hilger, Sister I. 1957. Araucanian child life and its cultural background.
        (Smithsonian miscellaneous collections 135. Public 4297.) Wash-
       ington, D.C.
Hockett, C. 1955. A manual of phonology. (Indiana University Publica-
       tions in Anthropology and Linguistics; Memoir 11 of the Interna-
       tional Journal of American Linguistics.) Bloomington.
       . 1958. A course in modern linguistics. New York: Macmillan.
       . 1960. Ethno-linguistic implications of studies in linguistics and
       psychiatry. Report of the 9th round table meeting, ed. W. Austin,
       pp. 175-193. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Hockett, C., and Ascher, R. 1964. The human revolution. Current
       Anthropology 5 (3): 135-168.
Hogan, H. 1967. An ethnography of communication of the Ashanti.
       Master's thesis. University of Pennsylvania. (Issued as Working
       Papers in Sociolinguistics, 1; Austin: University of Texas, Depart-
       ment of Anthropology).
Hunter, A. M. 1964. Interpreting the parables. London: SCM Press.
Hymes, D. 1956. The supposed Spanish loanword in Hopi for jaybird.
       International Journal of American Linguistics 22: 186.
       . 1960. Phonological aspects of style: some English sonnets. In
       Style in Language, ed. T. A. Sebeok, pp. 109-151. Cambridge,
       Mass.: MIT Press.
       . 1961a. Functions of speech: the evolutionary approach. In
       Anthropology and education, ed. F. C. Gruber, pp. 55-83. Phila-
Bibliography                                                            221


        delphia: University of Pennsylvania.
       -. 1961b. Linguistic aspects of cross-cultural personality study.
        In Studying personality cross-culturally, ed. B. Kaplan, pp. 313-
        359. Evanston: Row, Peterson.
       -. 1961c. On typology of cognitive styles in language (with ex-
        amples from Chinookan). Anthropological Linguistics 3 (1): 22-54.
           1961 d. Abstract of Vachek, The London Group of Linguists.
        International Journal of American Linguistics 27: 166-167.
       -. 1962. The ethnography of speaking. Anthropology and human
        behavior, eds. T. Gladwin and W. Sturtevant, pp. 15-53. Wash-
        ington, D.C.: Anthropological Society of Washington.
           1964a. Directions in (ethno) linguistic theory. Transcultural
        studies of cognition, eds. A. K. Romney and R. G. D'Andrade,
        pp. 6-56. (Special publication, American Anthropologist 66 (3),
        part 2.) Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological Association.
       -. 1964b. Introduction: toward ethnographies of communication.
        In The ethnography of communication, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D.
        Hymes, pp. 1-34. (Special publication, American Anthropologist
        66 (6), part 2.) Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological
        Association.
       -. 1964c. Introduction. In Language in culture and society, ed. D.
        Hymes. New York: Harper and Row.
       -. 1964d. A perspective for linguistic anthropology. In Horizons of
        anthropology, ed. S. Tax, pp.. 92-107. Chicago: Aldine.
          1964e. Formal comment. In The acquisition of language, ed. U.
        Bellugi and R. Brown, pp. 107-112. Lafayette: Child Development
        Publications.
       -., ed. 1964f. Language in culture and society. New York: Harper
        and Row.
          1966a. On anthropological linguistics and congeners. American
        Anthropologist 68:143-153.
          1966b. Two types of linguistic relativity. In Sociolinguistics, ed.
        W. Bright, pp. 114-158. The Hague: Mouton.
          1966c. Some points of Suislaw phonology. International Journal
        of American Linguistics. 32: 328-342.
          1966 ms. Sociolinguistic determination of knowledge: notes on
        the history of its treatment in American anthropology. Prepared
        for Research Committee on the Sociology of Knowledge, Interna-
        national Sociological Association.
       -. 1967a. Why linguistics needs the sociologist. Social Research
        34 (4): 632-647.
       -. 1967b. Models of the interaction of language and social setting.
        (Problems of bilingualism, ed. J. Macnamara.) Journal of social
        issues 23 (2): 8-28.
       -. 1967c. The anthropology of communication. In Human communi-
222                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY

       cation theory, ed. F. Dance, pp. 1-39. New York: Holt, Rinehart
       and Winston.
      -. 1967 ms. On communicative competence.
      -. 1968a. Review of Burke, Language as symbolic action. Language
       44: 664-669.
         1968b. Linguistic problems in defining the concept of the 'tribe.'
       In Essays on the Problem of Tribe, ed. }. Helm, pp. 23-48. (Pro-
       ceedings of the American Ethnological Society, 1967.) Seattle:
       University of Washington Press.
      -. 1968c. Linguistics — the field. International encyclopedia of the
       social sciences 9: 351-371. New York: Macmillan.
      -. 1968d. The 'wife' who 'goes out' like a 'man': reinterpretation of
       a Clackamas Chinook myth. Social Science Information 7 (3):
       173-199.
      -. 1969. Ends and meanings. Review of Symbols in society by H. D.
       Duncan. Science (9 May) 1964: 695-696.
      -. 1970a. Linguistic aspects of comparative political research. In
       Methodology of comparative research, eds. R. T. Holt and J.
       Turner, pp. 295-341. New York: The Free Press.
         1970b. Linguistic method of ethnography. In Method and theory
       in linguistics, ed. P. Garvin, pp. 249-325. The Hague: Mouton.
      -. 1970c. Linguistic theory and the functions of speech. In Proceed-
       ings of International Days of Sociolinguistics, pp. 111-144. Rome:
       Istituto Luigi Sturzo.
      -. 1971a. Sociolinguistics and the ethnography of speaking. In
       Social anthropology and language, ed. E. Ardener, pp. 47-93.
       (ASA monographs 10.) London: Tavistock.
      -. 1971b. Competence and performance in linguistic theory. In
       Acquisition of language: models and methods, eds. R. Huxley and
       E. Ingram, pp. 3-28. London: Tavistock.
         1971c. On linguistic theory, communicative competence and
       the education of disadvantaged children. In Anthropological per-
       spectives on education, eds. M. L. Wax, S. A. Diamond, and F. O.
       Gearing, pp. 51-66. New York: Basic Books.
      -. 1971d. Foreword. In The origin and diversification of lan-
       guages, by M. Sawdesh; ed. J. Sherzer, pp. v-x. Chicago: Aldine.
      -. 1971 e. Introduction, Part III. In Pidginization and creolization of
       languages, ed. D. Hymes, pp. 65-90. London: Cambridge Uni-
       versity Press.
      -. 1972a. Models of the interaction of language and social life.
       In Directions in sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D.
       Hymes, pp. 35-71. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
      -. 1972b. Introduction. In Functions of language in the classroom,
       eds. C. Cazden, V. John-Steiner, and D. Hymes, pp. xi-lvii. New
       York: Teachers College Press.
      -. 1972c. The use of anthropology: critical, political, personal.
                                                                      223
Bibliography

        In Reinventing anthropology, ed. D. Hymes, pp. 3-79. New York:
        Pantheon Books.
        . 1972d. Formal comment. In Sociolinguistics in cross-cultural
        analysis, eds. D. M. Smith and R. W. Shuy, pp. 103-115. Washing-
        ton, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
        . 1972e. On personal pronouns: 'fourth' person and phonesthema-
        tic aspects. In Studies in linguistics in honor of George L. Trager,
        ed. M. E. Smith, pp. 100-121. The Hague: Mouton.
        . 1973a. Toward linguistic competence. (Working papers in socio-
        linguistics, 16.) Austin: University of Texas, Department of
        Anthropology.
        . 1973b. Speech and language: on the origins and foundations of
        inequality in speaking. Daedalus (Summer): 59-86. (Proceedings
        of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 102 (3).)
        . 1974. Ways of speaking. In Explorations in the ethnography of
        speaking, ed. R. Baumann and J. Sherzer. New York and London:
        Cambridge University Press.
Irvine, f. 1968. Speech and music in two cultures, ms.
Jacobs, M. 1940. Coos myth texts. (University of Washington Publica-
         tions in Anthropology 8 (2): 127-260.) Seattle: University of
         Washington Press.
         . 1945. Kalapuya texts. (University of Washington Publications in
         Anthropology, 11.) Seattle: University of Washington Press.
         . 1958. The content and style of an oral literature. Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press.
         . 1959. Clackamas Chinook texts, part 2. (Research Center in
         Anthropology, Folklore and Linguistics, Publication 11.) Bloom-
         ington, Indiana.
 Jacobs, R. and Rosenbaum, P. 1971. Transformations, style and meaning.
         Waltham, Mass.: Xerox College Publishing.
 Jain, D. K. 1969. Verbalization of respect in Hindi. Anthropological
         Linguistics 11 (3): 79-97.
 Jakobson, R. 1953. Chapter 2. In Result of the conference of anthro-
        pologists and linguists, C. Levi-Strauss, R. Jakobson, C. F.
         Voegelin and T. Sebeok, pp. 11-21. (Memoir 8 of the International
         Journal of American linguistics, Indiana University Publications
        in Anthropology and Linguistics.) Bloomington. (Reprinted in
         his Selected Writings, 2: 554-567. The Hague: Mouton.)
         . 1957. Shifters, verbal categories, and the Russian verb. Cam-
        bridge, Mass.: Harvard University, Russian language project.
         (Reprinted in his Selected Writings, 2: 130-147. The Hague:
        Mouton.)
    =—. 1960. Concluding statement: linguistics and poetics. In Style in
        Language, ed. T. Sebeok, pp. 350-373. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
        Press.
        . 1963. Efforts towards a means-ends model of language in inter-
224                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

       war continental linguistics. In Trends in modern linguistics, eds.
       C. Mohrmann, F. Norman and A. Sommerfelt, pp. 104-108.
       Utrecht: Spectrum Publishers. (Reprinted in his Selected Writ-
       ings, 2: 522-526. The Hague: Mouton, 1971.)
       . 1965. Quest for the essence of language. Diogenes 51: 21-37. (Re-
       printed in his Selected Writings, 2: 345-359. The Hague: Mouton.)
       . 1969. Linguistics in relation to other sciences. In Actes du X
       congres international des Jinguistes, pp. 75-122. Bucharest: Edi-
       tions de 1'Acade'mie de la Re'publique Socialiste du Roumanie.
        (Reprinted in his Selected Writings, 2: 655-696. The Hague:
       Mouton, 1971.)
Jeremias, J. 1963. The parables of Jesus. London: SCM Press.
Jespersen, O. 1924. The philosophy of grammar. London: Allen and
       Unwin.
John, V. 1963. The intellectual development of slum children: some
       preliminary findings. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 33:
       813-822.
       . 1964. The social context of language acquisition. Merrill-
       Palmer Quarterly 10: 265-275.
Joos, M. 1959. The isolation of styles. In Report of the 10th round table
        meeting, ed. R. Harrell, pp. 107-113. Washington, D.C.: George-
        town University Press.
Joseph, Sister M. 1962. Rhetoric in Shakespeare's time. Literary theory
        in Renaissance Europe. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
        (Abridged from Shakespeare's use of the arts of language. New
        York: Columbia University Press, 1947.)
Kasper, W. 1969. The methods of dogmatic theology. Shannon: Ecclesia
        Press.
Katz, J. J. 1967. Recent issues in semantic theory. Foundations of Lan-
        guage 3: 124-194.
Katz, J., and Fodor, J. 1963. The structure of a semantic theory. Lan-
        guage 39: 170-210.
Keesing, F. M., and Keesing, M. M. 1956. Elite communication in Samoa:
        a study in leadership. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Kenyon, J. S. 1948. Cultural levels and functional varieties in English.
        College English 10: 31-36.
 Kiparsky, P. 1968. Tense and mood in Indo-European syntax. Founda-
        tions of Language 4: 30-57.
 Kjolseth, R. 1972. Making sense: natural language and shared knowledge
        in understanding. In Advances in the sociology of language, ed.
        J. Fishman, Vol. 2, pp. 50-76. The Hague: Mouton.
 Klima, E. 1964. Relatedness between grammatical systems. Language
        40: 1-20.
 Kluckholn, C. 1961. Notes on some anthropological aspects of communi-
        cation. American Anthropologist 63: 895-910.
Bibliography                                                        225


Kroeber, A. 1911. Incorporation as a linguistic process. American
      Anthropologist 13: 577-584.
       . 1916. Arapaho dialects. University of California Publications in
      American Archaeology and Ethnology 12: 71-138.
       . 1960. Evolution, history and culture. In Evolution after Darwin,
       ed. Sol Tax, pp. 1-16. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Labov, W. 1965. On the mechanism of linguistic change. In Report of
       the 16th round table meeting, ed. C. Kreidler, pp. 91-114. (Mono-
       graph Series in Languages and Linguistics, 18.) Washington, D.C.:
       Georgetown University Press.
       . 1966. The social stratification of English in New York City.
       Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics.
       . 1970. The study of language in its social context. Studium
       Generale 20: 30-87.
       . 1971. Methodology. In A survey of linguistic science, ed. W. O.
       Dingwall, pp. 412-491. College Park, Maryland: University of
       Maryland, Linguistics Program.
       . 1973a. Language in the inner city. Philadelphia: University of
       Pennsylvania.
       . 1973b. Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: University of
       Pennsylvania.
Ladefoged, P. 1964. A phonetic study of West African languages. Cam-
       bridge: At the University Press.
Lakoff, R. 1972. Language in context. Language 48: 907-927.
       . 1973. Language and woman's place. Language in society 2 (1):
       45-80.
Lambert, W. 1967a. A psychology of bilingualism. (Problems of bi-
       lingualism, ed. J. Macnamara.) Journal of social issues 23 (2):
       91-109.
       . 1967b. The use of tu and vous as forms of address in French
       Canada: a pilot study. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
       Behavior 6: 614-617.
       . 1972. Language, psychology and culture. Selected and introduced
       by A. S. Dil. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Lamb, S. 1964. The sememic approach to structural semantics. American
       Anthropologist 66 (3): 57-78.
Lammers, W. 1936. Wilhelm von Humboldts weg zur Sprachforschung
       1785-1801. Berlin.
Lanham, R. 1968. A handlist of rhetorical terms. Berkeley and Los
       Angeles: University of California Press.
Lee, D. 1959. Freedom and culture. Englewood-Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
       Spectrum Books.
Lefebvre, H. 1966. Le Langage et la societd. Paris. Gallimard.
        . 1968. The sociology of Marx. London: Allen Lane, The Penguin
       Press.
226                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY

Le Page, R. 1969. Problems of description in multilingual communities.
        Transactions of the Philological Society (1968), pp. 189-212.
        London.
Leroux, R. 1958. L'Anthropologic comparee de Guillaume de Humboldt.
         (Publications de la Faculte" des lettres de l'Universit£ de Stras-
        bourg, Fascicule 135.) Paris: Societe d'^ditions.
Le'vi-Strauss, C. 1953. Social structure. In Anthropology today, by A. L.
        Kroeber et al., 524-553. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        . 1958. La pensee sauvage. Paris: Plon.
        . 1960. L'Anthropologie sociale devant l'historie. Annales 15 (4):
        625-737.
          1963. Totemism. Boston: Beacon Press.
Lieberson, S., ed. 1966. Explorations in sociolinguistics. Sociological
       Inquiry 36 (2).
Lisker, L., Cooper, F., and Liberman, A. 1962. The uses of experiment in
       language description. Word 18: 82-106.
Lomax, A. 1959. Folk song style. American Anthropologist 61: 927-954.
          1968. Folk song style and culture. Washington, D.C.: American
        Association for the Advancement of Science.
Lounsbury, F. 1955. The varieties of meaning. In Report of the 6th round
        table meeting, ed. R. Weinstein. pp. 158-164. (Monograph Series
        on Languages and Linguistics 8.) Washington, D.C.: Georgetown
        University Press.
        . 1956. A semantic analysis of the Pawnee kinship usage. Lan-
       guage 32: 158-194.
Lowie, R. 1917. Notes on the social organization of the Mandan,
        Hidatsa, and Crow Indians. American Museum of Natural His-
        tory, Anthropological Papers 21 (I).
        . 1937. A history of ethnological theory. New York: Rinehart.
Lyons, J. 1968. Theoretical linguistics. London: Cambridge University Press.
Macnamara, J., ed. 1967. Problems of bilingualism. (Journal of Social
        Issues 23 (2).)
McCawley, J. 1968. The role of semantics in a grammar. In Universals in
        linguistic theory, eds. E. Bach and R. Harms, pp. 125-170. New York:
        Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Mcllwraith, T. 1948. The Bella Coola Indians. Toronto: University of
       Toronto Press.
McLuhan, M. 1962. The Gutenberg Galaxy. The making of typographic
       man. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
       . 1964. Understanding media. The extensions of man. New York:
       McGraw-Hill.
Mair, L. 1935. Linguistics without sociology: some notes on the Standard
       Luganda dictionary. Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies,
       London 7: 913-921.
Malinowski, B. 1920. Classificatory particles in the language of Kiriwina.
Bibliography                                                            227


         Bulletin of the School of Oriental (and African) Studies 1(4): 33-78.
          1923. The problem of meaning in primitive languages. In The
        meaning of meaning, by C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards, pp. 451-510.
        London: Kegan Paul. (Reprinted in his Magic, Science and Religion
         and Other Essays, pp. 228-276. Glencoe: Free Press, 1948.)
          1935. Coral gardens and their magic, Vol. 2. London: Allen and
         Unwin.
Mandelbaum, D., ed. 1949. Selected writings of Edward Sapir. Berkeley
        and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Mao Tse-Tung. 1964. On practice. Peking: Foreign Language Press.
Marchand, H. 1959. Phonetic symbolism in English word-formation.
       Indogermanische Forschungen 64: 146-168, 256-277.
Marrou, H. 1965. A history of education in antiquity. New York: Sheed
       and Ward.
May, L. C. 1956. A survey of glossolalia and related phenomena in
       non-Christian religions. American Anthropologist 58: 75-96.
Mead, M. 1937. Public opinion mechanisms among primitive peoples.
       Public Opinion Quarterly 1: 5-16.
       . 1948. Some cultural approaches to communication problems. In
       The communication of ideas, ed. L. Bryson, pp. 9-26. New York:
       Harper.
       . 1964. Continuities in cultural evolution. New Haven: Yale.
Mehan, H. 1972. Language using abilities. Language Sciences 22:1-10.
Meillet, A. 1906. Comment les mots changent de sens. L'annee socio-
       logique (1905-1906). (Reprinted in Linguistique historique et lin-
       guistique generale, Vol. 1: 230-271.) Paris: Klincksieck.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1967. Introduction a la prose du monde. La Revue de
       Metaphysique et de Morale 2: 139-153. (Published in English in
       Prose of the world. Evanston: Northwestern University Press,
       1970.)
Merriam, A. 1964. The arts and anthropology. In Horizons of anthro-
        pology, ed. S. Tax. Chicago: Aldine Press.
Messenger, J. Jr. 1960. Anang proverb riddles. Journal of American Folklore
         73: 225-235.
Metcalf, G. 1938. Forms of address in German (1500-1800). (Washington
        University Studies, n.s., Language and Literature, 7.) St. Louis.
Metzger, D., and Williams, G. 1963. Tenejapa medicine I: the cure.
        Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 19: 216-234.
Miller, G. 1956. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some
        limits to our capacity for processing information. The Psychologi-
        cal Review 63: 81-97.
Mills, C. W. 1959. The sociological imagination. New York: Oxford
       University Press.
Morris, C. 1946. Signs, language and behavior. Englewood-Cliffs:
        Prentice Hall.
228                                                         BIBLIOGRAPHY

Moule, C. 1966. The birth of the New Testament London: Adam and
        Charles Black.
Murphy, R. 1967. Tuareg kinship. American Anthropologist 69: 163-170.
Newman, S. 1955. Vocabulary levels: Zuni sacred and slang usage.
        Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 11: 345-354. (Reprinted in
       Hymes 1964).
Nida, E. 1945. Linguistics and ethnology in translation problems. Word
       1: 194-208.
Paredes, A. and Bauman, R., eds. 1971. Toward new perspectives in folklore.
        Austin: University of Texas Press.
Parain, B. 1969. Petite metaphysique de la parole. Paris: Gallimard.
Petrovich, G. 1967. Marx in the mid-twentieth century. Garden City,
       New York: Doubleday, Anchor Books.
Philips, S. 1970. Acquisition of rules for appropriate speech usage. In
       Report of the 21st round table meeting, ed. f. Alatis, pp. 77-96.
       (Monograph Series in Languages and Linguistics, 23.) Washing-
       ton, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
       . 1972. Participant structure and communicative competence:
       Warm Springs children in community and classroom. In Func-
       tions of language in the classroom, eds. C. Cazden, V. John, and
       D. Hymes, pp. 370-394. New York: Teachers College Press.
Pike, K. 1967. Language in relation to a unified theory of the structure
       of human behavior. The Hague: Mouton. [Preliminary edition in
       three parts, 1954, 1955, 1960 from Santa Ana, California: Sum-
       mer Institute of linguistics, with essentially same numbering but
       different pagination; pagination here is to the 1967 edition.)
Pittenger, R., Hockett, C., and Danehy, J. 1960. The first five minutes.
       Ithaca: Paul Martineau.
Postal, P. 1964. Underlying and superficial linguistic structure. Harvard
       Educational Review 34: 246-266.
       . 1968. Aspects of the theory of phonology. New York: Harper
       and Row.
Pride, J. 1970. Social meaning and language. London: Oxford University
       Press.
Quirk, R. 1968. Essays on the English language, medieval and modern.
       London: Longmans.
Reichling, A. 1947. What is general linguistics? Lingua 1 (1): 8-24.
Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. and A. 1961. The people of Aritama. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
Revill, P. 1966. Preliminary report on paralinguistics in Mbembe (E.
       Nigeria). In Tagmemic and matrix linguistics applied to selected
        African languages, by K. Pike, pp. 245-254. Appendix VIII. Final
       Report, Contract no. OE-5-14-065. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept.
        of Health, Education and Welfare, Office of Education, Bureau of
        Research.
Bibliography                                                           229


Richardson, A. 1961. The Bible in the age of science. London: SCM
       Press.
Roberts, J. ms. Four southwestern men.
Rubin, J.. 1969.,Bilingualism in Paraguay. Anthropological.Linguistics 1(4):
        52-58.
          1968. National bilingualism in Paraguay. The Hague: Mouton.
Rubin, J., and Jernudd, R., eds. 1972. Can language be planned? Hono-
       lulu: University Press of Hawaii.
Ruesch, J. 1961. Therapeutic communication. New York: W. W. Norton.
Ruesch, J., and Kees, W. 1956. Nonverbal communication. Notes on the
       visual perception of human relations. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
       University of California Press.
Sacks, H. 1972. On the analyzability of stores by children. In Directions
       in sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes, pp. 329-345.
       New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Salisbury, R. 1962. Notes on bilingualism and linguistic change in
       New Guinea. Anthropological Linguistics 4 (7): 1-13.
Samarin, W. 1965. The language of silence. Practical Anthropology 12:
       115-119.
       . 1969. The art of Gbeya insults. International Journal of American
       Linguistics 35: 323-329.
Samuels, M. L. 1972. Linguistic evolution with special reference to English.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sandys, Sir J. E. 1920. A history of classical scholarship. Vol. 1. Cam-
        bridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Sankoff, G. 1974. A quantitative approach to the study of communicative
        competence. In Explorations in the ethnography of speaking, eds.
        R. Bauman and I. Sherzer. New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Sapir, E. [Papers by Sapir reprinted in Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected
        writings of Edward Sapir (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
        of California Press, 1949) are indicated by "SWES," together with
       their pages in that collection.]
        . 1911. The problem of noun incorporation in American lan-
       guages. American Anthropologist 13: 250-282.
        . 1912. Language and environment. American Anthropologist 14:
        226-242. (SWES 89-103.)
        . 1915. Abnormal types of speech in Nootka. (Canada, Dept. of
       Mines, Geological Survey, Memoir 62; Anthropological Series,
        no. 5). Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau. (SWES 179-196.)
        . 1916. Time perspective in aboriginal American culture: a study
        in method. (Canada, Dept. of Mines, Geological Survey, Memoir
        90; Anthropological Series, No. 13) Ottawa: Government Printing
        Bureau.) (SWES 389-462.)
        . 1921. Language. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
230                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY

        . 1922. Takelma. In Handbook of American Indian Languages,
        Part II, ed. F. Boas, pp. 7-296. (Bureau of American Ethnology,
        Bulletin 40.) Washington, D.C.
        . 1924. Culture, genuine and spurious. American Journal of Soci-
        ology 29: 401-492. (SWES 308-331.)
        . 1925. Sound patterns in language. Language 1: 37-51. (SWES
        33-45.)
        . 1927a. Speech as a personality trait. American Journal of So-
       ciology 32: 892-905. (SWES 533-543.)
        . 1927b. The unconscious patterning of behavior in society. In
        The unconscious, ed. E. S. Dummer, pp. 114-142. New York:
        Knopf. (SWES 544-559.)
        . 1929. The status of linguistics as a science. Language 5: 207-214.
        (SWES 160-166.)
        . 1932. Cultural anthropology and psychiatry. Journal of Abnormal
        and Social Psychology 27: 229-242. (SWES 509-521.)
        . 1933a. Language. Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences 9:155-169.
        (SWES 7-32.)
        . 1933b. Communication. Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences 4:
       78-81. (SWES 104-109.)
       . 1934. The emergence of the concept of personality in a study
       of cultures. Journal of Social Psychology 5: 408-415. (SWES
       590-597.)
       . 1938. Why cultural anthropology needs the psychiatrist. Psy-
       chiatry 1: 7-12. (SWES 569-577.)
       . 1939. Psychiatric and cultural pitfalls in the business of getting
       a living. Mental Health, Publication No. 9, 237-244. (American
       Association for the Advancement of Science.) (SWES 578-589.)
Saussure, F. de. 1916. Cours de linguistique gSn6rale. Paris: Payot.
Schaff, A. 1962. Introduction to semantics. London: Pergamon Press.
Schegloff, E. 1968. Sequencing in conversational openings. American
       Anthropologist 70: 1075-1095.
Schneider, D. 1969. Componential analysis—a state of the art review.
       Prepared for Wenner-Gren symposium on cognitive studies and
       artificial intelligence research. Chicago.
Searle, J. 1962. Meaning and speech acts. The Philosophical Review 71:
       423-432.
       . ms. How to promise. (Revised in Searle, 1969.)
       . 1969. Speech acts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sebeok, T. 1962. Coding in the evolution of signalling behavior. Be-
       havioral Science 7: 430-442.
Sebeok, T., Hayes, A. S., and Bateson, M. C., eds. 1964. Approaches to
       semiotics: cultural anthropology, education, linguistics, psychia-
       try, psychology. 's-Gravenhage: Mouton.
Bibliography                                                              231


Seiler, J. J. 1962. On the syntactic role of word order and prosodic features.
         Word 18: 121-131.
Service, E. 1960. Kinship terminology and evolution. American Anthro-
        pologist 62: 747-763.
Sherzer, D„ and J. 1972. Literature in San Bias: discovering the Cuna
        Ikala. Semiotica 6 (2): 182-199.
Sherzer, J. 1967. An exploration into the ethnography of speaking of the
        Abipones. M.A. dissertation. Department of linguistics. Uni-
        versity of Pennsylvania.
        . 1970. La parole chez les Abipones. L'Homme 10: 42-76.
        . 1973. Verbal and non-verbal terms: the pointed-lip gesture in
        San Bias Cuna. Language in Society 2 (1): 117-132.
Sherzer, J. and Darnell, R. 1972. Outline guide for the ethnographic study
        of speech use. In Directions in sociolinguistics, eds. J. J. Gumperz
        and D. Hymes, 548-554. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Skinner, Q. 1970. Conventions and the understanding of speech acts.
        The Philosophical Quarterly 20:118-138.
        . 1971. On performing and explaining linguistic actions. The
        Philosophical Quarterly 21: 1-21.
Slobin, D., ed. 1967. A field manual for cross-cultural study of the
        acquisition of communicative competence. Berkeley, Dept. of
        Psychology. University of California.
Smith, D. M., and Shuy, R., eds. 1972. Sociolinguistics in cross-cultural
        analysis. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Smith, K. D. 1969. The phonology of Sedang personal names. Anthro-
        pological Linguistics 11 (6): 187-198.
Smith, M. G. 1957. The social functions and meaning of Hausa praise
        singing. Africa 27: 26-44.
Smithers, C. V. 1954. Some English ideophones. Archivum Linguisticum
        6: 73-111.
Snyder, G. 1969. Earth house hold: technical notes and queries to fellow
        dharma revolutionaries. New York: New Directions.
Sonnino, L. A. 1968. A handbook to sixteenth century rhetoric. London:
        Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Spier, L., and Sapir, E. 1930. Wishram ethnography. (University of
        Washington Publications in Anthropology 3 (3): 151-300.) Seattle:
        Washington University Press.
Ssukung, T. 1963. The twenty four modes of poetry. Chinese Literature
        7: 65-83. Peking Foreign Languages Press.
Steinmann, M. Jr., ed. 1967. New rhetorics. New York: Scribners.
Stern, 6 . 1931. Meaning and change of meaning. (Goteborg Hogskolas
         Arsskrift, 1932, 38 (1).) Goteborg. (Reprinted, Bloomington:
         Indiana University Press, n.d. [1963]).
Stern, T. 1957. Drum and whistle languages: an analysis of speech sur-
       rogates. American Anthropologist 59: 487-506.
232                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY

Swadesh, M. 1933. Chitimacha verbs of derogatory or abusive connota-
        tion with parallels from European languages. Language 9:192-201.
Taber, C. R. 1966. The structure of Sango narrative. (Hartford studies in
        Linguistics, 17.) 2 Vols. Hartford, Connecticut: Hartford Seminary
        Foundation.
Tambiah, S. }. 1968. The magical power of words. Man 3: 175-208.
Tedlock, D. 1971. On the translation of style in oral poetry. Journal of
        American Folklore 84: 114-133.
        . ms. From prayer to reprimand: The inversion of stress and pitch
        in Zuni.
Thome, J. P. 1969. The grammar of jealousy. Edinburgh studies in
        English and Scots. London: Longmans.
Tillich, P. 1964. Theology of culture. New York: Oxford University
        Press.
Titles and forms of address: a guide to their correct use. 1967. 13th
        edition. London: Adam and Charles Black.
Tolkien, J. R. R. 1965. The Lord of the Rings. New York: Ballantine Books.
Trager, G. T. 1949. The field of linguistics. (Studies in Linguistics; Occa-
        sional papers, 1.) Norman, Oklahoma: Battenburg Press.
Trueblood, D. E. 1960. Robert Barclay and Joseph John Gurney. In Then
        and now: Quaker essays. Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-
        vania.
Tulisano, R., and Cole, J. 1965. Is terminology enough? American
        Anthropologist 67: 747-748.
Turner, R. 1969. Words, utterances and activities. Existential sociology,
        ed. J. Douglas. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Tyler, S. A. 1965. Koya language morphology and patterns of kinship
        terminology. American Anthropologist 67:1428-1440.
        . 1966. Context and variation in Koya kinship terminology.
        American Anthropologist 68: 693-708.
Tylor, E. 1871. Primitive culture. London: John Murray.
Uldall, H. 1957. Outline of glossematics. Part I. (Travaux du cercle lin-
        guistique de Copenhague, Vol. 11.) Copenhagen.
Ullmann, S. 1953. Descriptive semantics and linguistic typology. Word
        9: 225-240.
Urban, W. 1939. Language and reality. New York: Macmillan.
Vachek, J. 1959. The London school of linguists. Sbornik Praci Filoso-
        ficke Fakulty Brenske University, Recnik 8: 106-113.
Van Hoik, A. 1962. Referential and attitudinal construction. Lingua 11:
        165-181.
Wallace, A. F. C. 1961. Culture and personality. New York: Random
        House.
Wallis, E. 1956. Sociolinguistics in relation to Mezquital Otomi transi-
       tion education. Estudios Anthropologicos Publicados en Homenaje
Bibliography                                                         233


      al Doctor Manual Gamco, pp. 523-535. Mexico, D. F.: Sociedad
      Mexicana de Antropologia.
Waterhouse, V. 1963. Independent and dependent sentences. Interna-
      tional Journal of American Linguistics 29: 45-54.
Watson, O. M., and Graves, T. D. 1966. Quantitative research in prox-
      emic behavior. American Anthropologist 68: 971-985.
Weinreich, U. 1953. Languages in contact. New York: Linguistic Circle
       of New York.
       . 1963. On the semantic structure of language. In Universals of
       Language, ed. J. H. Greenberg, pp. 114-171. Cambridge, Mass.:
      MIT Press.
Weinreich, U. 1966. Explorations in semantic theory. Current trends in
      linguistics 3: Theoretical foundations, ed. T. A. Sebeok. The
      Hague: Mouton.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W., and Herzog, M. 1968. Empirical foundations
      for a theory of language change. In Direction& for historical
      linguistics: a symposium, ed. W. Lehman and Y. Malkiel, pp.
      97-195. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Werner, O. 1966. Pragmatics and ethnoscience. Anthropological Lin-
      guistics 8 (8): 42-65.
Wescott, R. 1962. A Bini grammar. Part I: Phonology. East Lansing:
      Michigan State University, African Language and Area Center.
Wheeler, A. 1967. Grammatical structure in Siona discourse. Lingua
      19: 60-77.
Whiteley, W. H. 1966. Social anthropology, meaning and linguistics. Man
        (n.s.) 1: 139-157.
         1971 Language use and social change. London: Oxford University
       Press for the International African Institute.
Whiting, J., and Child, I. 1953. Child training and personality: a cross-
       cultural study. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Whorf, B. L. 1940. Linguistics as an exact science. Technological review
      43: 61-63, 80-83. (Reprinted in Language, thought and reality:
       selected writings of Benjamin L. Whorf, ed. J. Carroll. New York:
      John Wiley, pp. 220-232.)
      . 1941. The relations of habitual thought and behavior to language.
      In Language, culture and personality, Essays in memory of Ed-
      ward Sapir, eds. L. Spier, A. I. Hallowell, and S. S. Newman.
      Menasha, Wisconsin: Banta Books. (Reprinted in Language,
      thought and reality, pp. 134-159.)
Williams, R. 1960. Culture and society 1780-1950. Garden City, New
      York: Anchor Books.
Index




                  LANGUAGES AND GROUPS
Abipon, 34,155                Cashinaua, 114
Ainu, 155                     Central Africa, 31, 33, 34, 96,109
Aleut, 25                       115,127,148
Alorese, 109                  Chaga, 41,109,115
Amahuaca, 13                  Chinese, 25, 103 n. 18, 114
Anang, 34                     Choco, 58
Anuin, 159                    Clackamas Chinook, 11,100,161
Arabic, 30                      162
Aramaic, 100 n. 17            Cochiti, 49
Arapesh, 39, 40,115           Coos, 102
Araucanian, 34, 37            Crow, 36, 38, 107
Aritama, 36,110               Dutch, 197
Ashanti, 31,109
Australia, 50                 East Africa, 102
Aymara, 165                   East Asia, 25 111, 114,155
                              English, 30, 38, 48, 58, 71, 80,104,
Bali, 39, 40, 115               156
Bella Coola, 36, 41, 116
Bini, 39,159, 160, 161, 177   Europe, 98,103
Burundi, 96, 148              Flathead, 31
Caribbean, 104                French, 30, 104, 105, 156, 166
                              Friulian, 103
                                                              235
                                                                  INDEX
236


Gbeya, 33, 34, 127                   110, 197
German, 30, 49, 103, 158, 166      Middle East, 100 n. 17
Greek, 100 n. 17,156               Mohave, 24
Gros Ventre, 166                   Mohawk, 156
Guang, 159
                                   Nakanai, 114
Guarani, 30
                                   New Guinea, 30, 39, 40, 109, i l 4 ,
Haitian Creole, 104                  115
Hanunoo, 8, 25, 48                 Ngoni, 123
Haya, 102                          Nigeria, 104
Hebrew, 100 n. 17                  Nootka, 165
Hidatsa, 38,107                    North Africa, 111
Hindi, 155,161                     North America, 11,13,14, 24, 25,
                                     30, 31, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 49,
Iatmul, 39, 40, 114
                                     59, 70, 71, 100, 102, 104, 107,
Ibibio, 159
                                     108, 111, 116, 127, 150, 155,
Idoma, 159
                                     156, 157, 161, 162, 163, 165,
Indo-European, 98
                                     166 (cf. also English, Pig Latin,
Indonesia, 39, 40, 115
                                     Quakers)
Iroquois, 34, 111
Ishan, 177                         Ojibwa, 13, 14, 59
Italian, 103,105                   Omaha, 36, 70
Jabo, 24, 48                       Pali, 48
Japanese, 25                       Paliyans, 32, 36,116,127
                                   Philippines, 8, 25, 48, 57
Kaska, 104
                                   Pig Latin, 48
Klamath, 157
                                   Ponape, 40
Koasati, 155,166
Korean, 25, 111                    Quakers, 115
Kpelle, 161                        Quechua, 72
Kupwar, 197
                                   Russian, 30,112, 166
Late, 159
                                   Sahaptin, 150,163
Latin, 30
                                   Samoa, 40
Madagascar, 104                    San Bias Cuna, 58,197
Makah, 107                         Sanskrit, 48,101,155
Malagasy, 104                      Sauris, 103
Malawi, 123                        Senadi, 159
Manus, 40, 115                     Siane, 30
Maori, 31                          Sinhalese, 48
Mayan, 110                         Siona, 98, 154
Mazateco, 24, 48                   Siuslaw, 161
Melanesia, 114                     South Africa, 123
Menomini, 70, 71, 156              South America, 13, 30, 34, 35, 58,
Micronesia, 40, 114                   72, 98, 110, 114, 148, 154, 155,
Middle America, 24, 48, 58, 108,      165, 169, 197
INDEX                                                                  237



South Asia, 32, 36, 48, 101, 116,     Wasco. See Wishram-Wasco
  127, 155, 197                        Chinook
Spanish, 58, 72                       Welsh, 30
Sranan Tongo, 169                     West Africa, 8, 24, 31, 34, 39, 48,
Sudanese, 111                          104, 159, 160, 161, 177
Surinam, 148,197                      Wishram-Wasco Chinook, 11,14,
Syriac, 100 n. 17                      31, 37, 108,127,150, 166
Tagalog, 48                           Yakan, 57
Takelma, 150                          Yana, 155
Toba, 110                             Yir Yoront, 50
Tuareg, 111                           Yokuts, 38, 59, 62
Tunica, 165                           Yoruba, 159, 160, 161, 177
Truk, 114
                                      Zuni, 30, 40

                                 PERSONS
Abrahams, Roger, 128, 129            Birdwhistell, R., 181 n. 2
Abrahams, Roger and R. Bau- Blake, W., 143
  man, 42                            Bloch, B., 175, 176, 177
Abrahams, Roy, 83 n. 1               Blom, J. P. and J. Gumperz, 30, 57,
Agheyisi, B., 160                      76, 103 n. 18, 169
Alatis, J., 119 n. 1                 Bloomfield, L., 5,20, 25,47, 71, 73,
Albert, E„ 85 n. 4, 86,148             90, 96 n. 14, 97, 120, 156, 173,
Alisjahbana, S., 85 n. 3               177, 195
Ardener, E., 83 n. 1,193             Bloomfield, M. and L. Newmark,
Arewa, E. and A. Dundes, 62            156
Arnold, M., 209                      Boas, F., 89, 90, 94, 104, 120, 122,
Auden, W. H., 189                      135, 192, 202
Austin, J. L. 43, 81                 Bolinger, D., 164
                                     Bricker, V., 62
Barker, L. M., 99 n. 16
                                     Bright, W., 135, 193
Barnard, F. M., 120
                                     Brown, R. W., 20
Barth, F., 47
                                     Brown, R. W. and A. Gilman, 104
Barthes, R., 86 n. 5
                                     Buchanan, C. O., 88 n. 8
Basso, K., 32
                                     Buhler, K., 43
Bateson, G., 5, 23, 24,181 n. 2
                                     Burke, K., x, 21, 23, 43, 47, 57, 63,
Bauman, R., 46, 62, 63, 125 n. 1
                                       67, 100 n. 17, 106, 114, 114 n.
Bauman, R. and J. Sherzer, 192
                                       21, 135ff., 146
  n. 4
                                     Burling, R., 194
Ben-Amos, D., 61, 125 n. 1, 128,
  129, 133, 160                      Calame-Griaule, G., 42
Berger, P., 65 n. 6, 66, 69 n. 1     Carneiro, R. L., 13
Bernstein, B., 39,40,41, 74, 75,85 Carpenter, E., 21, 25
  n. 4, 86 n. 5, 115, 194, 199, 205 Cassirer, E., x, 31, 120, 122, 146
Bernstein, M., 196 n. 2              Cazden, C., V. John and D.
                                                                      INDEX
238


  Hymes, 193                           Ebeling, G., 113 n. 20
Chatman, S., 105                       Eersel, C., 148, 197
Chatman, S. and S. Levin, 105          Emerson, R. W., 140
Cherry, C., 5,15                       Ervin-Tripp, S. ML, 3 n. 1, 7, 17,
Chissell, J., 97 n. 15                   59, 74, 106, 120, 147, 178, 193
Chomsky, N., x, 21 n. 6,41,46,47,        n. 1,194, 199, 201, 202
  65, 76, 87 n. 7, 90ff., 100 n. 17,
  103 n. 18, 120, 130, 131, 132,       Fabbri, P., 145 n. 1
  147, 148, 149, 156, 170ff., 200      Faris, J., 40, 115
  n. 5, 202ff.                         Ferguson, C., 35, 74, 84, 172 n. 4,
Chomsky, N. and M. Halle, 93,             193, 194
  133, 155, 156, 159, 160, 197         Ferguson, C. and J. Gumperz, 59
Christ, Jesus, 88 n. 8, 100 n. 17,     Feuerbach, L., 47,121
  113 n. 20                            Fillmore, C., 104
Cicourel, A., 154                      Firth, J. R., 6,88 n. 8,146 n. 2,152,
Cohen, P. S., 65 n. 8                     179, 198
Colson, E., 107                        Fischer, J. L., 85 n. 4,163
Conant, F. P., I l l                   Fishman, J., 74, 84, 85 n. 4, 120,
Conklin, H., 3 n. 1, 10, 12, 13, 17       193, 194, 199
  n. 5,168                             Fishman, J., C. Ferguson and
Conrad, R., 29 n. 1                       J. Das Gupta, 84,193
Cowan, P. A., 24                       Fock, N., 57
Cowell, H., 114                        Fontana, B. L., 123
Currie, H. P., 84 n. 2                 Fought, J., 180
Curtin, P., 151                        Fox, J., 49
                                       Frake, C., 3 n. 1,10,12, 20, 56, 57
Dalby, D., 61                          Franklin, K., 150
Danes, F., 98,145 n. 1                 Fraser, B., 182
Darnell, R., 29 n. 1, 192 n. 4         Freud, S., 136
Darwin, C., 33                         Friedrich, P., 102, 104, 112, 157,
Das Gupta, J., 84, 193                    163, 202
DeCamp, D., 156
Denison, N., 103,145 n. 1,199          Gardner, P. M., 32, 36,116,127
De Saussure, F., 6, 89, 130,159        Garfinkel, H., 61, 80, 85 n. 4, 96
Descartes, R., 120ff.                    n. 13,179
Devereux, G., 24                       Garvin, P., 40,151,169
Dillard, J., 95                        Gayton, A. H. and S. Newman,
Dingwall, W., 204                        38ff
Dong, Q. P., 152                       Giglioli, P., 194
Dorsey, J. O., 70                      Gleason, H. A., Jr., 98
Duncan, H. D., 80                      Gluckman, M., 20, 107, 113 n. 19
Dundes, A., 129                        Goethe, J. W. von, 122
Durbin, M., 163                        Goffman, E., x, 3 n. 1, 74,179,180,
                                         192 n. 3
Easton, L. D. and K. H. Guddat,        Goodenough, W., 3 n. 1, 10, 12,
  122                                    17 n. 5, 24 n. 17, 114
INDEX                                                                   239



Goody, E., 83 n. 1                      Irvine, J. T., 31,192 n. 4
Goody, J., 25, 83 n. 1                  Jacobs, M., 17, 101, 102, 162, 192
Greenberg, J., 34, 59, 167, 194            n. 4
Greimas, A. H., 99                      Jacobs, R. and P. Rosenbaum,
Grice, H., 60                              200 n. 5
Gross, L„ 20                            Jain, D., 155
Guiraud, P., 164                        Jakobson, R., x, 6, 10, 15, 23, 24,
Gumperz, J. J., 3 n. 1, 47, 51, 59,        43, 63, 104, 130, 146 n. 2, 152,
  74, 120, 123, 145 n. 1, 178, 193         155, 163, 165, 179, 198, 207
  n. 1,194,198, 201                     Jeremias, J., 100 n. 17
Gumperz, J. J. and D. Hymes, 85         Jespersen, O., 104
  n. 4, 193, 194                        John, V., 43
Gumpetz, J. J. and R. Wilson, 197       Joseph, Sister Miriam, 43
Gunter, R., 98,100,151,179              Joos, M., 178, 202
Haas, M. R., 155                        Joyce, J., 137
Habermas,}., 205
                                        Kant, I., 140
Halliday, M., 3 n. 1, 74, 98, 129,
                                        Kasper, W., 113 n. 20
  179, 192 ii. 4, 199 n. 4, 206 n. 7
                                        Katz, J. J., 139
Hallowell, A. I., 13ff.
                                        Katz, J. J. and J. Fodor, 86
Hanson, H., 29 n. 1
                                        Keenan, E., 29 n. 1, 60,192 n. 4
Harris, Z., 90,99,175,201 n. 5,202
                                        Keesing, F. M. and M. M. Keesing,
Hasan, R., 98
                                          24 n. 7, 40, 42
Hattori, S., 155
                                        Kemnitzer, L., 29 n. 1
Haugen, E., 112,173, 194
                                        Kensinger, K., 114
Hendricks, W., 130
                                        Kenyon, J. S., 153
Herder, J. G. von, 120ff.
                                        Kiparsky, P., 98
Hertzler, J. O., 35
                                        Kjolseth, J. R., 80
Herzog, G., 24
                                        Klima, E., 178
Hilger, Sister Inez, 37
                                        Kluckhohn, C., 15
Hill, A., 179 n. 1
                                        Kroeber, A. L., 33, 90, 104, 202
Hiz, H., 98, 200 n. 5
Hockett, C., 11, 13, 15,127             Labov, W., 47, 74, 76, 85 n. 4, 95,
Hogan, H., 29 n. 1, 31, 43                96 n. 14,100,104,105,120,123
Householder, F. W., Jr., 164              145 n. 1,151,169,179,181 n. 2
Hughes, E., 69 n. 1                       193, 196, 198, 200
Hunter, A. M., 101 n. 17                Ladefoged, P., 159
Hymes, D., 3 n. 1, 8,11 n. 2,18,19,     Lakoff, R., 179, 180ff., 196
  20, 24, 26, 27, 31, 32, 34, 38, 43,   Lamb, S., 3 n. 1, 4, 7, 91, 91 n. 10
  44, 47, 57, 59, 69 n. 1, 85 n. 4,       149
  86 n. 5, 87 n. 7, 88 n. 8, 90, 93     Lambert, W., 74,194
  n. 12, 100, 104, 120, 123, 124,       Lammers, W., 122
  147, 150, 153, 156, 160, 163,         Lanham, R., 43
  164 n. 3,169,171,174,179,182,         Leach, E., 83 n. 1
  192 n. 4, 193, 194, 198, 201          Lefebvre, H., 65, 66, 86 n. 5
Hymes, V., x, 46, 145 n. 1, 163         Le Page, R., 47, 96 n. 14, 199
240                                                                    INDEX


Leroux, R., 122                       Morris, C. W., 6, 12, 43
Levi-Strauss, 6, 24, 99, 101 n. 17,   Moule, C., 100 n. 17
   150,187                            Murphy, R., I l l
Lieberson, S., 193                    Murra, J., 72
Lisker, L., F. Cooper and A.
  Liberman, 11                        Neustupny, }., 49
Litteral, R., 29 n. 1                 Newman, S., 30, 38
Lomax, A., 17,128, 129                Nida, E., 88 n. 8, 175, 176, 179
Lounsbury, F., 3 n. 1                 Ogden, C. K. and I. A. Richards,
Lowie, R., 38, 41                       43
Luther, M., 49
Lyons, }., 87                         Parain, B., 35
                                      Paredes, A., 125 n. 1
Macnamara, J., 193                    Philips, S., 29 n. 1,124 n. 4
MacRae, D., 65 n. 6                   Pike, K., 11,42,112,120,121,153,
Maher, J. P., 158                        175ff., 202
Maine, H., 209                        Plato, 35, 36
Mair, L., 80, 88 n. 8                 Polome, E., M. Jazayery and W.
Malinowski,B.,31f., 43,61, 75,84,       Winter, 179 n. 1
  88 n. 8, 102, 112, 127              Postal, P., 151, 156
Mallarme, 140                         Pride, J., 194
Mao Tse-Tung„ 209
Marchand, H., 164                     Quirk, R., 96 n. 13
Mark, 100 n. 17                       Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. and A., 36
Marrou, H., 199                       Revill, P., 58
Marx, K., x, 47, 85, 86 n. 5, 121,    Richardson, A., 113 n. 20
  204 n. 6                            Roberts, J., 24, 85 n. 4
May, L. C., 24                        Roethke, T., 140
McCawley, ]., 101, 102                Romano, A., x
Mcllwraith, T., 36, 41                Romney, A. K., 10
McLuhan, M., 21, 25                   Ross, J., 101
Mead, M., 39, 42, 115                 Rubin, J., 30
Mehan, H., 80                         Rubin, J. and R. Jernudd, 193
Meillet, A., 20, 50                   Russell, B., 23
Merleau-Ponty, M., 66
Messenger, J., Jr., 34                Sacks, H., 74, 80, 99,179,181 n. 2
Metcalf, G., 158                      Sacks, S., 3 n. 1
Metzger, D., 10, 26                   Salisbury, R., 30
Metzger, D. and G. Williams, 26       Samarin, W., 32, 34, 127, 163
Micklin, M., 69 n. 1                  Samuels, M., 164
Miller, E., 29 n. 1                   Sandys, Sir J. E., 35 n. 2
Miller, G., 62                        Sankoff, G., 96 n. 13,145 n. 1
Mills, C. W., 86                      Sapir, E., iii, vii, x, 5, 6,10,11,13,
Minoff, I., x                           18, 20 n. 6, 32, 46, 57, 69, 70,
Mintz, S., 133                          89ff., 104, 106, 120, 122, 127,
Morgan, L. H., 41                       130, 135, 150, 163, 165, 175,
INDEX                                                                  241


   177, 192, 195, 200 n. 5, 202,       Thorne, J. P., 96
   205, 207ff.                         Tillich, P., 106
Sapir, J. D., 29 n. 1, 145 n. 1, 160   Tiwary, K. M., 29 n. 1, 62
Sapir, P., 29 n. 1                     Tolkien, J. R. R., 150
Schaff, A., 22                         Trim, J., 83 n. 1
Schegloff, E., 20, 80,101,150,151,     Trueblood, D. E., 115
   179, 180, 197                       Tulisano, R. and J. Cole, 111
Schneider, D., 110                     Turner, R., 81
Scholte, B., 3 n. 1                    Tyler, S. A., 74, 113,179
Searle, J., 43,182                     Tylor, E., 20 n. 6, 41, 66
Seiler, H. J., 150
Seitel, S., 29 n. 1,102                Ughi, I., 145 n. 1
                                       Ullman, S., 164
Service, E., 20
                                       Urban, W., 35
Shakespeare, W., 140
Shannon, C. L., 24 n. 7                Vachek, J., 152,153
Sherzer, J., x, 29 n. 1, 43, 58, 64,   Van Hoik, A., 150
   145 n. 1, 155, 192 n, 4, 197        Victoria, Queen, 99 n. 16
Sherzer, J. and D. Sherzer, 58         von Humboldt, W., 122, 123
Sherzer, J. and R. Darnell, 42, 86     Voorhoeve, J., 47
   n. 5, 192 n. 4
                                       Wallace, A., 47, 75
Shuy, R., 193, 193 n. 1
Silverstein, M., x, 162                Wallerstein, I., 69 n. 1
Skinner, B. F., 43,92,136,139,147      Wallis, E., 84 n. 2
Skinner, Q., 182, 183                  Waterhouse, V., 151
Slobin, D., 3 n. 1, 42                 Watson, O. M. and T. Graves, 60
Smith, D. M. and R. Shuy, 193          Watt, I., 25
Smith, H., 14, 15 n. 3                 Wax, M., 69 n. 1
Smith, K. D., 150                      Weinreich, U., 49, 145, 173
Smithers, C. V., 164                   Weinreich, U., W. Labov and G.
Snyder, G., 60                           Herzog, 65 n. 6
Sonnino, L. A., 43                     Werner, O., 173
Soskin, W., 43                         Wescott, R., 177, 178
Spier, L. and E. Sapir, 14 n. 3        Wheeler, A., 98,113 n. 20,154,179
Ssung, Tu, 16 n. 4                     Whiteley, W. H., 87 n. 6, 88 n. 8,
Steinman, M., 105                        179, 193
Stern, T., 22, 24, 25                  White-Thunder, 71ff.
Stewart, W., 74                        Whorf, B. L., 18, 32, 86, 95, 122,
Sturtevant, W., 3 n. 1                   171, 174, 175, 192, 202
Swadesh, M.,104, 157, 163, 195         Wieck, F., x
Szwed, J., x                           Williams, G., 26
                                       Williams, R., 8,106
Tambiah, S., 49, 83 n. 1, 88 n. 8      Williams, W. C., 1,140
Tedlock, D., 62                        Winter, W., 151
Thomas, D. and D. Thomas, 29 n. 1      Yerkovich, S., x
Thompson, S., 125 n. 1                 Zeitlin, I. M., 86 n. 5
242                           TOPICS                             INDEX


abilities, 20 n. 6, 20ff., 33ff.,      39, 115, 205
  46ff., 71ff., 205, 206. See also code switching, 49, 103ff.
  capability                        cognitive styles, 174
acceptability, 20 n. 6,103,147fL, coherence, 98f., 100
   152                              communication, concept of,
accomplishment, 106,139                12ff.
acculturation, 73, 79f              communication, ethnography of,
acquisition of language, 14 n. 3,      Ch. 1
   18, 25, 42, 75, 91, 96 n. 14, communication, evolution of, 27
   119                              communication, primate, 27
act, communicative, 4. See also communication theory, 7,10,19,
  speech act                           24 n. 7
action, human, 7, 44-45,138, 202 communicative acts, 13, 15, 64
activity of the system, 9, 24ff     communicative boundaries, 4,
acts, see communicative, illocu-       15
  tionary, speech                   communicative competence, 75
act-sequence, 55, 64,107            communicative, conduct, vii, 202,
address, modes of, 111, 112,150,       207
   158                              communicative economy, 4, 17,
addressor, addressee, 22, 56           25, 26. See also speech econ-
American Indian languages, ix          omy
anthropology, ix, 32, 66, 78, 83f., communicative event, 4, 6, 7, 9,
   117, 126                            10, 12ff., 15ff., 129; see also
anthropology, applied, 26              speech event
anthropology, cultural, ix, 20, 69 communicative means, 5ff., 7,
anthropology, social, 6, 44, 78,       76, 103f. See also means of
   79, 100, 106f„ 110, 112f„ 115       speech, verbal means
appropriateness, 9, 11, 25, 94, communicative network, 14. See
   95, 123, 156f., 163, 203            also speech network
areal perspective, 17, 161          communicative process, folk-
attitudes, 10,11, 33ff.                lore as, 129
audience, 41, 55,129                communicative repertoire, 29-
                                       30. See also verbal repertoire
baby talk, 17,109                   community, 20 n. 6, 50, 51. See
bilingualism, 18, 30, 79f., Ch. 5.     also speech community, lin-
   See also education                  guistic community
                                     commutation test, 62,105, 200
capability, 10, 19ff., 20 n. 6, 92 comparative perspective, 24ff.,
capacity and state of compon-          32, 41, 42, 77, 86, 114, 116,
   ents, 9,19ff., 92                   190, 192, 203
Cartesian linguistics, 120           comparative reconstruction, viii-
channels, 8, 10, 13, 22f., 25, 59       ix
'Chinese music principle,' 114       competence, 42ff., 72f., 75, 92f.,
codes, 10, 13, 40, 48, 59, 79, 105      94, 96, 97, 120f., 130f., 139f„
codes, elaborate and restricted,        154. 205. 206
INDEX                                                                243


componential analysis, critique       education, 26, 29, 80, 84, 94, 96
  of, 110                                n. 14,124
components (of events), 8, 13,        education, bilingual, 44, 119f.
  15ff., 53, 54,103f.                 elaborated code, 39, 39 n. 5,115,
components, relations among, 1,          205
  16ff., 18,19, 20                    emic, 11
conjunct reduction, 98, 101, 155      ends, 6ff., 21, 56, 57, 104
conjunct replication, 101*            environment, 17-18
conjunctive derivation, 99            equality, 204, 205. See also in-
content, 10                              equality
context, 3, 5, 13, 20, 23, 61, 77,    ethics, 137
  98, 102, 129, 152, 155, 156,        ethnography, Ch. 1, 7-8, 12, 26,
  158, 177, 179, 190                     86, 89, 106, 108, 116, 139, 171,
context-sensitive, 98, 154f., 156        187-188
contextual styles, 105, 190           ethnography of communication,
contrastive relevance, 105, 150,         Ch. 1
  156,160-161                         ethnography of speaking, 8-9,
control, types of, 39ff.                 32, 65-66, 83, 89, 90, 97, 105,
correlational versus integrative         116,128,129
  approach, 74f., 76                   ethnography of symbolic forms,
Coyote, 14,14 n. 3                       66, 82,140
creativity, 65, 91f., 94,100 n. 17,    ethnolinguistics, 84, 87, 206
  104, 121, 131, 132, 146, 202f.       ethnomethodology, 81. See also
creolization, 79f„ 95                     Cicourel, Garfinkel, Sacks,
cuffing, 40,115                          Schegloff
cultural, concept of, 10ff., 20 n.    etic-emic, 11
   6, 207                             etics, 22, 23, 42ff.
cybernetics, 7, 24                     events, see communicative
                                          events, speech events
deep structure, 91                     explanatory adequacy, 41, 65f.,
derogation, 104                           77, 170f., 203f.
description, sociolinguistic, vii, expressive, 58, 106, 131, 133,
  10ff., 29ff., 33ff., 44ff., 66, 174     150
descriptive approach, 76, 77
deviation, 71f., 93, 106, 148,
  177f., 190                          factum valet, 95 n. 13
dialects, 59, 71, 76, 96 n. 14,105, feasibility, 95
  152                                 field, see language field, speech
discourse, dimensions of, 41, 98,        field
  131, 134, 156, 179f. See also fluent speaker, 46ff., 71
  speech styles, dimensions of folk taxonomy, 19, 26, 62, 70f.,
discovery procedures, 97                 86f.
diversification, 7                     folklore, 44, 125f., 127, 132f.
diversity, 29, 33, 46, 70f., 170       form-meaning covariation, 100,
dramatism. 138                           105
244                                                                  INDEX

formal analysis, 7, 64f., 70, 108,     information theory, 19
   200 n. 5, 202                       initial position, functions of, 150
forms of speech, 47, 59, 103f.         instrumentalities, 60, 103
freedom, 55, 90f., 94, 104, 204-       intelligibility, 31, 48ff., 59, 123
   205                                 interaction, analysis of, Ch. 2,
function and structure, 171, 199         80,103
"functional" linguistics, 78, 79,      interaction, emergent properties
   166, 192 n. 4, 196, 198               of, 65, 97,132
 functional perspective, 5, 9, 31,     interpretation, norms of, 60,
   64f., 106, 138, 166f., 197f., 206     103,183f.
 functional relativity, 9, 19, 34-     interrogative behavior, 110
   40, 72, 79, 123-124, 171, 198       invariance, 77, 171, 187, 200
 functions, types of, 9, 22, 23, 43,   investiture, property of colloca-
   53, 64, 113, 139, 146, 160,           tions, 158
   167f., 183
                                       kerygma, 113 n. 20
generalizations, 1, 9,143              key, 16, 53, 57ff., 181f., 183f.,
genre, 10, 16, 55, 58, 61ff., 99 n.      190
   16, 103, 126, 128, 133, 155         key terms, 138
gossip, 107, 128                       kinesics, 27,163
grammar, as genre, 198, 199            kinship terms, HOf.
grammar, limits of, 49, 139,
   14 7f., 154, 172, 198                language, as cultural metalan-
grammar, of symbolic action,              guage, 114,127,182
  137                                   language, as system of systems,
grammar, social basis, 113, 126,          152f„ 176
  Ch. 8, Ch. 9, 199                    language boundary, 3-4, 123
grammar, theory of, 3, 90f.,           language change, 65 n. 6
  147ff., 172ff„ 192, 192 n. 4         language, classification of, 34ff.
grammatical categories, 113f.          language, evolution of, 27, 72,
greetings, 108                            76,164
                                       language field, 50
                                       language, functions of, 18, 123,
hearer, 56                                139, 167. See also functions
hearer, ideal, see speaker-hearer      language, origin of, 27, 136
Hearer's maxim, 99
                                       language potential, 72
Herderian linguistics, 120f.
                                       language problems, developing
history, 65-66, 80, 203, 209
                                          nations, 84,195f.
human nature, 121f.
                                       language, theory of, vii, 3-4, 32,
                                          76-77, 146, 198, 206. See also
ideas, history of, ixf., 120f., 207       linguistics
identification, 47                     languages, classification of, 34
illocutionary acts, 43                 lexical elements, provenience
inequality, 71                            of, 156
infant speech, 109                     lexicography, 108,156
INDEX                                                                 245


 liberation, 205, 206                   message-content, 55
linguistic community, 51. See message-form, 6, 9, 16, 23, 54,
    also speech community                  101
linguistic description, vii, 89,172f. mock versus face value, 53, 181
    See also linguistic method- modalities, interrelations of, 26,
    ology, description, sociolinguis-      27. See also channel
    tics                                multi-lingualism, 103f., 123
 linguistic evolution, 75-76, 203       music, 31, 97 n. 15
 linguistic form, 3-4, 5, 6, 70, 76 myth, 41f., 99f., 114f.
 linguistic levels, 7, 91, 201 n. 5
 linguistic relativity, 16-17, 192. names, 114
     See also functional relativity names, functions of, 150
 linguistic repertoire, 30. See narrated event, 15, 23
     also verbal repertoire             negative, principle of, 136
 linguistics, applied, 44, 85 n. 4, neutralization, 7, 91
     124, 194, 195, 204f.               nonverbal, 26 n. 8, 96, 102, 127,
linguistics, as social science, viii,       151,197
    ix, 5, 84f., 123ff., 146,172, i95f. norms; see interaction, interpre-
linguistics, foundations of, vii,          tation
     viiif., 9, 70, 76, 79, 89f., 126, now-coding, then-coding, 39-40,
     138, 172, 194f., 196f.                115
linguistics, methodology, viii,
     21ff., 88r 97, 145, 200-201        objectivity, intersubjective, 8
linguistics, socially constituted, observational adequacy, 43
    195f.                               occurrence, 95
linguistics, socially realistic, oratory, 8, 34, 40
    195f.                               organization of diversity, 79
literary criticism, 136, 179 n. 1
liturgy, 88 n. 8                        parable, 100 n. 17
'living speech,' 121                    paradigmatic, 53, 97, 150, 187
logic of inquiry, complement- paralinguistics, 10, 24, 27, 164
    ary, 167                            (la) parole, 9
                                        participants, 10, 13, 23, 50f., 54
 'macro' versus 'micro' sociolin-          56
    guistics, 85 n. 4                   particulars, 1, 9, 122, 143
mands, as part of a system of pentad (Burke), 23, 63
    speech acts, 147                    performance, concept of, 95f.
marked usage, l l l f . , 157, 191         121, 128f., 130, 139, 206
'means-ends model,' 6ff.                performatives, 81. See also
means of speech, 198, 203. See             speech acts
    also verbal means                   personal control, 39ff., 115
men and women's speech, 37, personal perspective, 13-14, 15
    56, 62, 113, 155, 166, 205             20 n. 6, 45, 46, 50, 62, 106
message, concept of, 10                    122, 141, 165, 205f., 206
246                                                               INDEX

phatic communication, 31ff., 127     restatement, sociolinguistics, 38
philology, ix, 35 n. 2, 81             n. 4
philosophy, 27, 204                  restricted code, 39, 39 n. 5, 115,
phonesthematic description, 163         205
phonology, 89f„ 159f.                rhetoric, 43, 114 n. 21, 137,140,
pidgins (and Creoles), 72, 29f.,        198, 199
  169                                role relationships, 182ff.
poetic function, 23, 63              rules of alteration, 59, 201
poetics, 114, 137, 140, 141, 198     rules of co-occurence, 59, 106,
poetry, 8                               174, 177, 201
positional control, 39ff., 115       rules of speaking, 16, 62-64,103,
pragmatics, 5, 6                        123, 124, 153, 202
'pragmeme,' 7
pragmemics, 7, 91
Prague Circle, 5-6, 145 n. 1,146,    Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 18f.
  152                                scapegoating, 136
presuppositions, 102, 180, 181       scene, 55-56, 58
process versus product, 5            semantic analysis, 80, 87ff., 104,
promise versus threat, 182,184f.        145,180ff.
pronominal breakthrough, 104,        semantics, of social relation-
   157, 202                             ships, 112
pronouns, 104, 112, 126, 151,        semiotics, semiology, 6
   155,165                           sentence, 91, 150f., 156, 168
proverbs, 115                        sequence, 16, 98, 99
proxemics, 60                        settings, 10, 23, 55
psychology, 20-21, 87 n. 7, 208,     silence, 32
   208                               sincerity conditions, 181 n. 2,
purposes. See ends                      182
                                     situated, 100,106
                                     situation, 10, 103, 190. See also
quantifiers, 180                        context
                                     social change, 65, 73f„ 79, 171
receiver, 55                         social dialect, 76
reciprocal versus reflexive in-      social distance, 104, 157
   terpretation, 185f., 190          social meaning, 65f., 149, 151,
'recovery' procedures, 97               160, 174, 178, 180, 198, 200,
reference and address, terms of,        202, 206 n. 7
   111                               social problems, 195
referential function, 70, 79, 130,   social science, 32, 76. See also
   138, 149, 159, 164, 198, 200         linguistics, as social science
registers, 59,112                    socialism, ix, 86 n. 5
repertoires, 50,199                  socialization, 24-25, 76
repetition, 200                      sociocultural order, 65
replication of uniformity, 47, 79    sociolinguistic description, viii,
respect forms, 74                       10, 41, 74f., 104. 173f.
INDEX                                                                 247


sociolinguistic restatement, 38         speech event, 4, 23, 52, 109-110.
  n. 4, 43                                 See also communicative event
sociolinguistic systems, 73f.           speech field, 50
sociolinguistics and linguistics,       speech levels, 111
  vii-viii, 32,172,194f., 195f. See     speech network, 50. See also
  also linguistics, as social sci-         communicative network
  ence                                  speech situation, 26, 51ff.
sociolinguistics, goals of, vii-viii,   speech styles, 59, 102, 105, 190,
  195f.                                    202
sociolinguistics, mode of lin-          speech styles, dimensions of,
  guistic description. See de-             36-40, 41, 174; discursive dis-
  scription, sociolinguistic               closure, 37; elaborate, 38; la-
sociolinguistics, multidisciplin-          conic, 36; pithy, 36; reticent,
  ary, vii-viii, 32, 69, 78f., 80,         36, 37; sparse, 38; taciturn,
  116f., 206                               36, 37; verbose, 36, voluble,
sociolinguistics, status of,               36, 37
  vii, 9, 10,194, 206                   speech surrogates, 25, 48
sociolinguistics, the term, vii, 8,     speech varieties, 77
  32, 83f., 86, 193, 195                Sprachbund, 49
sociology, 6, 44, 65 n. 6, 69f., 74,    Sprechbund, 49
   76, 79f., 81, 82, 84, 116, 173,      storytelling, 127
   179-180, 208
                                        strategies, 57, 100 n. 17, 138
some-any distinction, semantics,
                                        "structural" linguistics, 70f., 78,
  180
                                           79, 92,100
Sound and meaning, 163, 197f.,          structuralism, pre-World War I,
  198
                                           5-6
sound change, 76,169                    structure, 8-9, 89, 100, 102, 171
sound patterns, 159f.                   style, analysis of, 16, 17, 45f.,
speaker-hearer, ideal, 46, 54,             105f., 131, 174f., 178. See also
  132, 205                                 speech styles
SPEAKING (mnemonic), 62
                                        style shifting, 200
speech activity, patterning of, 3
                                        stylistic perspective, as ethnog-
speech acts, 4, 26, 49, 52, 53, 81,
                                           raphy of speaking, 58, 66, 67-
  101f., 114, 181, 202
                                           69, 146, 149, 159f., 174f., 198
speech community, 34-35, 47-51,
                                        surface structure, value, 149
  72-73, 102, 120, 123, 132, 200,
                                        symbolic action, 80,135f., 139
  202, 206. See also linguistic
                                        symbolic competence, 139
  community
                                        symbolic form, speech as, 31,
speech, cultural role of, 33f.,
                                           46, 66, 81, 109, 139
  35f., 108f., 116, 127. See also
                                        syntactic structure, scope of, 91
  functional     relativity;    lan-
                                           98,180
  guage, functions of
                                        syntagmatic, 97, 150, 153
speech disguise, 8, 168
                                        systemic potential, 95
speech economy, 46. See also
  communicative economy
