On the ROAD of the WINDS





Restored Moai (statue) on Rapa Nui, with replicated obsidian and coral eyes. Photo by Thérèse Babineau.





On the ROAD of the WINDS


An Archaeological History of the Pacific Islands before European Contact





Patrick Vinton Kirch

REVISED AND EXPANDED EDITION





UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS





University of California Press, one of the most distinguished university presses in the United States, enriches lives around the world by advancing scholarship in the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. Its activities are supported by the UC Press Foundation and by philanthropic contributions from individuals and institutions. For more information, visit www.ucpress.edu.


University of California Press

Oakland, California

© 2017 by Patrick Vinton Kirch

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Kirch, Patrick Vinton, author.

Title: On the road of the winds : an archaeological history of the Pacific islands before European contact / Patrick Vinton Kirch.

Description: Revised and expanded edition. | Oakland, California : University of California Press, [2017] | Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2017012519 (print) | LCCN 2017015961 (ebook) | ISBN 9780520968899 (ebook) | ISBN 9780520292819 (pbk. : alk. paper)

Subjects: LCSH: Prehistoric peoples—Oceania. | Oceania—Antiquities.

Classification: LCC GN871 (ebook) | LCC GN871 .K573 2017 (print) | DDC 995—dc23

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017012519

Manufactured in the United States of America

27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1





FOR DOUGLAS E. YEN


WHOSE OUTSTANDING ETHNOBOTANICAL RESEARCHES CONTINUE TO INFLUENCE INTERPRETATIONS OF PACIFIC PREHISTORY





CONTENTS


List of Maps

List of Figures

List of Tables

Preface


INTRODUCTION

Defining Oceania • Linguistic, Human Biological, and Cultural Variation in Oceania • About This Book • A Note on Dates and Time

1 • DISCOVERING THE OCEANIC PAST

Enlightenment Voyagers • Outposts of Empire: Missionaries, Colonists, and Academic Beginnings • “The Problem of Polynesian Origins” • Te Rangi Hiroa and the “Micronesian Route” to Polynesia • The Discovery of Time Depth and Culture Change • The Search for Polynesian Sequences • Broadening Research Horizons • Moving beyond Polynesia: Archaeology in Melanesia and New Guinea • Francophone Archaeology in the Pacific • Not an Ivory Tower: Public Archaeology in the Pacific • Recent Advances in Pacific Archaeology

2 • THE PACIFIC ISLANDS AS A HUMAN ENVIRONMENT

Origins and Development of the Pacific Islands • Types of Islands • Climatic Factors in the Pacific • Island Life and Biogeography • The Microbiotic World and Human Populations • Island Ecosystems • Humans and Island Socioecosystems

3 • SAHUL AND THE PREHISTORY OF “OLD” MELANESIA

The Pleistocene Geography of Sahul and Near Oceania • Initial Human Arrival in Sahul and Near Oceania • Pleistocene Voyaging in Near Oceania • Near Oceania during the Pleistocene • Cultural Innovations of the Early Holocene • A Paradox and a Hypothesis

4 • LAPITA AND THE AUSTRONESIAN EXPANSION

The Human Landscape of Near Oceania at 2000–1300 b.c. • The Advent of Lapita • Lapita Origins: The Austronesian Expansion • Lapita across Time and Space • Lapita in Linguistic and Biological Perspective • The Lapita Ceramic Series • Lapita Sites and Settlements • Lapita Subsistence Economies • Exchange between Lapita Communities • Ancestral Oceanic Societies

5 • THE PREHISTORY OF “NEW” MELANESIA

Trading Societies of Papua and the Massim • The Late Holocene in Highland New Guinea • The Bismarck Archipelago after Lapita • The Solomon Islands • Vanuatu • The Polynesian Outliers in Melanesia • Ethnogenesis in La Grande Terre • Fiji: An Archipelago “in Between” • Larger Themes in Melanesian Prehistory

6 • MICRONESIA: IN THE “SEA OF LITTLE LANDS”

Colonization and Early Settlement in Micronesia • Cultural Sequences in Micronesia • Tuvalu and the Polynesian Outliers in Micronesia • Atoll Adaptations • Later Prehistory in Western Micronesia • Development of Sociopolitical Complexity in the Caroline High Islands

7 • POLYNESIA: ORIGINS AND DISPERSALS

Polynesian Origins • Polynesia as a Phyletic Unit • Ancestral Polynesia • Cultural Sequences in Western Polynesia • The Settlement of Eastern Polynesia • Early Settlement Sites in Eastern Polynesia • Polynesian Voyaging • Summary

8 • POLYNESIAN CHIEFDOMS AND ARCHAIC STATES

Polynesian Chiefdoms: Ethnographic Background and Anthropological Significance • The “Traditional” Atoll Societies • Sociopolitical Transformation in the Open Societies • The Emergence of Stratified Chiefdoms • From Chiefdom to Archaic State: Tonga and Hawai‘i • Polynesian History: A Concluding Note

9 • BIG STRUCTURES AND LARGE PROCESSES IN OCEANIC PREHISTORY

Voyaging and the Human “Conquest” of the Pacific • History Written in the Present: Correlations between Language, Biology, and Culture • The Role of Demographic Transitions in Oceanic History • Oceanic Populations on the Eve of European Contact • The Political Economy of Dynamic Landscapes • Intensification and Specialization in Island Economies • Transformations of Status and Power • On Comparison: A Closing Comment


Notes

References

Index





MAPS


1. Oceania, showing the traditional cultural regions of Polynesia, Melanesia, and Micronesia

2. The distribution of the Austronesian and Non-Austronesian languages in Oceania

3. A tectonic map of the Pacific basin

4. The dominant wind and current directions in the Pacific Ocean

5. Approximate configuration of Sunda and Sahul during the Pleistocene

6. Near Oceania, showing the distribution of important Pleistocene and early Holocene archaeological sites

7. The distribution of Lapita sites in Near and Remote Oceania

8. Island Melanesia, excluding Fiji, showing the location of key archaeological sites

9. The Fiji archipelago, showing the location of key archaeological sites

10. The islands of Micronesia

11. The islands of Western Polynesia, showing the location of key archaeological sites

12. The central Eastern Polynesian archipelagoes and islands

13. Rapa Nui (Easter Island), showing the location of key archaeological sites

14. New Zealand, or Aotearoa, showing the location of key archaeological sites

15. The Hawaiian Islands, showing the location of key archaeological sites





FIGURES


1.1.

Captain James Cook



1.2.

“Geometrical Details of the Monuments of Easter Island,” as recorded by the draftsman of La Pérouse’s voyage around the world



1.3.

Prehistoric artifacts found by Julius Von Haast in association with moa bones in New Zealand



1.4.

Katherine Routledge and assistant measuring a house foundation on Rapa Nui (Easter Island)



1.5.

Bishop Museum ethnologist John F.G. Stokes and his wife, Margaret, on the dock at Rapa Island in 1920



1.6.

Bishop Museum ethnologist Kenneth P. Emory in Haleakala Crater, Maui Island, 1920



1.7.

Te Rangi Hiroa and Kenneth P. Emory of the Bishop Museum at the investiture stone of Hauvivi marae, Ra‘iatea Island



1.8.

Te Rangi Hiroa’s theory of Polynesian origins, depicting the posited “Micronesian Route” of migrations



1.9.

Professor Edward W. Gifford of the University of California and his graduate student assistant Richard Shutler Jr., with their local workers, during their 1952 expedition to New Caledonia



1.10.

Kenneth P. Emory and Yosihiko Sinoto excavating at the Pu‘u Ali‘i sand dune site, South Point, Hawai‘i, in the early 1950s



1.11.

Statue 295 on the slopes of the Rano Raraku Quarry, Rapa Nui, after the completion of excavations by the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition in 1956



1.12.

Robert C. Suggs cleaning a stratigraphic section through the Ha‘atuatua dune site in the Marquesas Islands in 1956



1.13.

Robert Suggs’s cultural sequence for the Marquesas Islands



1.14.

Excavations by Yosihiko Sinoto at the sand dune site of Hane on Ua Huka, Marquesas



1.15.

The model of Polynesian dispersals proposed by Emory and Sinoto in 1965



1.16.

Map of a marae, or temple complex, in the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea



1.17.

Excavations in the deeply stratified Sinapupu sand dune site on Tikopia Island



1.18.

Excavations in progress at the Matenbek site, New Ireland



2.1.

Dramatic sea cliffs along the windward coast of Moloka‘i



2.2.

Examples of the principal geological types of islands



2.3.

Anuta Island in the southeastern Solomons, one of the smaller high islands in the Pacific



2.4.

The high island of Niuatoputapu in the northern Tongan group



2.5.

Stages in the development of an atoll, illustrated by block diagrams of various near atolls and atolls



2.6.

Large tracts in the interior of Futuna Island in Western Polynesia are covered in pyrophytic Dicranopteris fernlands



2.7.

Reconstruction of the extinct megapode Sylviornis neocaledoniae and the extinct terrestrial crocodile Mekosuchus inexpectatus from New Caledonia



3.1.

Waisted axes from the Huon Peninsula



3.2.

Fluctuating sea levels characterized the Pacific world during the late Pleistocene and Holocene



3.3.

Archaeological excavation in progress in the Pamwak rockshelter, Manus Island



3.4.

Kafiavana Rockshelter in the New Guinea Highlands, after excavation



3.5.

Stone tools from the Pleistocene occupation levels at Kosipe, New Guinea Highlands



3.6.

Stone tools from the Matenkupkum Rockshelter on New Ireland



3.7.

Archaeological section across a large drainage ditch at the Kuk site



4.1.

Carved anthropomorphic image, in porpoise bone, from Talepakemalai



4.2.

The large aroid plant Alocasia macrorrhiza



4.3.

The dentate-stamped method of decoration is characteristic of Lapita pottery



4.4.

The subgrouping, or “family tree,” for the Austronesian languages



4.5.

Excavations in progress at the Talepakemalai Lapita site



4.6.

Reconstructed ceramic vessels from the Talepakemalai site



4.7.

Excavations in progress at the Teouma cemetery site, Vanuatu



4.8.

A human cranium interred in a ceramic vessel at Teouma



4.9.

Decorated potsherds from the Nukuleka site, Tongatapu



4.10.

Artifacts from early Lapita contexts on Niuatoputapu Island



4.11.

The subgrouping of the Oceanic languages



4.12.

Open-air pottery firing in the Sigatoka Valley, Fiji



4.13.

Varieties of Lapita vessel forms occurring in early Lapita sites in New Caledonia



4.14.

An anthropomorphic face design on potsherds from the Talepakemalai, Mussau



4.15.

Anaerobically preserved wooden post bases at the Talepakemalai site in the Mussau Islands



4.16.

Plan of the Nenumbo Lapita site in the Reef Islands



4.17.

Fishhooks of Trochus shell from the Talepakemalai Lapita site



4.18.

Carefully prepared sections of Conus shell, with holes drilled for line attachment or suspension



5.1.

High-volume production of pottery for trade characterized many of the coastal societies of Papua in the proto-historic period



5.2.

Potsherds from the Nebira 4 site



5.3.

A pedestaled bowl from the Collingwood Bay region



5.4.

Potsherds from the Epakapaka rockshelter site (EKQ) in Mussau with incised and punctate designs



5.5.

Terebra shell adzes from post-Lapita sites in the Mussau Islands



5.6.

Graphic model of key cultural elements of the Roviana Period in the New Georgia Islands



5.7.

A sculpted face on a stone platform facade, Kolombangara Island



5.8.

Stone-lined burial crypts at a ridgetop settlement in the Ndughore Valley, Kolombangara Island



5.9.

Plan of Dai village, Nendö Island



5.10.

Potsherds from the Mangaasi site on Efate Island, Vanuatu



5.11.

Plan of the Roy Mata burial site on Retoka Island



5.12.

The Roy Mata burial site



5.13.

A prehistoric irrigation canal on Aneityum Island, after excavation



5.14.

Tikopia, a volcanic cone with a central crater lake



5.15.

The cultural sequence of Tikopia



5.16.

Turbo shell fishhooks excavated from archaeological sites on Tikopia Island



5.17.

Tikopia Tridacna and Terebra shell adzes from the Sinapupu Phase



5.18.

The ceramic sequence of New Caledonia



5.19.

Major trends in the evolution of New Caledonian culture



5.20.

Stacked walls of limestone boulders at the Hnakudotit fortification site on Maré, Loyalty Islands



5.21.

Flights of formerly irrigated taro terraces cover a large section of the New Caledonian landscape



5.22.

Plan of house mounds at Tipalet in the Bopope region of New Caledonia



5.23.

A paddle-impressed pot from the Sigatoka dune site, Fiji



5.24.

Plan of a ring-ditch-fortified village at Lomolomo, in the Rewa Delta of Viti Levu, Fiji



6.1.

The earliest ceramic vessel forms from the Marianas Islands



6.2.

Stone and shell artifacts from early period sites in the Marianas Islands



6.3.

The sequence of changes in shell fishhook types on Nukuoro atoll



6.4.

Excavation through the berm of a Cyrtosperma cultivation pit on Maloelap, Marshall Islands



6.5.

A sailing canoe of the central Caroline Islands, as drawn by the French artist Louis Choris



6.6.

The Tapony latte site on Guam, Marianas Islands



6.7.

Reconstruction of the House of Taga latte site



6.8.

The terraced landscape at Airai, Babeldaob, Palau



6.9.

Aerial photo of a terraced landscape, Babeldaob, Palau



6.10.

Whole pots on a prepared surface under earthwork fill, Roismelech, Palau



6.11.

An “owl”-face stone sculpture at Ngereklngong, Ngeremlengui State, Palau



6.12.

The Bairulchau site on Babeldaob, with its megalithic carvings



6.13.

A Yapese stone “money” disc of aragonitic limestone in a village plaza



6.14.

An aerial view of part of the Nan Madol site on Pohnpei



6.15.

Perspective view of the Nandauwas tomb complex at Nan Madol, Pohnpei



6.16.

Map of the Nan Madol site complex by the German ethnographer Paul Hambruch



6.17.

View of the Nandauwas tomb complex from the adjacent canal



6.18.

Perspective rendering of the Sapwtakai site in the Kiti District, Pohnpei



6.19.

A residential compound at Lelu, Kosrae, as recorded during the early nineteenth-century Russian visit of Lütke



6.20.

The construction sequence for the Lelu site, as determined by Ross Cordy



6.21.

Radiocarbon frequency distribution for Kosrae Island



7.1.

The beach at To‘aga, Ofu Island, Manu‘a



7.2.

Excavations in the coastal plain at To‘aga, Ofu Island



7.3.

Changes in pottery vessel forms from Early Eastern Lapita to Polynesian Plain Ware



7.4.

The subgrouping of the Polynesian languages



7.5.

Excavation through a large earthen mound at Vailele, ‘Upolu Island, Western Samoa



7.6.

Artifacts from the Ancestral Polynesian site of To‘aga



7.7.

The Ancestral Polynesian lunar calendar and ritual cycle



7.8.

The Hane site on Ua Huka Island, Marquesas, exhibits complex stratification



7.9.

Early Eastern Polynesian fishhooks from the Marquesas Islands



7.10.

One-piece fishhooks of pearl shell from the Tangatatau rockshelter, Mangaia Island



7.11.

Basalt adzes from the Tangatatau rockshelter, Mangaia Island



7.12.

A Polynesian double-hulled canoe at sea between Tonga and Samoa, as seen by the Dutch voyagers Schouten and Le Maire in 1616



7.13.

Geoff Irwin’s model of survival sailing strategy



7.14.

Geoff Irwin’s model of arcs of exploration



7.15.

The replicated voyaging canoe Hokule‘a at sea



7.16.

Internal view of the Anaweka canoe hull



7.17.

Sea turtle image in raised relief on the Anaweka canoe hull



8.1.

The paramount chief of Hawai‘i Island, Kalani‘o-pu‘u, arrives in Kealakekua Bay to greet Captain James Cook in 1779



8.2.

Settlement pattern map of the island of Mangaia



8.3.

The large Tangatatau rockshelter in Veitatei District, Mangaia



8.4.

Selected artifacts from the Tangatatau rockshelter, Mangaia



8.5.

The interior of Tautua refuge cave, Mangaia



8.6.

Diagram of ideological relationships in proto-historic Mangaian society



8.7.

View of Ua Pou Island, Marquesas



8.8.

Chart showing the progressive reduction of the Marquesan cultural sequence



8.9.

The Hanamiai dune site on Tahuata Island during excavation



8.10.

Plan map of the Vahangeku‘a tohua site in Taipivai Valley, Nuku Hiva, Marquesas



8.11.

The central ceremonial plaza on the Ta‘a‘oa tohua site on Hiva Oa Island, Marquesas



8.12.

A large anthropomorphic statue at Puamau, Hiva Oa Island, Marquesas



8.13.

Small tiki in the Hane Valley, Ua Huka, Marquesas



8.14.

Pearl shell fishhooks from the Onemea dune site, Mangareva



8.15.

Stone seat on a paepae at Atituiti, Mangareva



8.16.

Round-ended chief’s house at Vitaria, Rurutu



8.17.

The fortified ridgetop village site of Morongo Uta, Rapa Island



8.18.

Excavation of an unfinished moai at Rano Raraku, Rapa Nui



8.19.

The restored ahu of Tongariki, Rapa Nui



8.20.

Mata‘a, obsidian spearheads from Rapa Nui



8.21.

The largest moa towered over their Polynesian hunters



8.22.

A hilltop pa site in the Pouto region of North Island, New Zealand



8.23.

Plan of the Tiromoana pa site, New Zealand



8.24.

The ceremonial plaza (malae) of the late prehistoric village site at Loka, Alofi Island



8.25.

A view of part of the Taputapuātea temple (marae) complex on the island of Ra‘iatea, seat of the Oro cult



8.26.

Plan of Sites ScMo-124 I and J, adjacent marae in the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea



8.27.

Marae Mahiatea on Tahiti Island in 1797



8.28.

The Tahitian war fleet assembled at Opare‘e, Tahiti



8.29.

Perspective sketch of a Samoan star mound



8.30.

View of the Pulemelei mound on Savai‘i Island



8.31.

Perspective sketch of a walled fortification at Uliamoa, Savai‘i Island



8.32.

LiDAR image of the Tongatapu landscape



8.33.

Archaeological plan of the Mu‘a site, Tongatapu Island



8.34.

Tomb J9, Tauatonga, at Mu‘a, Tongatapu



8.35.

The annual tribute presentations on the great plaza fronting the burial mounds of the Tu‘i Tonga, at Mu‘a, in 1777



8.36.

The Ha‘amonga-a-Maui trilithon at Heketa, Tongatapu



8.37.

Settlement pattern map of Niuatoputapu Island



8.38.

The Houmafakalele burial mound site on Niuatoputapu Island



8.39.

Artifacts from the early Bellows sand dune site (O18) at Waimānalo, O‘ahu Island



8.40.

The Hālawa dune site, Moloka‘i



8.41.

Archaeological plan of an irrigation system in the Anahulu Valley, O‘ahu



8.42.

LiDAR imagery of a section of the leeward Kohala Field System, Hawai‘i Island



8.43.

A large fishpond on the southern shore of Moloka‘i Island



8.44.

Aerial view of a midsized temple (heiau) in the ahupua‘a of Kipapa, Kahikinui, Maui



8.45.

The war temple of Pu‘ukoholā, Hawai‘i Island



9.1.

The fern-covered hills of Mangaia Island



9.2.

Irrigated taro pondfields of Tamarua Valley, Mangaia Island



9.3.

A katoanga, or village feast, in Sigave District, Futuna Island, in 1974



9.4.

A human sacrifice being offered to the god Oro on a marae in Tahiti, Society Islands, as drawn by John Webber, on Captain Cook’s third voyage





TABLES


3.1.

Selected Pleistocene sites of Near Oceania



3.2.

Comparison of the modern faunas of New Guinea and New Britain



3.3.

Selected sites of the early to mid-Holocene Period in lowland New Guinea and Near Oceania



4.1.

Selected Lapita sites in the Bismarck Archipelago and Solomon Islands



4.2.

Selected Lapita and related ceramic sites in Remote Oceania



5.1.

Selected non-Lapita sites in Melanesia



6.1.

Selected archaeological sites in Micronesia



6.2.

The Pohnpei culture-historical sequence



7.1.

Selected archaeological sites in Western Polynesia



7.2.

Selected early Eastern Polynesian archaeological sites



8.1.

Selected later prehistoric sites in Eastern Polynesia



8.2.

The revised Hawaiian cultural sequence





PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION





Born and raised on one Pacific island, I have spent three decades of my adult life exploring, living on, studying, and seeking to understand a plethora of others, especially the history and culture of their inhabitants. While my own ancestry is ultimately European, I sometimes feel that the Pacific is in my blood. This is, naturally, but a metaphor. Yet the many years spent living and working with Pacific islanders, learning to speak more than one of their indigenous languages, and adapting my behavior to fit their cultural canons have—I hope—engendered a certain empathy beyond that typically associated with dispassionate social science. This book is my attempt to distill a lifetime of study—and the insights gained through much tedious sifting of often minute strands of evidence by myself and innumerable colleagues—into a coherent whole, a synthesis for those whose curiosity would take them on an intellectual voyage into the Oceanic past.

Mine is but one of many constructions that could be made from the formidable array of archaeological, historical linguistic, ethnographic, and human biological evidence concerning the Oceanic past, assembled by scholars over more than two centuries. It is necessarily personal in the emphasis I accord particular times, places, and concepts. Despite my acceptance of the idea that history (or “prehistory”) is constructed rather than reconstructed (as might have been said three decades ago, during the heyday of the “New Archaeology”), I do not subscribe to the ultrarelativist stance of some late-twentieth-century social scientists. Although each new generation of archaeologists and prehistorians inevitably rewrites the past in their own terms, I prefer to see this, in Paul Veyne’s (1984) words, as a process of “lengthening the questionnaire,” of constructing multiple, rather than single, historical plots.

With each new generation the empirical base of archaeology advances, constraining what the next generation of scholars may construct of the past. Thus I agree with Ernst Mayr (1997:83) when he claims that science does advance, despite false starts and wrong-minded diversions along the way. Just as Mayr can rightly claim that our understanding of the cell in biology has truly progressed since its first recognition by Robert Hooke in 1667, so our knowledge of Pacific archaeology and long-term history has without question improved throughout the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The many surveys and excavations of Pacific archaeological sites, enhanced by the patient laboratory analyses of artifacts and other material traces, increasingly improve our ability to come to grips with the human past of Oceania. That does not mean that our current knowledge and understanding constitute “truth” in any absolute sense; it does mean that our models of what happened in the past are now a better approximation of that historical reality. Was there a “real past”? Yes, but we shall never know it definitively, as it exists only as material traces in the present. Thus for epistemology.

Peter Bellwood authored the last attempt at a general synthesis of Oceanic prehistory two decades ago: Man’s Conquest of the Pacific (1979). Still useful as a guide to the literature and the interpretations of its time, Peter’s book is long out of date, an encouraging sign of how our knowledge base has increased; it is long out of print as well. Despite the obvious need for a suitable replacement for his opus, I long refrained from undertaking such a work myself. Once committed to the task, however, I found it both stimulating and challenging to grapple with the problems of condensing such a broad field, one that has in recent decades grown by leaps and bounds. To compress within the covers of a 448-page book the panoply of archaeological and anthropological minutiae with which the scholar ordinarily concerns himself is impossible. How to sort and prioritize? What is truly significant? And what can be eliminated? Asking these questions forced me to confront more fundamental issues: underlying assumptions about the very nature of the field, what we think we know, the often-unstated yet subtle organizing categories by which we conduct our research. In the end, the act of writing this book proved far more intellectually engaging than at first I imagined it might be.

I first participated in Pacific archaeological fieldwork thirty-five years ago, as part of a 1965 Bishop Museum team investigating rockshelter sites in Kona and Ka‘u, Hawai‘i, and I published my first professional article in 1970. When I came into the field as a young student in the mid-1960s, Jack Golson, Roger Green, Doug Yen, and others in Pacific archaeology were inspiring a renaissance in perspective and approach, as well as moving beyond (while not dispensing with) questions of cultural origins and migrations. Their work encompassed the then-new “settlement pattern” approach, questions of human ecological adaptations, and problems of sociopolitical evolution in island societies. Since then, I have been privileged to participate in many key developments and advances in Pacific prehistory, such as those that came out of the Southeast Solomons Culture History Program of the 1970s and the Lapita Homeland Project of the 1980s. Fieldwork has taken me across the breadth of the Pacific, from the Mussau Islands of Papua New Guinea to Rapa Nui, with stays between these geographic extremes in Palau (Belau), Yap, Majuro, Arno, Kolombangara, Nendö, Vanikoro, Tikopia, Anuta, Futuna, Alofi, ‘Uvea, Niuatoputapu, Vava‘u, Ofu, Olosega, Ta‘u, Mangaia, and all of the main islands of Hawai‘i except Ni‘ihau. My research has encompassed high islands and atolls, islands tropical and sub-tropical, ones large and small, and spanned the classic ethnographic regions of Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. I trust it not untoward to claim that this diversity of field experiences lends me sufficient geographic and cultural background with which to undertake the synthesis attempted here, incorporating as well the work of a great many other field researchers. The comparative approach has long been a cornerstone of anthropology, and the opportunities to compare the archaeological records of so many diverse islands have been inspirational. Still, this book is as much a synthesis of the work and insights of innumerable others, some of whom I have been privileged to know as colleagues and friends, others only as academic ancestors whom I have met through the legacy of their scholarship.

Organizing this book—structuring it into chapters and subheadings—was perhaps the most agonizing part of writing. Early on, I experimented with less conventional schemes, with various topically organized outlines. In the end, I rejected these approaches in favor of an outline based partly on time and largely on space. Though more conventional in structure, this plan in my view allows for better presentation of the “facts” of prehistory as we currently conceive them, enabling them to be more readily accessed by students as well as other professionals seeking an introduction to the long-term history of the Pacific. But I am fully cognizant that “facts” exist—or at least can be interpreted—only within the context of theory, and I have tried to relate archaeological evidence to contemporary theoretical issues and debates wherever possible. My final chapter is an attempt to canvass what I see as some of the grand themes in the prehistory of the Pacific, issues that in the end transcend place and time, and go to the core of anthropology and history at large.


For more than twenty years I have taught Pacific archaeology and prehistory to undergraduates and graduate students at the Universities of Hawai‘i, Washington, and California at Berkeley. Admittedly frustrated by the lack of a suitable introductory text that covered the entire Pacific field, I had not thought of writing such a book myself. Too many other high-priority projects were always to the fore; the undertaking of a general synthesis seemed something that could wait for a more leisured time. William Woodcock, formerly of Princeton University Press, convinced me otherwise, and without his urging I would still be thinking of this as a far-off project. Still, it took four years before I was able to find the appropriate time to concentrate on its writing.

A year-long fellowship (1997–98) at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS), Palo Alto, provided invigorating freedom from normal academic duties. I am grateful for the financial support provided by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. SBR-9601236), which partially supported my fellowship at the Center, and to the University of California at Berkeley for the grant of a year’s sabbatical leave. I especially thank Neil Smelser, director of the CASBS; Robert Scott, associate director; and their wonderfully supportive staff. Librarians Joy Scott and Jean Michel cheerfully tracked down obscure references and obtained rare volumes through interlibrary loans. Virginia MacDonald graciously word-processed my editorial corrections to several drafts. Susan Beach’s delicious lunches helped too! And the stimulating intellectual atmosphere generated by my fellow colleagues of the Center’s Class of 1997–98 made the experience especially memorable.

Several colleagues were generous enough to read and comment on one or more draft chapters. I especially thank Roger Green and Kent Lightfoot for reading the entire manuscript. Jim Allen, Steve Athens, Chris Gosden, Laura Nader, Barry Rolett, Matthew Spriggs, and David Steadman commented on specific chapters. They have saved me from making many errors, and I am most appreciative of their collegial efforts. I also thank the following colleagues for graciously giving me permission to use their photographs or illustrations: Jim Allen, Wal Ambrose, Steve Athens, Janet Davidson, John Flenley, José Garanger, Jack Golson, Roger Green, Geoff Irwin, Pat McCoy, William Morgan, Barry Rolett, Christophe Sand, Yosi Sinoto, Jim Specht, Matt Spriggs, Robert Suggs, Joanne Van Tilburg, Paul Wallin (for the Kon-Tiki Museum), Marshall Weisler, and Peter White.

At the University of California Press, Director Jim Clark and Executive Editor Doris Kretschmer enthusiastically accepted my book manuscript and made its production a high priority. I also thank Nicole Hayward for her superb design and Peter Strupp for his meticulous copyediting.

It gives me distinct pleasure to dedicate this book to Douglas E. Yen, who over three decades has been by turns mentor, co-fieldworker, and colleague, as well as friend and confidant. We have shared never-to-be-forgotten field experiences in Makaha, Hālawa, Kolombangara, Anuta, Tikopia, and Kahikinui, as well as evenings at various watering holes from Nanakuli to Honiara. Doug’s ceaseless adherence to the sound scientific principle of always being alert to the unsuspected alternative hypothesis has more than once been an inspiration. His influence on my generation of Pacific archaeologists has been legion.

PATRICK VINTON KIRCH

Palo Alto





PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION





On the Road of the Winds, written nearly twenty years ago, introduced the field of Pacific archaeology and prehistory to a new generation of students and has provided a reference source for scholars and the general public. The book was well received. Norman Hammond, writing in the Times Literary Supplement (February 23, 2001), opined, “Comparing Kirch’s excellent book and its scores of new sites, hundreds of radiocarbon dates and bibliography of more than fifty pages, with [previous works] . . . we can see that the fundamentals have not changed much, but that the depth and texture of our understanding of the voyagers on the road of the winds have immeasurably increased.” Peter Bellwood, reviewing On the Road of the Winds in the leading journal Antiquity, called it “a grand synthesis,” adding that “Kirch has done Pacific archaeology proud with this book.”

A few years ago, however, I began to hear from colleagues who regularly used On the Road of the Winds as a university text that they were spending too much time in their courses explaining where parts of the book had been superseded by new discoveries or revisions of older theories. This did not surprise me, for with the passing of two decades there is no question that our knowledge base and understanding of the ancient Pacific has advanced enormously. In late 2014, with retirement from active teaching and the seemingly endless demands of university “service” pending, I canvassed nine of these colleagues regarding a possible revised edition. The uniformly enthusiastic response encouraged me to approach my then-editor at the University of California Press, Blake Edgar, with a proposal for a revised edition.

In my proposal, I enumerated a few of the major advances in Pacific historical anthropology that called for a revised edition:

• The discovery of new Lapita sites had extended our knowledge of the geo-graphic range of Lapita (into the southern coast of New Guinea, for example) as well as the nature of the Lapita culture itself, such as the use of ceramic vessels for burials at the Teouma cemetery site in Vanuatu.

• A plethora of new genetic data from both mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome analyses of Pacific islander populations had illuminated the biological complexities of early human migrations into the region.

• Extensive fieldwork on the enigmatic terraced landscapes of Palau had elucidated the chronology and function of these massive earthworks.

• The development of high-precision uranium/thorium dating of coral artifacts had pinned down the timing of initial Polynesian settlement as well as revealed the chronologies for temple building in Tahiti and Hawai‘i.

• The previous debate about “long” versus “short” chronologies for the expansion of Polynesians into the central and eastern Pacific had been resolved, including the timing of human settlement on Easter Island and in Hawai‘i.

• There was new evidence for contact between Polynesia and the Americas.

• New theoretical work placed the late precontact Hawaiian and Tongan societies among a handful of “archaic states” that arose in various parts of the world.

• The exciting integration of research in island ecology with archaeology had helped to advance the new discipline of “human ecodynamics,” in which the Pacific islands as “model systems” played a key role.

• There was an ongoing debate about whether Easter Island represented a case of societal “collapse” or a model for indigenous resilience.

These are, of course, only a few examples of how Pacific archaeology had changed and moved forward over the past two decades.

Only after Edgar and UC Press enthusiastically accepted my proposal and issued a contract did I begin to realize how much work I had committed myself to. Even though I have followed the advances in our field over the past two decades—indeed, I have directly participated in some of them—it has been a daunting exercise to compile, review, and synthesize the enormous amount of new research. Literally hundreds of journal articles and book chapters and dozens of new monographs, edited volumes, and books had to be read and absorbed. The task consumed a great deal of my time throughout 2016, prompting my wife, Thérèse, to muse that I lived in my study. Fortunately, the freedom of “retirement” allowed me to devote uninterrupted periods to the project, much as the freedom of an academic sabbatical had allowed the first edition to be completed in 1997–98. I am quite certain that I will not undertake yet another revision twenty years hence. I bequeath that task to some younger scholar!

I am especially grateful to a number of colleagues who sent me their publication lists and pdf copies of their articles and graciously allowed me to use their illustrations in this revised edition. In particular, I thank Jim Allen, Melinda Allen, Wal Ambrose, Atholl Anderson, Steve Athens, Stuart Bedford, Peter Bellwood, David Burley, Mike Carson, Jeff Clark, Tom Dye, Eric Conte, Geoff Clark, Jeff Clark, Janet Davidson, Scott Fitzpatrick, Travis Freeland, Aymeric Hermann, Geoff Irwin, Dilys Johns, Jennifer Kahn, Thegn Ladefoged, Jolie Liston, Helene Martinsson-Wallin, Lisa Matisoo-Smith, Mark McCoy, Guillaume Molle, Mara Mulrooney, Andrew Pawley, Seth Quintus, Barry Rolett, Christophe Sand, Peter Sheppard, Jim Specht, Matt Spriggs, Glenn Summerhayes, Pam Swadling, Robin Torrence, Jo Anne Van Tilburg, Richard Walter, Marshall Weisler, and Peter White.

At the University of California Press, I thank Blake Edgar and Reed Malcolm for editorial stewardship. Sheila Berg skillfully copyedited my manuscript. Diana Izdebski prepared the maps.

During the tedious research and writing process, my loyal Rhodesian ridgeback, Nani, kept me company on her bed next to my desk, only periodically reminding me of the need to take a break by resting her head heavily on my arm, forcing a halt in my typing. But it is especially to my wife, Thérèse Babineau, that I owe a tremendous debt for her love and support. Me ke aloha pumehana.

As with the first edition, I dedicate this new edition to Douglas E. Yen, still going strong in the ninth decade of his life. His early mentoring has not ceased to influence my scholarship.

PATRICK VINTON KIRCH

Quinta Pacifica





Introduction



Mine is the migrating bird winging afar over remote oceans,

Ever pointing out the sea road of the Black-heron—the dark cloud in the sky of night.

It is the road of the winds coursed by the Sea Kings to unknown lands!

POLYNESIAN VOYAGING CHANT, in

J.F. STIMSON, Songs and Tales of

the Sea Kings (1957)





IN MARCH 1896, AN ENGLISH gentleman-adventurer by the name of F.W. Christian arrived at a place called Madolenihmw, on the southern coast of Pohnpei Island in Micronesia. Having spent some years in Samoa (where he was a neighbor of Robert Louis Stevenson), Christian had heard from that equally famous teller of South Sea tales, Louis Becke, that there existed on Pohnpei “an ancient island Venice shrouded in jungle.” Relating his first visit to the Nan Madol ruins at Madolenihmw, Christian wrote, “Passing the southern barricade of stones, we turned into the ghostly labyrinth of this city of the waters, and straight-away the merriment of our guides was hushed, and conversation died down to whispers” (1899:78). The immensity of the ancient town and its stonework, laced with canals, overwhelmed him: “Above us we see a striking example of immensely solid Cyclopean stone-work frowning down upon the waterway, a mighty wall formed of basaltic prisms” (79). Uncertain what to make of these vestiges of the “long, long ages,” Christian evoked comparisons with “the semi-Indian ruins of Java, and the Cyclopean structures of Ake, and Chichen-Itza in Yucatan” (80). Almost a century later, archaeological excavations at Nan Madol would reveal a story of the rise and fall of an island civilization.

Although one of the largest and most dramatic archaeological sites in the Pacific, Nan Madol is not the most famous; the gargantuan statues of Rapa Nui (Easter Island) would surely claim that distinction. They too testify to the rise of another island civilization, one whose fate has been hotly debated in recent years—whether Rapa Nui stands as a testament to “ecocide” or to adaptability and resilience. Other Pacific archaeological locales, while known primarily to scholars, are no less significant on the scale of world history. Kuk, a stratified succession of clay layers in the swampy floor of a New Guinea Highlands valley—the antithesis of an impressive stone construction like Nan Madol—has produced clues to some of the earliest horticultural activities anywhere in the world, at about 7000 B.C. And at Matemkupkum, a limestone rockshelter on New Ireland, fishbones and shellfish dating back 35,000 years testify to some of the earliest exploitation of coastal marine resources by modern Homo sapiens.

These examples hint at the diversity and richness of the Oceanic archaeological record, a legacy that only began to be thoroughly explored, studied, and interpreted in the second half of the twentieth century. In the process, questions that scholars have posed and puzzled over for two centuries and more—Where did the Pacific islanders come from? How did they discover and settle the thousands of islands? Why did they build great constructions like Nan Madol, or carve the Rapa Nui statues?—are finally being answered. This book chronicles the efforts of archaeologists to discover and understand the archaeological record of the Pacific islands and offers a synthesis of what we have found.

My title—On the Road of the Winds—is meant to evoke the countless voyages that underwrote the discovery and settlement of the myriad Oceanic islands. Some voyages were short, others of great duration and hardship, most often made toward the east, hence upwind along countless trackways stretching off into the dawn. Ultimately, the origins of the Pacific islanders trace back to the west, to a period tens of thousands of years ago when cyclically rising and falling ice age seas wrought great changes in the coastal configurations of the Southeast Asian and Australian continents. Much later, other voyagers followed, propelled in their outrigger canoes with sails of woven mats across previously untracked seaways, ultimately to reach the shores of South America. Then too my title invokes not just voyages undertaken by Oceanic peoples themselves—whether by raft, dugout, or double-hulled sailing canoe—but also another kind of voyage: the intellectual voyage of exploration and discovery of the Oceanic past. For this is a past encoded not in written texts but in potsherds and stone tools unearthed from island soils, in the relationships among Pacific island languages, in the cultural and biological variation of hundreds of Oceanic societies and populations dispersed over one-third of the earth’s surface, from New Guinea to Rapa Nui, from Hawai‘i to New Zealand. Both kinds of voyages—the real voyages of history and the intellectual voyages of the mind—are the concern of the chapters to follow.

Pacific islanders possess their own indigenous forms of history, accounts of ancestors passed down through chants, songs, and oral traditions.1 These oral narratives also speak of voyages, many of epic proportions. There is, for example, Rata, whose great double-hulled canoe, The-Cloud-Overshadowing-the-Border, carried him and his mother, North Tahiti—after many harrowing adventures—back home to Great Vava‘u in Upper Havaiki. Or the famous canoe Lomipeau, which transported the massive limestone slabs from ‘Uvea Island to Tongatapu, where they were used to build Paepaeotelea (the tomb of Telea). The atoll dwellers of Kiribati recount stories of the voyages of “the tropic bird people” led by Koura, in the canoe Te-Buki-ni-Benebene (The-Tip-of-a-Coconut-Leaf). Such indigenous traditions provide one source of knowledge regarding the Oceanic past, offering insights into cultural motivations. It is an insider’s history. Western scholars have long drawn on the historical traditions of Pacific islanders; indeed these offered primary evidence for many late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century syntheses.2 But as the human sciences matured in the twentieth century, they developed sophisticated methods for extracting historical information from diverse sources lying outside the boundaries of either traditional oral or written histories, sources that open windows on the deep past of “the peoples without history.” This book offers an explicitly anthropological history that privileges the archaeological record of human material culture and culturally altered landscapes. It is a history that also draws as appropriate upon the evidence of historical linguistics, comparative ethnography, and biological anthropology. Let us call it, then, an archaeological history that is equally informed by its sister anthropological disciplines.

Using an elegant metaphor of history as a ceaseless progression of waves of different amplitude, the French historian Fernand Braudel (1980) called the longest of these the longue durée. The “long run” of history, of deep time, tracks the underlying rhythms of economic production, the fundamental structures of society, the seemingly imperceptible fitting of culture to nature, and the manipulation of nature to reproduce culture. In writing his famous opus on another ocean, La Méditerranée, Braudel followed the lead of his mentor Marc Bloc by incorporating nondocumentary sources of evidence, arguing that the history of the longue durée is as much inscribed in the very fabric of the land, and in the patterns of culture, as it is in the written word. Many archaeologists, myself among them, have come to view our work as the writing of such long-term histories, the unearthing of the longue durée.

The deep, strong currents of the longue durée are akin to the great transoceanic swells that sweep the Pacific Ocean from continent to continent. To take the measure of their wavelength requires that we move beyond the constraints of a narrow documentary history, or even of a particularistic archaeology. A holistic perspective is called for, one that brings to bear the clues derived as much from the study of synchronic linguistic, cultural, and biological variation as from the direct, materialist, properly diachronic evidence of archaeology.

Modern archaeology is still less than a century old in the Pacific, but the islands have begun to take their rightful place in the annals of world history. Their longue durée is a rich story, one that our narratives are only beginning to describe—fascinating in its own right but also replete with plots and themes whose historical significance resonates beyond local place and specific time.

This is where I would now take you, on a voyage to the islands of history.





DEFINING OCEANIA


Vasco Nuñez de Balboa gazed out, in 1513, across the Pacific Ocean; Ferdinand Magellan crossed it in 1520–21. By the late sixteenth century the Spanish were annually sailing from Acapulco to Manila and back to New Spain via the North Pacific, yet Europeans had little real knowledge of the Pacific or its thousands of islands until nearly two centuries later, when the epic voyages of Captain James Cook (1768–80) disproved the theory of a great Terra Australis, a southern continent. Cook for all intents and purposes created the modern map of the Pacific. Moreover, he and the gentlemen-naturalists who sailed with him (Joseph Banks, Sydney Parkinson, Daniel Carl Solander, Johann Reinhold Forster, and George Forster) initiated serious ethnographic inquiry into the peoples and cultures of the Pacific islands. These European explorers—part of the great intellectual movement we call the Enlightenment—were amazed to find the islands of the “Great South Sea” well populated by indigenous peoples, many (but not all) of whom spoke related languages. Moreover, these islanders were expert sailors and navigators. Tupaia, a Tahitian priest-navigator interviewed by Cook, named no less than 130 islands to which he knew the sailing directions and relative distances.3 Thus, long before the Spanish and later the French and English, other peoples had explored the vastness of the Pacific, discovered virtually every single one of its habitable islands, and founded successful colonies on most. These island societies—of which “Otaheite” (Tahiti) was the sine qua non—intrigued and tantalized Enlightenment savants, including Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Denis Diderot, who mined the explorers’ journals for evidence to support their provocative theories of the human social condition.

One of the last of the naval commanders of this period of great exploratory voyages, the Frenchman Dumont d’Urville, in his “Notice sur les îles du Grand Océan” (1832), classified the peoples of the Pacific islands into three major groups. The first of these were the Polynesians (“many islands”),4 a light-skinned people spread over the islands of the eastern Pacific, including Tahiti, Hawai‘i, Rapa Nui, and New Zealand. In the western Pacific north of the equator, Dumont d’Urville defined another major group, the Micronesians (“little islands”), many of whom occupied small atolls. His third group, whom he called the Melanesians (“dark islands”), consisted of the generally darker-skinned peoples inhabiting the large islands of New Guinea, the Solomons, Vanuatu (then the New Hebrides), New Caledonia, and Fiji.

Although based on a superficial understanding of the Pacific islanders, Dumont d’Urville’s tripartite classification stuck. Indeed, these categories—Polynesians, Micronesians, Melanesians—became so deeply entrenched in Western anthropological thought that it is difficult even now to break out of the mold in which they entrap us (Thomas 1989; Tcherkézoff 2008). Such labels provide handy geographic referents, yet they mislead us greatly if we take them to be meaningful segments of cultural history. Only Polynesia has stood the tests of time and increased knowledge as a category with historical significance. Probably this is because the Polynesians were defined by Dumont d’Urville as much by their linguistic similarities as by perceived racial affinities. Hence, the Polynesians do form a meaningful unit for culture-historical analysis (see chap. 7).

The labels “Micronesia” and, most particularly, “Melanesia” imply no such culture-historical unity. Whether we are looking at language, human biological variation, or culture, the peoples of Melanesia defy categorization; they are among the most diverse and heterogeneous to be found in any comparably sized geographic space on earth. The historical processes underlying such great variety—which can only be disentangled through the holistic methods of anthropological history—are the subject of this book. Suffice it to say that when the terms Melanesia or Micronesia are used in the following pages, the reference will be exclusively to geographic regions, with no implied ethnolinguistic uniformity.

Dumont d’Urville’s three groups, taken together, are generally understood to make up Oceania and usually exclude the islands of Southeast Asia (the Indonesian and Philippine archipelagoes in particular). In some usages (e.g., Oliver 1989), Oceania includes Australia, although that is not the sense here. Island Southeast Asia is usually also regarded as a distinct region from Oceania, even though there are close culture-historical relationships between the indigenous peoples of island Southeast Asia and the Pacific. For one thing, the great Austronesian language family spans both regions. However, island Southeast Asia has had a complex historical overlay of cultural influence from the Indian subcontinent, which is not shared with the islands east of the Moluccas in Eastern Indonesia; this has partly influenced the separateness of geographically focused scholarly traditions. For the purposes of this book, I largely confine my scope to Oceania as traditionally defined (excluding Australia and island Southeast Asia), although at times it will be necessary to look beyond its borders in order to understand fully aspects of Oceanic history and culture.

Two other geographic terms require discussion, for these are relatively new concepts, although they are increasingly used by anthropologists and historians who work in Oceania. These are Near Oceania and Remote Oceania, originally proposed by Roger Green (1991b) in reaction against the historical sterility of the “Melanesia” concept. As seen in map 1, Near Oceania includes the large island of New Guinea, along with the Bismarck Archipelago, and the Solomon Islands as far eastward as Makira and Santa Ana. This is not only the region of greatest biogeographic diversity within Oceania but also that which saw human arrival beginning in the late Pleistocene (ca. 40,000 years ago; see chap. 3). Within Near Oceania, we find peoples who speak both Austronesian and Non-Austronesian (Papuan) languages. Remote Oceania includes all the Pacific islands to the north, east, and southeast of Near Oceania, yet its inhabitants speak exclusively Austronesian languages. The Remote Oceanic islands were not discovered or settled by humans until after about 1200 B.C., and in some cases as recently as A.D. 1000 (Green 1995). Thus the distinction between Near Oceania and Remote Oceania is not merely a geographic division, but one that encapsulates two major epochs in the history of the Pacific islanders.




MAP 1 Oceania, showing the traditional cultural regions of Polynesia, Melanesia, and Micronesia. The heavy dashed line indicates the boundary between Near Oceania (to the west) and Remote Oceania (to the east).





LINGUISTIC, HUMAN BIOLOGICAL, AND CULTURAL VARIATION IN OCEANIA


While primarily a work of history, this book also seeks an anthropologically grounded explanation for—and understanding of—the synchronic cultural, linguistic, and human biological variation exhibited throughout the modern Oceanic world. Thus a brief introduction to the dimensions of such variation is essential.5 I begin with language. The indigenous peoples of Oceania speak roughly 1,200 extant or historically recorded languages. Of these, about 450 belong to the well-defined and geographically widespread Austronesian family (map 2). The Austronesian languages (which total approximately 1,200) are found as far west as Madagascar, and include most of the languages of island Southeast Asia (including the aboriginal languages of Taiwan), the majority of languages spoken in Melanesia outside New Guinea, and all the languages spoken within Micronesia and Polynesia. Moreover, with few exceptions (specifically Chamorro and Palauan in western Micronesia) the Austronesian languages spoken in Oceania all belong to one particular subgroup known as Oceanic (Pawley and Ross 1995). This linguistic distribution pattern proves to be of great culture-historical significance, as discussed further in chapter 4.




MAP 2 The distribution of the Austronesian and Non-Austronesian (or Papuan) languages in Oceania. The Non-Austronesian languages are situated in the shaded areas, while the heavy lines delineate several major subgroups of Austronesian languages. SHWNG, South Halmahera–West New Guinea; CMP, Central Malayo-Polynesian.





On the large island of New Guinea, and in a few scattered locales elsewhere in Near Oceania (such as on New Britain and Bougainville Islands), the indigenous languages are Non-Austronesian, or, as they are sometimes called, Papuan (Foley 1986, 2000). There are an estimated 750 Papuan languages, but these emphatically do not form a single, coherent (i.e., “genetically related”) language family, as with Austronesian. Rather, the linguistic diversity encompassed within the Papuan group is enormous, and several family-level groups (“phyla”) are included under this rubric. Many of the Papuan languages are nonetheless historically related (such as those of the Trans–New Guinea Phylum), even though not all of them may have descended from a common ancestral or proto-language. In contrast to the Austronesian languages, the Papuan languages display significantly greater variation and diversity, with profound historical implications. In particular, there had to have been a substantially greater time depth for the differentiation of the Papuan languages, correlating with the much deeper time span of human occupation of New Guinea and Near Oceania (see chap. 3).

Perhaps to a greater extent than in any other major region of the world, in the Pacific archaeologists and historical linguists enjoy a fruitful collaboration. Our data and methods are different and our conclusions are derived independently, but both groups of scholars are concerned with cultural history (Blust 1995, 1996, 2013; Pawley and Ross 1993, 1995). Significantly, historical linguistic work on Pacific languages utilizes the comparative method, a theoretically and empirically well-grounded set of techniques for establishing the “genetic” or historical relationships among a set of related languages, as well as for reconstructing the vocabularies (and associated semantic meanings) of various ancestral or proto-languages (Hoeningswald 1960, 1973; Trask 1996:202–40). Trask (1996:208) calls the comparative method “the single most important tool in the historical linguist’s toolkit,” and it must not be confused with other methods, such as lexicostatistics, that depend on crude statistical comparisons and may not yield accurate language family histories or relationships (e.g., Dyen 1965). As Pawley and Ross (1995:40–43) explain, the comparative method builds on rigorous comparison of extensive sets of words or morphemes in groups of languages hypothesized to be historically related (cognate sets), thereby determining patterns of regular sound correspondences. Only when such patterns have been carefully confirmed does the historical linguist turn to the task of generating a “subgrouping model” or “family tree” of relationships among the languages under consideration. With such a model in hand, in which branches of related languages are robustly marked by sets of shared innovations, one can begin to reconstruct ancient vocabulary sets and their cultural domains. In this book, I periodically refer to the subgrouping models of Pacific linguists, as well as to reconstructed proto-vocabulary, to assess independently how these stack up against the evidence of archaeology.

Recently, work on the historical relationships of Oceanic and other Austronesian languages has benefited not only from traditional comparative linguistic methods but also from the application of cladistic procedures derived from biology (Greenhill and Gray 2005; Gray and Jordan 2000; Hurles et al. 2003). Although these methods rely on statistical comparisons between word lists, the phylogenetic, or “family tree,” relationships they reveal closely match those derived from classical linguistic methods.

Turning to human biological variation, it is risky to summarize the great diversity of Pacific human populations in a few short paragraphs. Earlier in this century, pioneering physical anthropologists sought to classify the diverse populations of the Pacific into a small set of “races,” such as Negroid, Negritoid, Australoid, or Polynesian (the latter being regarded as a “mixed race”).6 Modern biological anthropologists have shrived themselves of this kind of racial pigeonholing and endeavor to study “populations,” using an array of both phenotypic (e.g., anthropometric, dermatoglyphic) and genetic (e.g., mitochondrial DNA, nonrecombining Y-chromosome DNA, blood polymorphisms) characteristics.

The peoples who inhabit Polynesia, while displaying considerable differences in body form, are a relatively homogeneous group when compared to other Oceanic populations. Along with the people of Fiji, the Polynesians generally link together robustly in statistical analyses. Populations distributed within Micronesia are somewhat more varied than those of Polynesia. Most diverse of all, however—almost to the point of defying description—are the populations distributed within the geographic area of Melanesia. “Melanesian” human biological diversity is immense, once having been described by the Harvard anthropologist W.W. Howells (1970:192) as “so protean and varied as to resist satisfactory analysis.” As with language, Melanesia (and particularly the part we call Near Oceania) proves to be the most diverse sector of the Oceanic world; this is again an observation with considerable historical significance, since diversity frequently implies great time depth.

Yet the immense biological diversity found within Near Oceania is neither wholly random nor unpatterned. Investigations of genetic variation in this region (e.g., Friedlaender, ed., 1987; Hill and Serjeantson, eds., 1989; Lum and Cann 1998; Merriwether et al. 1999) reveal strong correlations between certain genetic markers and populations as defined on the basis of linguistic criteria (especially the distinction between Austronesian and Non-Austronesian speakers). For example, J.W. Froehlich (1987) used fingerprints (dermatoglyphs), which are highly heritable characters, to look at phylogenetic patterns among Solomon Island populations. He found that “despite an accumulation of . . . local effects, and with local relationships sometimes obscured by sampling variance, the fingerprint gene pools still reflect a broadly geographical and presumably historical distinction between [Non-Austronesian-] and [Austronesian]-speaking people” (1987:206).

A major breakthrough in our understanding of human biological variation in the Pacific came with advances in population genetics and molecular biology, especially through sequencing of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nonrecombining Y-chromosome (NRY) DNA (Boyce, Harding, and Martinson 1995; Hill and Serjeantson, eds., 1989; Friedlaender et al. 2008; Friedlaender, ed., 2007; Martinson 1996; Martinson et al. 1993; Melton et al. 1998). One of the first major discoveries was that Polynesians and island Southeast Asians shared a particular 9-base pair deletion in mtDNA, sometimes called the “Polynesian motif” (Hertzberg et al. 1989; Lum and Cann 1998; Lum et al. 1998; Merriwether et al. 1999). This discovery strengthened the linguistic argument that Polynesian origins could be traced back to Southeast Asia, and more specifically to Taiwan. Subsequent work on NRY variation, however, showed that the dominant Y haplotype in Polynesians is likely to be of Melanesian (Near Oceanic) origin (Kayser et al. 2000; Hurles et al. 2002; Su et al. 2000). This apparent contradiction in the mtDNA and NRY evidence can be resolved through a model whereby “Polynesian ancestors originated from East Asia but genetically mixed with Melanesians before colonizing the Pacific” (Kayser et al. 2008:1362; see also Vilar et al. 2008). A period of sustained gene flow between ancestral Polynesian and Melanesian populations is also evidenced by the presence of an α-thalassemia deletion, which confers resistance to malaria. This genetic mutation must have been transferred to the ancestral Polynesian populations in Near Oceania before their dispersal to Remote Oceania, where malaria is generally absent (Hill et al. 1985; Martinson 1996).

The recent molecular research has also made significant contributions to understanding genetic diversity within Near Oceania. The various studies of mtDNA and NRY variation in northern Melanesia support an interpretation of great time depth in this region; microsatellite diversity gives estimated divergence ages of between 32,000 and 50,000 years for haplotypes that developed in Near Oceania (Friedlaender, ed., 2007:92). Moreover, Papuan-speaking language groups (typically inland populations) are genetically the “most distinctive” in island Melanesia (232). These findings correlate well with archaeological and linguistic models of Pleistocene settlement of Near Oceania by ancestors of Papuan-speaking groups, as discussed further in chapter 2.

Culturally, the peoples of Oceania also vary greatly, with similarities and differences that reflect patterns frequently cross-cutting the old categories Melanesia and Micronesia, although again Polynesia stands out as a robust group of closely related cultures. Many aspects of culture are widely shared throughout Oceania, such as a subsistence economy based on tropical root, tuber, and tree-crop horticulture, widely augmented by fishing. Yet within these broad similarities much variation persists: in the emphasis accorded particular crops, in the mode of agricultural intensification, and in fishing techniques. Another aspect of overall similarity is undeniably an emphasis on watercraft and open-ocean voyaging. Yet even here, on close inspection of technological details one finds amazing diversity in the distribution patterns of lashing methods, sail types, and outrigger forms, yielding hypotheses concerning the historical development of sailing traditions (Haddon and Hornell 1936–38; Horridge 1987). For example, the wide distribution of the Oceanic lanteen sail throughout the island Pacific strongly implies that this was the sail type used on the canoes of early Austronesian speakers when they rapidly dispersed into the islands of Remote Oceania beginning around 1200–1100 B.C. (see chap. 4). On the other hand, the restriction of the Oceanic spritsail to Eastern Polynesia shows this is a later, and independent, development. Thus in ethnographically documented patterns of culture—as in language and biology—one may read fragments of the history of Pacific islanders.

Other aspects of Oceanic cultures are yet more varied, such as systems of kinship reckoning and descent, spiritual beliefs, and ritual practices. Descent reckoning, for instance, ranges from matrilineal systems, such as those found in parts of Melanesia (e.g., New Britain, New Ireland) and Micronesia (e.g., Truk), to patrilineal systems (e.g., southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia) to ambilineal or cognatic systems (which dominate in Polynesia but are also found elsewhere). A distinction between political organization based on principles of chiefship and those of “big man–ship” was at one time thought to distinguish Polynesian from Melanesian cultures definitively (Sahlins 1963). More ethnohistorically and ethnographically informed work now suggests that true “big man” societies are typical of the Papuan-speaking groups of New Guinea, whereas Austronesian-speaking island Melanesians characteristically had some form of hereditary leadership (e.g., Guiart 1963; Scaglion 1996). But this is not the venue to rehearse a litany of cultural traits and their distributions. Suffice it to say that the cultural patterns practiced by the varied peoples of Oceania are the products of history, a history whose outlines are finally emerging through the insights of archaeology and historical anthropology.





ABOUT THIS BOOK


I close this introduction by addressing what this book is intended to cover, what I have chosen to emphasize, and what I have had to leave out. I am painfully aware of how much simply could not be mentioned in a book that takes as its scope such a vast segment of the world, encompassing more than 40,000 years of human history, perhaps five thousand islands, and a panoply of peoples and cultures. How to reduce the subtleties of data and argument, the complexities of history that have required entire scholarly monographs, to a few succinct pages? Yet grand syntheses are valuable—arguably, essential—in an age of exponentially expanding information, not only in traditional print media, but in cyberspace as well. Only a few committed scholars and students can take the time to read and digest for themselves all the relevant articles, chapters, monographs, and books underpinning a work such as this.

In the end, my choice of what to include and what to ignore—or at best to relegate to a footnote—has been dictated by my own view of what is most interesting in Oceanic history. In this I have taken a broad, generalizing, and above all comparative perspective, for I believe that the long-term human history of Oceania, although inherently interesting in its own right, is worth studying for what it tells us more generally about the human career. My position has long been that archaeology and historical anthropology are historical sciences: they retrodict rather than predict, and they must take account of contingency and chance, as well as general principles and processes of human behavior and evolution. Thus our mode of explanation is properly the “historical narrative,” guided by general principles of social science as constrained by empirical evidence (see Mayr 1982, 1997).7 But as in our sister historical disciplines, generalization and comparison are also valid aims and goals; we can aspire to more than the documentation of the particular and the contingent. “History matters,” it has been said, and I take that simple phrase to heart in the multiplicity of its connotations.

Hence I have tried to keep my writerly vision on the far horizon while not neglecting too much the local particulars on which valid generalization and comparison must always build. This means, however, that some particulars, such as the details of artifacts and artifact-based sequences, will be touched on only lightly. Rather, I emphasize aspects of the archaeological record that I personally find of greater utility in comparative synthesizing: settlement patterns and their ideologically indexed architectural components, evidence for economic systems and their intensification, patterns of population growth, paleoenvironmental indications of land use and misuse, and material signals of interaction between island groups, whether over shorter or longer distances, to name a few.

The structure of this book and the coverage given to some regions and temporal periods also inevitably reflect the history and current state of archaeological research in Oceania. The Pleistocene period in Near Oceania, for example, has only been revealed through archaeological research since about 1985; the number of excavated and well-published sites still remains limited. Polynesia stands in striking contrast, because both surface and stratigraphic archaeology have a much longer history there, for which the published literature now runs to thousands of citations. Consequently, my treatment of the Pleistocene in Near Oceania is limited to a single chapter of modest length, whereas Polynesia commands two chapters. Near Oceania is not less intrinsically interesting; it will simply require more decades of hard and concerted effort to build up an archaeological record comparable to that of Polynesia.

Such then are my biases, as well as the constraints imposed by the state of our knowledge. Caveat lector.





A NOTE ON DATES AND TIME


Professional archaeologists agonize over the complexities of radiocarbon and other techniques of “absolute” dating, painfully aware that the conversion of such “dates” into actual calendar years is not straightforward, and in fact often problematic. Because this book is intended for a broad audience, I generally avoid representing time in radiocarbon years, although in some cases it is necessary (or important) to do so. Whenever radiocarbon years are given, these are “years before present” (B.P.), and a standard deviation is also provided if a specific age determination is being cited. It needs to be noted, however, that with radiocarbon dates the “present” in “before present” is standardized to the year 1950. In the tables of sites, time spans are also given as B.P. ages or ranges, since these are based on radiocarbon dates; the interested reader should consult the references provided in the tables for specific 14C dates and calibrated age ranges. Otherwise, I have used the more familiar B.C./A.D. system for general time periods. The reader should bear in mind, however, that such “calendar” dates have usually been derived from radiocarbon age estimates and their calibrations and therefore do not have the precision associated with dates derived from historical (written) texts. In most cases, general ages given for sites or phenomena have been rounded out to the nearest century.





ONE


Discovering the Oceanic Past



While this [excavation] was in progress, in May of 1950, word came of W.F. Libby’s momentous discovery of a method for dating charcoal through measuring radioactivity. A sample of charcoal from a fireplace [in Kuli‘ou‘ou rockshelter] . . . was submitted[,] . . . revealing that the shelter had been occupied about A.D. 1004. This was the first radiocarbon date from any island in the Pacific and it opened up undreamed of possibilities for reconstructing the prehistory of the area.

K.P. EMORY, IN EMORY, BONK, AND SINOTO,

Hawaiian Archaeology (1959)





ALTHOUGH THEY POSSESSED NO written scripts, Pacific islanders have always promulgated their own indigenous forms of history, encoded in oral traditions passed from generation to generation. While some traditions are mythological, others are surely rooted in the deeds and events of real historical actors. Such traditions provide an important “insider” body of historical knowledge. Another way of knowing the past is through the material traces inscribed on and sedimented in island landscapes by countless former generations. This way of “reading” history from adzes, potsherds, fishhooks, and scraps of bone and shell in the stratified layers of rockshelters and sand dunes, or from the monumental stone foundations of long-abandoned temples and house sites, is the purview of archaeology. This book is one archaeologist’s effort to read the history of the Pacific islands from such material traces. It also draws—where relevant—on indigenous traditions, as well as ethnohistoric and ethnographic documents and even linguistic and human biological evidence, in the tradition of a holistic anthropological archaeology. In writing the deep time history of the Pacific, we must seek our evidence wherever we can find it.

For the West, speculations on the origins of Pacific islanders began with the great exploratory voyages of the Enlightenment and continued as missionaries and other Europeans began to settle in the islands. But archaeology as an academic discipline did not commence in the Pacific until the early twentieth century, and only came into its own following World War II. Prior to E.W. Gifford’s pioneering work in Fiji in 1947, most anthropologists were convinced that the Pacific islands lacked a stratified record of cultural change.1 To appreciate fully our current understanding of Pacific prehistory and archaeology, some historical perspective is essential. This chapter traces the intellectual background of Pacific prehistory and archaeology over two centuries, providing a mirror for reflection on our own contemporary approaches and perspectives.





ENLIGHTENMENT VOYAGERS


Within decades after Magellan crossed the Pacific in 1520–21, Spanish galleons annually plied the equatorial seaways from America to Guam (where the Spanish established a small settlement replete with stone forts) and on to Manila, returning to Acapulco via a tedious and often fatal North Pacific passage. Mendaña led his ill-fated expedition to colonize the Islands of Solomon in 1595. Dutch expeditions under the command of Schouten and Le Maire (in 1615), Tasman (in 1642), and Roggeveen (in 1721) advanced European geographic and cartographic knowledge of the Pacific Ocean. The motives for these early voyages were commercial or imperial; the explorers’ journals give little hint of any intellectual curiosity regarding the “Other.” Then, as the Enlightenment gathered steam in the latter part of the eighteenth century, interest in the peoples of the Pacific exploded. Louis de Bougainville returned from Tahiti in 1769 with reports that set the salons of Paris buzzing, inspiring Denis Diderot (author of the famous Encyclopédie) to write his Supplément au Voyage de Bougainville, musing on social tolerance and sexual freedom. Jean-Jacques Rousseau based his idea of l’homme naturel on the Tahitian model. The peoples of the South Seas were suddenly incorporated in the Enlightenment project.

The three expeditions of Captain James Cook exemplify the Enlightenment voyage of discovery, whose goals were as much the advancement of natural science as the expansion of empire (fig. 1.1). By the tragic third voyage (1776–80), Cook had seen more of the Pacific—interacting extensively and often sensitively with its inhabitants—than any previous European explorer. Cook was struck by the similarities he perceived among the peoples we now call Polynesians, whom he encountered on such widely separated islands as Tahiti, New Zealand, Rapa Nui (Easter Island), and Hawai‘i. Lying off Rapa Nui in 1774 while on his second voyage, Cook mused that “it is extraordinary that the same Nation should have spread themselves over all the isles in this vast Ocean from New Zealand to this island which is almost a fourth part of the circumference of the globe” (Beaglehole, ed., 1969:354). Cook and his fellow voyagers were particularly intrigued by the evident similarities in language. By the third voyage, Cook had outlined a theory of origins.

From what continent they originally emigrated, and by what steps they have spread through so vast a space, those who are curious in disquisitions of this nature, may perhaps not find it very difficult to conjecture. It has been already observed, that they bear strong marks of affinity to some of the Indian tribes, that inhabit the Ladrones [Marianas] and Caroline Islands; and the same affinity may again be traced amongst the Battas and the Malays. When these events happened, it is not so easy to ascertain; it was probably not very lately, as they are extremely populous, and have no tradition of their own origin, but what is perfectly fabulous; whilst, on the other hand, the unadulterated state of their general language, and the simplicity which still prevails in their customs and manners, seem to indicate that it could not have been at any very distant period. (Quoted in Howard 1967:46)




FIGURE 1.1 Captain James Cook, seen here observing a sacrificial rite in Tahiti in 1777, thought that the Polynesians had originated in Southeast Asia. (Detail from “A Human Sacrifice, in a Morai in Otaheite,” drawn by John Webber for the atlas of Cook’s third voyage; collection of the author.)





The Enlightenment tradition of grand exploratory expeditions persisted well into the nineteenth century, under the command of La Pérouse, Vancouver, D’Entrecasteaux, Labillardière, Krusenstern, Kotzebue, Freycinet, Dumont d’Urville, and others (fig. 1.2). Dumont d’Urville burdened us with the tripartite classification of Pacific peoples as Polynesians, Melanesians, and Micronesians. The great expeditionary period culminated in 1838–42 with the United States Exploring Expedition under the command of Charles Wilkes. Horatio Hale (1846), the expedition’s ethnographer, was impressed with the linguistic connections among Pacific populations, advancing a theory of Polynesian origins grounded in careful philological comparisons. As Howard (1967:50) comments, “On the basis of his research [Hale] concluded that the progress of emigration was from west to east, and that the Polynesians belong to the same race as that which peoples the East Indian Islands.” Hale elaborated a putative sequence of migrations within Polynesia, with the Fiji group being the primary staging area:

The original scene is probably on the Feejee Group. A party of Melanesians, or Papuans, arrive first at this group, and settle principally on the extensive alluvial plain which stretches along the eastern coast of Viti-levu. Afterwards a second company of emigrants, of the Polynesian race, perhaps from some island in the East Indies, called Bulotu, make their appearance, and finding the western coast unoccupied, establish themselves upon it. The two thus divide the land between them, and are known to one another as eastern people and western people, or Viti and Tonga. (1846:178)




FIGURE 1.2 “Geometrical Details of the Monuments of Easter Island,” as recorded by the draftsman of La Pérouse’s voyage around the world in 1786. This engraving, showing details of Rapa Nui ahu temples and stone houses, is one of the earliest archaeological plans recorded for the Pacific. (Engraved 1798; collection of the author.)





In his reliance on linguistic comparisons, as well as his linking of Polynesian origins to the island Southeast Asian region, Hale prefigures contemporary scholarly debates regarding Pacific prehistory.





OUTPOSTS OF EMPIRE: MISSIONARIES, COLONISTS, AND ACADEMIC BEGINNINGS


By the early nineteenth century, the Pacific islands were under the sway of expanding proselytizing, commercial, and imperial designs. The Société de Marie (French), the London Missionary Society, and the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (Boston) had dispatched parties of missionaries to various (primarily Polynesian) destinations in Oceania. These purveyors of the faith took a great interest in the languages, cultures, and traditions of the peoples they endeavored to convert. Some, like William Ellis (1830), wrote substantial ethnographic tracts.

The missionaries established orthographies for indigenous languages, encouraging large numbers of Polynesians to become literate. Some Polynesians—such as David Malo and Samuel Kamakau in Hawai‘i, Te Ariki Tara‘are in Rarotonga, and Mamae in Mangaia—authored their own indigenous oral traditions and histories. Kamakau’s Ruling Chiefs of Hawaii (1961), for example, remains a remarkable record of indigenous political history. But missionaries were hardly the only whites to settle in the islands, as colonial outposts were established in New Zealand, Tahiti, Fiji, and elsewhere. Colonial officials such as Sir George Grey (who collected a wealth of Maori oral traditions), Basil Thompson (who wrote on both Fiji and Tonga), Abraham Fornander (a magistrate of the Hawaiian government), and S. Percy Smith (who recorded Rarotongan traditions) assembled important collections of Polynesian oral traditions. Judge Fornander, who compiled a monumental collection of Hawaiian oral traditions (Thrum, ed. 1916–20) proposed an elaborate theory of Polynesian origins:

I think the facts collected . . . will warrant the conclusion that the various branches of the family . . . are descended from a people that was agnate to, but far older than, the Vedic family of the Arian race; that it entered India before these Vedic Arians; that there it underwent a mixture with the Dravidian race, which . . . has permanently affected its complexion; that there also . . . it became moulded to the Cushite-Arabian civilization of that time; that, whether driven out of India by force, or voluntarily leaving for colonizing purposes, it established itself in the Indian Archipelago at an early period, and spread itself from Sumatra to Timor and Luzon. (Fornander 1878:159)

From island Southeast Asia, Fornander traced the Polynesian ancestors to Fiji, then to Samoa and Tonga, and finally to the far-flung islands of the eastern Pacific. Fornander’s ideas carried great force in Polynesian studies well into the early twentieth century.

Like Fornander, S. Percy Smith relied heavily on Polynesian oral traditions, primarily those of Rarotonga (Cook Islands) and Taranaki (New Zealand). Smith (1921 [1910]:158–59) postulated an Indian homeland for the Polynesians, using genealogies to assign unduly precise calendrical dates to such events as a putative migration from Java to Fiji and the Lau Islands between A.D. 0 and 450.

At the fin de siècle, as ethnology and anthropology were being formally defined as academic disciplines in European and American universities, important institutions were established in leading Pacific centers (Rose 1980). In New Zealand, the Polynesian Society was established in 1892 “to promote the study of the Anthropology, Ethnology, Philology, History, and Antiquities of the Polynesian race,” principally through the publication of a journal bearing its name (it has been in continuous publication ever since). Equally significant was the founding, in 1889 at Honolulu, of the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology and Natural History, a memorial to the last of the Kamehameha dynasty of ruling chiefs that incorporated their collection of Hawaiian ethnographic materials. The Bishop Museum’s first director, William T. Brigham, wrote innovative monographs such as Stone Implements and Stone Work of the Ancient Hawaiians (1902). In New Zealand, the Dominion Museum in Wellington and the Otago Museum in Dunedin provided similar institutional bases for scholars such as Elsdon Best, who published research on Maori pa fortifications (Best 1927).

In this premodern period of academic anthropology, archaeology (the study of “antiquities”) was not yet distinguished from ethnology. The same practitioners undertook both ethnographic work and museum studies of artifacts, stressing systematic description and classification of material culture. While actual excavation was rare, as early as 1872 Julius Von Haast in New Zealand dug into sites in South Island where prehistoric artifacts were comingled with the bones of the moa, extinct flightless birds (fig. 1.3). This led to more digging in South Island sites and the amassing of museum collections of unearthed artifacts (unfortunately, mostly lacking stratigraphic provenience). In 1913, John F.G. Stokes of the Bishop Museum excavated a stratified rockshelter on Kaho‘olawe in the Hawaiian Islands, recovering bone fishhooks and other objects (Spriggs 2017). Unlike his contemporaries in New Zealand, Stokes recognized the stratigraphy present in the Kamohio rockshelter, but his careful notes on these associations were ignored when J.G. McAllister wrote up the site two decades later. Stokes (1991) also surveyed temple sites on Moloka‘i and Hawai‘i, in an effort to test Bishop Museum director Brigham’s theory of a two-stage development of Hawaiian religion (Dye 1989; Flexner et al. 2017).




FIGURE 1.3 Prehistoric artifacts found by Julius Von Haast in association with moa bones in New Zealand. (From Von Haast 1872.)





Another archaeological pioneer of the premodern period, Katherine Scoresby Routledge, led a remarkable expedition to Rapa Nui between 1913 and 1916 (see Fischer 1997:125–39; Van Tilburg 2003). Routledge’s description of her “research design” contrasts wonderfully with contemporary academic jargon: “When . . . we decided to see the Pacific before we died, and asked the anthropological authorities at the British Museum what work there remained to be done, the answer was ‘Easter Island.’ It was a much larger undertaking than had been contemplated; we had doubts of our capacity for so important a venture” (1919:3–4).

Not the least of her doubts concerned the extreme difficulty of getting to remote Rapa Nui: “It was therefore decided, as Scoresby is a keen yachtsman, that it was worth while to procure in England a little ship of our own, adapted to the purpose, and to sail out in her” (Routledge 1919:4). The 90-foot Mana provided Routledge with a base of operations as she carried out the first thorough exploration of Rapa Nui’s unique statuary complex as well as temple foundations and house sites (fig. 1.4). Based on her field studies, Routledge correctly concluded that “various links connect the people now living on Easter Island with the great images” and that these were “the work of the ancestors” of the Polynesian-speaking Rapa Nui people (291). Routledge’s publication was a popular but nonetheless invaluable account of her fieldwork.




FIGURE 1.4 Katherine Routledge and her Rapa Nui assistant measuring the length of an Easter Island boat-shaped house foundation, during the Mana Expedition (1914–15). (British Museum photograph MM008939, Creative Commons license; courtesy of Jo Anne Van Tilburg.)





Anthropological interest in Oceania was intense at the turn of the century, marked by what Welsch (ed., 1998:565) calls the “expedition period” of ethnological research. Among the great expeditions of this age were the Cambridge Torres Straits Expedition led by A.C. Haddon (Herle and Rouse, eds., 1998), the ethnographic survey of Papua led by C.G. Seligman (1910), the Percy Sladen Trust Expedition under W.H.R. Rivers (1914),2 and the Joseph N. Field South Pacific Expedition directed by A.B. Lewis (Welsch, ed., 1998). All of these expeditions focused on Melanesia, while the German Hamburg (Peiho) Expedition spanned Melanesia and Micronesia (Thilenius 1902). Despite early emphasis on Melanesia, the focus of most ethnographic and archaeological work soon shifted to Polynesia, and would remain there as far as archaeology is concerned until fairly recently.

During the first few decades of the twentieth century, anthropology had a strong historical orientation, promulgated by such scholars as Franz Boas at Columbia, Roland Dixon at Harvard, and Alfred Kroeber at Berkeley (Stocking 1982). As Bruce Trigger (1989) observes, archaeology during the first half of the twentieth century was absorbed in developing methods—such as time-sensitive artifact classification and seriation—for reconstructing cultural sequences in the absence of corroborating historical texts (e.g., Old World hieroglyphics or cuneiform tablets). The Pacific islands lacked not only written texts but also pottery, leaving only monumental architecture and stone tools as the main objects of archaeological study (e.g., Best 1927; Brigham 1902; Routledge 1919).





“THE PROBLEM OF POLYNESIAN ORIGINS”


The year 1920 marked a watershed in Pacific anthropology. Herbert E. Gregory, a Yale professor and chairman of the National Research Council Committee on Pacific Investigations, had just been appointed director at the Bishop Museum in Honolulu. Gregory quickly convened the first Pan-Pacific Scientific Conference, in Honolulu, which drew up a set of recommendations for anthropological research in Polynesia, including archaeology (Rehbock 1988). Archaeological fieldwork was among the recommended projects: “Since Polynesian archaeology is in most respects a virgin field, the first problem is to make island surveys. . . . Such a survey should not only reveal the content of the archaeology for the island examined but should give hints of time relations and local variations” (Gregory, ed., 1921:117).

With $40,000 of Yale funds at his disposal, Gregory implemented the Bayard Dominick Expeditions to make good on the recommendations of the Pan-Pacific Scientific Conference and thus resolve “the problem of Polynesian origins” (Gregory, ed., 1921:13–15). Four field teams, made up of young graduate students from elite American universities, were dispatched to the Marquesas, Tonga, the Australs, and Hawai‘i. Each team included an ethnologist to study social organization and religion and an archaeologist to attend to stone structures and material culture, “with necessary interpreters and assistants . . . stationed at strategic points to make the studies necessary to establish standards of physical form, material culture, traditions, and language of the Polynesians” (Gregory, ed., 1921:14). The teams were also furnished with calipers and standardized “anthropometrical cards on which to record the physical characteristics of as large a number as possible of the native inhabitants of the islands under study” (Hiroa 1945:45). In short, the Bayard Dominick Expeditions implemented the first modern, holistic anthropological study of Polynesia.

In retrospect, archaeology played a subordinate role in the Bayard Dominick Expeditions. In the Marquesas—without having put a spade in the ground—Ralph Linton (1925:3) precipitately decided that the islands “offer few opportunities for archaeological research; . . . no opportunity was afforded for the gradual accumulation of stratified deposits and so far as known no kitchen middens or shell heaps exist in the islands.” Stokes, more attuned to the potential of archaeology and already seasoned by fieldwork in Hawai‘i, led the Austral Islands team, surveying fortified village sites on Rapa Island (fig. 1.5). In Tonga, William C. McKern (1929:4) was only slightly less pessimistic: “On first consideration, the archaeological outlook in Tonga is not promising. The student finds here a mottled field, poor in stratified deposits attributable to human sources, but rich in artificial monuments of earth and stone.” But McKern, at least, tried to dig; he was rewarded with the discovery of pottery, previously unknown in Tonga. He reported that “at several scattered places [pottery] was found, in stratified deposits, occurring most plentifully in strata free from evidence of European contact” (1929:116). Yet, stymied by the lack of a method for ceramic dating, McKern mistakenly interpreted his sherds as a variant of late prehistoric Fijian pottery, with no great time depth. Had he been aware of nearly identical pottery found by a Belgian priest (Meyer 1909) on tiny Watom Island, 4,500 kilometers to the west, McKern might have realized that his Tongan potsherds held clues to the earliest phase of human settlement in Remote Oceania (the Lapita cultural complex; see chap. 4). However, the opportunity was missed, handing the task of reconstructing Pacific prehistory to the ethnologists.




FIGURE 1.5 Bishop Museum ethnologist John F. G. Stokes and his wife, Margaret, on the dock at Rapa Island in 1920, during the Bishop Museum’s Bayard Dominick Expedition. Stokes was a pioneer in Polynesian archaeology, in many respects ahead of his time. (Photo courtesy Bishop Museum Archives.)





The ethnologist Edward S.C. Handy, head of the Marquesan party of the Bayard Dominick Expeditions, quickly rose to prominence in Polynesian studies. Ignoring the limited evidence of archaeology, Handy promulgated a theory of Polynesian origins and migrations that was little improved over the earlier efforts of Abraham Fornander and S. Percy Smith. Based on his Tahitian ethnographic data, Handy laid out a complex diffusionist scheme, in which various Polynesian culture “traits” were correlated with “Brahmanical” and “Buddhistic” cultures from India, Indo-China, Malaysia, and China (Handy 1930b; see also Linton 1925).

Some ethnologists, however, were uncomfortable with the diffusionist paradigm promoted by German scholars such as Fritz Gräbner of the Kulturkreise (Culture Circles) school (see Harris 1968:382–92), which was at odds with the careful historical particularism of American scholars such as Franz Boas and Edward Sapir.3 In a work whose sophisticated culture theory was ahead of its time, Edwin Burrows (1938) argued that differences between Western Polynesian and Eastern Polynesian cultures had resulted from in situ cultural processes, such as local development and the abandonment or rejection of ideas. Ralph Piddington, the posthumous editor of Robert W. Williamson’s (1924) voluminous comparative works on Polynesian social organization and religion, likewise attacked Handy’s diffusionist history.4 But Piddington also failed to grasp that archaeology could contribute more directly to knowledge of the past. His view was that archaeology had “failed to produce any integrated body of historical conclusions” (Piddington 1939:334).

Remarkably, given this stultifying perspective, a certain amount of basic field archaeology was accomplished in the Pacific before World War II, mostly in Polynesia. Kenneth P. Emory (fig. 1.6), Wendell C. Bennett, J.G. McAllister, and others mapped and recorded stone structures in Hawai‘i, the Society Islands, the equatorial atolls, and elsewhere, and used these data to advocate historical hypotheses regarding Polynesian migrations (Bennett 1931; Emory 1924, 1928, 1933, 1934a, 1934b; McAllister 1933). In Micronesia, Laura Thompson (1932) synthesized collections excavated by two amateurs in the Marianas Islands. Yet, despite continued excavations in New Zealand (e.g., Duff 1942; Lockerbie 1940; Skinner 1923–24), virtually all Pacific archaeology during these years was restricted to surface survey and to the description and classification of material culture.5




FIGURE 1.6 Bishop Museum ethnologist Kenneth P. Emory (center), member of the Hawaiian team of the Bayard Dominick Expedition, during excavations at the Hanakauhi group of structures in Haleakalā Crater, Maui Island, 1920. This was Emory’s first field project in Polynesia. (Photo courtesy Bishop Museum Archives.)





Physical anthropologists of the 1920s and 1930s also weighed in on the debates concerning Polynesian origins. Harvard’s Roland Dixon (1929) regarded the Polynesians as a mixture of several migratory “waves” (including Australoids, Oceanic Negroids, Caucasics, and Mongoloids), each with their own distinctive somatic characteristics. Louis Sullivan (1924), who tabulated and analyzed anthropometric observations obtained by the Bayard Dominick field parties, wrote that “the Polynesians are a badly mixed people for whenever there has been a general disagreement as to the racial affinities of any group it has been found almost invariably that the group was a non-homogeneous group” (22; emphasis added). From the perspective of modern population biology such statements—antiquated at best, perniciously racist at worst—are representative of the typological thinking of this period. In the decades leading up to World War II, they helped to fuel white American views on racial purity and the desirability of restricting alien immigration, especially of “Asiatic races.”6 One outcome of this attitude was a particular shaping of the historical theories of the prominent Polynesian scholar Te Rangi Hiroa.





TE RANGI HIROA AND THE “MICRONESIAN ROUTE” TO POLYNESIA


Te Rangi Hiroa (Sir Peter Buck)7—one of the most prominent Polynesian scholars of the mid-twentieth century (fig. 1.7)—was raised in a bicultural world, learning the language and customs of his Maori mother while aspiring to the cultural institutions of his Irish father. Born in 1877, Hiroa attended Te Aute College, an Anglican boarding school for the children of the Maori elite, and earned his medical degree at Otago Medical School in 1910. Government service as medical officer to the Maoris and a term in the New Zealand parliament were interrupted by his enlistment with the much-feted Maori regiment, which barely survived the debacle at Gallipoli. Even before the Great War, Hiroa was becoming entranced with ethnological research. In 1927, Hiroa accepted an appointment to the Bishop Museum staff to carry out field studies in tropical Polynesia. Nine years later, the Bishop Museum trustees invited Hiroa to take the position of director on the retirement of Herbert Gregory.




FIGURE 1.7 Te Rangi Hiroa (right) and Kenneth P. Emory (left) of the Bishop Museum at the investiture stone of Hauvivi marae, part of the Taputapuātea complex on Ra‘iatea Island, during the Mangarevan Expedition of 1934. (Photo courtesy Bishop Museum Archives.)





As director of the Bishop Museum, Hiroa held a prominent academic position (the director also carried the title of professor at Yale University). Yet Hiroa found himself, part Polynesian, in a society shackled by ideas of innate differences between human “races.” He was proud of his Maori ancestry, yet painfully aware that many whites viewed the Polynesians as inferiors, classified by some anthropologists as a mixture of “Negroid” and “Mongoloid” elements.8 Despite his wartime service and academic fame, Hiroa had failed to garner the ultimate form of recognition from his mother country, a knighthood (Sorrenson, ed., 1986–88, 3:262; see also Condliffe 1971:197–98).9 This led him to seek American citizenship, but here too he ran up against racial prejudice, for to many Americans Polynesians were part of the feared “Yellow Peril.”10

In this social and political context, Hiroa developed a new theory of Polynesian origins, not surprisingly one that avoided any association between the Polynesian people and the dark-skinned inhabitants of Melanesia (then classified as “Oceanic Negroids”). Most theories of the time traced Polynesian migrations through Melanesia, implying that the Polynesians had a Melanesian “racial” component. As early as 1930, in reviewing Rivers’s History of Melanesian Society (1914), Hiroa wrote to his friend Sir Apirana Ngata, “If you can cut out any survivals of Melanesian influence on [Polynesian] social organization so much the better” (Sorrenson, ed., 1986–88, 2:78).11 In 1938, Hiroa published his mature theory in Vikings of the Sunrise (1938b), his grand synthesis of the Bishop Museum’s ethnographic survey of Polynesia (see also Hiroa 1944; 1945:12–13). The endpapers comprise a map of the Pacific with arrows, bearing the caption, “The Polynesian Triangle with the northern Micronesian route and the rejected southern Melanesian theory” (fig. 1.8) To avoid any taint of contamination with Melanesia, Hiroa had the ancestral Polynesians migrate from island Southeast Asia through the atolls of the Caroline and Kiribati archipelagoes. He invoked the anthropometric studies performed by the Bishop Museum, claiming that “the master mariners of the Pacific must be Europoid for they are not characterized by the woolly hair, black skins, and thin lower legs of the Negroids nor by the flat face, short stature, and drooping inner eyefold of the Mongoloids” (1938b:16).12 Hiroa put his case as follows:

In light of recent comparative study of the material cultures and social organizations of Melanesia and Polynesia, it seems improbable that the great migrations into the Pacific passed through Melanesia. In general the Polynesians are physically very different from the Melanesians. Had they stopped at Melanesian islands to refit their ships and gather new supplies, it is probable that racial intermixture would have taken place and that Negroid characteristics would appear consistently among Polynesians. . . .

Strong support in favor of the Micronesian route lies in the positive evidence against the route through Melanesia. It is unfortunate that the original population of Micronesia had been overlain by Mongoloid elements that crept in after the ancestors of the Polynesians had passed through. Yet, in spite of the imposition of a new language throughout the area, numerous Polynesian words occur to mark the ancient trail. (1938b:41, 45)




FIGURE 1.8 Te Rangi Hiroa’s theory of Polynesian origins, depicting the posited “Micronesian route” of migrations. The dashed lines indicate secondary migrations. (From Hiroa 1944.)





Determined to avoid any taint of Melanesian influence on Polynesia, Hiroa ignored several problems with his Micronesian route theory. One of the most serious was that the source of the Polynesian horticultural complex lay in Melanesia and could not be derived from the Micronesian atolls, a fact that Hiroa himself acknowledged (1938b:307; 1945:13). Moreover, the sophisticated stone tool industries of Polynesia would have had to be reinvented after a period of adaptation to shell technology in Micronesia. To resolve these problems, Hiroa had the Polynesians reacquire food plants and domestic animals from the Melanesians in Fiji, via Samoa and Tonga: “Though the Polynesians traveled into central Polynesia by the Micronesian route, such important food plants as the breadfruit, banana, yam, and finer taro were carried from Indonesia to New Guinea and relayed by Melanesians to their eastern outpost at Fiji. . . . The richer food plants which reached Fiji had to be relayed to central Polynesia through volcanic islands. The first relaying station in western Polynesia was provided by Samoa or Tonga” (1938b:307–8). It was hardly a parsimonious explanation.

I have dwelled at some length on Te Rangi Hiroa both because he was the prominent authority on Polynesia in the mid-twentieth century and because his work demonstrates how any scholar’s work can be influenced by his or her sociopolitical context. The Micronesian route theory—never well supported by empirical evidence—would fall completely once stratigraphic archaeology and modern comparative linguistics were brought to bear on the problem after World War II. Relying almost exclusively on comparative ethnographic data—especially material culture—Hiroa was nonetheless able to mount a convincing argument. His work marks the culmination of the period of ethnographic domination of Pacific prehistory, with archaeology a mere bystander.13





THE DISCOVERY OF TIME DEPTH AND CULTURE CHANGE


World War II focused unprecedented attention on the Pacific, as thousands of American GIs fought their way through the jungles of Guadalcanal, New Guinea, Saipan, and other exotic locales. Partly as a result of this heightened interest in the Pacific, at war’s end several regional anthropological programs were launched. While Pacific anthropology in the first half of the twentieth century had been dominated by ethnography, archaeology rapidly came into its own soon after midcentury. Edward W. Gifford of the University of California, Berkeley, who as a young ethnologist had led the 1920 Bayard Dominick Expedition to Tonga, decided in 1947 to turn his hand to archaeology. Convinced by the prevailing views of Hiroa and others that there was no cultural stratification in Polynesia, Gifford chose to tackle Fiji:

As tropical Polynesia has yielded archaeologically only the early phase of the local cultures which were flourishing at the time of discovery, I decided to look farther west for a succession of cultures. Fiji seemed a likely place, and moreover I reasoned that it might show traces of early Polynesians, if they had come via Fiji. Also, I reasoned that large islands rather than small ones would be likely to produce a succession of cultural horizons; early colonizers would presumably be attracted to large land masses rather than to small ones. Hence Viti Levu, of more than 4,000 square miles area, was selected. (1951:189)

Gifford explored Viti Levu for six months, discovering thirty-eight sites and excavating two, Navatu and Vunda (see chap. 5), both well stratified and producing a sequence of changing pottery styles. Gifford was uncertain of the ages of these sites, but based on external stylistic comparisons he thought the stratigraphically earlier materials might correlate with “the Bronze Age of southeastern Asia via Borneo and the Solomons” (1951:237). The modern period of Pacific archaeology was launched.

Buoyed by his Fijian results, Gifford organized a second Pacific archaeological expedition in 1952, this time to the large island of New Caledonia (Gifford and Shutler 1956).14 Willard Libby’s pathbreaking radiocarbon dating method had just been developed; Gifford seized the opportunity to date charcoal samples from his New Caledonian sites, as well as previously excavated samples from Fiji. At a place called Lapita on New Caledonia’s west coast, Gifford and his student Richard Shutler Jr. (fig. 1.9) found a distinctive kind of stamped pottery, which Gifford recognized as nearly identical to the sherds that his Bayard Dominick Expedition coworker McKern had found in Tonga in 1920. What truly astounded Gifford, however, was the age of the associated charcoal samples as dated by 14C: 2800 ± 350 years B.P.




FIGURE 1.9 Professor Edward W. Gifford (in pith helmet at left) of the University of California, Berkeley, and his graduate student assistant Richard Shutler Jr. (with dark glasses, on right), with their local workers, during their 1952 expedition to New Caledonia. It was during this expedition that the site of Lapita was discovered. (Photo courtesy P. A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology.)





Suddenly all the old assumptions about shallow time depth for Pacific island cultures seemed to crumble away; Gifford’s excavations revealed just the kind of cultural stratification that the previous generation of archaeologists had claimed did not exist. Here was a type of finely decorated pottery showing an early connection between Melanesia and Polynesia, quite contrary to Hiroa’s Micronesian route theory. Indeed, what soon came to be called the “Lapita” pottery style—crossing the boundary separating Melanesia and Polynesia—would in time force even the ethnologists to rethink fundamental categories they had inherited from the time of Dumont d’Urville (e.g., Thomas 1989; Tcherkézoff 2008).

In 1949–50, Alexander Spoehr of Chicago’s Field Museum of Natural History explored the archaeology of the Marianas Islands on the western fringe of Micronesia (Spoehr 1957). He too found well-stratified sites enmeshed in a ceramic sequence, as well as stone architecture that could be fitted into the later part of the cultural sequence (see chap. 6). Spoehr took advantage of the new radiocarbon dating method to obtain a basal date of 1527 ± 200 B.C. from the Chalan Piao site on Saipan. He boldly argued that while the “reconstruction of Oceanic prehistory” had previously drawn on other branches of anthropology, “it is very largely on the data of archaeology that future knowledge of Oceanic culture history must be built” (1957:17). Appointed to succeed Hiroa as director of the Bishop Museum after the latter’s death in 1951, Spoehr was soon in an influential position to advance that research agenda.

Less than a year before Te Rangi Hiroa died from cancer, the Bishop Museum’s Kenneth P. Emory had been the first to heed Willard Libby’s call for charcoal samples from Pacific Island sites.15 Emory, engaged in excavating the Kuli‘ou‘ou rockshelter on O‘ahu Island, sent Libby a sample from a hearth at the base of the shelter’s cultural deposit: “On February 19, 1951, Buck [Hiroa] called Kenneth to his office and read aloud a letter just received from Chicago. Libby had dated Kenneth’s sample of charcoal from the cave at Kuliouou at A.D. 1004, plus or minus 180 years. It was the first carbon date for Polynesia. ‘Boy, was I excited,’ said Kenneth later. ‘Immediately it opened a whole new vista of possibilities’” (quoted in Krauss 1988:338). Emory soon launched a major program in Hawaiian archaeology, excavating sites throughout all the main islands, leading to the definition of a sequence based not on pottery—which was absent from Eastern Polynesia—but on changes in bone and shell fishhook styles (Emory, Bonk, and Sinoto 1959).16

But Emory in Hawai‘i was not the only ethnologist-turned-archaeologist now searching for new evidence with which to reconstruct the Polynesian past. A decade earlier, Roger Duff had commenced excavations at Wairau Bar in New Zealand, which contained both habitation deposits and burials.17 Duff opened his classic monograph on the Wairau Bar site with this notable statement: “The student of the ethnography of Polynesia has at hand a remarkable human laboratory in which to study whatever laws determine the evolution of human culture in time and space.” He observed that if human culture had “remained static one might have expected the culture of any one island to have remained exactly like that of any other” (1950:1). Obviously, this had not been the case in the Pacific, even though the ethnologists had attempted to explain cultural differences as the result of successive migrations, or “waves,” of people. But in New Zealand, Duff and his colleagues discovered direct archaeological evidence of local cultural change, in part due to adaptation to the temperate conditions of these islands. Duff concluded that “the major contribution of this study to the theory of Polynesian cultural change is the demonstration that the culture may alter by a continuous and mainly self-motivated process of change” (12). At last, cultural change and process were being integrated into Pacific archaeological and anthropological research.

The rejuvenation of Pacific archaeology immediately following World War II owes a great deal to radiocarbon dating. This independent, scientific means of direct dating of cultural materials freed archaeologists from hazy guesswork based on presumed stylistic correlations, often over vast geographic distances. Moreover, the ages for the first dated samples from New Caledonia, Saipan, and O‘ahu exceeded what orthodox ethnographic theories had predicted. Henceforth, Pacific prehistory belonged to archaeology. The dominance of comparative ethnology and the diffusionists was a thing of the past.





THE SEARCH FOR POLYNESIAN SEQUENCES


Inspired by their colleagues’ successes, other researchers began to join the Pacific archaeological scene. Despite the exciting finds from Fiji, New Caledonia, and the Marianas, the greatest focus remained on Polynesia. In Hawai‘i, Emory was joined in 1954 by Yosihiko Sinoto (fig. 1.10), a young Japanese archaeologist, who convinced Emory to abandon his method of excavation by arbitrary six-inch levels in favor of real stratigraphic control (Sinoto with Aramata 2016). Joined by William J. Bonk, a University of Hawai‘i graduate student, Emory and Sinoto excavated stratified rockshelters and sand dunes—sites rich in fishhooks—throughout the Hawaiian Islands. Sinoto realized that he could use stylistic changes in fishhook shapes to seriate Hawaiian archaeological sites, in a manner similar to the way that pottery types were used in other parts of the world to establish chronological frameworks (Emory, Bonk, and Sinoto 1959; Sinoto 1962).




FIGURE 1.10 Kenneth P. Emory and Yosihiko Sinoto excavating at the Pu‘u Ali‘i sand dune site, South Point, Hawai‘i, in the early 1950s. They are kneeling on an exposed pavement of basalt cobbles, examining a remnant baulk of the overlying cultural deposit. (Photo courtesy Y. H. Sinoto.)





In New Zealand, the University of Auckland appointed its first academic archaeologist in 1954. Jack Golson, a graduate of Cambridge University, brought to New Zealand a materialist tradition of archaeology stemming from his mentors V. Gordon Childe and Graham Clarke. Golson set out to professionalize the standards of excavation in New Zealand, organized the New Zealand Archaeological Association, and published several key papers outlining the prehistoric cultural sequence in these large islands (Golson 1959; see also Groube 1993b).

In 1947, the world was enthralled by the Kon-Tiki balsa raft adventure of Thor Heyerdahl, a young Norwegian zoologist who tirelessly promoted his theory that the Polynesians had originated not in the west but from the Americas (Heyerdahl 1952). Riding on the fame of Kon-Tiki, Heyerdahl led an expedition into southeastern Polynesia in 1955–56, this time on a converted Greenland trawler equipped for archaeological research and staffed with four professional archaeologists (E. Ferdon, W. Mulloy, A. Skjølsvold, and C. Smith). The expedition’s main objective was Rapa Nui, but work was also carried out on Rapa Iti and Ra‘ivavae in the Australs and on Hiva Oa in the Marquesas (Heyerdahl and Ferdon, eds., 1961, 1965). On Rapa Nui, the team concentrated on the statuary cult (fig. 1.11), with surveys and excavations at the Rano Raraku statue quarry and at several temples sites (including the Ahu Vinapu complex), in large part because Heyerdahl had proposed that similarities between Rapa Nui architecture and statues and those found in parts of South America supported his migration theory.




FIGURE 1.11 Statue 295 on the slopes of the Rano Raraku quarry, Rapa Nui, after the completion of excavations by the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition in 1956. (Photo courtesy Kon Tiki Museum, Oslo.)





What the Norwegian Expedition failed to do, however, was convince anyone of the veracity of Heyerdahl’s South American origins hypothesis. The American archaeologist Robert C. Suggs lost no time leveling a searing attack on Heyerdahl. In his widely read synthesis, The Island Civilizations of Polynesia (1960), Suggs parodied Heyerdahl’s claims to have proved his raft theory:

Heyerdahl’s Peruvians must have availed themselves of the classical device of science fiction, the time machine, for they showed up off Easter Island in A.D. 380, led by a post–A.D. 750 Incan god-hero, with an A.D. 750 Tiahuanaco material culture featuring A.D. 1500 Incan walls, and not one thing characteristic of the Tiahuanaco period in Peru or Bolivia. This is equivalent to saying that America was discovered in the last days of the Roman Empire by King Henry the Eighth, who brought the Ford Falcon to the benighted aborigines. (Suggs 1960:224)

Heyerdahl did not fare much better in the scholarly press. Golson (1965:78) asserted that all of the archaeological evidence uncovered by the Norwegian Expedition supported a more conventional view that the island had been settled by ancestral Polynesians from the west, with subsequent internal cultural developments on Rapa Nui itself.

While the Norwegian Expedition was at work on Rapa Nui, Robert Suggs was carrying out the first stratigraphic excavations in the Marquesas Islands of Eastern Polynesia (fig. 1.12). Suggs’s trend-setting research reflected changing agendas in Americanist anthropology. In the post–World War II era, an evolutionary perspective had arisen under the influence of such scholars as Julian Steward and Leslie White, as had an interest in human ecology (see Harris 1968:643–87). Although Suggs did not neglect artifact classification and seriation, he was intrigued by broader anthropological questions of culture change: “I wanted to collect comparative information on much more general topics. How did various kinds of ancient temple architecture in Polynesia fit in with the religious philosophies of the natives? Was there evidence of warfare on other islands? If so, did the situations resemble that which had evidently arisen on Nuku Hiva during the period when so much of the population had sought shelter in caves in the remote reaches of the island? How did the village plans in various Polynesian societies fit with the social organization of these groups?” (1962:222).




FIGURE 1.12 Robert C. Suggs cleaning a stratigraphic section through the Ha‘atuatua dune site in the Marquesas Islands, on the day he discovered the site in 1956. The Ha‘atuatua site revealed the earliest period of Eastern Polynesian occupation. (Photo courtesy R. C. Suggs.)





Rather than just enumerate a sequence of changing artifact types over time, Suggs’s (1961) synthesis of Marquesan prehistory constituted a model for how the Marquesan culture had evolved in relation to such factors as island ecology and human demography (fig. 1.13). His research meshed well with changing perspectives in Oceanic cultural anthropology, which had abandoned the old comparative ethnographic approach of Handy and Hiroa in favor of controlled comparisons and the study of culture process, a perspective exemplified in the work of such influential anthropologists as Ward Goodenough (1957), Marshall Sahlins (1958), and Irving Goldman (1970).




FIGURE 1.13 Robert Suggs’s cultural sequence for the Marquesas Islands, as graphically summarized by American Museum artist Nicholas Amorosi. Suggs defined his cultural periods as much in terms of settlement patterns and population dynamics as artifact types. (Courtesy R. C. Suggs.)





In the early 1960s, following their success in finding sites rich in fishhooks and other artifacts in Hawai‘i, the Bishop Museum’s Emory and Sinoto extended their research to the Society Islands. Disappointed by the lack of stratified, artifact-rich sites in Tahiti, Sinoto shifted his efforts to the Marquesas (Sinoto 1966). The Hane dune site on Ua Huka Island in the northern Marquesas, excavated by Sinoto from 1963 to 1965, yielded a rich assemblage of fishhooks, adzes, and other artifacts (fig. 1.14). These discoveries led Emory and Sinoto to propose a new model for the settlement of Eastern Polynesia, with the Marquesas as a dispersal center from which people moved to other archipelagoes of the region (Emory and Sinoto 1965; Sinoto 1966, 1970). Their Marquesas-centric model of Eastern Polynesian settlement is depicted in figure 1.15.




FIGURE 1.14 Excavations by Yosihiko Sinoto at the sand dune site of Hane on Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands, exposed simple pavements of waterworn stones on which dwellings were erected. (Photo courtesy Y. H. Sinoto.)





FIGURE 1.15 The model of Polynesian dispersals proposed by Emory and Sinoto (1965), based on initial results of excavations in Eastern Polynesia, emphasized the Marquesas Islands as a primary dispersal center.





BROADENING RESEARCH HORIZONS


By the 1960s, the research agendas of Pacific archaeologists and anthropologists were broadening beyond issues of cultural origins and defining artifact-based sequences. A major innovation was the development of “settlement pattern” archaeology, first applied in Polynesia by Roger C. Green, who had been trained in this approach by Gordon Willey at Harvard (Golson 1996a). First in his study of the ‘Opunohu Valley on Mo‘orea in the Society Islands (Green 1961; Green et al. 1967) and then in a major multiyear project focused on Western Samoa (Green and Davidson 1969, 1974), Green demonstrated the power of a settlement pattern perspective. Rather than concentrate exclusively on artifact-rich sites, Green wanted to incorporate all aspects of an archaeological landscape (fig. 1.16). He argued that “with the development of settlement pattern studies in archaeology and increasing concern with delineating the social aspect of the data recovered from sites as well, the day has passed when such monuments or their structural features can afford to be treated only as contexts for portable artifacts and not as artifacts in their own right” (1967b:102). Settlement pattern studies became the norm in Polynesia, as archaeologists recognized their potential to yield insights into prehistoric social and political organization. By the late 1960s and early 1970s, such studies were being carried out in Hawai‘i (e.g., Kirch and Kelly 1975; Tuggle and Griffin 1973), New Zealand (Groube 1964, 1965), Rapa Nui (McCoy 1976), and the Marquesas (Bellwood 1972; Kellum-Ottino 1971).




FIGURE 1.16 The settlement pattern approach to archaeology, introduced to Polynesia by Roger C. Green, paid attention to all classes of sites and not merely to artifact-rich deposits. This map of a marae, or temple complex, in the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea, was prepared as part of Green’s settlement pattern survey in 1961. (From Green et al. 1967.)





The settlement pattern approach, initially intended to shed light on prehistoric social relations and community structure, rapidly acquired an additional, ecological orientation. Combined with the recovery and analysis of faunal and floral materials (e.g., Kirch 1973; Shawcross 1967, 1972), settlement pattern studies began to encompass agricultural field systems and other evidence for economic production. The ethnobotanist Douglas E. Yen collaborated with archaeologists on a pioneering study of prehistoric irrigation in the Makaha Valley, O‘ahu, that yielded the first stratified evidence for agricultural change in Polynesia (Yen et al. 1972). Archaeological remains of agricultural systems and the identification of preserved plant remains were increasingly incorporated into Pacific research.

During the Cold War, government institutions increasingly influenced U.S. science. American research universities and institutions began to receive unprecedented infusions of federal funds, owing in part to the newly constituted National Science Foundation (NSF). As early as 1951, a subcommittee on Pacific archaeology of the National Research Council recommended a program for Micronesian archaeology, and a similar program for Polynesian archaeology was put forward in 1953 (Emory 1962:1; Spoehr 1954:24).18 Throughout the 1950s, expanding field research in Pacific archaeology was still supported largely by private funds and grants, but this changed dramatically in 1962 when the Bishop Museum received its first NSF grant for Pacific archaeology (Emory 1962; Force 1964:19, 29; Spoehr 1962:13–14). With $77,220 for a three-year period, the museum dispatched field expeditions to Rarotonga, Pitcairn, Western Samoa, and American Samoa, including representatives of Auckland University, the Canterbury Museum, and the Otago Museum (New Zealand). Alex Spoehr, who would soon turn the reins of the Bishop Museum over to his protégé Roland Force, summed up the role of the NSF and other federal agencies in Pacific research: “The financial resources required for reasonably large scale research are beyond the means of any single institution. In the United States, federal support of basic research is becoming more and more necessary” (1962:3).

The Bishop Museum implemented its second three-year program of “Polynesian culture history” in 1965 (Force 1965), with increased NSF funding of $274,554 again supporting an international group of investigators, incorporating historical linguistics and ethnobotany along with archaeology. The impact of this infusion of federal research funds cannot be underestimated; many of the advances in Polynesian archaeology during the 1960s stem directly from these programs. Moreover, the NSF has continued to fund Pacific archaeology, such as the multi-institutional Southeast Solomon Islands Culture History Program (SSICHP) (Green and Cresswell 1976) and more recently the Hawai‘i Biocomplexity Project (Kirch, ed., 2011).





MOVING BEYOND POLYNESIA: ARCHAEOLOGY IN MELANESIA AND NEW GUINEA


Although Gifford and Spoehr targeted western Pacific archipelagoes in their post–World War II efforts to revitalize Pacific archaeology, most research in the 1950s and 1960s continued to focus on Polynesia. Perhaps this was an inevitable need to achieve consensus on the “problem of Polynesian origins,” based on the new methods of stratigraphic excavation and radiocarbon dating. But Jack Golson, seeing the need for renewed work in Melanesia, seized the opportunity presented by an offer of appointment to the faculty of the Australian National University (ANU) in Canberra in 1961.

Golson mapped out a series of projects that would add immensely to our knowledge of Melanesian prehistory (see Golson 1996a). Aware of excavations by Ralph and Susan Bulmer (1964) in two rockshelters in the New Guinea Highlands, Golson sent his student J. Peter White to find and dig additional rockshelters in the interior of that huge island.19 Other students were dispatched to locations that Golson judged would be key to expanding our knowledge of Melanesian prehistory: Peter Lauer to the D’Entrecasteaux Islands, Brian Egloff to Collingwood Bay on the northeastern New Guinea coast, and Ron Vanderwal and Geoff Irwin to the Papuan coast.20 The emerging importance of the Lapita cultural complex—about which Golson himself wrote several key papers (Golson 1963, 1971, 1972a, 1972b)—was not neglected. Jim Specht reexcavated the Watom Lapita site, Jens Poulsen dug several Lapita middens on Tongatapu, and Colin Smart investigated sites in New Caledonia.21 Jim Allen, who had studied Australian historical archaeology under Golson, was appointed to the first faculty position in archaeology at the new University of Papua New Guinea in 1969. From this base, Allen carried out important work at Nebira and Motupore near Port Moresby.

By the close of the 1960s, the new fieldwork in New Guinea and the Melanesian islands was finally drawing attention away from Polynesia, to the western archipelagoes of the Pacific. Roger Green, who was deeply engaged with the question of Polynesian origins (Green 1966, 1967a, 1968), became convinced that the Lapita ceramic complex held essential clues to the deeper origins of the pre-Polynesians, as well as to the peoples of island Melanesia. In 1970, Green and Douglas Yen obtained NSF support for “an interdisciplinary investigation of the prehistory of the Southeast Solomon and Santa Cruz Islands” (Green 1976a:9). Their research design combined fundamental culture-historical problems with an emphasis on ecological diversity, economic systems, and interisland exchange networks. In 1971–72, field teams investigated Kolombangara, Ulawa, Uki, San Cristobal, Santa Ana, Santa Cruz (Nendö), the Reef Islands, and Anuta, precipitating a veritable outpouring of research results. The NSF funded a second two-year phase of the Southeast Solomons project in 1977–78, extending fieldwork to Vanikoro, Tikopia (fig. 1.17), and Taumako, with continued work in Nendö and the Reef Islands.22




FIGURE 1.17 Excavations in the deeply stratified Sinapupu sand dune site on Tikopia Island during the 1978 phase of the Southeast Solomons Culture History Program revealed three thousand years of continuous occupation. (Photo by P.V. Kirch.)





The Southeast Solomons project demonstrated the effectiveness of coordinated, multi-institutional research programs. Jim Allen (1984a) consciously adopted this approach when he organized the Lapita Homeland Project (LHP), which focused on the Bismarck Archipelago. Although they were known to have some Lapita sites and while there was a suggestion from the Misisil rockshelter on New Britain that they might have a Pleistocene history (Specht, Lilley, and Normu 1981), the Bismarcks’ prehistory was largely unknown. In 1985, the LHP carried out surveys and excavations on New Britain, New Ireland, Watom, Nissan, Manus, and Mussau. This concerted effort not only expanded our knowledge of Lapita sites (Gosden et al. 1989), but resulted in the discovery of several cave sites with Pleistocene sequences (fig. 1.18) that pushed the prehistory of the Bismarck Archipelago back to an astounding 33,000 years (Allen, Gosden, and White 1989; Allen and Gosden, eds., 1991). Pleistocene dates had been known for Australia and New Guinea, but this was the first demonstration that humans had expanded into the Near Oceanic islands at such an early period.




FIGURE 1.18 Excavations in progress at the Matenbek site, New Ireland, during the Lapita Homeland Project in 1985. (Photo courtesy Jim Allen.)





Island Melanesia has continued as the scene of much exciting fieldwork over the past two decades, especially as members of the LHP built on initial results to extend their research in New Britain, Mussau, Manus, and elsewhere. And in both Vanuatu and New Caledonia, a number of archaeologists have greatly expanded on the pioneering work of Gifford and Golson to clarify our knowledge of southern Melanesian prehistory (see chap. 5). Important new research has also been carried out in the western Solomons. Melanesia, long neglected, finally has a significant archaeological record of its own, one in many respects deeper and richer than that of Polynesia.





FRANCOPHONE ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE PACIFIC


In spite of France’s substantial colonial holdings in the Pacific, including French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna, New Caledonia, and the Loyalty Islands, the French academic establishment was slow to engage in archaeological research in the region. Inspired by the dramatic results of American researchers in various islands of French Polynesia, in 1962–63, Pierre Vérin conducted excavations on Rurutu in the Australs (Vérin 1969). It was José Garanger, however, who was largely responsible for launching a new era of Francophone archaeological research in the Pacific. Trained by the famous French prehistorian Leroi-Gourhan, Garanger went in 1964 to the then French-British “Condominium of the New Hebrides” (now Vanuatu) at the urging of the ethnologist Jean Guiart, who was concerned that the program of Pacific archaeological research initiated at the 1961 Pacific Science Congress should have Francophone participation (Di Piazza, Pearthree, and Sand 2008:22; Sand 2004). Exploring central Vanuatu, Garanger discovered a ceramic horizon—which he named Mangaasi after its type locality—that seemed to replace the Lapita ceramic horizon in parts of island Melanesia (Garanger 1972a). Equally important, he opened up a new interpretive realm at the interface of archaeology and oral traditions by demonstrating the historical veracity of certain indigenous Vanuatu narrative histories (Garanger 1972b), particularly that of the famous chief Roy Mata (see chap. 5).23 These efforts led Garanger to establish the first French academic program in Pacific archaeology, initially at the University of Nanterre and later at the Sorbonne in Paris, where he succeeded Leroi-Gourhan as the director of the famous Laboratoire d’Ethnologie Préhistorique.

Although Garanger did not continue fieldwork in the Pacific, he sent a succession of students there; indeed, virtually all of the French archaeologists working in the Pacific were at one time or another associated with Garanger’s research team. Among the first of these was Daniel Frimigacci, who excavated in New Caledonia and later in Futuna and ‘Uvea (Frimigacci 1974, 1975, 1990, 2000). In New Caledonia, Frimigacci was joined by Jean-Christophe Galipaud (1988), then by Christophe Sand (1994, 1995). Sand, a locally born “Caledoche” whose ancestors were exiled from France to New Caledonia, has built a major program of archaeology in New Caledonia. Working closely with Sand in these efforts over many years have been the Kanak archaeologists Jacques Bolé, André Ouétcho, and Francis Wadra. Frédérique Valentin, a bioarchaeologist based at the University of Nanterre, has been especially active in recent years in several collaborative projects, including the major excavations at the Lapita site of Teouma in Vanuatu (Valentin et al. 2011).

In French Polynesia, Garanger was responsible for the establishment in 1979 of an archaeology program at the Centre Polynésien des Sciences Humaines in Tahiti, initially directed by Jean-Michel Chazine (1977) and later by Maeva Navarro. A number of French archaeologists, including Pierre Ottino, Eric Conte, Catherine and Michel Orliac, and Bertrand Gérard subsequently carried out surveys and excavations in the Society Islands, the Marquesas, and the Tuamotus. Eric Conte, in particular, has gone on to a distinguished career in the archaeology of French Polynesia, establishing the Centre International pour la Recherche Archéologique sur la Polynésie at the University of French Polynesia and training the latest generation of French archaeologists, including Guillaume Molle (2011) and Aymeric Hermann (2013).

Although there are many commonalities in the approaches of Anglophone and Francophone archaeologists working in the Pacific, there are significant differences as well (Conte 2000). Sand sees these contrasts as stemming from fundamentally different perspectives about how science should be conducted: “Simply put, European, and especially south European anthropology, believes that [theoretical] models must develop mainly from empirical field data, whereas most Anglophone human sciences reply on theoretical models built as abstract academic constructs that are then tested in the field” (Di Piazza, Pearthree, and Sand 2008:31; see also Sand 2004).





NOT AN IVORY TOWER: PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE PACIFIC


From the first decades of the twentieth century—when anthropology and archaeology achieved formal status as academic disciplines—to the 1960s, virtually all archaeological research in the Pacific was carried out by museum- or university-based scholars. In the United States (including Hawai‘i), federal and state laws passed in the 1960s and 1970s began to mandate archaeological surveys and “salvage” excavation. Some museums and university departments began to undertake “contract archaeology” (which came to be called cultural resource management, or CRM, archaeology). But these changes also spawned the rise of independent archaeological contractors. Initially, CRM archaeology in the Pacific was confined to Hawai‘i and to other U.S. territories, including American Samoa and Guam. However, the New Zealand government soon adopted similar laws, and in Micronesia the U.S. federal statutes began to be applied in the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and later by the independent governments of Palau, the Northern Marianas, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Marshall Islands (see Cordy 1980, 1982). In fact, the expansion of archaeological work throughout Micronesia over the past forty years has been largely driven by the CRM movement.

The rise of CRM archaeology in Hawai‘i, New Zealand, Micronesia, and to a lesser extent elsewhere in the Pacific has had several consequences. A huge infusion of funds for archaeological work (in the case of Hawai‘i, totaling several million U.S. dollars per year), far exceeding what has ever been available for archaeological research either from private funding sources or from federal research agencies such as the NSF, has produced a vast outpouring of survey and excavation data. However, these results are most often reported in limited-distribution documents and are only too rarely published in traditional academic journals or books. Synthesis lags behind fieldwork and data reporting. The inevitable linking of archaeology with land development has also led to sometimes heated conflicts between archaeologists and indigenous peoples, as in Hawai‘i (see Kawelu 2015; Kawelu and Pakele 2014; Kirch 1999; Nāleimaile and Brandt 2013; Sorovi-Vundilo 2003; Spriggs 1989, 1991a).

In the postcolonial world of the Pacific, the very practice of archaeology (as well as anthropology) became the focus of critique, discussion, and renegotiation. Some indigenous activists called for a halt to archaeological work, seeing it as a legacy of white colonialism. In the early 1990s, partly in response to the hugely controversial H-3 highway project on O‘ahu and the excavation of a major burial ground on Maui (Kawelu 2015), the Native Hawaiian activist Haunani-Kay Trask (1993:172) called for a stop to “all anthropology and archaeology on Hawaiians.” Trask wrote, “There should be a moratorium on studying, unearthing, slicing, crushing, and analyzing us.” Others, such as Joseph Kabui, former premier of Bougainville Province (Papua New Guinea), regarded archaeology positively, looking to archaeological findings in their search for national identity (Spriggs 1992a:269). Certainly, as this historical overview shows, archaeology in the Pacific was—with a few notable exceptions such as Te Rangi Hiroa—until quite recently largely the work of nonindigenous scholars. But things have changed rapidly in the twenty-first century. Indigenous Maori, Hawaiian, Fijian, New Guinean, Kanak, and other Pacific islanders have increasingly become involved in the practice of archaeology in the Pacific. Today many other indigenous scholars have joined the ranks of practicing archaeologists. Some of those who have made substantial contributions include Nick Araho, Alois Kuaso, John Muke, and Herman Mandui in Papua New Guinea; Lawrence Foanaota, John Keopo, and Kenneth Roga in the Solomon Islands; Jacques Bolé, André Ouétcho, and Francis Wadra in New Caledonia; Ralph Regenvunu in Vanuatu; Sepeti Matararaba and Tarisi Sorovi-Vunidilo in Fiji; Hinanui Cauchois and Paul Niva in French Polynesia; Peter Adds, Des Kahotea, Nepia Stewart, Nick Tupara, and Dean Whiting in New Zealand; Mauricio Rufino in Pohnpei; Erika Radewagen and Epi Suafo‘a in American Samoa; and Kehau Cachola-Abad, Koa Hodgins, Kathy Kawelu, Kekuewa Kikiloi, Sean Nali‘imaile, and Hanna Springer in Hawai‘i. With these and other indigenous scholars, the future of Pacific islands archaeology is sure to take on new dimensions and explore new waters.





RECENT ADVANCES IN PACIFIC ARCHAEOLOGY


In the foregoing pages I traced some of the main intellectual themes and debates that run through the history of archaeology and historical anthropology in the Pacific. The ways in which scholars have approached Pacific prehistory, their assumptions about time depth and cultural processes, the kinds of evidence they considered—all of these have shifted in ways both subtle and dramatic. Assessing where contemporary archaeology in the Pacific is headed is more challenging.

To the outsider, archaeologists of the Pacific may seem to be endlessly squabbling over theory, methods, evidence, and interpretation. Some debates focus on historical particulars and reflect rapidly changing empirical records. These kinds of issues eventually get resolved by new fieldwork and by finer-grained laboratory analysis. Other debates reflect differences in fundamental approaches to archaeology. Still other controversies stem from how one views the Pacific islands as a theater for anthropological research. Since at least 1950, many scholars invoked the “laboratory” aspects of Pacific islands and their human populations and cultures, suggesting that in the Pacific one has a kind of “natural experiment” of cultural differentiation and adaptation (e.g., Duff 1950; Goldman 1970; Goodenough 1957; Kirch 1984a; Sahlins 1958). Others have objected to what they call the “myth of the primitive isolate” (Terrell et al. 1997; Rainbird 2004). A better approach may be that of islands as “model systems,” the fundamental premise adopted by the Hawai‘i Biocomplexity Project (Kirch, ed., 2011; Vitousek 2002; Vitousek et al. 2004). Another debate, which has subsided somewhat in recent years, entails phylogenetic versus reticulate models of cultural differentiation (Bellwood 1996b; Kirch and Green 1987, 2001).

One thing is certain: since the publication of the first edition of this book nearly two decades ago, the range of methods and techniques available to Pacific archaeologists has expanded immensely, allowing for the extraction of many new kinds of data from the archaeological record. In the critical arena of dating and chronology—on which all archaeological interpretations are ultimately based—major advances in radiocarbon dating and the routine use of accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) dating now yield age estimates with standard errors of just ± 15 years. Botanical identification of charcoal through examination of wood anatomy prior to dating (Allen and Huebert 2014), allowing the selection of short-lived plant specimens, has largely eliminated the problem of “old wood” or in-built age, which was responsible for misleading archaeologists regarding initial settlement ages in Eastern Polynesia and elsewhere (see chap. 7). The application of Bayesian calibration for sets of radiocarbon dates has contributed further to heightened precision in our chronologies (Dye 2011, 2015). In addition to these advances, the application of uranium/thorium (U/Th) series dating to corals is yielding dates with a previously unheard of precision of just ± 2 years in some samples. U/Th dating has elucidated the chronologies of temple construction in Hawai‘i and the Society Islands (Kirch and Sharp 2005; Kirch et al. 2015; P.C. McCoy et al. 2009) and pinned down the settlement date for Tongatapu (Burley, Weisler, and Zhao 2012; Burley et al. 2015).

When the first edition of this book was published, geochemical characterization and sourcing of adzes and other lithic artifacts was just beginning to benefit from X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis; two decades later, improvements in XRF combined with isotopic techniques permit discrimination between sources and quarries not previously possible, allowing interisland and interarchipelago transfer of stone tools to be identified (Collerson and Weisler 2007; Weisler et al. 2016). Analysis of stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen in the bones of humans as well as of commensal animals such as rats, pigs, and dogs has provided new insights into ancient diets and subsistence practices (Allen and Craig 2009; Kinaston et al. 2013; Stantis et al. 2015, 2016; Swift, Miller, and Kirch 2016). Another source of data on diet comes from the extraction of microfossils such as phytoliths, pollen, and starch grains that are trapped in the dental calculus (tartar) of ancient teeth (Dudgeon and Tromp 2014; Tromp et al. 2016). Such plant microfossils are also now being routinely extracted from archaeological sediments (Horrocks et al. 2003; Horrocks and Nunn 2007; Horrocks and Wozniak 2007). And, of course, we cannot ignore the huge contributions being made by genetic sequencing of ancient DNA (aDNA) from the bones of humans and other animals.

At the much larger scale of interpreting entire archaeological landscapes, settlement pattern and spatial analysis has been greatly augmented by the use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS), enabled in part by the Global Positioning System (GPS), for accurate site location (McCoy and Ladefoged 2009). Virtually all landscape-level interpretation in Pacific archaeology now utilizes GIS. And remote sensing, which previously depended primarily on either aerial photography or satellite imagery, has now received a major advance through airborne LiDAR, capable of producing high-resolution images of archaeological features, even through forest canopy (Freeland et al. 2016; M.D. McCoy et al. 2011; Quintus et al. 2015).

No doubt Pacific archaeologists will continue to debate the interpretations, hypotheses, and models derived from our evidence, even as our ability to generate ever more data increases. As the great biologist Ernst Mayr (1997) observed, science is a self-correcting system. Only time will reveal what survives and what ends up on the midden heap of intellectual history. I, for one, would be sad to see the day dawn when we think we know all the answers, for half the fun lies in pursuing new questions. My intention has been merely to show that the field of Pacific archaeology—as always—is in flux. That, after all, makes the pursuit of it stimulating and worthwhile.





TWO


The Pacific Islands as a Human Environment



In no other ocean has it been as difficult for a bit of land to be entirely surrounded by water. In no other has it been as difficult for a piece of the earth’s crust to raise its head above the water to become an island. The wonder is not that most islands are small and scattered but that there are so many of them, for the Pacific Ocean contains more islands than all the rest of the world’s oceans combined.

W.L. THOMAS JR., “The Variety of Physical

Environments among Pacific Islands” (1963)





DURING A LIFETIME OF RESEARCH I have been fortunate to visit, explore, and simply spend time on myriad environmentally and ecologically diverse islands (Kirch 2015). These have included diminutive Anuta, less than a square kilometer in land area and just 80 meters high, yet the permanent home of some 160 Polynesians; the semi-atoll formed by Eloaua and Emananus, whose reefs and lagoon harbor an almost indescribable array of marine life; Mangaia, with its fortresslike escarpment of upraised pinnacle karst encompassing an ancient, highly eroded volcano; the vast, elongated island of New Caledonia, whose ancient rocks and metallic soils are remnants of archaic Gondwanaland; and Moloka‘i, whose majestic windward cliffs rise 1,200 meters from the sea, gapped by lush amphitheater-headed valleys with waterfalls cascading down their slopes (fig. 2.1). The contrasts inherent in just these five examples testify to the amazing diversity of Pacific island environments. Such contrasts stem from varied geological origins that have raised islands from the oceanic depths, from different ages, from the work of wind and water on landforms, and from biological processes of dispersal, colonization, and evolution that have cloaked Pacific islands in a rich flora and fauna, distinct from those of continents.




FIGURE 2.1 Dramatic sea cliffs along the windward coast of Moloka‘i were created by massive landslides. Deep amphitheater-headed valleys slice into the central mountain range. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





In spite of tremendous diversity, some patterns and processes are common to all oceanic islands. Islands can be classified into several major geological types, and important biogeographic trends across the Pacific account for much of the variation in island biota. In this chapter I review these patterns, trends, and processes, providing a background for understanding the human settlement of the Pacific. The story of the movement of Homo sapiens, first out onto the larger islands and archipelagoes of Near Oceania, then in more recent times into the vast reaches of Remote Oceania, eventually to discover virtually every habitable speck of land, cannot be fully appreciated without some understanding of these key environmental variables. Winds and currents, along with island distances, have influenced the development of navigational methods and seafaring skills. Limitations in natural plant and animal foods helped to shape the subsistence economies of Pacific peoples. Variations in soil, rainfall, and climate necessitated adaptations to their horticultural practices. The availability or absence of natural materials—basalt, chert, obsidian, shell, plant fibers, and the like—played a role in the development of material culture. None of this is to say that the lifeways or cultures of Pacific islanders, any more than those of other peoples, were “determined” by their natural environments. On the contrary, humans everywhere actively modify and shape their world; in contemporary ecological jargon, they “construct” their own ecological “niches.” Yet they do so within certain constraints—and sometimes challenges—posed by the environments they inhabit.





ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE PACIFIC ISLANDS


The geological origins of the Pacific islands mystified scientists of the nineteenth and early twentieth century. The possibility that a great Pacific continent had formerly existed, only to sink beneath the sea, was entertained by various scholars and provided the basis for one of the more bizarre theories on the origins of Pacific peoples.1 The theory of plate tectonics is surely one of the great triumphs of later twentieth-century science, revealing that the earth’s crust consists of shifting plates separated by boundaries, themselves variously zones of spreading or subduction.2 Along the spreading zones, outpourings of magma continually create new crust, especially along the East Pacific Rise. At the subduction zones, as one plate thrusts beneath another, the oceanic crust plunges to great depths to be reabsorbed into the earth’s mantle, partly to reappear as molten lava on the surface through island-arc volcanism, such as along the Kermadec-Tonga Trench.

A tectonic map reveals the center of the Pacific basin to be a vast crustal sheet, the Pacific Plate (map 3). Originating along its eastern margin, the Pacific Plate extends from the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge up through the East Pacific Rise (on which Rapa Nui sits) and follows the western coast of North America. As new oceanic crust is created along this lineament, the Pacific Plate ever so slowly yet relentlessly moves toward the northwest (arrows on map 3). At its western margins the Pacific Plate is “consumed” by being downthrust into a complex series of subduction zones, marked by deep oceanic trenches. These include the Kermadec-Tonga Trench, the New Britain Trench, the Palau Trench, the Mariana Trench (notable for having the deepest spot in the earth’s oceans), the Japan and Kuril Trenches, and the Aleutian Trench. The sinuous line formed by these trenches has long been known as the Andesite Line, because the rocks found in islands to the west are predominantly andesitic, whereas islands on the Pacific Plate are dominated by basaltic lavas. To the west of these trenches lies not just one plate, but a maze of interlocking smaller plates.




MAP 3 A tectonic map of the Pacific basin. The heavy lines indicate major plate boundaries, and the general directions of plate movement are indicated by the arrows. (Adapted from Oliver 1989.)





Strings of island-arcs formed by a characteristic kind of volcanic activity define the western margins of the Pacific Plate. As the geographer Patrick Nunn describes the process, “The magma involved in island-arc volcanism derives from melting of subducted ocean crust. . . . The melting of the crust is the consequence of being heated through burial and from friction along the contact with the buoyant plate” (1994:34). Such plate margin volcanism has formed the extensive Tonga, Vanuatu, and Solomon archipelagoes. The complex geological history of island-arcs can include successive stages of active volcanism, erosion, subsidence, and formation of marine limestones and other sedimentary deposits, producing islands with complex structures of volcanic, metavolcanic, and sedimentary rocks.

The western margin of the Pacific also incorporates plate fragments derived from the ancient supercontinent of Gondwana, which began to break apart 100 million years ago. New Caledonia is one such Gondwanaland fragment, parts of New Zealand another; both broke off from Australia about 80 million years ago and began a slow, isolating drift to the east. Their origins in the ancient southern supercontinent account for unique aspects of the biota of these islands, including archaic conifer trees and many species of large geckos on New Caledonia.3 New Guinea too has a highly complex geological history—also reflecting its Gondwanaland origins—and contains rocks ranging in age from Cambrian or even older formations up to recent Pleistocene volcanics (Brookfield and Hart 1971:26–29).

Pacific Plate islands have a different origin mechanism from that of island-arcs. These midplate or intraplate islands typically originate from a “hot spot,” or thermal plume of magma arising from deep in the mantle. Such hot spots are stationary within the mantle, while the slowly migrating lithosphere of the Pacific Plate gradually moves over them.4 This movement is sufficiently slow that there is time for new islands to be created by successive extrusions of lava that begin with a rupture on the seafloor; the lava flows pile up, creating a volcanic mass that eventually rises above the ocean. In time, the new island moves off the hot spot as it is carried along by the conveyor belt of the crustal lithosphere. A new island then begins to form over the same stationary hot spot. Over a period of tens of millions of years, an entire linear chain of volcanic islands successively rises from the ocean depths. Midplate islands in such linear chains typically pass through the following evolutionary stages: (1) initial volcanism and shield building; (2) subsidence due to point-loading of the thin oceanic crust; (3) subaerial erosion by streams, waves, and wind; (4) often, a late stage of renewed volcanism, typically pyroclastic; (5) continued erosion and reduction of the island’s mass; (6) formation of extensive coastal reefs, if the island is within the tropical to subtropical regions; (7) complete erosion and subsidence of the volcanic cone, resulting in the formation of a coral atoll; and (8) eventual drowning of the island, forming a submerged seamount.

The textbook example of such a midplate linear island chain is the Hawaiian-Emperor Archipelago, extending from the island of Hawai‘i (where the originating hot spot is located), up through the main “high” volcanic islands such as O‘ahu, and continuing through the remnant volcanic pinnacles and coral atolls of the Northwestern Hawaiian chain (also known as Papahānaumokuākea) and finally to the submerged Emperor seamounts that end in Meiji Seamount, a total distance of 3,942 kilometers.5 The Hawaiian chain was created by a stationary magma plume situated in the southeast (where a new, submarine island, named Loihi, is being constructed today off the coast of Hawai‘i); eventually its submerged islands end their evolutionary cycle with subduction into the Kuril Trench. Based on potassium-argon dating of islands along this lineament, the entire life cycle of a Hawaiian island spans 75 million to 80 million years, during which it is above water for perhaps only the first 8 million to 15 million years.

Most islands on the Pacific Plate are oriented along such linear chains, including the Marquesas, Society Islands, Tuamotus, Australs–Southern Cooks, and Samoa. Where they lie in this evolutionary cycle determines the degree of weathering and landform development that occurs. For example, in the main Hawaiian Islands the new island of Hawai‘i (with surface rocks less than 0.3 million years old) has been weathered very little, most of its surface lacking streams or deeply developed soils. At the other end of the chain, Kaua‘i (about 5.1 million years old) is deeply weathered, boasting a valley topography with streams, rich soils, and a coastline protected by coral reefs. Such contrasting landforms were of great consequence to colonizing Oceanic peoples who, with their horticultural subsistence economy, preferred environments with ample water and good soils. Coral reefs and lagoons offered abundant fish and shellfish. The Oceanic peoples were keen observers of geological differences between islands, and they had their own folk theories about island origins. The Hawaiians, for example, recognized that their archipelago had originated progressively from the southeast, the abode of the volcano goddess Pele. The Pele-Hi‘iaka cycle of Hawaiian mythology (Beckwith 1970) describes Pele moving her home from Kaua‘i successively to the other islands, to end up at her present residence in the crater of Halemaumau on Hawai‘i.





TYPES OF ISLANDS


Different geological origins of island-arc and midplate islands provide one basis for classifying Pacific islands; another important variable is that of changes in an island’s landform resulting from submergence and the formation of coral reefs, or by later emergence of reefs. Geographers (e.g., Thomas 1963) have long used a simple four-part classification of Pacific islands that remains useful for understanding the varied island environments to which Pacific peoples adapted. The four island types are (1) island-arc islands; (2) high islands of midplate hot spot origin; (3) coral atolls, formed on volcanic masses that have subsided beneath the ocean’s surface; and (4) makatea islands, in which coral atoll or reef formations have been uplifted or have emerged through tectonic activity. The last three types of islands are illustrated in figure 2.2.




FIGURE 2.2 Examples of the principal geological types of islands. (After Kirch 1984a.)





ISLAND-ARC ISLANDSFormerly labeled “continental” islands because they sometimes incorporate ancient continental rocks, island-arc islands are among the largest islands in the Pacific, concentrated along the western margins of the Pacific basin.6 They include New Britain and New Ireland in the Bismarck Archipelago, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides), New Caledonia, Fiji, and New Zealand. Often large in scale, such islands exhibit varied habitats. On large islands such as New Guinea and New Britain, one finds interior-dwelling peoples who have no direct experience of the coast or the sea, although they trade with coastal populations. Because of their complex geological histories, these islands offer a wider range of lithic resources utilized by ancient Pacific peoples to manufacture stone tools. Rhyolite, dacite, metavolcanic rocks, chert, and obsidian are to be found in such island-arc locations.7


HIGH ISLANDSHigh islands are of midplate hot spot origin still in the earlier stages of their evolutionary cycle, before subsidence and erosion have done their work. They will eventually sink beneath the ocean surface to become atolls or seamounts. Tahiti, Rarotonga, Tutuila, and Pohnpei are typical examples of high islands. Most high islands consist of basalt, a hard, dense stone extensively used by Pacific peoples to make adzes and other implements. These islands range considerably in size, from Hawai‘i at 10,458 square kilometers down to Anuta, only 0.8 square kilometer in land area (fig. 2.3). They also vary greatly in landform, depending to a large degree on age and hence extent of erosion. Geologically younger islands often lack watercourses, whereas older islands are deeply dissected by stream valleys. Some high islands, such as ethnographically famous Tikopia, consist of volcanic cones with lakes in their exploded craters.




FIGURE 2.3 Anuta Island in the southeastern Solomons group is one of the smaller high islands in the Pacific but nevertheless home to about 160 Polynesians. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





When they are still young, high islands lack developed coral reefs and typically have wave-cut cliffs along their shorelines. In time, reefs develop along the shores of high islands, first as fringing reefs and later, as the island continues to subside, in the form of barrier reefs separated from the main island by a lagoon (fig. 2.4). However, coral reefs are confined to tropical and subtropical waters, because reef-building corals will not grow north or south of about 24° latitude. Gaps in the reef exist wherever there is substantial freshwater runoff, as at the mouths of large stream valleys. These passes were important, allowing canoes to move between the sheltered lagoon and the open sea.




FIGURE 2.4 The high island of Niuatoputapu in the northern Tongan group is surrounded by an extensive barrier reef and lagoon. In the distance looms Tafahi Island, a young volcanic cone lacking reefs. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





ATOLLSCharles Darwin (1842) first described the stages in the formation of a coral atoll, although he was at a loss to account for the geological mechanism of subsidence, now explained by plate tectonics. As islands migrate westward on the relentlessly moving Pacific Plate, they gradually subside and, in combination with erosion by wind and water, are slowly reduced. Reefs begin to develop around the island’s margin, so that in time an older high island will have a small volcanic core (or sometimes several small islets) surrounded by a lagoon and barrier reef, as with Aitutaki, Mangareva, and Chuuk. This stage of atoll formation is sometimes called an “almost atoll.” Eventually the remnant volcanic peak also becomes submerged, leaving only a ring of coral reef above the ocean. The coral continues to grow upward in the photic zone of the ocean; in time, coral heads and sand generated by storms and biological processes accumulate to form islets, called motu after their Polynesian name. The stages in atoll development are diagrammed in figure 2.5.




FIGURE 2.5 Stages in the development of an atoll, illustrated by block diagrams of various near-atolls and atolls. A, Naiau; B, Kambara; C, Fulanga; D, Tuvutha; E, Namuka; F, Ongea; G, Yangasa; H, Oneata; I, North Argo; J, Reid; K, Great Argo. (After Davis 1928.)





Atolls are among the most precarious environments settled by Pacific peoples.8 Atoll motu stand only 2 to 3 meters above sea level, making them vulnerable to inundation by waves and storm surges during cyclones. Atoll dwellers have learned that a thin lens of freshwater (the Ghyben-Herzberg aquifer) floats on the heavier salt water within the sandy sediments of motu and can be tapped by excavating shallow wells. Certain crops, such as the giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis), can be cultivated in pits dug down to expose this freshwater lens. In Micronesia, people developed salt-tolerant varieties of breadfruit that thrived in atoll conditions (Petersen 2009). However, cultivation on atolls is risky; many crops simply will not tolerate the saline conditions. On the other hand, atolls offer rich marine resources, and atoll peoples tend to be at home as much on and in the sea as on the land. Since atolls lack stone of any kind, their inhabitants have had to adapt their material culture, using coral and shell, especially the giant clam (Tridacna gigas), to make adzes and other tools.


MAKATEA ISLANDSWhen an atoll, or an old high island surrounded by a barrier reef, becomes elevated above sea level it forms a makatea island. Makatea is a Polynesian word meaning “white stone” (reef limestone); it is also the proper name of an island of this type in the Tuamotu Archipelago. Makatea islands are formed by tectonic uplift at plate margins, or by lithospheric flexure, in which a new volcanic hot spot island point-loads the thin oceanic crust, causing an upwarping at a certain distance from the hot spot. The heavy mass of Rarotonga in the Southern Cook Islands caused just such a warping of the oceanic crust, elevating several nearby islands as much as 80 meters above sea level. Some makatea islands are marginal environments for human habitation, lacking surface water (rainfall disappears immediately into the spongelike karst) and even soil for cultivation. One such is Henderson Island, yet prehistoric Polynesians managed to maintain a settlement there for six hundred years (see chap. 8).





CLIMATIC FACTORS IN THE PACIFIC


Pacific islands span the humid tropics to the temperate zones (New Zealand), but most of the islands considered here lie within the tropical to subtropical range. On some islands, high mountains create microclimates, as on Hawai‘i and Maui, where the higher elevations span humid temperate to alpine and tundra environments. The summits of both these islands receive snowfalls during the winter months, and Mauna Kea on Hawai‘i was capped by a small glacier during the late Pleistocene. New Guinea not only had Pleistocene glaciers, but exhibits even greater altitudinal climate differences.

The wind and current systems of the Pacific basin greatly influenced voyaging and settlement, and have important effects on island ecology.9 A wind and current map of the Pacific reveals two great gyres, or circulation cells, one each in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres (map 4). Both of these flow from east to west across the equatorial region (the intertropical convergence zone); the northern gyre flows clockwise, while the southern gyre flows counterclockwise. Given that the prevailing winds and currents are from the east throughout the main zone of tropical islands, Pacific navigators had to develop strategies for sailing from west to east (see chap. 7). There is some temporal variation, however, and the trade winds dominating the eastern Pacific are concentrated between May and September. In the western Pacific, there is a stronger seasonality between trade wind and monsoon seasons, influenced by the cyclic heating and cooling of the nearby Asian and Australian landmasses.




MAP 4 The dominant wind and current directions in the Pacific Ocean. (Adapted from Oliver 1989.)





The persistent trade winds, coming year after year from the same direction, have a major environmental effect on high islands in their path. As moisture-laden trades flow across the windward side of a high island, they are heated and rise, resulting in heavy rainfall (known as orographic precipitation). The island’s leeward side remains in a rain shadow, with significantly reduced rainfall. Over time, greater windward rainfall results in accelerated stream erosion and the creation of broad, amphitheater-headed valleys, while leeward landforms remain relatively dry and undissected. Lush rainforests cover windward slopes, while dryland shrub or parkland characterizes leeward slopes. These windward-leeward contrasts influenced where Oceanic peoples could establish their settlements and gardens. Not surprisingly, the Polynesians developed a terminology for this windward-leeward axis, tonga/tokerau, which they carried with them throughout their colonizations.10

To horticultural peoples such as those of Oceania, rainfall is critical to the sustenance of life. Rainfall over the Pacific gradually declines from west to east, with the Melanesian archipelagoes of the Bismarcks and Solomons receiving the greatest rainfall. However, there is sufficient rainfall throughout the zone of most islands to make horticulture feasible. The exceptions are along the equator (the Kiribati and Tuvalu Archipelagoes) and in northern Micronesia, where, for example, certain of the Marshall Islands suffer from periodic drought, making habitation tenuous.

El Niño and Southern Oscillation are terms that have become familiar to many people because of their effect on contemporary patterns of rainfall or drought in North and South America as well as Australia. The El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) process consists of a periodic thermodynamic redistribution of energy over the Pacific basin, resulting from differential heat buildup in the western Pacific. During an ENSO event, the normal aridity of the western-central Pacific is broken by periodic heavy rainfall episodes, trade winds decrease in intensity, and there is a significant eastward flow of warm water. ENSO events can have dramatic consequences for particular islands, including droughts in the western and central Pacific and heavy rains, floods, and increased cyclone frequency in the eastern Pacific. Fish populations, and the seabird colonies that depend on them for food, are sometimes devastated. These events presumably had serious impacts on Pacific island populations in the past.11





ISLAND LIFE AND BIOGEOGRAPHY


When a new volcanic island emerges above the ocean swells it consists merely of barren rock and cinder—but not for long. Plant colonization begins surprisingly quickly, with floating seeds washed ashore by the waves, or with tiny seeds passed through the digestive tracts of visiting birds. Insects and spiders arrive either under their own power or passively dispersed on high-altitude winds. Seabirds may colonize an island even if it is still relatively barren of plant life. Over a few hundred thousand years, the new island will have acquired a significant biota, its slopes cloaked in trees, shrubs, and herbs, inhabited by a diversity of invertebrates and of volant vertebrates (e.g., birds, fruit bats, or microbats).

Dispersal is one of the most fundamental aspects of Pacific biogeography.12 Groups of plants and animals that are good dispersers (because, for example, their seeds float and remain viable in salt water or because they are capable of over-water flight) have managed to colonize oceanic islands time and again. Other groups, such as most vertebrates, have found it generally impossible to get far beyond continental shores. Because of this, the biota of Pacific islands differs radically from that of continental regions, with certain groups well represented and others wholly lacking; biogeographers refer to this phenomenon as disharmony.

Distance—both from mainland source regions and between stepping-stone islands that aid in the dispersal process—is a critical aspect of island biogeography. The majority of Pacific islands are clustered in the ocean’s western sector; interisland distances increase dramatically as one moves eastward. Due to this uneven clustering of islands, Asia and New Guinea have served as primary source areas for Pacific floras and faunas, with a much lesser contribution from the Americas. Moreover, the large archipelagoes closest to Asia and New Guinea, such as the Solomons and Vanuatu, have much more diverse biotas, with greater numbers of higher-order taxa represented (genera and families), than islands in the central and eastern parts of the Pacific.

Another key aspect of island biogeography is the process of adaptive radiation. When a species of plant or animal succeeded in colonizing an isolated island, it often found itself without its former predators and in a position to exploit what ecologists call an empty niche. Generations descending from this original colonist multiplied and diverged as some offspring adapted and moved into different microhabitats. The classic textbook case of adaptive radiation is that of Darwin’s Galápagos finches, but numerous other examples abound throughout Oceania, such as the achatinellid and amastrid land snails of Hawai‘i or the cryptorhynchinid weevils of Rapa. Speciation on oceanic islands led to high degrees of endemism in certain islands and archipelagoes. In the Hawaiian Islands, for example, no less than 94 percent of all flowering plant species and 13 percent of the plant genera are endemic; that is, they are found nowhere else in the world.

These aspects of island biogeography, whose complexities I have only touched on, had important consequences for colonizing human populations. First, as people moved from the large Near Oceanic archipelagoes into Remote Oceania, they increasingly found the newly discovered islands lacking in many familiar plants and animals. Moreover, east of the Bismarcks, there were few indigenous plants with edible tubers or fruits; the would-be colonizers had to bring crop plants and other economic species with them. On the other hand, sizable populations of land birds and nesting seabirds offered a ready source of meat, a resource that was frequently hit very hard within the first few decades after human settlement (Steadman 2006).

Vegetation on Pacific islands varies tremendously according to island size and altitudinal range, but a few typical plant communities are noteworthy from the perspective of human use.13 In the tropical Pacific, the immediate coastal or strand vegetation is dominated by salt-tolerant trees such as Pandanus, whose leaves were widely used to weave mats; Barringtonia asiatica, whose fruit produces a poison used to catch fish; and the ubiquitous coconut palm (Cocos nucifera). A wild form of coconut had naturally dispersed at least as far as central Polynesia (Cook Islands and Society Islands) prior to human settlement, but domesticated varieties with their larger fruit were carried by would-be colonists in canoes.14 In the western Pacific, the coastal zone is often characterized by extensive mangrove (Rhizophora and other taxa) swamps or by lowland swamps dominated by the sago palm (Metroxylon spp.), which is harvested for its starchy pith. Moving away from the coast into the interior lowlands of island-arc or high islands, one enters rainforest, eventually giving way to even wetter montane and cloud forests on the higher islands. On some islands, the lower and middle elevations are dominated by grasslands or fernlands, especially in the drier leeward zones. This is the case over large parts of Viti Levu in Fiji (Ash 1992) and on New Caledonia, as well as on some smaller islands, such as Futuna, Mangaia, and Mangareva (fig. 2.6). These pyrophytic (fire-tolerant) savannas, characterized by Miscanthus grass or Dicranopteris ferns, often resulted from millennia of forest clearance and repeated burning by humans.




FIGURE 2.6 Large tracts in the interior of Futuna Island in Western Polynesia are covered in pyrophytic Dicranopteris fernlands, the result of former land use practices such as shifting cultivation. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Island faunas, as I have noted, are frequently disharmonic in comparison to those of nearby continental regions.15 In the Pacific, mammals are limited to a few marsupials (e.g., wallabies, wombats, cuscus) and to several genera of rats (Rattus, Melomys, Uromys), along with fruit bats (Pteropodidae). Of these, only fruit bats dispersed into Remote Oceania, the marsupials and rats being restricted to the Bismarcks and the Solomon Islands. Reptiles too are of fairly limited distribution, with the majority of species of snakes, frogs, diurnal lizards, and geckos being found in Near Oceania or in the larger island-arc archipelagoes. Because of their excellent dispersal abilities, many kinds of birds managed to colonize Pacific islands, where they account for the greatest diversity of vertebrates. Seabirds (including frigates, shearwaters, petrels, noddies, and boobies) and various kinds of land birds (megapodes, pigeons, fruit doves, rails, and parrots, among them) were especially abundant on oceanic islands at the time of first human arrival (Steadman 1995, 2006). More-over, flightlessness developed in a repeated evolutionary process on many Pacific islands, especially in various genera of rails.

The richest terrestrial faunal diversity on Pacific islands was among the invertebrates, including insects and land snails, but most of these were of little direct consequence or interest to people. However, a large and highly delect-able land crab, Birgus latro, the “coconut robber” crab, was a prized food of islanders. The presence of certain insects—most of all the Anopheles mosquitoes, which are vectors for several kinds of Plasmodium, the cause of malaria—also had health implications for humans.

The Pacific islands were not rich in edible terrestrial species other than birds and fruit bats, and their floras were particularly impoverished in terms of edible plants. Far more important sources of animal food were the reefs and lagoons surrounding most islands. The same general pattern of a west-to-east decline in diversity holds for the fish and mollusks of the Indo-Pacific faunal province.16 Thus the waters of the Bismarck Archipelago teem with several thousand species of fish, whereas remote Rapa Nui has a mere 126 species. Most important to Oceanic peoples were the inshore and benthic, or bottom-dwelling, fish, in such families as the parrotfish (Scaridae), wrasses (Labridae), tangs (Acanthuridae), squirrelfish (Holocentridae), jacks (Carangidae), and groupers (Serranidae). These were taken with an amazing variety of fishing techniques, including the use of hooks, nets, spears, traps, and poisons. Oceanic peoples also knew how to troll the open sea for pelagic fish such as tunas (Scombridae) and mahi-mahi (Corphyraenidae), but compared to the inshore reefs the open ocean is a relative desert; the yield from pelagic trolling was fairly minor. Bivalves and gastropod mollusks of all kinds were collected from reef and lagoon floors, both for consumption and, in many cases, to manufacture artifacts from their durable shells. Other important marine foods were sea urchins, octopi, crabs of many kinds, seaweeds, and marine turtles, especially the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas).





THE MICROBIOTIC WORLD AND HUMAN POPULATIONS


It may be a universal cognitive feature of Homo sapiens to think of the world primarily in terms of our own bodily scale; this bias carries over even into scientific notions about human history. Thus we take great account of human interactions with macroscopic animals and plants but in general pay little attention to the vast microscopic world that not only surrounds us but also lives within us. Archaeologists have paid too little attention to these matters, partly because the evidence for disease among prehistoric populations can be difficult to obtain. However, the historically documented distribution of disease-causing microorganisms in the Pacific islands raises several important hypotheses regarding the impacts and effects of disease in Oceanic prehistory.

The same biogeographic patterns that hold for macroscopic biota in the Pacific apply to the microscopic world. Thus the diversity of microorganisms drops off sharply between Near Oceania and Remote Oceania, as does the diversity of such disease-bearing vectors as Anopheles mosquitoes. Generalizing broadly, the archipelagoes of Near Oceania (and here we must extend the boundary to encompass Vanuatu as well) are replete with infectious and parasitic viruses, protozoa, bacteria, and other disease-causing microorganisms, whereas the islands of Remote Oceania are (or were, prior to the expansion of disease after Western contact) relatively disease-free. Anyone who has done fieldwork in both Near Oceania and Remote Oceania will have learned this difference for themselves, often the hard way. I have spent many months on islands in both regions, and whereas neither I nor my Western team members have ever suffered serious health problems in Remote Oceanic field sites, it has been quite the opposite story in the Solomon Islands or in Mussau in the Bismarcks. There we have contracted malaria (at times life-threatening), ulcerating skin infections resistant to even broad-spectrum antibiotics, persistent respiratory ailments, and gut-racking intestinal infections. It is not just that we are “soft” Westerners unaccustomed to the rigors of the “bush.” The indigenous villagers with whom we lived in close contact in the Solomons and Mussau are themselves beset with these same ailments; they often exhibit high levels of anemia from endemic malaria. In contrast, the indigenous peoples with whom I have worked in Remote Oceania generally enjoy good health, even where little or no modern medical care is available (see Howe 1984:47–50). Tellingly, the exceptions occur where the adoption of a Western diet and lifestyle has led to such new diseases as hypertension and diabetes.

Without doubt, the most significant parasitic disease preying on the human occupants of Near Oceania (again extending into Vanuatu) has been malaria, a highly debilitating and often fatal disease resulting from infection by one or more of several Plasmodium species. In historic times, Plasmodium vivax, P. malariae, and P. falciparum have been found throughout the low- to midaltitude elevations of New Guinea, the Bismarcks, the Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu. The first two of these have probably been in the region for as long as humans (Groube 1993a), whereas the more virulent and often fatal P. falciparum may have been introduced somewhat later in prehistory. At least five species of Anopheles mosquito are also present, providing the necessary vector. In a study of four Solomon Islands populations, Damon (1974) found that as many as two-thirds of the adults (in Kwaio and Baegu) had enlarged spleens and lowered hemoglobin as a consequence of high malarial infection rates. In contrast, both the Plasmodium parasite and the Anopheles vector are absent from all of Remote Oceania other than the Reef–Santa Cruz group of the southeastern Solomons and Vanuatu. (Indeed, in some Remote Oceanic island groups such as Hawai‘i, mosquitoes were entirely absent prior to European contact.) This disjunct distribution of malaria probably had major consequences for the demographic history of human populations in the two regions.

Near Oceania is also replete with other kinds of infectious and parasitic microorganisms, many of which are little studied and not well documented in either the anthropological or the medical literature. Epidemiological surveys of several human groups in the Solomon Islands, however, reported frequently high infection rates for such parasites as hookworm (nearly 45 percent of some populations) and intestinal parasites like Entamoeba coli and other species (causing amoebic dysentery), Ascaris, Trichuris, Iodamoeba, Giardia, and Dientamoeba (Damon 1974; Friedlaender and Page 1987). Brown (1978:60–61) refers to the “high incidence of enteric and respiratory disease” among the Highlands peoples of New Guinea, as well as the presence of various “parasite and worm infections.” The pervasiveness of these diseases in Near Oceania presumably lowered the overall resistance levels of indigenous populations, thereby increasing the probability of mortality from malaria or other fatal diseases, especially among high-risk individuals such as infants and pregnant women. While we must be cautious about overgeneralizing, the distribution of diseases in the pre-European Pacific islands was far from uniform. Certainly, the concentration and persistence of disease-causing microorganisms in Near Oceania had serious consequences for long-term human history.





ISLAND ECOSYSTEMS


Just as island biotas differ in fundamental ways from those of continents, so island ecosystems have their peculiar characteristics. The brilliant Pacific botanist Raymond Fosberg (1963b) drew attention to some of the key aspects of island ecosystems that are relevant to our understanding of the role of humans in adapting to—and frequently changing—Pacific environments. Fosberg delineated two features as “basic to insularity”: isolation and limited size. Naturally, both of these are relative and become more significant as one moves from the larger and less isolated archipelagoes of Near Oceania into the vastness of the central and eastern Pacific. Fosberg cataloged some of the consequences of isolation and limited size: “limitation in, or even absence of certain other resources; limitation in organic diversity; reduced inter-species competition; protection from outside competition and consequent preservation of archaic, bizarre, or possibly ill-adapted forms; tendency toward climatic equability; extreme vulnerability, or tendency toward great instability when isolation is broken down; and tendency toward rapid increase in entropy when change has set in” (1963b:5). The last two of these are of particular relevance to the human settlement and occupation of the Pacific islands, for insular ecosystems were more vulnerable than others to disturbance at human hands. As Fosberg put it, “Perhaps the thing that most distinguishes islands, at least oceanic islands . . . is their extreme vulnerability, or susceptibility, to disturbance” (1963a:559).

Oceanic ecosystems have never been static or changeless; natural and cultural processes are always at work to foster change. Short-term natural processes such as ENSO events trigger episodes of drought or high cyclone frequency. In various parts of the Pacific, volcanic eruptions have had dramatic consequences for human populations. In Melanesia, explosive eruptions have occurred within the period of human occupation in New Guinea, New Britain, the Manus Islands, and Vanuatu.17 Some of these volcanic events blanketed vast areas with scalding ash and pyroclastic debris, killing many people and making human habitation impossible. The Kuwae eruption in the mid-fifteenth century A.D. blew apart an originally larger island, creating a vast caldera between what are now Epi and Tongoa Islands in Vanuatu. This eruption, which is recorded in Vanuatu oral traditions, probably had some effect on world climate; it is recorded in ash falls from the South Pole dating to A.D. 1452 (Robin, Monzier, and Eissen 1994). About three hundred years ago, Long Island off the northeast coast of New Guinea similarly exploded in a cataclysmic eruption, spewing 10 cubic kilo-meters of tephra westward across the interior of New Guinea, blanketing about 80,000 square kilometers with an average depth of 1.5 centimeters of airfall tephra; this momentous geological event is likewise recorded in oral traditions throughout the region (Blong 1982). In the Hawaiian Islands, volcanism is rarely explosive but no less significant for the Polynesian inhabitants, since large portions of Hawai‘i Island (and some parts of Maui) have been extensively covered with lava flows since the time of initial human arrival (Somers 1991).

Longer-term dynamism comes from such changes as the subsidence and formation of atolls, tectonic uplift of makatea islands, and eustatically fluctuating sea levels. Sea level change, in particular, has had important consequences for human settlement of the Pacific. During the Pleistocene, sea levels were periodically as much as 100 to 120 meters lower than at present, facilitating movement of people into Near Oceania (see chap. 3). Sea levels rose rapidly during the early Holocene, and throughout much of the central Pacific they reached a level 1 to 1.5 meters higher than at present by about 4,000 to 6,000 years ago. Archaeological sites dating to this time period are frequently found on older beach terraces, sometimes a considerable distance inland from present coastlines (see chap. 4).





HUMANS AND ISLAND SOCIOECOSYSTEMS


It has not always been realized that Pacific islanders played an active role in modifying and molding their island worlds. Eighteenth-century voyagers to the Pacific helped to shape European notions of the “noble savage,” l’homme naturel, living in a state of harmony with nature. Arriving at Tahiti in April 1768, the French navigator Louis de Bougainville thought himself “transported into the garden of Eden” (Smith 1985:42). As natural history studies gained sophistication in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, the role of humans in causing disturbance to island ecosystems became increasingly evident, but often this was attributed to changes that occurred after the arrival of Western peoples, who introduced a host of new plants and animals, many of them competitive and destructive (e.g., goats, sheep, and cattle), as well as new land use practices (e.g., large-scale plantation agriculture). Thus for most anthropologists, until relatively recently, the disturbances caused by indigenous populations in the Pacific were thought to be minor or insignificant. The social anthropologist George P. Murdock (1963:151) summed up the prevailing view when he claimed that even the colonization of islands by Polynesian agriculturalists resulted in “little net change in organic diversity.”

This Rousseauian view was based on unquestioned assumptions, untested with direct empirical evidence of environmental changes before and after the colonization of islands by indigenous Pacific populations. Evidence for pre-European anthropogenic change began to accumulate in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when archaeologists working in the Pacific started to shift their research agendas away from an emphasis on origins and cultural sequences to investigate ecological relationships between indigenous human populations and island environments. Working collaboratively with palynologists, avian paleontologists, geomorphologists, and other natural scientists, Pacific archaeologists have amassed a substantial body of data demonstrating that the nonindustrialized peoples of the Pacific often exerted major impacts on island ecosystems.18 This should not come as a surprise, given the inherent fragility or vulnerability of oceanic ecosystems (as Fosberg had pointed out), combined with the high human population densities observed on many Pacific islands and the intensive modes of land use practiced by Pacific peoples.

But the interactions between island populations and their environments was hardly a one-way street. Even as human activities inevitably changed island landscapes and the fauna and flora that inhabited them, people themselves had to adapt their technologies, their economies, and their social and political organization. To use current phrasing, the natural and human systems on islands were “dynamically coupled.” Barton et al. (2004) proposed the term socioecosystems for landscapes shaped by these dynamically linked human-natural processes.

Human-induced changes on islands often commenced with the first arrival of would-be colonists, for these people usually were equipped to establish permanent settlements, which meant that they were carrying with them crop plants and domestic animals. Islanders also moved other organisms about, such as tree snails of the genus Partula, which were prized for making necklaces (Ó Foighil, Lee, and Slapcinsky 2011). Moreover, voyaging canoes carried inadvertent “stowaways,” such as the Pacific rat (Rattus exulans), whose bones show up in virtually every Pacific settlement site.19 Rats, whose numbers soon increased in the absence of predators, probably had significant impacts on ground-nesting land bird and seabird populations. In addition to the rat, we have evidence for the accidental transport of geckos and skinks, certain species of garden snails (e.g., Lamellaxis gracilis), and various weeds (e.g., Ludwigia octivalvis).

The modification of island ecosystems began in earnest as native forests were cleared to make way for root-crop gardens and for orchards of tree crops. Oceanic peoples widely practice swidden, or shifting, cultivation, in which patches of forest are cut, allowed to dry, and burned prior to planting.20 Under conditions of low population density it is possible for forests to regenerate, but more often than not the cleared land is gardened repeatedly and a highly transformed, “second-growth” vegetation replaces the original rainforest. On certain kinds of substrate, where soils are thin or poorly developed (as on many tropical islands), the removal of forest and repeated burning can seriously degrade a landscape, which then comes to be dominated by fire-resistant (pyrophytic) grasses or ferns. Other landscapes were, over time, thoroughly reworked by Pacific agriculturalists into highly intensive forms of land use. Examples of such “landesque capital-intensive” agriculture are the Highlands valleys of New Guinea, the vast irrigated systems and yam fields of New Caledonia, the extensive hill and ridge terraces of Palau, and the stone-faced taro pondfields of Hawaiian valleys.21

Evidence for vegetation changes resulting from such land use practices as shifting cultivation has now been obtained from many Pacific islands, primarily through the analysis of pollen grains (palynology) in sediment cores. Pollen sequences from sites in New Guinea, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji, Yap, the Cook Islands, the Society Islands, New Zealand, Rapa Nui, and Hawai‘i all demonstrate major vegetation changes that can be linked to human land use actions.22 Charcoal recovered from archaeological excavations offers an alternative source of information regarding human use of woody plants and changes in forest composition through time (Dotte-Sarout et al. 2013; Huebert and Allen 2016).

Rapa Nui presents a dramatic case of human-induced vegetation change, for this entire island was essentially deforested through hundreds of years of intensive land use.23 Botanists, who once thought that the island was a natural oceanic grassland “steppe,” now realize that it was originally covered in forest dominated by an extinct species of giant palm (Paschalococos disperta), closely related to the Chilean oil palm. The Mangareva Islands are another instance where the natural forest was virtually eliminated, replaced with a limited range of Polynesian-introduced tree crops (including coconut and breadfruit) on the coastal plains and in the narrow valleys, while on the steeper slopes and hills fire-resistant ferns and grasses came to dominate (Kirch, Molle, et al. 2015).

The causes of deforestation on Pacific islands may not have been limited to forest clearance alone (Rolett and Diamond 2004). On volcanic islands more than a few million years old (e.g., Mangaia and Mangareva), rock-derived nutrients such as phosphorus become seriously depleted, hindering forest regeneration (Vitousek 2002). On these older islands, large colonies of nesting seabirds probably provided a key source of nutrients, through deposition of their guano, prior to human arrival. Decimation of these seabird populations, however, eliminated the nutrient flows. Analysis of stable isotopes in the bones of Pacific rats excavated from Mangareva archaeological sites shows steep declines in nitrogen levels over time (Swift, Miller, and Kirch 2016), almost certainly a consequence of major reductions in seabird colonies.

Forest clearance had additional consequences on certain islands, due to the exposure of steep hill slopes and accelerated erosion. Matthew Spriggs (1986) has shown that on the island of Aneityum in Vanuatu, a process of valley-bottom infilling and extension of the coastal plains began about two thousand years ago, as a direct result of forest clearance and increased erosion rates on the interior hills and ridges. Similar sequences have been suggested for Futuna, Mo‘orea, and O‘ahu Islands; the extensive iron sand dunes at the mouth of the great Sigatoka Valley on Viti Levu (Fiji) probably also owe their existence to land clearance and increased erosion rates in the interior. In addition to sedimentation in valleys and on coastal plains, increased sediment loads in streams and rivers may have had effects on inshore marine ecology. In the Koné region of New Caledonia, for example, changes in the kinds of marine mollusks available through time are linked to changes in littoral substrates or turbidity resulting from erosion (Miller 1997). Vast tracts on both North and South Islands, New Zealand, were converted from temperate forest to open terrain, typically dominated by Pteridium ferns, as a consequence of human ignited fires (Bussell 1988; Elliot et al. 1995; McGlone 1983; McGlone and Wilmshurst 1999).

Human impacts on islands were by no means limited to forest clearance and the development of savannas, or to erosion and valley infilling. Dramatic evidence for human impacts on island ecosystems comes from the record of bird bones excavated from Pacific archaeological sites. David Steadman (2006) has analyzed assemblages of bird bones from sites on many islands across tropical Polynesia; his data are reinforced by other studies for Hawai‘i and New Zealand. Case after case demonstrates that the Pacific islands before the advent of humans had a far richer bird fauna than that historically documented, with large populations of certain kinds of birds occupying oceanic islands at the time of initial human arrival.24 On Rapa Nui, for example, at least twenty-five species of seabirds and possibly six species of land birds were originally present, yet only one seabird species survives (barely) on the island today; there are no endemic or indigenous land birds at all (Steadman 2006; Steadman, Vargas, and Cristino 1994). In New Caledonia, a large mound-building megapode (Sylviornis neocaledoniae) went extinct soon after the arrival of humans in the mid–second millennium B.C., as did other endemic fauna, including a terrestrial crocodile (fig 2.7).




FIGURE 2.7 Reconstruction of the extinct giant ground-dwelling megapode Sylviornis neocaledoniae and the extinct terrestrial crocodile Mekosuchus inexpectatus, both from the island of New Caledonia. (After Sand 1995.)





In 1989 and 1991, together with Steadman, I excavated a large rockshelter site on Mangaia Island, called Tangatatau (Kirch, ed., 2017). From the well-stratified ashy midden layers of this rockshelter, which had been occupied by Mangaians repeatedly for about eight centuries, we recovered a remarkable collection of bird bones, revealing a typical story of the reduction, local extirpation, and extinction of a large part of the island’s original avifauna.25 Among the bird species that were once present on the island, and which had been hunted, eaten, and their remains discarded in the shelter, were rails, crakes, a gallinule, a sandpiper, fruit doves, pigeons, and lorikeets. In all, a prehuman avifauna consisting of at least nineteen land bird species and twelve seabird species was reduced during the period of Polynesian occupation to five land bird and six seabird species, many of these today holding on to a most precarious and endangered existence.

For no island group in the Pacific is the record of bird extinctions more dramatic than New Zealand. On these large subtropical to temperate islands, a marvelous array of birdlife had evolved prior to the arrival of the first Polynesian settlers. Most distinctive were several genera and species of flightless birds known collectively by their Maori name, moa.26 The biggest of these moa, Dinornis giganteus, stood almost 4 meters tall, probably the largest bird ever known to exist. However, New Zealand wildlife was not limited to the moa, and at least thirty-seven native bird species and subspecies went extinct during the period of Polynesian settlement (Anderson 1997:280). By the time of European arrival, all eleven moa species had been completely eliminated. The larger moa were extensively hunted for food, especially on South Island, where some archaeological middens were so packed full of moa bones that they were commercially mined in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century in order to make bone meal fertilizer! Equally important as a cause of the decimation of New Zealand’s birdlife was forest clearance for gardening and clearance by fire for hunting, which has been estimated to have drastically reduced the native forest cover of the two main islands (McGlone 1983, 1989).27

Recognizing that indigenous Pacific peoples were responsible for significant changes to their island environments—as documented by mounting archaeological and paleoecological evidence—is not to single them out as environmentally insensitive eco-vandals. In my view, Pacific islanders were not more or less environmentally conscious than most other human groups; it is only our outdated Rousseauian notions that make it appear so. Pacific peoples certainly have a fond and often deeply emotional attachment to their island homes, and their songs and traditions frequently speak to the great beauty of these islands. It is also the case that traditional Oceanic societies practiced certain kinds of conservation practices and land management strategies, but these were generally aimed at conservation of resources for future use.28 Yet the simple truth is that human populations everywhere live not in some idealized “state of nature” but in various forms of exploitative relationships with their environments. The impact of low-density hunters and gatherers may be relatively slight, but the cumulative effects of high-density agricultural peoples on their landscapes are inescapably significant. Pacific islanders did much—with the “neolithic” technology at their disposal—to create viable subsistence economies on the islands they settled and to manage their resources wisely. That they were not always successful is a lesson that humanity today has yet to fully hear or heed.





THREE


Sahul and the Prehistory of “Old” Melanesia



The Pleistocene evidence may open a window onto two different forms of the creation of time and space. The initial forms of colonisation created a spatially extensive and mobile world, in which the definition of groups and social identity would have been quite unlike anything we know of today. Spatially extensive and temporally long lasting, this world was then transformed in the glacial maximum to a way of life with different spatial and temporal rhythms.

C. GOSDEN, “Understanding the Settlement

of Pacific Islands in the Pleistocene” (1993)





ON THE HUON PENINSULA of northern Papua New Guinea, nature played the role of architect on a grand scale: a staircase created for a Wagnerian race of giants rises steeply from the Bismarck Sea, climbing hundreds of meters into the sky. The relentless tectonic engine of plate-margin uplift raised a succession of coral reefs over the past 140,000 years. Each emerged reef appears like an abrupt step; thanks to U/Th dating, these stages can be accurately dated. In the 1980s, Les Groube of the University of Papua New Guinea explored this giant staircase. At a place called Bobongara he found numbers of stone implements called “waisted blades” on a reef terrace dated between 61,000 and 52,000 years ago. Actually, these tools are more like crude axes, sometimes made from large river cobbles that had been split in half and further modified by flaking at their “waists,” possibly to tie or haft them to wooden handles (fig. 3.1). Volcanic ash from a layer associated with some of these implements gave a thermoluminescence date of 60,000 to 40,000 years ago, cross-checking well with the U/Th dates on the reef terrace.1 This makes the Huon site among the oldest manifestations of a human presence in the Australia–New Guinea region.




FIGURE 3.1 Waisted axes from the Huon Peninsula. (After Groube 1986.)





On our way to a third field season in the Mussau Islands in 1988, my graduate students and I visited Groube at his University of PNG laboratory at Boroko, just outside the capital, Port Moresby. One of the more colorful characters of Pacific archaeology, Les greeted us in rumpled clothes and sandals and proceeded to pull out several wooden trays filled with the Bobongara waisted blades while his lab mascot—a wiry tabby cat—rolled about on a heap of potsherds on the lab workbench. There is an indescribable thrill to holding in one’s own hands a stone tool manufactured more than forty millennia ago (something on the order of 1,600 to 2,000 human generations). Later, at the university staff club, Les told us of his speculative interpretation of the Huon tools. Not being edge-ground, these implements could not have functioned as proper axes, but given their weight they might have been effective at smashing down forest undergrowth or for ring-barking trees. According to Groube (1989:297), these tools “would be suitable also for some forms of more direct food procurement [such as] stages of sago production, for splitting cycad trunks, or for thinning Pandanus stands to promote ripening of the fruit.” Groube observed that various natural food plants, such as “aerial yams, local bananas, swamp taro,” and others (many of which were domesticated in Near Oceania), would thrive in areas where the dense rainforest canopy had been disturbed or opened up (299). In short, the waisted axes of the Huon Peninsula may represent early stages in an evolutionary progression from forest foraging, through intermediate stages of food-plant promotion and forest management, leading ultimately to plant domestication and true gardening (301–2).2

The Bobongara finds are among the critical and exciting evidence pertaining to the first great era in Pacific prehistory: the colonization of Australia, New Guinea, and the adjacent islands of Near Oceania by early humans and the development—by generations of their descendants—of diverse cultures, languages, and biological populations. Although Pleistocene and early Holocene people did not venture into the Pacific beyond the southeastern end of the Solomons, this period is of greatest significance for regional prehistory. For it was here, in the area we call Near Oceania, that several fundamental cultural developments took place, especially the domestication of tropical crop plants and the origination of an oceanic mode of horticulture.





THE PLEISTOCENE GEOGRAPHY OF SAHUL AND NEAR OCEANIA


The great nineteenth-century naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace explored the Malay archipelago (what we today call Indonesia), drawing the attention of biogeographers to fundamental biological differences between the Australia–New Guinea region and Southeast Asia. Notable among such differences is the concentration of marsupials in the Australia–New Guinea region, with a concomitant near-total absence of other forms of terrestrial mammals. The boundary between the Asian and Australian faunal regions consists of a zone of smaller islands bearing the name “Wallacea,” in honor of the great co-discoverer of the theory of natural selection.3

Wallace (1895:9) speculated that the key to understanding this disjunct faunal distribution would lie in “now-submerged lands, uniting islands to continents.” He was right in that, with plate tectonic theory and knowledge of the geological evolution of the former Gondwanaland supercontinent, we now comprehend the long-term mechanisms for the patterns Wallace recognized. The deep-time history of Gondwanaland need not detain us, except to note that the Australian Plate separated from the rest about 40 million years ago; its archaic biota thenceforth evolved on a separate trajectory. By the Pleistocene era the Australian Plate was in its modern position, separated from the Asian mainland by deep oceanic trenches in the Wallacean region.

New Guinea, Tasmania, and some smaller islands near Australia appear on a modern map as separate lands, yet were we to siphon off the world’s oceans to a depth of only 130 meters below sea level, all these would suddenly be joined to the greater Australian landmass. This, indeed, is just what happened at several intervals during the Pleistocene, the siphon being the uptake of oceanic waters into the vast ice sheets that repeatedly covered the world’s high latitudes. A map of the Australian region during such a glacial maximum, such as map 5, reveals the modern Arafura Sea between New Guinea and Australia as an extensive plain (with the Gulf of Carpentaria as a lake at various times) linking New Guinea to Australia, and similarly, the Bass Strait as a land bridge to Tasmania. Biogeographers call this enlarged “Greater Australian” continent Sahul (Ballard 1993). On the western side of Wallacea, the vast Sunda shelf was also exposed as dry land, greatly expanding the Southeast Asian mainland. Nonetheless, the islands of Wallacea (primarily Sulawesi, Ambon, Ceram, Halmahera, and the Lesser Sundas) always remained an island world, imposing a barrier to the dispersal of terrestrial vertebrates, including early hominids.




MAP 5 Approximate configuration of Sunda and Sahul during the Pleistocene. (Adapted from Spriggs 1997.)





To the north and east of New Guinea, the islands of Near Oceania (the Bismarcks and Solomons) were likewise never connected to Sahul by dry land, for deepwater trenches also separate these from the Australian Plate. This isolation gave rise to marked biogeographic patterns, for the diversity of marsupials, birds, and other life forms drops off rapidly as one leaves New Guinea and moves progressively through the Bismarck and Solomon Archipelagoes.

The Pleistocene sequence of rising and falling global sea levels—linked to climatic cycles of glacial retreat and expanse—and the succession of transgressing and regressing shorelines that resulted from sea level change have been reconstructed by analyzing deep-sea cores combined with geomorphological study and radiometric dating of coastlines, such as that of the Huon Peninsula.4 A sea level curve for the past 140,000 years indicates that the periods of greatest fall were at about 140,000 and 18,000 years ago (fig. 3.2). Between these two maximal periods, when the oceans dropped more than 100 meters, were less pronounced cycles with drops of 20 to 60 meters.




FIGURE 3.2 Fluctuating sea levels characterized the Pacific world during the late Pleistocene and Holocene. HP, Huon Peninsula curve; NJS, temperature-corrected isotopic sea level curve. (After Chappell 1993.)





One might anticipate that the peopling of Sahul would correlate with one of these phases of greatest sea level lowering and maximal exposure of dry land. The archaeological evidence is against this, however, and it seems that human colonization of this region was most likely effected during the interval between 60,000 and 40,000 years ago. But the key point is that even when the oceans were at their lowest levels, there were always significant open-water gaps between the islands of Wallacea; therefore the arrival of humans into Sahul necessitated over-water transport. This was also the case with the expansion of humans beyond New Guinea into the archipelagoes of Near Oceania. Herein lies one of the most exciting and intriguing aspects of Pacific prehistory: we are likely dealing with the earliest purposive voyaging in the history of humankind.





INITIAL HUMAN ARRIVAL IN SAHUL AND NEAR OCEANIA


More than one hundred Pleistocene sites have been discovered in Sahul (including Australia) and Near Oceania (Smith and Sharp 1993). According to a recent review by O’Connell and Allen (2015:74; see also Allen and O’Connell 2014), there are “26 archaeological sites or localities that offer relatively reliable, relatively well-published evidence of an anatomically modern human presence in Sahul, Wallacea and the Bismarck Archipelago by about 40,000 years ago.” Although the possibility of earlier sites cannot be entirely dismissed, after a thorough review of the radiocarbon dates from these sites, O’Connell and Allen (2015: 80) conclude that the ancestors of the modern Sahul indigenous peoples arrived on the continent around 47,000 year ago. These early sites are not concentrated in the western parts of Sahul near the likely corridors of human entrée but are distributed over virtually the entire geographic expanse of Sahul and Near Oceania, from Northern Australia to the Murray-Darling basin, from southern Tasmania to New Guinea, and even up to New Ireland. This geographic spread demonstrates that having crossed the sea barriers separating Sahul from Asia for more than 40 million years, Homo sapiens populations rapidly spread out over these new lands. Moreover, these early modern humans were able to move into, exploit, and permanently inhabit a remarkable range of habitats, from the tundralike high latitudes of Tasmania through the deserts of Australia to the humid tropical rainforests of New Guinea and the Bismarcks.5

Within Near Oceania itself, several sites on New Guinea, New Britain, and New Ireland date to the early stage of human entry into Sahul (table 3.1). In addition to Bobongara on the Huon Peninsula, open sites in the Ivane Valley in the eastern Highlands have been dated to between 38,000 and 41,000 years old (Ford 2011; Summerhayes, Leavesley et al. 2010). Colonists would have had to cross open water from New Guinea to reach New Britain, where sites at Kupona na Dari on the Willaumez Peninsula (Torrence et al. 2004) and at Yombon in the island’s interior (Pavlides 1993) indicate human activities over this large island by around 40,000 years ago. And on New Ireland, two rockshelters, Buang Merabak and Matemkupkum, have initial occupations dated to between roughly 38,000 and 40,000 years ago.


TABLE 3.1

Selected Pleistocene Sites of Near Oceaniaa





Synthesizing the available archaeological evidence for the initial colonization of Sahul and Near Oceania, O’Connell and Allen write:

Wallacea and Sahul were deliberately colonised by highly mobile, Southeast Asian–derived human populations practising economies based on the exploitation of intermediate and high ranked plant and animal foods. Migration was provoked by demographic pressure on Sunda and facilitated by the relatively favourable climatic and environmental conditions. . . . Despite their inherent capacity for growth, Sahul populations subsequently remained surprisingly small and spatially concentrated in persistent ‘sweet’ spots, enjoying occasional growth spurts and expanding geographically, but always retreating to the same or similar refuges, mainly along steeply sloping coastlines, in better-watered parts of the continental interior and on the islands of the Bismarck Archipelago. . . . Patterns in archaeological site structure and assemblage composition point to high mobility in each of the regions occupied. With limited exceptions, diets and technologies remained narrow and relatively simple for many millennia. Historically known patterns in economy, technology and demography emerged only in the Holocene. (2012:12)





PLEISTOCENE VOYAGING IN NEAR OCEANIA


When Pleistocene-age dates for Australia began to be reported, first from Mulvaney’s 1962 excavations at Kenniff Cave and then increasingly as the pace of archaeological research picked up, the probability of purposive voyaging—or of the watercraft to enable such voyaging—seemed unlikely for this remote time period. Some speculated that Sahul was settled by accident, with a few early humans (or even a single pregnant female!) drifting on floating logs over the Wallacean waterways. However, the mounting (if indirect) evidence that these early colonists were capable of transporting themselves over open ocean for distances of 200 or more kilometers has forced a rethinking of the possibilities of Pleistocene-era watercraft. On reflection, this seems only appropriate, for the history of humankind in the Pacific must above all be a history of voyaging.

The evidence is entirely circumstantial, for no remains of rafts, dugouts, bark-boats, or the like have been preserved. What then compels us to think that the colonists of Sahul and Near Oceania did not merely drift into their new lands by accident? The weight of statistical probability. If only a single open-water crossing were required, one could invoke Occam’s razor, or similar principles of parsimony, to argue that over the course of thousands of human generations, surely a few individuals would have made it by chance alone over the Wallacean divide into Sahul. But this was not the case, for—regardless of whether the early migrants followed a northerly route into Sahul via Sulawesi, Peleng, and Sula on into what is now Irian Jaya (or other variants thereof) or a southerly route via the intervisible chain of islands stretching from Java through Bali, Lombok, Sumbawa, Flores, Alor, and Timor onto the Arafura Shelf—not just one, but repeated water crossings of 10 to 100 kilometers would have been required.

Such successive and successful crossings, over admittedly largely intervisible gaps between islands, got humans onto the Sahul continent. But the evidence does not end there. In 1981 Jim Specht reported the first Pleistocene-age radiocarbon date from New Britain, an island never connected to Sahul by dry land (Specht, Lilley, and Normu 1981). A few years later, the Lapita Homeland Project uncovered firm evidence for the settlement of both New Britain and New Ireland at least 35,000 years ago. New Britain is visible from New Guinea, and New Ireland from the former, so one might again argue that an adventurous Sahulian saw opportunity on the horizon, set himself or herself adrift on a handy log, and hoped for the best. But then came the evidence from Kilu, a rockshelter on Buka Island in the Solomons with a first occupation dated to 29,000 years ago, which is not visible from New Britain.6 Suddenly the probability that people had gotten all the way out to the Solomons by a remarkable sequence of merely accidental “voyages” seemed quite low indeed. And then the clincher: an Australian National University team dug into the 4-meter depths of Pamwak rockshelter on Manus (fig. 3.3) and found that the Admiralty Islands too had been settled deep in the Pleistocene, by at least 13,000 years ago if not considerably before.7 Matthew Spriggs, one of the excavators of Pamwak, puts the implications of this discovery this way:

The settlement of Manus may represent a real threshold in voyaging ability as it is the only island settled in the Pleistocene beyond the range of one-way intervisibility. Voyaging to Manus involved a blind crossing of some 60–90 km in a 200–230-km voyage, when no land would have been visible whether coming from the north coast of Sahul or New Hanover at the northern end of New Ireland. These would have been tense hours or days on board that first voyage and the name of the Pleistocene Columbus who led this crew will never be known. The target arcs for Manus are 15° from New Hanover, 17° from Mussau, and 28° from New Guinea. (1997:29)




FIGURE 3.3 Archaeological excavation in progress in the Pamwak rockshelter, Manus Island. (Photo courtesy Wal Ambrose.)





Once it was certain that Manus and Buka had been colonized in the Pleistocene, who could doubt that the first Sahulians were people comfortable around and on the water? And why not? Fish bones and shellfish remains from the Matenkupkum site on New Ireland are possibly the earliest evidence of marine resource exploitation anywhere in the world.8

While we can be confident that early Pacific peoples were capable of open-ocean voyages, gaining real understanding of their vessels or their methods is another matter. Here we remain wholly in the realm of theory, although the carefully crafted studies of Geoff Irwin (1991, 1992, 1993) allow us to glimpse some of the possibilities. Irwin views the region extending from the Bismarck Archipelago through the main Solomon Islands as a great “voyaging nursery,” sheltered from the tropical cyclone belts that lie to the north and south, and one in which “seasonal and predictable changes” in wind and current direction encouraged early voyagers to experiment with round-trip expeditions exploring and exploiting these mostly intervisible islands. An intrepid navigator might anticipate the prevailing winds and currents of the southern summer that would take his or her social group from a departure point in New Britain or New Ireland down through the Solomons chain as far as San Cristobal or Santa Anna and plan for an equally predictable return voyage in the southern winter. If such a group were at home exploiting the rich shellfish and fish of inshore waters, as well as the more limited marsupial, avian, and other resources of the rainforest, the trip might well be repeated on a regular basis. But here we come to the limits of theoretical speculation regarding this period, so remote from the world of known ethnography; a brief reimmersion into the “facts” of prehistory is appropriate.





NEAR OCEANIA DURING THE PLEISTOCENE


Archaeological knowledge of New Guinea, the Bismarcks, and the Solomons during the Pleistocene remains limited, with only about twenty-four documented sites (table 3.1).9 Map 6 shows the geographical locations of some of the key site locations. Unfortunately, not all of these sites have yet been thoroughly excavated or reported. With the exception of Bobongara on the Huon terraces, most of the New Guinea sites are located in the interior, mountainous Highlands. The dearth of coastal or lowland sites stems from the difficulty of finding exposed sedimentary contexts dating to the Pleistocene, due both to post-Pleistocene drowning of coastlines and to the modern prevalence of extensive mangrove swamps around the littoral perimeter of New Guinea. Thus the uplifted terraces of the Huon Peninsula provide a uniquely preserved example of Pleistocene shorelines. The other sites listed in table 3.1 are located on the large islands of New Britain and New Ireland, and on more distant Manus and Buka. Since these two clusters of Pleistocene sites—in the New Guinea Highlands and on the Melanesian islands—occur in radically different environmental settings, I discuss them separately, beginning with the Highlands.




MAP 6 Near Oceania, showing the distribution of important Pleistocene and early Holocene archaeological sites.





THE NEW GUINEA HIGHLANDSEuropean exploration of the Highlands, which began in earnest only in the mid-twentieth century, stunned the anthropological world by revealing the unsuspected presence of at least a million people, living a more or less “neolithic” existence. Thanks to the work of several archaeologists—especially Jack Golson, Mary-Jane Mountain, and J. Peter White—we know that people have been present in these intermontane valleys for more than thirty millennia.10 Moreover, the very landscape of the Highlands, with its extensive grasslands, has been radically shaped by the cumulative actions of many human generations. Still, we have little more than a glimpse through the window of time into the lives and cultures of these early mountain dwellers, because direct evidence is limited to materials from a handful of excavated and published sites, such as the Kafiavana (fig. 3.4) and Nombe rockshelters, the open site of Kosipe, and other localities in the Ivane Valley of the eastern Highlands. The material culture found in these sites consists largely of amorphous stone flake and core tools and, from some sites such as Kosipe and Nombe, waisted blades, or axes, similar to those from Bobongara (fig. 3.5). Remains of animal bones and terrestrial gastropods collected for food provide limited evidence of diet and economy. Additional evidence for environmental change comes from pollen sequences obtained from several Highlands swamp sites.11




FIGURE 3.4 The Kafiavana rockshelter in the New Guinea Highlands, after excavation by J. Peter White. The site spans the terminal Pleistocene to Holocene periods. (Photo courtesy J. P. White.)





FIGURE 3.5 Stone tools from the Pleistocene occupation levels at Kosipe, New Guinea Highlands. (After White and O’Connell 1982.)





The climate of the higher-altitude interior of New Guinea fluctuated during the late Pleistocene, in response to worldwide climatic changes. Between about 35,000 and 30,000 years ago, alpine shrub or grassland vegetation expanded considerably and persisted until perhaps 15,000 years ago, when the tree line began to rise significantly in response to climatic warming. The pollen cores suggest, however, that climatic factors were not the only influence on vegetation patterns; there is good evidence that humans were igniting fires, and thus encouraging the spread of grasslands, certainly as early as 21,000 years ago and possibly even before 30,000 years ago (Fairbairn, Hope, and Summerhayes 2006). The evidence for anthropogenic burning lies in significant increases in carbonized particles in the cores, as described by Haberle (1993:117), who refers to a “sustained anthropogenic disturbance episode” lasting from 21,000 to 8,000 years ago. The cultural reasons behind such human burning can only be guessed, but they might include the facilitation of hunting or forest clearance in order to encourage the growth and spread of economically useful plants, such as Pandanus. I have already mentioned Groube’s hypothesis that early people in New Guinea were actively managing plant resources, using waisted axes to open up forest canopy by trimming or ring-barking. Such cobble tools have been found at a number of the Highland sites, including Kosipe, which has been interpreted as “a seasonal site for the exploitation of mountain pandanus nuts and perhaps hunting of some of the upper forest megafaunal browsers” (Mountain 1991a:515). From sites in the Ivane Valley, Summerhayes, Leavesley, et al. (2010) recovered charred Pandanus nutshells, and starch grains extracted from the surfaces of stone tools were identified to the yam genus Dioscorea. From these data, they argue that “people occupied a New Guinea valley at 2000 m above sea level soon after their arrival in Sahul. As the climate cooled, the optimal growing conditions for yams would have occurred at lower altitudes. This may indicate that Pandanus was the most important staple at this time and help explain the late Pleistocene abandonment of the highland sites” (2010:81). Denham argues that “highly mobile groups” may have permanently occupied the Highlands during the Pleistocene, hunting and exploiting plant resources such as Pandanus: “Since first colonisation, people engaged in environmental manipulation to enhance resource availability as well as extensive hunting and foraging activities, including the targeting of relatively resource-diverse gaps in the forest and along ecotones, such as those along wetland margins and riparian corridors in addition to the high altitude grassland/forest boundary” (2007:46).

The New Guinea Highlands during the Pleistocene were home to a remarkable range of marsupial megafauna, all of which were extinct by the early Holocene (Sutton et al. 2009). Several species of large, herbivorous marsupials have been identified from archaeological contexts, belonging to the Diprotodontidae and Macropodidae families. According to Tim Flannery (1994:132), these animals were “browsers of the forest and subalpine grassland,” and although smaller than their Australian megafaunal counterparts, they offered substantial food packages to Highlands hunters. The largest of the extinct diprotodons weighed up to 200 kilograms and “was similar in form to the marsupial rhinoceros of Australia.” There was also the “Huli beast” (Hulitherium tomassetii), “shaped much like a panda, with the same high forehead and forward-facing eyes,” weighing about 100 kilograms. Bones of Protemnodon, Dendrolagus, Thylogale, Diprotodon, and various other genera have been recovered from Highlands sites such as Nombe; these are likely to have been among the prey targeted by early hunters. To what extent hunting was responsible for the extinction of these great beasts is debatable, although the combination of hunting and human-induced fires resulting in grassland expansion is likely to have been important, in conjunction with climatic changes. In her detailed faunal analysis of Nombe, Mountain (1983, 1991a, 1991b) demonstrated important changes in the faunal evidence for hunting over the 20,000 years that this Highlands rockshelter was inhabited. In particular, at the end of the Pleistocene and into the early Holocene, there are significant increases in the numbers of smaller and medium-sized prey, such as birds, rodents, and fruit bats.

One yearns to know more about this fascinating and lengthy period in the early history of Near Oceania, but the evidence is still thin. We are left with a hazy picture of peoples adept at inhabiting a relatively cold, interior region despite their minimal technology, insofar as that technology is reflected in the surviving record of stone and bone. They may have hunted a range of now-extinct large marsupials, as well as other smaller fauna including birds, fruit bats, rodents, frogs, and dasyurids. By at least 21,000 years ago and quite likely even earlier, they were also burning the vegetation of their valleys, and possibly practicing forms of forest clearance and plant management (especially of Pandanus) aided by their waisted, split-cobble axes. Such early experiments in plant manipulation and management would lead, by the early Holocene, to the actual domestication of certain plants.


THE BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO AND THE SOLOMONSIn 1985, the international Lapita Homeland Project sent several teams of archaeologists into the field throughout the Bismarck Archipelago, in a coordinated effort to resolve some refractory issues surrounding the Lapita cultural complex (see chap. 4).12 Prior to the LHP, relatively little was known of the prehistory of this vast arc of islands: a handful of Lapita ceramic sites had been identified, the Balof 1 rockshelter on New Ireland had been dated to ca. 6000 B.C., and a single cave site called Misisil in the interior of New Britain had yielded a radiocarbon date that barely qualified as terminal Pleistocene. A year later, at the conclusion of the main field season of the LHP, Melanesian prehistory had to be rewritten. Excavations at four rockshelters on New Ireland (Balof 2, Buang Merabak, Matenkupkum, and Panakiwuk) had produced sequences well back into the Pleistocene, with the oldest from Matenkupkum coming in at 35,410 ± 430 years B.P. (J. Allen and Gosden 1996:186). In the next few years, continued work by LHP members and others resulted in new Pleistocene finds at Matenbek on New Ireland, Yombon and Kupona na Dari on New Britain, Kilu on Buka, and Pamwak on Manus (see table 3.1). The evidence from these sites allows us to rough out the framework of a prehistoric sequence for the Bismarcks-Solomons region from 40,000 to 10,000 years ago.13

Allen and Gosden (1996:185) opined that “crossing the Vitiaz Strait may have been a quick paddle for humans but it was a significant journey for Pacific history,” for the Bismarcks were the first true Pacific islands to be colonized, beyond the shifting continental margins of Sahul. Establishing a viable existence on these islands required certain adaptations, given a steep decline in biogeographic richness as one moves off Sahul into the island world. The numbers of plant and animal resources available to Pleistocene hunters and gatherers would have been noticeably reduced, as illustrated by a comparison of the modern faunas of New Guinea and New Britain (table 3.2). Moreover, the islands lacked the now-extinct marsupial megafauna that had been available both in Australia and in the New Guinea Highlands during the period of initial human arrival.


TABLE 3.2

Comparison of the Modern Faunas of New Guinea and New Britain (Numbers of Species)a





From the finds at the early coastally situated rockshelters such as Buang Merabak and Matenkupkum, it appeared at first that this adaptation to a true island existence might have been facilitated by a focus on the exploitation of littoral food resources (C. Gosden and Robertson 1991:43), in a kind of “strandlooping” (coastal hunting-and-gathering) economic mode. However, several of the rockshelters now close to the coast were, at the time of their Pleistocene occupation, situated a considerable distance inland, a consequence of lowered sea level. Moreover, the discovery of chert flaking floors dated to 35,000 to 33,000 years ago at Yombon, in the interior of New Britain (35 kilometers from the coast), dispels any simple notion that the Pleistocene colonists of the Bismarcks confined their activities to the shoreline. As Pavlides (2004:106) writes, “The new evidence from Yombon indicates from the time of their earliest arrival in New Britain, people located and harnessed key rainforest resources.” These findings challenge “current theories about both the pre-agricultural utilization of this habitat, and the capability of Pleistocene humans to successfully harness and colonize the tropical rainforest zone.”

In fact, the faunal evidence from the oldest Pleistocene sites in the Bismarcks suggests that people exploited a wide range of both terrestrial and inshore marine resources. Among the terrestrial animals represented in the faunal assemblages from these sites are a number of bird species (including some now extinct; Steadman, White, and Allen 1999), lizards, snakes, rats, and fruit bats. The coastal marine fauna includes a few fishbones and a limited range of shellfish, such as the large reef gastropod Turbo argyrostoma. These marine foods could have been taken with simple methods, such as spearing, hand groping, and collecting.

A more open question concerns the kinds of plant foods that might have provided some balance to the diet of these early settlers. No hard-shelled nuts or other plant remains (including pollen) have yet been recovered from sites or levels predating 20,000 years ago. However, microscopic starch grains and raphides identified on stone tools from the Kilu site have been tentatively identified to the aroid genus Colocasia (of which the domesticated taro, C. esculenta, is a member), raising the possibility of wild tuber gathering.14 Not only Colocasia but also the aroid genera Cyrtosperma and Alocasia may have been naturally present in the Bismarcks, along with the sago palm (Metroxylon spp.); Spriggs (1997:34) suggests that these could have been “possible staples . . . encountered by the first colonists.”

The lithic technology of the pre-20,000 B.P. period in the Bismarcks consists almost exclusively of simple flake and core tools of expedient or amorphous shapes (fig. 3.6). These were made of locally available rocks, primarily fine-grained igneous or sedimentary types. There is no indication at this earliest period of the transport or exchange of stone resources over long distances.




FIGURE 3.6 Stone tools from the Matenkupkum rockshelter on New Ireland. (After J. Allen et al. 1989.)





Summarizing the period from about 35,000 to 20,000 years ago in the Bismarcks, Allen and Gosden (1996:187) wrote that the “meagre data imply population numbers large enough to create archaeological sites, but beyond this the sites themselves suggest only sporadic occupation. . . . We envisage this settlement to have involved small groups of mobile, broad-spectrum foragers.” Gosden (1993:133) has called this a “world without any ethnographic parallel,” emphasizing the challenge it poses to archaeological understanding. At about 20,000 to 18,000 years ago, however, things began to change in a manner that is detectable in the archaeological record of the Bismarcks. Two changes have captured the attention of prehistorians: (1) the appearance of bones of the gray cuscus, an arboreal marsupial (Phalanger orientalis); and (2) the presence of obsidian, deriving from the Mopir and Talasea sources on New Britain.15 The cuscus bones are important because this species is not indigenous to the Bismarcks and is likely to have been purposively introduced by humans into the islands from its original habitat on New Guinea.16 Matthew Leavesley, who studied the faunal remains of cuscus from the Buang Merabak rockshelter site, opines that “the introduction of the cuscus dramatically increased the number of individual animals and therefore expanded the island-based protein resource available to prehistoric hunters” (2005:218). The obsidian, in a similar manner, indicates that people were no longer simply using local stone resources, but were transporting—directly or through trade or exchange networks—a valuable lithic material over distances of up to 350 kilometers (e.g., from Talasea to Matenbek, as measured by straight-line distance). Gosden (1993:133) points to the significance of these two changes: “instead of moving people to resources, resources were [now] moved to people,” perhaps signaling a shift in the way that islanders viewed their environment. Certainly, the possibility that watercraft and sailing abilities had undergone further development seems likely. It may be at around this time that the more remote Manus Islands were discovered, as the oldest levels in Pamwak (fig. 3.3) date to some time earlier than 11,000 B.C.

Other aspects of subsistence do not look much different in the period after 20,000 years ago from that preceding. A mix of fish, shellfish, bats, rats, reptiles, and the newly imported Phalanger fills out the roster of faunal remains.17 There may have been some evolution in material culture, however, for in addition to the imported obsidian there are hints at shell working. Some worked shell pieces from Matenbek appear to be blanks or roughouts for simple fishhooks.

Although the Pleistocene archaeological record for island Melanesia remains only scantily documented, remarkable strides continue to be made in our knowledge of regional prehistory. The millennia that passed between the initial voyage across the Vitiaz Strait from New Guinea to New Britain and the end of the Pleistocene were not without significant cultural changes. Filling out the archaeological record of change remains a challenge lying ahead.





CULTURAL INNOVATIONS OF THE EARLY HOLOCENE


If the pace of cultural change during the Pleistocene was so gradual as to be barely perceptible in the archaeological record, things began to change rapidly during the early Holocene, both in the New Guinea Highlands and in the coastal lowlands and islands. It is an open question whether the developments in these two regions proceeded independently or whether they were influenced by exchanges of ideas (and human genes?). Likewise, prehistorians debate the extent of cultural and biological contacts between the peoples of Near Oceania and those of island Southeast Asia during the early to mid-Holocene. Near Oceania was certainly not hermetically sealed; the appearance of the pig in New Guinea—by around 3000 B.C. if not somewhat earlier—suggests that contacts between Near Oceania and Southeast Asia were active. For the most part, however, the cultural developments of this period were indigenous to Near Oceania.

Plant geographers and ethnobotanists have long recognized that New Guinea and the adjacent Bismarcks are the probable place of origin for many tropical crops, because the wild ancestors of these plants are restricted in their natural distributions to this region.18 Among these domesticates are the Australimusa bananas (which have an upright inflorescence and reddish-orange fruit), sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum), a tuber crop (Pueraria lobata), the ti plant (Cordyline fruticosum), probably breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis), a number of fruit- and nut-bearing trees (including the Canarium almond, Tahitian chestnut [Inocarpus fagiferus], Barringtonia spp., and Terminalia), as well as several aroids, notably taro (Colocasia esculenta), “elephant-ear” taro (Alocasia macrorrhiza), and giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis). Colocasia, a major staple throughout Oceania, was once thought to be a Southeast Asian domesticate, but cytological research suggests multiple loci of domestication, one in the New Guinea region.

Archaeological discoveries in Near Oceania increasingly lend support to this ethnobotanical interpretation of a Near Oceanic center of early plant domestication and horticultural development.19 These include macroscopic archaeobotanical remains of crop plants such as carbonized tubers (parenchyma), as well as microbotanical remains such as pollen and phytoliths; the physical remains of field cultivation systems across landscapes provides another line of evidence. Moreover, radiocarbon dates make it increasingly certain that these developments began in the early Holocene (if not indeed in the late Pleistocene), as early as similar steps toward agriculture elsewhere in the Old World. As Denham (2011) stresses, these steps toward domestication and horticulture certainly preceded the dispersal of the Austronesian-speaking peoples. Thus the peoples of Near Oceania can rightly lay claim to their own act in the great play that is the cultural development of modern Homo sapiens: the independent invention within Near Oceania of a horticultural mode of production.


THE NEW GUINEA HIGHLANDSWhen Western explorers first entered the Highland valleys before World War II, they were amazed not only at the density of indigenous populations but also at the marvelous ditched and raised-bed gardens that frequently covered hectare upon hectare of originally swampy valley bottoms.20 The first evidence for the antiquity and development of such Highlands cultivation systems began to emerge in the late 1960s, when Jack Golson began his long-term work at the now-famous Kuk plantation site in the Wahgi Valley near Mount Hagen.21 At an elevation of 1,550 meters above sea level, the swampy floor of the Wahgi was being drained for a tea plantation in 1970 when Jim Allen observed a stratigraphic succession of often intercut older drains in the sidewalls of the new plantation drainage canals. When subjected to detailed stratigraphic analysis, combined with extensive areal excavations by Golson, these drains and associated features revealed a remarkable sequence of horticultural use of the Wahgi Valley floor over a period of some 9,000 years.

Golson defined six phases of increasingly complex and intensive use of the Wahgi Valley floor at Kuk. Phase 1, dated to 9,000 years ago, was described as a series of “gutters, hollows, pits and stakeholes” of human origin sealed beneath a telltale wedge of “grey clay” that blanketed the entire valley floor (Golson 1977:613). Golson interpreted these features as reflecting some kind of simple horticultural function, while the gray clay testified to a period of accelerated erosion on the surrounding valley flanks. The evidence of erosion, in conjunction with pollen analyses, was regarded as a signal of heightened levels of human disturbance, arguably from some form of incipient horticulture. In a detailed reanalysis of the Phase 1 “palaeosurface” features, however, Denham (2004:56) argued that the archaeological evidence did not support “claims of an agricultural origin” for these features. In Kuk phase 2 (6000–5500 B.P.), the evidence for active manipulation of the swampy valley floor becomes incontrovertible, with at least four large channels up to 2 meters wide and deep that were cut across the swamp to drain it (fig. 3.7). In phase 2, there are now also circular clay islands about 1 meter in diameter separated by intersecting channels (Golson 1977; Denham et al. 2003; Denham, Haberle, and Lentfer 2004). Such islands would have formed excellent raised beds for the cultivation of Colocasia taro, and possibly also Australimusa bananas or Pueraria tubers. By phase 3 (4000–2500 B.P.), the primitive raised beds of phase 2 had been replaced by true reticulate drainage systems that are undeniably the antecedents of the complex drainage systems ultimately witnessed by twentieth-century anthropologists.




FIGURE 3.7 Archaeological section across a large drainage ditch (the dark infilled feature to the man’s right), dating to about 1500 B.C., at the Kuk site in the New Guinea Highlands. (Photo courtesy Jack Golson.)





A study of the pollen archive preserved in the Kuk swamp has provided additional information on the paleoenvironmental changes that occurred from the late Pleistocene into the Holocene (Haberle et al. 2012; see also Haberle 2003). During the period that the “gray clay” was being deposited over the phase 1 features, grasslands and ferns increased at the expense of forest, which was being periodically burned. The most dramatic change, however, occurred around 7,000 years ago, when there was “a rapid loss of forest associated with increased and persistent burning and a permanent open grass-sedge swampland” was established (Haberle et al. 2012:135). Combined with the archaeological evidence from the Kuk swamp, this “vegetation history represents the establishment of an agricultural landscape in the Upper Wahgi Valley by the mid-Holocene” (Haberle et al. 2012:135).

Douglas Yen (1991) originally hypothesized that Colocasia taro, which seems to have been domesticated independently in Near Oceania, was a key crop plant cultivated in the Kuk swamp. More recent research supports this hypothesis. Fullagar et al. (2006) extracted microfossil starch granules from stone tools at Kuk, demonstrating that both Colocasia taro and Dioscorea yams were being processed at the site by 10,200 years ago, although these may have been wild, rather than domesticated, forms of these plants. By about 7,000 years ago, “the processing of taro, yam and other plants indicates that they are likely to have been integrated into cultivation practices on the wetland edge” (Fullagar et al. 2006:595). In addition, banana (Musa) phytoliths are also present throughout the sequence at Kuk, although deliberate planting of bananas may not have occurred until phase 2 (Denham et al. 2003). Future research should expand our understanding of the kinds of social and economic transformations that surely accompanied these early steps in the development of indigenous agriculture in the Highland valleys.22


NEW GUINEA LOWLANDS AND THE ISLANDSA number of sites ranging geographically from the northern New Guinea lowlands to the main Solomon Islands have yielded cultural materials dating to the early to mid-Holocene period (table 3.3). Some of these are the upper levels of sites also producing Pleistocene-age assemblages, such as Pamwak and Panakiwuk rockshelters; others are strictly of Holocene age. Space precludes a site-by-site discussion; here I will focus on two key aspects emerging from this period: evidence for horticulture and for advances in material culture, especially shell tool technology.23


TABLE 3.3

Selected Sites of the Early to Mid-Holocene Period in Lowland New Guinea and Near Oceania





At present, portions of the north coast of New Guinea and the entire floor of the great Sepik-Ramu River drainages extending some 100 or more kilometers inland are dominated by dense, seasonally flooded swamps with Nipa palms, sago, mangrove, and other plants. Traveling by canoe or launch up the meandering Sepik today and viewing kilometer after kilometer of rank, saltwater-crocodile infested swampland, one would think such an environment virtually primeval. Yet a mere 6,000 years ago, the lower Sepik-Ramu was not swamp at all but a vast inland sea or lagoon rich in marine and brackish water resources, enticing people to settle along its shifting shorelines. Archaeologists Pam Swadling and Nick Araho of the Papua New Guinea National Museum, aided by the geochronologist John Chappell, determined the extent of this mid-Holocene embayment and its subsequent history of alluvial infilling, locating several settlement sites that help to fill in the picture of early economic developments in Near Oceania.24

The Dongan site, a marine shell midden now more than 15 kilometers inland on a tributary of the Ramu River, was once situated on or near the shores of the ancient inland sea. A test trench excavated into the eroding riverbank revealed occupation deposits radiocarbon dated between 5,690 and 5,830 years ago, and the waterlogged, anaerobic sediments contained well-preserved plant remains. Among the fruits, seeds, and nuts found by Swadling and Araho and their team are many of the tree crops so important in indigenous Melanesian subsistence: the Canarium almond, coconut (Cocos nucifera), candlenut (Aleurites), Pangium edule, Pometia pinnata, Pandanus, and several others (Swadling, Araho, and Ivuyo 1991).25 This is the strongest evidence yet that the peoples of lowland Near Oceania had already taken significant steps toward the domestication of tree crops by the middle Holocene.26

From various sites in the Bismarcks and Solomons, evidence for indigenous arboriculture based on domesticated Canarium almond and other tree crops is also slowly accumulating. At Apalo on Kumbun Island off the southern New Britain coast, another waterlogged deposit dated to 2300–2100 B.C. (and thus predating the Lapita period) also yielded remains of Canarium indicum, coconut, Aleurites, Terminalia, Pandanus, Pangium, Spondias, and Dracontomelon (Spriggs 1997:79). On Nissan Island between the Bismarck and Solomon Archipelagoes, Spriggs recovered Canarium, Pangium, Sterculia, Metroxylon, Burckella, Dracontomelon, and Terminalia remains from levels of two rockshelters dated to the early second millennium B.C., again predating Lapita ceramic horizons. And in two aceramic rockshelter sites on Guadalcanal Island in the main Solomons, Roe (1992, 1993) found Canarium nut charcoal and anvil stones used to crack open the hard-shelled nuts.

All of this evidence mounts a fairly strong case for indigenous development of arboriculture, or orchard-based tree cropping, prior to the arrival of Austronesian-speaking peoples in Near Oceania. Whether taro or other root crops such as Pueraria were also cultivated at this period in the Near Oceanic lowlands and islands is not yet established. But tree crops such as Canarium, which is today distributed from Wallacea to Vanuatu, could have provided an important basis for subsistence. Moreover, Canarium and various other economically important trees would later become an essential component of subsistence economies not only in Near Oceania but also in the farther-flung islands of Remote Oceania.27

Other key cultural developments of the early to mid-Holocene period took place in material culture. Both Pam Swadling and Paul Gorecki have claimed that pottery was present in mid-Holocene contexts in their sites in the Ramu River region and on the Vanimo coast of New Guinea, respectively. There are unresolved questions, however, regarding the stratigraphic contexts and dating of these collections.28 Gaffney, Ford, and Summerhayes (2015) have shown that potsherds originally excavated by Sue Bulmer at the Wañelek site on the fringe of the central Highlands of New Guinea, and radiocarbon dated to around 3,000 years ago, were both imported from the coast and locally manufactured. As the authors noted, “Whether the pottery, and the knowledge of its production, came with the original Austronesian speakers or was traded and copied will require further research from a wider area” (12). On present evidence, however, the existence of any pre-Lapita ceramic assemblages in Near Oceania seems unlikely.

What is clear is that in the islands there was a mid-Holocene advance in shell-working technology, a critical adaptation to an insular and marine way of living. The sample of shell artifacts is still limited, but enough examples have been recovered from Pamwak (where there are edge-ground adzes or axes of Tridacna shell), Lolmo Cave (where the assemblage includes fishhooks and armbands of Trochus shell and a Conus shell disc), Lebang Halika (Tridacna shell adzes, polished shell knives, and a Trochus fishhook), and the Guadalcanal rockshelters (Trochus armbands and cut shell) to dispel any doubts about the development of a complex shell-working technology. Both adzes and fishhooks are among the objects manufactured from shell; these are two of the most fundamental implements in the classic oceanic tool kit: the adz for forest clearance and woodworking of all kinds, the fishhook for exploitation of sea resources beyond what can be simply speared or gathered in the inshore shallows.

Of noneconomic aspects of life among these mid-Holocene occupants of Near Oceania we as yet know almost nothing. A few shell beads and armbands hint at a bodily aesthetic, but what of their forms of kinship address and social organization, their mythologies and cosmologies—all the things that make us uniquely human? The archaeological record is, for the present, mute, and I imagine that it will take the work of several more generations of archaeologists and historical anthropologists to even begin to draw back this veil of time. Matthew Spriggs (1977:66) sums up the situation elegantly: “That the early Island Melanesians had an aesthetic sense is obvious. They were after all modern humans like us. If they painted on cave walls the tropical climate would long ago have removed all traces. Other canvases for their art were likely to have been even more ephemeral. They had no fired pots to paint or incise. Their songs have gone.”





A PARADOX AND A HYPOTHESIS


Before leaving the topic of “Old” Melanesia, I must draw attention to an apparent paradox of great consequence for the human history of Oceania. Given that humans have been in Near Oceania for at least 40,000 years and that this is a region of large and resource-rich islands, why did human populations never reach high density levels (except in the New Guinea Highlands), especially after the development of food-producing subsistence strategies in the early Holocene? The natural reproductive capacity of humans to increase rapidly has been understood at least since Thomas Malthus’s classic essay; even at the relatively low reproductive rates known for hunting and gathering populations (perhaps 0.1 percent per year; Hassan 1981:200–203) a sizable population could easily have arisen in Near Oceania. Presumably the carrying capacity of the rainforests and littoral zones was not sufficient to support this kind of density with only a hunting and gathering economy, but then why did populations not suddenly burgeon after the domestication of various indigenous tree and root crops, as they did elsewhere in the world following the invention and adoption of agriculture? There is no evidence in the archaeological record for Near Oceania that human populations were ever very numerous or densely settled; if anything, the archaeological landscape of the early to mid-Holocene is particularly sparse. Moreover, as we will see in later chapters, this situation contrasts strikingly with that in the Remote Oceanic islands, in which large and dense populations arose repeatedly on islands within only 1,000 to 2,500 years. The demographic history of Near Oceania (except the New Guinea Highlands) thus stands apart from that of Remote Oceania.

This paradox is best explained by the pernicious effects of malaria, combined with other infectious diseases, as Groube (1993a) suggested (see also Golson 1972b:29). The several species of malaria parasite (Plasmodium), along with their Anopheles mosquito vectors, are geographically confined to Near Oceania, along with the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands and Vanuatu. At least two species of Plasmodium (P. vivax and P. malariae) probably accompanied the first human colonizers of Sahul, or followed shortly thereafter, given the presence of genetic mutations in the blood systems of Near Oceanic populations that have been selected for because they confer partial resistance to the disease.29 The more debilitating and frequently fatal P. falciparum may have entered the region later. Groube notes how endemic malaria (which is persistent, in contrast to epidemic diseases such as measles) might have regulated human population numbers, primarily through the continual mortality of individuals before they could reach reproductive age. Even with a case mortality of just 0.5 percent due to P. vivax, endemic malaria could have the effect of an 80 percent reduction in the rate of natural increase in the population (Groube 1993a:175–76). In addition to causing high mortality among infants and children, malaria can lodge in the placenta of a pregnant woman, “causing anaemia, foetal loss and death” (Groube 1993a:174). Endemic malaria combined with other debilitating infectious diseases in adults can also lead to higher overall mortality rates.

In sum, Groube presents a hypothesis of fundamental significance in the long-term human history of Near Oceania. He writes, “It is pointless to speculate too closely on unknown demographic variables in such a remote period. What is clear is that the natural increase rate appears to have been very low throughout the prehistory of Sundaland. Infections of vivax and malariae offer one possible check upon natural increase which could have been in operation from an early stage in the prehistory of the region” (1993a:177). The single obvious exception in Near Oceania is the New Guinea Highlands, where a large and dense population did develop in the fertile valleys, supported by intensive systems of food production. But the Highlands are generally above the altitude for Anopheles mosquitoes to survive, and malaria is either absent or has relatively little effect in the Highlands valleys (Brown 1978:60; Cattani 1992:304); they are the exception that proves the rule.





FOUR


Lapita and the Austronesian Expansion



We can propose for the S.W. Pacific some early community of culture linking New Caledonia, Tonga, and Samoa, antedating the “Melanesian” cultures of the first and ancestral to the historic Western Polynesian cultures of the other two. This community is expressed in terms of variants of the same pottery tradition.

J. GOLSON, “Report on New Zealand, Western

Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Fiji” (1961)





THE REDDISH-GOLD LIGHT OF EARLY morning streamed laterally through motionless coconut palms as the Eloaua village workmen and I headed up the narrow path toward our excavation at a place called Talepakemalai, in the Mussau Islands of Papua New Guinea. The sky was cloudless; I mused silently that it would be another scorching day in the breezeless excavation pit under a baking equatorial sun. Arriving at the site—a waterlogged ancient village of stilt houses that had once fronted the lagoon at Talepakemalai—we took up our places, some at the screening platforms, some at the hand-operated pumps, others excavating. Bauwa Sagila, an alert and careful excavator, began work in one of the one-meter grid units while I took up my place in the adjacent square.

The work progressed steadily through the morning, sweat running in little rivulets off our brows as the tropical sun broke above the cool shade of the surrounding jungle. The point of my trowel revealed a cluster of reddish potsherds, still lying where they had settled in the shallow lagoon bed after being tossed off the platform of a stilt house in this ancient village. Next to me, I could see that Bauwa had uncovered a small, elongate object of heavy bone, which he had left carefully in place. After I had taken the object’s coordinates, Bauwa gingerly lifted the little piece of white bone, about 4 inches long, turning it over as he set it in his palm. Simultaneously, we caught our breath, two pairs of eyes riveted on the exquisitely carved, stylized human face that stared back emotionless, sunlight illuminating it for the first time since it had found its watery grave more than three thousand years earlier (fig. 4.1). Neither of us spoke; then Bauwa muttered in Melanesian pidgin, “God belong ol Lapita!”




FIGURE 4.1 The carved anthropomorphic image, in porpoise bone, from the Talepakemalai Lapita site in Mussau. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





The little “Lapita god” from Talepakemalai was just one of many discoveries we made in the course of three seasons of excavations in Mussau, part of the 1985 Lapita Homeland Project. Lapita sites first attracted the attention of Pacific archaeologists in the 1950s and 1960s, when it became evident that this cultural complex spanned the ethnographic divide between Melanesia and Polynesia. Synthesizing the emerging picture of Lapita in 1961, Jack Golson proposed that this ceramic complex represented a “community of culture” ancestral to many of the later societies of both Melanesia and Polynesia. More than a half century after Golson made this radical proposal, the significance of Lapita for Pacific prehistory is more evident than ever. This chapter summarizes what we have learned of Lapita and the role that the “Lapita peoples” played in the colonization of Remote Oceania.1 First, however, let us review the Oceanic world on the eve of the Lapita phenomenon, between about 4,000 and 3,300 years ago.





THE HUMAN LANDSCAPE OF NEAR OCEANIA AT 2000–1300 B.C.


The first great epoch in the colonization of the Pacific commenced with Pleistocene human movements across Wallacea into Sahul and—seemingly without pause—to the Bismarck and Solomon Archipelagoes beyond. After 30,000 years, perhaps longer, of local cultural development and change, especially in the early to mid-Holocene, a complex human landscape had emerged on the face of Near Oceania. We know far less than we would like to about this island world prior to the advent of the Lapita cultural complex in the late second millennium B.C., but some patterns are discernible.

Human populations in Near Oceania were still small and scattered at this time, for the sites they left seem not to be numerous, nor are they extensive. There are no large permanent villages predating Lapita, and indeed most of our information comes from small, intermittently occupied rockshelters.2 We might infer that individual social groups—whatever their kinship patterns and social organization—were also small, perhaps a few related families. Moreover, there was a settlement pattern of strong inland orientation, as opposed to a coastal focus, even though coastal resources were regularly exploited.

By the mid-Holocene the peoples who occupied island Near Oceania had developed new subsistence strategies that—while continuing to incorporate older patterns of hunting marsupials, reptiles, birds, and other small game, as well collecting forest products—included food production. Edible roots, tubers, fruit, and nuts had been brought under human manipulation and control, domesticated by planting, tending, and selecting. Among these were some bananas (e.g., the Australimusa types with upright inflorescences) and aroids (taro, Colocasia, and, in the coastal lowlands, Alocasia and Cyrtosperma), sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum), and a range of tree crops (fig. 4.2). These changes in subsistence were accompanied by new technologies in the working of shell and stone (as seen in the development of obsidian tools in sites near the main obsidian sources on New Britain). Adzes of Tridacna shell were probably used to clear small gardens, and fishhooks of Trochus shell allowed people to catch an expanded range of fish from reefs and inshore waters. The new shell technology was also applied to aesthetics, in the creation of beads and arm rings.




FIGURE 4.2 The large aroid plant Alocasia macrorrhiza is one of many tropical crops domesticated in Near Oceania. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Communication between the varied populations that occupied the islands of Near Oceania is evidenced by the movement of obsidian over considerable distances. Nonetheless, this was hardly a uniform human landscape culturally, linguistically, or biologically. Over 30,000 or more years, the indigenous peoples of Near Oceania had diversified. Linguistically, the Near Oceanic region is one of the most complicated in the world. Not including the Austronesian languages, New Guinea and island Near Oceania encompass at least twelve distinct language families, with hundreds of mutually unintelligible languages.3 These are loosely grouped under the rubric Non-Austronesian or Papuan languages, today concentrated in the interior of New Guinea, with scattered enclaves in the Bismarcks and Solomons (see map 2). Such great linguistic diversity arose primarily through the long time depth of human occupation in Near Oceania, combined with geographic factors favoring isolation. As the linguist William Foley, an expert on Papuan languages, puts it, “Fifty thousand years is a very long time, and if the present-day populations in the Sahul region descend directly from this period, then the extreme linguistic diversity found there, especially in New Guinea, finds a ready historical explanation” (1986:270).

The human landscape of Near Oceania was just as diverse biologically and culturally. Biological anthropologists have long noted the heterogeneity of Melanesian peoples; while some of the diversity seen among the region’s modern populations derives from gene flow with later Austronesian-speaking peoples, it is evident that the Near Oceanic populations already displayed substantial genetic variation by 2000 B.C. (Attenborough and Alpers, eds., 1992; Friedlaender 1987, 2007; Friedlaender et al. 2008; Kayser et al. 2000, 2006). Some populations within island Near Oceania had been in place long enough to evolve genetic changes that were adaptive in a malarious environment, such as the α-thalassemia deletion.4

Just prior to the cultural events that turned this world of “Old” Melanesia upside down in the middle of the second millennium B.C., a natural disaster devastated parts of the Bismarck Archipelago. Mount Witori in New Britain erupted violently around 3,300 years ago (the W-K2 eruption), in what Matthew Spriggs (1997:76) describes as “one of the most massive eruptions to occur anywhere on earth during the time that modern humans have existed on the planet” (see also Machida et al. 1996). The explosion, probably heard hundreds of kilometers away, left a vast expanse of New Britain blanketed in scalding, suffocating volcanic ash. At Mopir, locally exploited obsidian sources were buried under meters of ashfall. The full impact of the Witori eruption on the human landscape of the Bismarcks has yet to be determined archaeologically, but it was doubtless a pivotal event in regional prehistory.

Research in West New Britain, especially by Robin Torrence and colleagues (e.g., Rath and Torrence 2003; Torrence and Boyd 1997; Torrence and Summerhayes 1997; Torrence 2001, 2012, 2016; Torrence, Specht, and Fullagar 1990; Torrence et al. 2000), has demonstrated significant cultural discontinuities associated with the Witori eruption. The W-K2 tephra that blanketed much of New Britain (it reached as far as Lolmo Cave in the Arawe Islands, off the south coast) provides a distinct stratigraphic marker, now estimated by means of Bayesian calibration of radiocarbon dates from a number of sites on New Britain at 1530–1200 B.C. (Petrie and Torrence 2008). Below the W-K2 tephra, in the period dated to about 5,900 to 3,600 years ago, there are distinctive, well-worked obsidian tools with stemmed bases, presumably for hafting. Such stemmed tools are absent above the W-K2 tephra, with a shift to a more expedient lithic technology involving unretouched flakes. (This shift in lithic technology is evident as well at the Yombon site in the interior of New Britain.) There are also changes in land use and settlement patterns, with evidence for high mobility before the W-K2 eruption, followed by more localized settlement, associated with coastal locations. Obsidian exchange, minimal prior to the W-K2 event, became substantial (and specialized) after it (Torrence and Summerhayes 1997:82). Notably, there are no ceramics in the archaeological contexts buried by the W-K2 tephra, whereas after this event the distinctive style of dentate-stamped pottery known as Lapita soon made its appearance in the Bismarck Archipelago. Commenting on the possible implications of the W-K2 eruption, Petrie and Torrence (2008:740) write, “The possible contemporaneity between W-K2, the loss of obsidian stemmed tools and the beginning of Lapita pottery in the Willaumez Peninsula raises the issue of whether this natural disaster was responsible for the wide-scale extinction of particular cultural groups. The catastrophe might have facilitated the arrival of immigrants bearing a new ceramic style and possibly a different language.”





THE ADVENT OF LAPITA


On New Britain following the W-K2 eruption of Mount Witori, the “character and speed of [cultural] change is much more radical than before; for example, pottery is introduced, stone tool types disappear, and the whole pattern of artefact discard is transformed” (Torrence et al. 2000:241). In fact, these sweeping changes are evident across the entire Bismarck Archipelago, marked by the appearance of sites ranging from the Mussau Islands, Anir, and Ambitle to New Ireland to the Arawe group off the southern coast of New Britain and on to Nissan and Buka in the northern Solomons (table 4.1). Several characteristics render these sites wholly different from anything preceding them in Near Oceania. First, they were good-sized settlements (in the case of Talepakemalai, up to 80 or more hectares in extent), situated on coastal beach terraces or built out over the shallow lagoons as clusters of stilt houses. Second, their occupants made, traded, and used large quantities of earthenware ceramics, of both plain and decorated varieties. The plain ware consisted largely of red-slipped globular jars with out-turned rims, while the decorated pottery was covered in finely executed motifs, many representing human faces, made by pressing small toothed, or dentate, stamps into the leather-hard clay before firing (fig. 4.3). Third, the economic base had expanded from that of the preceding phase in Near Oceania, utilizing all of the tree crops that had been domesticated in this region but also including pigs, dogs, and chickens. Fishing strategies were sophisticated, and employed a variety of fishhooks, including trolling lures for taking tuna and other pelagic fish on the open ocean.




FIGURE 4.3 The dentate-stamped method of decoration is characteristic of Lapita pottery. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





The Lapita people were seafarers, venturing beyond coastal waters to move pottery, obsidian, chert, oven stones, and other materials between their communities, frequently over hundreds of kilometers. Their material culture included adzes in stone as well as shell, flake tools of obsidian and chert, shell scrapers and peeling knives, anvil stones, polishers, slingstones, shell rings of a variety of sizes and shapes, bracelet units, arm rings, beads, discs, needles, awls, tattooing chisels, fishhooks, net sinkers, and other items. Archaeologists combine the sites exhibiting these characteristics—but most particularly the dentate-stamped pottery—under the rubric Lapita, the toponym of a site on the Foué Peninsula of New Caledonia, where Edward W. Gifford and his student Richard Shutler Jr. discovered such pottery in 1952 (Sand and Kirch 2002; see chap. 1).

The distinctive Lapita pottery establishes these sites as having been occupied by closely related groups of people sharing a common set of artistic rules and conventions. Radiocarbon dates5 indicate that the earliest Lapita sites in Near Oceania appear suddenly in the second half of the second millennium B.C. Although some initial radiocarbon dates from sites in the Bismarck Archipelago suggested that Lapita might begin as early as 1500 B.C. (Kirch 1997a:58), more extensive dating using AMS and focusing on plant materials rather than shell (which has uncertainty issues because of the marine reservoir effect) now puts the appearance of Lapita in this region at between 1410 and 1290 B.C. (Denham, Ramsey, and Specht 2012).

Despite earlier proposals that the Lapita phenomenon in Near Oceania represents an indigenous, in situ development,6 the conclusion has become inescapable for most archaeologists that Lapita sites represent something entirely new and intrusive on the cultural landscape of this island world. To understand Lapita origins, however, we must broaden our geographic purview and assess developments to the west of Near Oceania, among the islands of Southeast Asia during the period between about 5,000 and 3,300 years ago.





LAPITA ORIGINS: THE AUSTRONESIAN EXPANSION


Until about 3000 B.C., the island world of Southeast Asia exhibited a human landscape not dissimilar from that of adjacent Near Oceania, and indeed there is no reason to think that there was any impermeable boundary between them. Around the beginning of the third millennium B.C., however, ceramic-making peoples are first evidenced on the large island of Taiwan off the Chinese mainland, and over the course of the next 1,500 years, their descendants or closely related peoples expanded south and southeast, toward Near Oceania (Bellwood 2017; Hung and Carson 2014; Kirch 1995; Spriggs 2007a, 2011). On Taiwan, the earliest ceramic phase is the Dabenkeng (or Ta-p’en-k’eng) culture, succeeded around 2200 B.C. by several other cultures, some of which made not only ceramics and ground-stone adzes but also fishhooks and ornaments of Trochus and other shells. These people appear to have been horticulturalists, although more work must be done on the reconstruction of their subsistence economy. Around the same time, similar assemblages appear in the Philippines, such as in the Cagayan Valley (e.g., the Lal-lo and Magapit sites) in northern Luzon. Around 2200 B.C., ceramic-using peoples expanded their distribution to Sulawesi and adjacent islands. At the Uattamdi rockshelter site on Kayoa Island west of Halmahera, red-slipped pottery nearly identical to Lapita plain ware, associated with a rich diversity of stone and shell artifacts, has been dated to about 1300 to 800 B.C. (Bellwood 1998, 2017; Bellwood et al. 1998).

Peter Bellwood, who has synthesized the modern archaeological record of island Southeast Asia,7 argues that this progression of ceramic-using cultures from Taiwan through the Philippines and into the equatorial islands of Southeast Asia represents the expansion of a particular ethnolinguistic group of people: the Austronesian speakers (see also Carson et al. 2013). The Austronesian language family is the most widely dispersed in the world, ranging from Madagascar to Rapa Nui (Easter Island), but its speakers are concentrated in island Southeast Asia and in the islands of the Pacific. Bellwood’s contention that the archaeological record of an expansion of pottery-using, agricultural peoples out of Taiwan into island Southeast Asia and the Pacific correlates with the spread of the Austronesian speakers is shared not only by other archaeologists (e.g., Kirch 1997a; Spriggs 1995, 1997) but also by historical linguists who have studied the deep history of the Austronesian language family.8 The archaeological model and its dating are remarkably consistent with the internal relationships or subgrouping (the “family tree”)9 of the Austronesian languages as worked out through careful linguistic comparisons (fig. 4.4).




FIGURE 4.4 The subgrouping, or “family tree,” for the Austronesian languages. (After Kirch 1997a.)





The linguist Robert Blust, who has made a life’s work of studying the historical relationships of the Austronesian languages and reconstructing their early culture history, summarizes the implications of the Austronesian family tree as follows:

In accordance with the “principle of least moves” it follows that the most likely homeland of the AN [Austronesian] languages was on Taiwan, although it was not necessarily confined to that island. From Taiwan population expansion into the northern Philippines had begun by perhaps 5500 B.P. . . . From the southern Philippines the linguistic evidence strongly suggests a split into two major population segments, a western one ancestral to Western [Malayo-Polynesian], and an eastern one ancestral to Central [Malayo-Polynesian]. [Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian] in turn evidently split into two streams, Central [Malayo-Polynesian] (CMP) moving southward into the central Moluccas and then westward through the Lesser Sunda Islands, and Eastern MP (EMP) moving eastward around the north coast of New Guinea and then splitting into South Halmahera–West New Guinea (SHWNG) and Oceanic (OC), the latter moving on into the insular Pacific, where it is associated archaeologically with the Lapita culture complex in the Bismarck Archipelago by at least 3600 B.P. (1995:458)

Archaeological evidence reveals that these expanding Austronesian peoples were horticulturalists, had domestic animals, knew how to fish the inshore and offshore waters, made red-slipped earthenware pottery, used ground-stone and shell adzes, and had a variety of other tools and implements in shell. Lexical reconstructions of the Proto Austronesian (PAN) and Proto Malayo-Polynesian vocabularies by linguists such as Blust have greatly expanded our knowledge of early Austronesian cultures. For example, these people had words for such important Indo-Pacific crops as taro (PAN *tales),10 coconut (*niuR), banana (*punti), and breadfruit (*kuluR), and for the domesticated pig (*beRek), chicken (*manuk), and dog (*asu). They lived in dwellings called *Rumaq sometimes raised on posts (*SadiRi), and their settlements included other house types, one of which (*balay) was an open-sided building used at times for public gatherings. Significantly, given their rapid expansion over island Southeast Asia, the Austronesians were canoe builders and navigators. Linguists Andrew Pawley and Medina Pawley (1994, 1998) have reconstructed early Austronesian terms for canoe parts and sailing, finding that speakers of these languages had outrigger canoes (*wagka) with planks (*papan), washstrakes (*[q]oRa), and possibly carved end-pieces (*ijug), and with platforms (*patar) between hull and outrigger (*saman). Such canoes had masts (*kayu-tuqur) and were propelled by sails (*layaR), or paddled (*pa-luja), and they were captained by expert seafarers (*tau-tasi[k]).

These seafarers—who appeared on the landscape of island Near Oceania in the mid–second millennium B.C.—were a branch of the Austronesian peoples. Their outrigger canoes must have been a novel sight in Pacific waters, and they established stilt-house settlements fringing the beaches of Mussau, New Ireland, and New Britain. Yet they were not the first inhabitants of these islands; on the beaches of Near Oceania we must envisage a meeting of cultures, between the immigrant seafarers who spoke an Austronesian language that we call Proto Oceanic and the diverse indigenous inhabitants who spoke not one but a plethora of Papuan (or Non-Austronesian) languages and who were culturally and biologically quite varied. From these encounters—no doubt tentative and cautious at first—would come a cultural synthesis that changed the face of “Old” Melanesia.

The pottery excavated from the earliest Lapita sites in the Bismarck Archipelago is undeniably related to ceramics from contemporary or slightly older sites in Halmahera, Talaud, Sulawesi, and the Philippines (Kirch 1995). Yet the Lapita decorative style itself seems to be an innovation in Near Oceania, one of several traits that allow us to define Lapita as a “cultural complex” that emerged in the Bismarck Archipelago, out of a fusion of intrusive Austronesian and indigenous Papuan cultures. From the older indigenous occupants of Near Oceania the Lapita peoples may have borrowed the concept of the earth oven; they quickly adopted the cultivation of local tree crops, including the Canarium almond. Intermarriage between the intrusive Austronesian speakers and the long-resident populations of Near Oceania is indicated by the incorporation of certain markers into the gene pool, particularly an α-thalassemia deletion that confers resistance to malaria.11 Recognizing these and other indications of interaction between the immigrant Austronesian speakers and the indigenous Papuan-language speakers of Near Oceania in the mid–second millennium B.C., Roger Green (1991b) proposed the “Triple-I” model of immediate Lapita origins. “Triple-I” stands for the terms intrusion, innovation, and integration, recognizing that all three processes played a role in the emergence of the Lapita cultural complex within the Bismarck Archipelago.12





LAPITA ACROSS TIME AND SPACE


The geographic extent of Lapita across space and the temporal span of Lapita in various archipelagoes are both more accurately defined now than when the first edition of this book was published. More than 230 sites bearing dentate-stamped pottery—the sine qua non of Lapita—have now been recorded, from the Bismarcks to Samoa (map 7).13 A selection of the most important sites in the Bismarck-Solomons region is enumerated in table 4.1.




MAP 7 The distribution of Lapita sites in Near and Remote Oceania.





TABLE 4.1

Selected Lapita Sites in the Bismarck Archipelago, New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands





Hundreds of radiocarbon dates from Lapita sites ranging geographically from the Bismarck Archipelago to Samoa and Tonga allow us to track the chronology and rate of population spread.14 The calibration and interpretation of these dates has recently been subject to adjustment through more precise AMS dating, with greater attention to marine reservoir effects (the ΔR factor) for shell samples and the use of Bayesian calibration. It is increasingly evident that Lapita represents one of the most rapid population expansions across geographic space known anywhere in world history.

Roger Green (1979b) was the first to suggest formal subdivisions within Lapita. He combined the Fijian and Tongan (and later Samoan) Lapita sites into an Eastern Lapita group and designated the Eastern Solomon Islands assemblages as Western Lapita (also including sites in Vanuatu). When later fieldwork of the Lapita Homeland Project uncovered numerous sites in the Bismarck Archipelago—again exhibiting unique regional characteristics—it became necessary to distinguish those assemblages as Far Western Lapita (Summerhayes 2000a). In my 1997 synthesis of Lapita, I proposed a Southern Lapita province for sites and their ceramic assemblages in the Loyalty Islands and New Caledonia (Kirch 1997:72–73; Sand 2000b, 2001, 2010). Most recently, David et al. (2011) have proposed a South Papuan Lapita province based on their late Lapita finds at Caution Bay.


FAR WESTERN LAPITAThe earliest dates for sites with the distinctive Lapita style of dentate-stamped decoration, from several locations in the Bismarck Archipelago, range between 1410 and 1290 B.C. (Denham, Ramsey, and Specht 2012).15 Among the most significant early Far Western Lapita sites are those of Talepakemalai in the Mussau Islands, Tamuararai on Emirau just to the east of Mussau, Komgot on Anir Island, and several sites in the Arawe Islands off the southwestern coast of New Britain. The Talepakemalai site was extensively excavated in 1985–88 (fig. 4.5), yielding a large collection of pottery, shell artifacts, and assemblages of faunal remains and anaerobically preserved plant materials (Kirch, ed., 2001). Talepakemalai and the Arawe sites, and probably others as well, were stilt-house villages standing over shallow lagoons or tidal flats at the time they were occupied. Their ceramic assemblages include flat-bottomed dishes, bowls supported on pedestals (ring-feet), cylinder stands, and large carinated jars, often elaborately decorated with dentate-stamped (and less frequently, incised) motifs, many displaying human faces (fig. 4.6). Among the nonceramic artifacts are a wide array of shell artifacts, as well as obsidian flakes from sources in both the Admiralty Islands and on the Willaumez Peninsula of New Britain.




FIGURE 4.5 Excavations in progress at the waterlogged Lapita site of Talepakemalai in the Mussau Islands in 1986. The anaerobic conditions at this early Lapita site preserved the bases of wooden stilt-house posts as well as thousands of seeds and other plant remains. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 4.6 A selection of reconstructed ceramic vessels from the Talepakemalai site, showing the intricate decoration typical of Far Western Lapita pottery. (Drawing courtesy of Christophe Sand.)





Around 1100 B.C., a phase of long-distance exploration and colonization commenced, with Lapita groups rapidly breaking through the invisible boundary of Near Oceania (at the southeastern end of the main Solomons chain), which for 30,000 years or more had marked the limits of human existence in the Pacific. Lapita canoes began to ply waters where no humans had gone before, first to the islands of the Santa Cruz group, 380 kilometers southeast of Makira, where they established small settlements along the coast of the main island of Nendö (and on its adjacent off-shore islets) and on the small coral islands of the Reefs. A lingering question, however, remains whether Lapita groups “leapfrogged” over the main islands of the Solomons, as Sheppard (2011) has argued. While later Lapita sites have been discovered in intertidal locations in the New Georgia group, the remainder of the Solomons are thus far devoid of Lapita settlements.16 In my view, this absence of evidence may simply be a consequence of the spotty nature of archaeological research throughout this large archipelago rather than actual evidence of absence. Future fieldwork on such islands as Malaita and Makira will ultimately resolve this question.


WESTERN LAPITALapita sites in the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands were first investigated by Roger Green during the Southeast Solomon Islands Project in the early 1970s, with additional work on Nendö by McCoy and Cleghorn (Green 1974b, 1976b, 1978, 1979b; McCoy and Cleghorn 1988). Among the most important sites are Nenumbo (RF-2) in the Reefs and Nanggu (SZ-8) on an islet off the coast of Nendö. Based on a reexcavation at Nanggu and Bayesian calibration of all radiocarbon dates from both sites, Sheppard, Chiu, and Walter (2015) conclude that Lapita movement into this region did not commence before 1050 B.C. (table 4.2).


TABLE 4.2

Selected Lapita and Related Ceramic Sites in Remote Oceania





TABLE 4.2 (continued)





Other Lapita groups rapidly moved south, through the Banks Islands and into the main Vanuatu Archipelago, and were well emplaced by 1000 B.C. A number of Lapita sites are known in northern Vanuatu, mostly on small islets off the coasts of Santo and Malekula (Sand and Bedford, eds., 2010:122–37).17 Among these are Makué, on Aore Island off of Santo, and Vao, on an islet near Malekula. At Vao, Bedford (2006) recovered sherds from a remarkable pot, which after firing had its dentate-stamped designs covered over with bands of red clay and white lime.

In central Vanuatu, on the large island of Efate, the discovery in 2004 of a Lapita cemetery at Teouma has revealed hitherto unknown aspects of Lapita society, and of the Lapita people themselves through analyses of the skeletal population.18 The site sits on a river terrace, which was probably nearer to the sea at the time it was occupied. Extensive excavations over five field seasons exposed at least eighty inhumations (fig. 4.7), as well as a midden deposit that postdates the cemetery. The mortuary practices at Teouma were complex: “mortuary ritual appears to have been a multifaceted and lengthy process rather than a single one-off event” (Sand and Bedford, eds., 2010:155). Corpses were manipulated before burial and during the early stages of decomposition. Skulls were typically removed during these mortuary rituals; in one case a cranium was found inside a carinated Lapita pot, which in turn was covered over by a flat-bottomed dish (fig. 4.8). In another instance, three skulls were placed across the chest of an adult male whose cranium had been detached. Dentate-stamped vessels appear to have marked burial sites; more than seventy-three decorated vessels have been reconstructed. All of these mortuary practices suggest a society that practiced ancestor worship. Radiocarbon dating of Teouma indicates that the cemetery began to be used between 970 and 920 B.C. and was abandoned by 920–800 B.C. (Petchey et al. 2015).




FIGURE 4.7 Excavations in progress at the Teouma Lapita cemetery site on Efate Island, Vanuatu. (Photo courtesy of Stuart Bedford, Australian National University.)





FIGURE 4.8 A human cranium was interred in a ceramic vessel at the Teouma cemetery site in Vanuatu. (Photo courtesy of Stuart Bedford, Australian National University.)





SOUTHERN LAPITAThe Lapita diaspora proceeded rapidly down through Vanuatu to the upraised makatea islands of the Loyalty group (where at least seven Lapita sites are now recorded) and on to discover La Grande Terre of New Caledonia (Sand 2010). On La Grande Terre, Lapita sites are concentrated mostly along the southwestern coastline, including the eponymous site of Lapita at Koné, although a few are also known from the northeastern coast.19 One site (Vatacha) occurs on the Île des Pins off the southern tip of New Caledonia. Numerous radiocarbon dates bracket Lapita colonization of the island between about 1100 and 1050 B.C. The Lapita phase proper, with sites containing classic dentate-stamped pottery, ended by 800–750 B.C., after which time new forms of paddle-impressed and incised pottery make their appearance (see chap. 5).


EASTERN LAPITAVirtually at the same time that the Lapita expansion proceeded down through Vanuatu to New Caledonia, other explorers undertook awe-inspiring voyages due east from either the Santa Cruz or northern Vanuatu Islands, sailing upwind against the prevailing trades and currents to cross 850 kilometers of open, trackless ocean, with no stepping-stone islands in between, arriving in the Fiji archipelago.20 The earliest dates from Fiji, from Bourewa and other sites, come in at about 1070 to 910 B.C. (Nunn and Petchey 2013; Petchey et al. 2015). At least thirty-five Lapita sites have been reported from various islands in the Fiji group.

From Fiji, there was rapid exploration eastward, via the numerous small islands of the Lau Archipelago21 on to Tongatapu and ‘Eua. The earliest known site on Tongatapu, Nukuleka, has been precisely dated using the U/Th method on coral abraders to 888 ± 8 years B.C. (Burley, Weisler, and Zhao 2012; Burley et al. 2015). The decorated pottery from Nukuleka exhibits similarities to the Western Lapita style of the Santa Cruz Islands (fig. 4.9). Lapita colonists moved rapidly northward through the Tongan archipelago, via Ha‘apai to Vava‘u (ca. 855 B.C.). Isolated Niuatoputapu, where the Lolokoka Lapita site is located, was probably settled from Vava‘u. The Lolokoka site on Niuatoputapu contained not only dentate-stamped pottery, but an array of shell, stone, and sea urchin tools and implements (fig. 4.10). Futuna and ‘Uvea, between Fiji and Samoa, were also discovered and settled in roughly this same period.




FIGURE 4.9 Decorated potsherds from the Nukuleka site on Tongatapu Island. (Photo by David Burley, Department of Archaeology, Simon Fraser University.)





FIGURE 4.10 Artifacts from early Lapita contexts on Niuatoputapu Island: a, b, Turbo shell fishhooks; c, Conus shell ring; d, Conus shell bead; e, sea urchin spine abrader; f, g, volcanic glass flakes; h, i, Tridacna shell adzes; j, hammerstone with pecked finger grip.





For the large Samoan archipelago, the only site with actual dentate-stamped pottery is Mulifanua, a submerged deposit under a capping of reef rock, fortuitously discovered during offshore dredging for a ferry berth. Mulifanua is dated to 930–800 B.C. (Petchey 2001). The absence of other Lapita sites in Samoa has been attributed by Cochrane et al. (2015) to the lack of suitable coastal plains some 3,000 years ago; a more likely explanation is simply the rapid geological subsidence of Samoa and probable drowning of other Lapita sites, as in the case of Mulifanua. In the small Manu‘a Islands, at the extreme eastern end of the Samoan chain, sites such as To‘aga on Ofu, which has thin, fine-ware pottery lacking dentate-stamped decoration, date to around 750 B.C. (Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1993; J.T. Clark et al. 2016). The Tonga-Samoa chain of islands comprises the region known ethnographically as Western Polynesia, hence the initial human colonization of these islands by Lapita peoples is key to establishing Lapita as ancestral to later Polynesian cultures and societies (see chap. 7).


SOUTH PAPUAN LAPITAThe discovery of a late variant of Lapita at Caution Bay along the southern coast of New Guinea (the region known as Papua) has prompted the definition of another Lapita “province,” called South Papuan by David et al. (2011; see also Skelly et al. 2014). The oldest of these Lapita deposits has been dated to 950 B.C. Preliminary reports describe a coarse, “open” form of dentate-stamped decoration on “low-fired, thick-walled carinated and sometimes collared vessels,” which rapidly gives way to “shell valve end-impressed dentate designs” (McNiven et al. 2011:4). This discovery suggests that Lapita sites will ultimately be found in the intervening Massim region as well.

The Lapita expansion out of Near Oceania into Remote Oceania—as far south as New Caledonia and as far east as Tonga and Samoa—was accomplished in less than three centuries, and probably closer to two hundred years. To put the Lapita dispersal in directly human terms, these small groups of seafarers explored an ocean realm stretching across 4,500 kilometers during the course of just ten to fifteen successive human generations (taking 20 years as the length of a reproductive generation). Without a doubt, the Lapita colonization of Remote Oceania ranks as one of the great sagas of world prehistory.

These were not merely voyages of discovery by itinerant sailors who came for a brief period and then returned to a homeland in the western Pacific. Quite the contrary, these were purposeful voyages of discovery and colonization. The earliest Lapita sites are permanent habitations, not temporary camps. The Lapita expansion involves successive groups of settlers, each in its turn founding a new colony on a previously uninhabited island. Within a generation or two, descendants of the group repeated the scenario, setting out to find yet another new island. This sequence of island colonization raises fundamental anthropological questions, both demographic and social.

Demographically, this process of expansion—which established new, permanent settlements and yet continued to bud colonizing daughter populations—required a high net population growth rate, presumably achieved by a combination of high fertility and low morbidity. Otherwise, there would not have been sufficient demographic momentum to keep the process moving. Even so, colonizing populations were small, resulting in genetic bottleneck effects that are evident in genetic variation among Polynesians (Flint et al. 1989; Martinson et al. 1993). Socially, we must ask, what motives impelled these people to keep exploring southward and eastward into the unknown waters of the Pacific? It could not have been the sometimes-cited “population pressure” of overcrowded islands, for many of the newly discovered lands were vast and uninhabited; it would take centuries before large islands such as Efate or Viti Levu were densely populated. Rather than a push factor, we must invoke pull factors to understand the Lapita expansion. Initially, one kind of pull incentive that brought Austronesian speakers from Southeast Asia into the Bismarck Archipelago might have been a search for new trading opportunities (e.g, obsidian). However, once the Lapita peoples left Near Oceania and ventured into uninhabited “oceanic outer space,” trade seems an unlikely explanation.

Lapita social structure may have played a key role in driving the engine of exploration and colonization. Linguistic reconstructions of Proto Oceanic words for kinship, social statuses, and the like reveal that these peoples put great emphasis on birth order.22 Older and younger siblings were ranked, and inheritance of house sites, garden lands, and other kinds of property, as well as such intangibles as ritual privileges and esoteric knowledge, passed from parents to firstborn offspring. As I have written elsewhere, “In such societies, junior siblings frequently adopt a strategy of seeking new lands to settle where they can found their own ‘house’ and lineage, assuring their own offspring access to quality resources” (Kirch 1997a:65). Rivalries between older and younger brothers are a frequent theme in the oral traditions of Polynesians,23 the direct descendants of one branch of the Lapita peoples. Peter Bellwood (1996a) has argued that such a “founder-focused ideology” is inherently characteristic of Austronesian-speaking peoples and that discovery and settlement of a new island (or later, a new valley or part of an island) served to enhance founder rank. Of course, we cannot underestimate the importance of new voyaging strategies (such as upwind search-and-return voyages) and of improved watercraft, which provided the technological basis for such expansion (Irwin 1990, 1992).





LAPITA IN LINGUISTIC AND BIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE


The arrival of pottery-making, seafaring peoples in the Bismarck Archipelago around 1300 B.C.—from whom the Lapita culture arose out of a synthesis of intruder and indigene—correlates closely with the inferred movements of the easternmost branch of the Austronesian language family, the Oceanic subgroup of Austronesian.24 The Oceanic subgroup includes virtually all of the approximately 450 modern languages spoken by island peoples in Polynesia, Micronesia,25 and all of the Melanesian islands within Remote Oceania (i.e., Fiji, Vanuatu, the Loyalty Islands, and New Caledonia). In Near Oceania, most of the languages of the Bismarcks and Solomons and many languages along the coast of New Guinea belong to the Oceanic subgroup. Map 2 shows the distribution of the Oceanic languages; the distribution of Lapita sites is depicted in map 7. The Lapita region forms a sort of core, out of which populations speaking Oceanic languages expanded centrifugally.

Some archaeologists are skeptical of linking archaeological sites and cultures with specific ethnolinguistic categories such as “Oceanic.” In the case of the Oceanic languages and Lapita, however, such a linkage is particularly well supported (Green 1997; Pawley 2007; Pawley and Green 1973, 1984).26 Decades of careful linguistic work have yielded a well-attested phylogeny or subgrouping model for the Oceanic languages and their position within the larger Austronesian family. The Oceanic branch of Austronesian has no deep history of successive language “splits” as would be expected had speakers of these languages been present for a long period in Near Oceania (as is the case with the highly diverse Papuan languages). Rather, the first-order branches or subgroups of Oceanic form a chainlike linkage (fig. 4.11). To linguists, this implies that the Proto Oceanic speech community moved rapidly into the area east of Halmahera and as far as the Solomon Islands, quickly forming a dialect chain, along which communication continued for some time. Differentiation eventually occurred as links in this chain were severed, leading to the four or five major first-order subgroups of Oceanic witnessed in the area today.27 This linguistic model resonates well with archaeological evidence for the rapid intrusion of a new population coming out of island Southeast Asia around 1400–1300 B.C. and rapidly setting up new communities through the Bismarcks and Solomons.




FIGURE 4.11 The subgrouping of the Oceanic languages. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





When we turn to Remote Oceania, the linkage between Lapita and Oceanic languages is more ironclad, because these are foundation cultures and foundation languages, respectively.28 There is no evidence for any human occupation prior to Lapita, and virtually all of the languages in this vast realm (with the exception of Chamorro and Palauan on the Western Micronesian fringe) are exclusively Oceanic.29 We have no evidence for any language replacement, or for any other kind of intrusive population, within the Remote Oceanic area.

Linking the Oceanic branch of Austronesian languages with the Lapita cultural complex does not mean that there were not complexities in the ways that Proto Oceanic and its early first-order branches evolved over time into the sometimes stunning linguistic diversity found in parts of Remote Oceania, especially in Vanuatu and New Caledonia. Vanuatu has 138 distinct languages, constituting the “densest linguistic landscape in the world” (François et al., eds., 2015:8). The processes of linguistic polygenesis are succinctly summarized as follows:

In sum, the linguistic diversity observed today in Vanuatu results from three millennia of diversification from what was once a single language spoken across a vast social network—in a way similar to the fragmentation of Latin into a multitude of Romance languages and dialects. During the centuries following its initial settlement, Vanuatu formed a vast dialect continuum in which communalects remained in constant contact through trade, interisland marriage and other forms of alliances. Every time a linguistic innovation emerged somewhere in the network, it would diffuse to a more or less extended portion of the network. . . . The modern outcome is an entangled web of linguistic linkages: a long chain where languages get gradually different as one travels across the territory. (François et al., eds., 2015:12)

The linguistic picture for the Solomon Islands exhibits other kinds of complexities, such as extensive interaction between Oceanic and Non-Austronesian or Papuan speech communities in the northern part of this long archipelago. According to Pawley (2009:536), the linguistic diversity of the northwest Solomons must be explained by a process in which “in each locality small populations of immigrant Oceanic speakers came into contact with established populations of non-Austronesian speakers, leading to extensive intermarriage, bilingualism and lexical borrowing from non-Austronesian languages.” In the southeast Solomons, however, the situation was quite different, as there apparently were few if any Papuan-language speakers present when the Proto Oceanic (i.e., Lapita) communities arrived and a distinct southeast Solomonic subgroup began to form. Furthermore, the linguistic evidence from the southeast Solomon languages “weighs strongly against” Sheppard’s (2011) hypothesis that Lapita voyagers “leapfrogged” past the islands from Guadalcanal to Makira (Pawley 2009:536), because as a distinct subgroup, the languages of the southeast Solomons have obviously been in place as long as those of other Oceanic subgroups. This reinforces my view that the absence of Lapita sites in the southeast Solomons is a problem of archaeological “visibility” that calls for more intensive fieldwork in the region.

Historical linguistics can also help us to construct more robust culture histories than are possible through archaeology alone. Archaeologists are rarely able to offer nuanced reconstructions of social organization, ritual practice, or ideology. Through careful lexical and semantic reconstruction, on the other hand, linguists can offer much detail regarding kinship, social structure, the names of gods and spirits, the parts of such items of perishable material culture as canoes, and other nontangible categories (Ross, Pawley, and Osmond, eds., 1998). Working collaboratively, archaeologists and historical linguists can produce far more sophisticated culture histories.30

The rapid movement of Austronesian-speaking populations from island Southeast Asia into Near Oceania and then on into Remote Oceania is also reflected in the pattern of human biological variation in the Pacific. Human geneticists have long insisted that the movement of the Austronesian speakers into the Pacific left a “genetic trail.” For instance, there is a high degree of correspondence between a particular 9-base-pair deletion characteristic of island Southeast Asians, Polynesians, and Austronesian-language-speaking populations in island Melanesia.31 Lum and Cann (1998:116) examined a large sample of Oceanic individuals for mtDNA variation, observing “significant correlations between genetic and linguistic distances when geographic distances are controlled.” However, intermarriage and gene flow between the Austronesian speakers and the indigenous Papuan-language speakers of Near Oceania are also indicated in these genetic markers.32 According to Martinson (1996:185), molecular data indicate both that “a major component of the Polynesian gene pool was until recently located in island Southeast Asia” and that as the pre-Polynesian population expanded into island Melanesia there was “enough exchange with the existing inhabitants of the region, for that population to acquire a 30% component of Melanesian nuclear markers.”

Recent work on nonrecombining Y-chromosome DNA variation, however, showed that the dominant Y haplotype in Polynesians is likely to be of Near Oceanic origin (Kayser et al. 2000; Hurles et al. 2002, 2003; Su et al. 2000). The apparent contradiction in the mtDNA and NRY evidence can be resolved with a model of matrilocal residence in the early Oceanic-speaking (i.e., Lapita) populations, whereby Melanesian men were recruited into Lapita communities (Hage and Marck 2003; Jordan et al. 2009; Kayser et al. 2006, 2008). Thus, according to Kayser et al. (2008:1362), “Polynesian ancestors originated from East Asia but genetically mixed with Melanesians before colonizing the Pacific” (see also Vilar et al. 2008). A period of sustained gene flow between ancestral Polynesian and “Melanesian” populations is also evidenced by the presence of the α-thalassemia deletion, which must have been transferred to the ancestral Polynesian populations in Near Oceania before their dispersal to Remote Oceania (Hill et al. 1985; Martinson 1996).

The Lapita cemetery at Teouma in Vanuatu has provided a unique opportunity to biologically analyze an early Lapita population, both through classical morphological methods (describing and comparing their phenotypes) and through sequencing of ancient DNA extracted from their bones. Valentin et al. (2016) compared twelve adult crania from Teouma with samples from East Asia, Western Micronesia, island Melanesia, Australia, and Eastern Polynesia, looking at various measures of craniofacial shape. Their results “clearly point to a Lapita–Asian biological connection . . . [with] little or no affinities between the Teouma cranial series and the modern Australian and Melanesian cranial series but strong similarities to Chinese, Western Micronesian, and especially Polynesian cranial series; in other words, the Teouma individuals fit into the Asian pole and not into the Australo-Melanesian pole” (2016:295). This conclusion was reinforced by Skoglund et al. (2016), who extracted DNA from three Teouma individuals and one individual from the Talasiu site on Tongatapu (all females), sequencing their genome-wide DNA. Their results show that these four individuals “are similar to indigenous Taiwanese populations such as the Ami and Atayal as well as to populations from the Philippines such as the Kankanaey, who have no detectable Papuan ancestry” (2016:2). They conclude that “the Papuan genetic signature appeared in many Remote Oceanian populations only subsequent to initial settlement” (2016:3).

The new molecular methods have also been applied to other organisms as proxies for human movement into the Pacific. The Pacific rat (Rattus exulans) was carried by voyagers from Near Oceania into Remote Oceania, either as a food item or as an inadvertent stowaway. mtDNA phylogenies of R. exulans show the presence of three major haplogroups, the distributions of which are consistent with the “Triple-I” model of Lapita origins in Near Oceania (Matisoo-Smith and Robins 2004). Recent genetic analysis of a human bacterial parasite, Helicobacter pylori, showed two distinct populations: (1) an hpSahul population with an estimated divergence of age of 23,000 to 32,000 years, which is confined to Near Oceania; and (2) hpMaori, which is believed to have accompanied Austronesian expansion out of Taiwan at about 5,000 years ago (Moodley et al. 2009).





THE LAPITA CERAMIC SERIES


The distinctive pottery first led E.W. Gifford, and then Jack Golson, to affirm the significance of the Lapita cultural complex. Lapita ceramic assemblages are not uniform; there were rapid changes in manufacture, in vessel forms, and especially in decoration over time as the Lapita peoples expanded into Remote Oceania. Nonetheless, there are commonalities to all Lapita ceramics, which can be grouped under the rubric Lapita Ceramic Series.

Lapita pottery consists of handmade earthenware, manufactured without the aid of a wheel but often using slab building and a paddle-and-anvil method of vessel wall thinning. The potting clays had beach or river sand added as temper.33 We have no evidence of kilns; pots were presumably fired in simple open blazes of coconut shells and wood, as is still done in some Oceanic societies (fig. 4.12). Due to this method of rapid, low-intensity firing (with temperatures in the range of 600°–700°C), the interior walls of Lapita vessels are often incompletely oxidized, leaving a telltale “sandwich” filling of dark, unfired clay, while the outer surfaces are usually a reddish-brown color.




FIGURE 4.12 Lapita pottery was probably fired using an open-air method, as is still practiced in Fiji. This firing sequence was observed by the author in the Sigatoka Valley, Viti Levu. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Lapita vessels take a range of shapes, as shown in figure 4.13 with examples from early Lapita assemblages in New Caledonia. Early Far Western Lapita assemblages from sites such as Talepakemalai in Mussau, Komgot on Anir, and some in the Arawe Islands are dominated by open bowls supported by pedestals or ring-feet (a typically Southeast Asian vessel form), by flat-bottomed dishes with flaring sides, by large carinated jars with everted rims, and by globular jars with restricted necks and flaring rims. The bowls and flat-bottomed dishes, along with the carinated jars, are decorated with elaborate dentate-stamped designs; the globular jars are often plain, or decorated with simpler incised designs.




FIGURE 4.13 The varieties of Lapita vessel forms occurring in early Lapita sites in New Caledonia. (Diagram courtesy Christophe Sand.)





Although all Lapita ceramic assemblages include both decorated and plain wares, the decorated pottery has especially captured the attention of archaeologists.34 Lapita potters used several techniques to decorate the surfaces of bowls, dishes, and jars. Most often the leather-hard clay was impressed with stamps that had series of finely carved teeth; the process was thus referred to as dentate-stamping. The stamps, which have not been archaeologically recovered, may have been carved in wood, bamboo, or possibly turtle shell (Ambrose 1997). Less frequently, Lapita potters incised motifs into the clay with a finely pointed tool and also modeled and carved vessel surfaces. But it is the dentate-stamping that gives Lapita decoration its distinctive and unique character. The individual stamps each constitute a single design element, which were combined in highly regularized patterns to form larger motifs and design fields. The stamps were applied by the Lapita potters according to a set of artistic rules, constituting a “grammar” of Lapita design. We will never know how the potters themselves thought or spoke of these designs, or the cultural rules for making them, but we can analyze and write a formal grammar of Lapita design using a linguistic or structuralist approach (Mead et al. 1975; Sharp 1988, 1991). Such formal studies, and comparisons of motif catalogs from different Lapita sites, provide archaeologists with powerful tools for determining degrees of similarity between different Lapita ceramic assemblages.

That all Lapita ceramics share the same basic design code (which underwent various changes and transformations over time and space) is prima facie evidence that the peoples who made and used these vessels shared a common, culturally encoded aesthetic system. Although archaeologists are cautious about equating pots with people, in the case of Lapita a common culture is strongly indicated, at least for the earliest stage. Once the various descendant Lapita populations had expanded into Remote Oceania, becoming increasingly isolated from each other, local and regional changes gradually led to cultural differentiation.

The most complex and finely executed decorated pottery occurs in the oldest sites, especially in the Bismarck Archipelago, but also in the earliest sites in Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji, and Tonga. In all of these archipelagoes, there was rapid simplification of the design system and range of motifs within just two or three centuries following initial Lapita settlement, leading to a virtual loss of dentate-stamped decoration across the entire southwestern Pacific by no later than 750 to 700 B.C. The elaborately decorated vessels (which required considerable labor to produce) almost certainly played a socially significant role in Lapita society; they were not simply utilitarian objects. Indeed, temper and chemical analyses of the clay reveal that decorated vessels were exchanged between Lapita villages and thus may have been objects that circulated between communities whose members were linked by social and economic ties. Such linkages would have been critical in the early phase of Lapita expansion and island colonization, when it would have been advantageous for small daughter populations to maintain connections with kinsfolk on “homeland” islands, both for marriage partners and for material support (Kirch 1988b).

Further evidence that the early, decorated pottery played a strongly social role in Lapita society comes from an analysis of the motifs. In the earliest assemblages, recovered from such sites as Talepakemalai and Teouma, a large number of the motifs on Lapita bowls, dishes, and other kinds of vessels represent human faces.35 The most figurative of these anthropomorphic representations have almond-shaped eyes, an elongated nose, curved upraised arms with five digits, a kind of “flame” headdress, and subsidiary emblems or motifs flanking the face (fig. 4.14). Other examples are more geometrically figurative, and over time there was a progression to highly stylized representations, such as rows of eye motifs or stylized noses. But even these stylized transformations depicted human faces that would have been evident to participants within the cultural system.




FIGURE 4.14 An anthropomorphic face design on potsherds from the Talepakemalai site in the Mussau Islands. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





What did these human faces on bowls and dishes signify to the Lapita peoples? Possibly they were representations of ancestors, the vessels functioning within a ritual system or cult of ancestors, as well as constituting objects of reciprocal exchange among related kinship groups. As noted earlier, the extensive manipulation of burials and the complexity of funerary rites at the Teouma burial ground are strongly suggestive of ancestor worship. This would be in keeping with what historical linguists have reconstructed for Proto Oceanic societies, with an emphasis on founder ideology and birth-order rank. Indeed, a Proto Oceanic word for “ancestor” (*tumpu) can be reconstructed, derived from the word *tumbuq, meaning “to grow.” As Jim Fox (1995) and other ethnographers have argued, the Austronesian peoples have deeply rooted concepts of “origin structures” and conceive of their social groups as growing and expanding like a tree or bush, with ancestors at the base or trunk. (Interestingly, this indigenous concept turns the anthropological notion of “descent” groups on its head, for Austronesians see themselves as having “ascent” groups.)

Chiu (2003, 2005) has proposed that the intricate designs expressed on Lapita pottery, including the anthropomorphic motifs, can be understood in the broader context of “house societies,” a form of social organization characteristic of Austronesian societies (Fox 1995), in which groups are organized around a named house linked to land as well as nonmaterial possessions (genealogies, origin stories, etc.). Human pottery, in Chiu’s view, formed a “category of house heirlooms that were used not only to differentiate houses and social status, but also as a symbol of unity between houses or among an entire community” (2005:5). Drawing on ethnographic analogy with the Tsimshian people of British Columbia (also a “house society”), Chiu suggests that the Lapita face motifs functioned as “house crests” and were regarded as “signs of history.”

It is likely that the decorated vessels in some way represented or memorialized ancestors. Furthermore, the act of decorating the pots may have been analogous to the tattooing of human bodies (Kirch 1997a:141–44). We know that the Lapita peoples practiced tattooing, for tattoo chisels have been found in some sites, made up of rows of fine teeth, probably similar to the stamps used to decorate Lapita pottery.36 It does not require much of a stretch of the imagination to find the origins of the Lapita decorative style in the transference of an aesthetic system from one medium (the human body) to another (clay), especially since Oceanic art is of the pervasive (as opposed to partitive) type, in which the same motifs and rules are applied to a diversity of artistic media.37 Ambrose (pers. comm. 2016) has alternatively suggested that the elaborate geometric designs found on many Lapita pots could be transfers from complex weaving patterns.

At the eponymous site of Lapita (WKO-013A) at Koné, New Caledonia, Christophe Sand in 1995 discovered the eroding remnants of a pit containing two large, virtually intact Lapita pots and large sections of at least nine other vessels (Sand 1998a; Sand et al. 1998). These large carinated jars, intricately decorated (some with anthropomorphic face designs), were purposively interred in the pit, perhaps at the conclusion of some ceremony. Both of the intact pots had pierced bases, which suggests some sort of ritual “killing” of these vessels. The Lapita “pottery pit” is thus far unique, but it hints at the social role of the decorated component of Lapita ceramics.

Not all Lapita pottery was decorated; in many sites the majority of potsherds are of plain ware. These plain wares are of vessel shapes mostly different from the decorated pottery: primarily globular jars with flaring rims or simple open bowls. Such vessels were likely used for storage, since there is little evidence that they were used for cooking over open fires (they lack the fire clouding and carbonized remains that would have resulted). One possibility is that the larger globular jars with narrow necks were used to hold “flour” derived from the pith of sago (Metroxylon) palms. When kept dry, sago flour will keep for extended periods, and this food may have been essential to colonizing groups while their horticultural systems were being established.





LAPITA SITES AND SETTLEMENTS


One fundamental similarity among Lapita sites is that they are all found along coasts, usually on beach terraces (Dickinson 2014). At the time of Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania, sea levels in the southwestern Pacific were about 1 to 1.5 meters higher than at present (Dickinson 2003). Many Lapita middens are situated on beach terraces that formed at that higher sea stand; such terraces are often now found some distance inland from present coastlines. In Samoa, on the other hand, the Lapita site of Mulifanua lies beneath 2 meters of seawater and is capped by a cemented reef platform, because the island of ‘Upolu has undergone rapid submergence.38 In the Bismarck Archipelago, Lapita stilt-house villages built over reef flats either have been covered with prograding sands (but remain waterlogged) or exist as palimpsests scattered over reef flats (as at Kreslo on New Britain and the Roviana and Marovo Lagoons in the western Solomon Islands).

That beaches and reefs were the favored location of Lapita settlements speaks to several aspects of their culture. Certainly they had a maritime orientation, as most sites are located across from or near a major pass in the adjacent reef, permitting ready canoe access to the open sea. Lapita sites are also typically situated close to fresh water and to good gardening land (Lepofsky 1988). By situating their hamlets and villages on the beach—at the interface between land and sea—the Lapita peoples took full advantage of both terrestrial and marine resources. There is also the possibility, at least for the Near Oceanic area where stilt-house settlements may have been the norm, that they were trying to avoid undue exposure to the swarms of malaria-bearing mosquitoes that inhabit the rainforest.

Lapita settlements also vary in size; spatial data on area from about thirty-six sites (Sheppard and Green 1991) show that the majority are smaller than 5,000 square meters, while another eight sites fall into the range between 9,000 and 15,000 square meters. There are three quite large sites in the sample, the most extensive being Talepakemalai (82 hectares or more). Translating these numbers to a human scale, the smaller sites would be characterized as hamlets, generally with fewer than ten dwelling houses and in some cases with only one or two dwellings.39 The midsized settlements could have accommodated between fifteen and thirty dwellings and as many households, and thus they would begin to approximate what we could think of as a modest village. A very large site, such as Talepakemalai, could have incorporated as many as 150 households, although it is not certain that this entire site was ever occupied simultaneously, so the Talepakemalai village may have always been smaller. At any rate, we are for the most part referring to small-scale communities, a significant clue in assessing the nature of Lapita society.

Lapita settlements were constructed of wooden posts and rafters, with thatch probably made from sago leaf or Pandanus leaf—all materials that do not normally preserve in the archaeological record of the humid tropics. At Talepakemalai and some of the Arawe Islands sites, the waterlogged, anaerobic deposits preserved the bases of wooden house posts or stilts (fig. 4.15), while the house platforms and thatched superstructures have disappeared. These Lapita sites in Near Oceania consisted of clusters of houses constructed over reef flats or the shores of lagoons, with stilts or pilings driven into the sand and coral rubble. Once Lapita peoples expanded into Remote Oceania, they abandoned such pile dwellings and constructed their houses directly on the sandy beach terraces. One such house cluster at Nenumbo in the Reef Islands was extensively excavated by Roger Green, revealing details of the household layout (fig. 4.16).40 A main house lay at the north end of the site, near a large earth oven. In the southern sector a mass of smaller post molds and food storage pits delineates cook sheds; a deep pit nearby may have been a well dug to tap the coral islet’s freshwater lens. Decorated ceramics were concentrated in the area of the main house; in the cook shed area the pottery consists primarily of plain ware, especially large globular jars. The artifact distribution pattern also reflects spatial differences, with concentrations of obsidian and chert tools around the main house and fishbone and shellfish remains in the cook shed area.




FIGURE 4.15 Excavations at the waterlogged Talepakemalai site in the Mussau Islands exposed the anaerobically preserved bases of wooden posts, once supporting stilt houses over a shallow reef flat. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 4.16 Plan of the Nenumbo Lapita site in the Reef Islands, excavated by Roger C. Green. (After Kirch 1997a.)





Drawing on archaeological as well as historical linguistic evidence, Green and Pawley (1998) have traced some key transformations in the houses and settlements of the Lapita peoples (or, linguistically, the speakers of Proto Oceanic and its descendant languages). The original form of their main dwelling houses, probably raised on stilts as at Talepakemalai, would have been called *Rumaq, a term that is found throughout island Southeast Asia and that persists in Near Oceania as well as in Micronesia. In the Fiji–Western Polynesian region, however, we find that the dwelling house is called by variants of the Proto Oceanic word *balay (e.g., Samoan fale). Originally, the *balay was some kind of open-sided building, built directly on the ground. When Lapita peoples moved eastward into Remote Oceania, they abandoned the stilt-house style and adapted the *balay for their dwellings (reflected in later, descendant languages by words such as Fijian bure and Hawaiian hale). Thus the older term *Rumaq dropped out of the vocabulary of these Remote Oceanic people.





LAPITA SUBSISTENCE ECONOMIES


In resource-rich Near Oceania—with its abundance of marsupials, reptiles, birds, and wild plant foods as well as shellfish and inshore fishes—small groups of people made a living as hunters and gatherers for tens of thousands of years. Not so in the biogeographically impoverished and faunally depauperate islands of Remote Oceania. While wild populations of birds and fish were plentiful in lagoons and on reefs in Remote Oceania, and on some islands there were terrestrial tortoises and crocodiles (Hawkins et al. 2016; White et al. 2010), these fragile resources could be quickly decimated. Moreover, the central Pacific islands lacked wild plants with edible seeds, fruit, or tubers suitable for gathering, let alone for domestication. Thus an essential part of what made the Lapita peoples so successful as oceanic colonizers was not just their seafaring technology and navigational abilities but also their subsistence economies.

Wherever they sailed in Remote Oceania, Lapita groups came fully equipped to establish permanent settlements, carrying with them domestic animals and planting stocks of tuber, fruit, and tree crops, as well as a sophisticated knowledge of horticulture and plant manipulation. They transported and established the biotic and cultural components necessary to re-create in each new island the kind of managed landscape they had just left behind. The ethnobotanist Edgar Anderson (1952) coined the phrase “transported landscapes” to refer to the ensemble of crops, weeds, animals, vermin, and other biota that accompany all human populations but especially agricultural peoples as these expand into new territories. The transported landscapes of the Lapita peoples were a fundamental part of what made them—and in due time their descendants—able to settle virtually every speck of habitable land in the Pacific Ocean. The consequences for the island ecosystems of Remote Oceania were irreversible (see chap. 2).

In the early years of Lapita studies, archaeologists vigorously debated whether Lapita populations subsisted merely by exploiting marine resources, moving rapidly from island to island like some manner of oceanic “strandloopers.”41 With improved analytical methods, the evidence has gradually accumulated—ranging from the permanent nature of settlement sites to plant-food preparation equipment to the bones of domestic animals to the direct botanical remains of crop plants themselves and, most recently, microscopic and isotopic data—to falsify this scenario. In addition, the evidence of historical linguistics provides us with an extensive Proto Oceanic vocabulary, not just words for crop plants, but also terms for swidden garden and various aspects of horticultural practice.42 Everything we know tells us that the Lapita people entered the new realm of Remote Oceania fully equipped to replicate their horticultural and domestic animal subsistence regimes.

The roster of crop plants cultivated by Lapita gardeners—and successfully transported by them from island to island—runs to twenty-eight species (Kirch 1997a:table 7.2), of which at least fifteen are attested by archaeobotanical remains and the rest by linguistic or other inferential evidence.43 The list includes root and tuber crops such as taro (Colocasia esculenta) and yams (Dioscorea alata and other species), coconut (Cocos nucifera), bananas (Musa hybrids and Australimusa), and a wide variety of tree crops, bearing nuts (e.g., Canarium almond, Terminalia almond, Tahitian chestnut [Inocarpus fagiferus]), starchy fruit such as breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis), and fleshy fruits (e.g., Vi apple [Spondias dulcis], Malay apple [Eugenia malaccensis]). As described in chapter 3, some of these plants—domesticated in Near Oceania—were among the cultural elements contributed by the indigenous Papuan-speaking populations to the synthesis we call Lapita. Other crops, such as the greater yam (D. alata) and the Eumusa bananas, are of island Southeast Asian origin and were probably carried into the region by the intrusive Austronesian speakers.

The waterlogged sands of Talepakemalai in Mussau yielded more than ten thousand well-preserved plant remains. Similar finds came from the Arawe Island sites excavated by Chris Gosden.44 While soft, fleshy plants such as taro tubers or bananas were not preserved, we did find abundant remains of virtually all of the hard-shelled nuts, especially the delicious Canarium almonds whose shells had been cracked open and discarded by the hundreds around the Talepakemalai stilt houses. Coconut shells, husked and cracked in half to extract the meaty flesh, were common in the anaerobic midden deposits; one coconut shell bore distinct traces, on its inner surface, of a serrated shell implement used to grate the meat. Grated coconut meat was most likely squeezed and strained to produce coconut cream, an essential ingredient of Oceanic cuisines. Another unique find was the fleshy key of a Pandanus fruit with impressions of a row of human incisors on its proximal end, where the edible pulp had been stripped away.

How the Lapita people cultivated their crops and what gardening techniques they used are questions that are hard to answer by means of direct archaeological evidence. Gosden believes that erosional lenses of clay at the base of a hillslope on Pililo Island in the Arawe group are the telltale traces from clearing of the rainforest to make swidden gardens.45 The linguistic evidence for Proto Oceanic reveals at least sixteen reconstructed words that apply to horticulture (Osmond 1998), including terms for a garden (*quma), for yam mounds (*ta[p,b]puki) and planting stocks (*[m]pula[m]pula), and for various kinds of horticultural activity, such as clearing (*poki), planting (*pasok), weeding (*papo), and harvesting (*sapu[t]). The main horticultural implement was presumably the dibble or digging stick of wood (*waso), a tool virtually ubiquitous among ethnographically documented peoples in Oceania.

Lapita horticulture combined permanent orchard gardens of perennial tree crops (quite likely situated in and around the villages themselves) with swiddens or shifting cultivations cut annually in the rainforest (or from second-growth forest once this was established) for the root and tuber crops. We have no evidence that complex systems of water control (irrigation or drainage) were used, although naturally swampy areas might have been planted in hydrophilic aroids such as Colocasia and Cyrtosperma. Large-scale valley or hillside irrigation systems developed independently and later in the Pacific, not as a result of agricultural “diffusion” out of Asia (see chaps. 5 and 7).46 Nonetheless, the Lapita horticultural complex encompassed all of the essential crops and agronomic strategies that laid the foundation for the more elaborated horticultural and agricultural economies of later Oceanic societies.

The Oceanic peoples are ethnographically characterized as keeping a triumvirate of chickens, dogs, and pigs (Oliver 1989:217–28). These are all of Southeast Asian origin, part of the contribution of the early Austronesian speakers to the Lapita complex.47 Pig bones are present (usually in small numbers) in some Lapita sites, but they are often outnumbered by chicken bones; dog bones are rare but present. Although they were not major components of the Lapita diet, these animals were an important part of the Lapita “transported landscape.” In later societies that descended from Lapita colonists, one or more of these animals (especially pigs) would at times become major prestige foods.

The Lapita peoples were hardly exclusively focused on the land. Theirs was a dual economy, reflected in their choice of beaches for settlements, and they extensively harvested the resources of reef, lagoon, and open sea. Most Lapita sites are dense middens full of a diversity of mollusk shells along with the bones of fishes, sharks, rays, and turtles.48 At Talepakemalai, each cubic meter of deposit yielded on average 30 kilograms of mollusk shells, including a diversity of clams and oysters, cones, spider conchs, cowries, and many other species. The fish bones are predominantly from inshore and reef-edge species, such as parrotfish, wrasses, surgeonfish, triggerfish, eels, and emperors, which is not surprising considering that the greatest biomass concentration on tropical reefs is in these inshore microhabitats. Bottom-dwelling (benthic) fishes, such as squirrelfish and groupers, are also represented. And although not common, the bones of large pelagic, carnivorous fish such as tunas (Scombridae) are present in Lapita middens. Shark teeth and the bony vertebrae of sharks or rays, along with the plastron bones of the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas), are frequently present. At Talepakemalai, we recovered numerous porpoise bones; the little “Lapita god” was carved from one of these (did it thus represent a deity of the sea?).

This diverse range of marine foods was doubtless obtained through a variety of methods and fishing strategies, including simple hand gathering and collecting on the reef but also using nets, spears, fishhooks, and probably plant poisons.49 Fishhooks manufactured from the stout shells of Trochus niloticus (or from Turbo setosus) have been found at a number of Lapita sites (fig. 4.17). These include one type of hook for bottom fishing and another for open-sea trolling, as well as diminutive hooks of pearl shell probably intended for hand-line fishing on reefs.50




FIGURE 4.17 Unfinished and finished fishhooks of Trochus shell from the Talepakemalai Lapita site. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





Although the sea yielded the greatest range and quantity of their flesh foods, Lapita peoples also used such wild food resources as they could obtain on land. Their middens yield bones of sea- and land birds, particularly plentiful on central Pacific islands, such as in the Ha‘apai group of Tonga. In New Caledonia, they found a large, flightless megapode bird (Sylviornis neocaledoniae) to hunt, as well as an endemic terrestrial crocodile (Mekosuchus inexpectatus). In Vanuatu and Fiji, there were large tortoises (Meiolania damelipi), and in Tonga, iguanid lizards.51 Terrestrial crabs were also available on most islands, especially the highly prized coconut robber crab (Birgus latro).

New analytical methods have allowed us to gain additional perspective on Lapita diets. Kinaston et al. (2014; Valentin et al. 2010, 2014) used the ratios of stable isotopes of carbon (δ13C) and nitrogen (δ15N) in the bones of sixty-eight burials at Teouma to assess the protein component of the diet of this colonizing Lapita population. The isotopic evidence indicates “a mixed subsistence strategy which included broad-spectrum marine resource foraging, the consumption of wild animals, especially fruit bats, and animal husbandry” (Kinaston et al. 2014:15). Kinaston et al. suggest that while horticulture was surely a component of the diet, there may have been less reliance on plant foods during the earliest settlement phase, before gardens and tree crops were well established. A different approach to diet has been pioneered by Tromp (2016; Tromp et al. 2016), who extracted plant microfossils including phytoliths and starch granules from the dental calculus adhering to teeth in the Teouma burials. These microfossils provide significant evidence for the plant component of the Lapita diet, including the consumption of coconut, breadfruit, several kinds of nuts (Canarium, Barringtonia, and Inocarpus), the Malay apple, bananas, giant taro, yams, Polynesian arrowroot, and probably sugarcane (Tromp 2016:189).

Lapita subsistence economy, based on a strategy of transported landscapes and on the intensive exploitation of naturally available resources, can be viewed from two perspectives. From the human viewpoint, this highly successful and adaptive strategy permitted Homo sapiens to expand into a vast empty sector of the globe and to establish viable communities even on tiny coral islands. From the perspective of the naturalist, however, the Lapita expansion was not without its irrevocable impact on the biota and ecology of these islands. Although Lapita populations were not initially large, they frequently had a significant impact, especially on the smaller islands and islets. In Lapita sites throughout the Tongan archipelago, indigenous and endemic land birds, including parrots, rails, pigeons, and fruit doves, were swiftly exterminated after human arrival, through a combination of direct predation for food and feathers and forest clearance to make way for gardens (Steadman 2006). Also in Tonga, an endemic iguana was soon hunted to extinction, and in the Manu‘a group of Samoa an endemic flightless megapode bird was similarly extirpated from the natural biota. Even on the vast island of New Caledonia, the large flightless Sylviornis megapode, the terrestrial crocodile, and the horned tortoise did not persist past the end of the Lapita period.52 To chronicle these changes is not to impute some inherently destructive ethos to the Lapita people; probably it could not have been otherwise if they were to convert these oceanic islands to sustainable human habitats. In the existential game between humans and nature, there are always trade-offs, and the myth of l’homme naturel is precisely that—a myth.





EXCHANGE BETWEEN LAPITA COMMUNITIES


One of the most fascinating aspects of the Lapita is the extensive and elaborate exchange between their communities. Ethnographically, Oceania is famous for the diversity and complexity of its many exchange networks (Hage and Harary 1991, 1996). It now seems that the genesis of many of these historically documented systems may ultimately be traced to systems of exchange that were first developed by the Lapita peoples.

Exchange is, fundamentally, a social phenomenon and in its purest form consists of the exchange of marriage partners, often in some formal symmetrical or asymmetrical pattern. But much exchange also involves a material component; social and material manifestations are often complexly interwoven, as in some well-known Oceanic systems (e.g., the kula exchanges of the Massim, or the red feather money exchange network of the Santa Cruz group).53 For the archaeologist, social aspects of prehistoric exchange must be inferred, usually only with difficulty, but at least some components of material exchange can be directly determined through the sourcing of raw materials, as well as through technological analysis of specialized production. For Lapita sites, it has been possible to source (or at least to characterize source variability in) the following kinds of materials: obsidian, chert, metavolcanic adzes, pottery (including clay and temper), and oven stones. Some shell objects also functioned as exchange valuables, based on evidence for their specialized production.54 Some of these objects traveled long distances, particularly obsidian, which has been found as far as 4,500 kilometers from its quarries. This is the extreme case, however; most exchanges were conducted over shorter distances, ranging from a few tens of kilometers up to 300 or 400 kilometers.

The large village site of Talepakemalai, in Mussau on the northern periphery of the Bismarck Archipelago, provides a case study for Lapita exchange. Talepakemalai was occupied for something like four to five centuries, and over this time we can track a number of significant changes and realignments in external exchange.55 During the earliest phase (ca. 1300–1000 B.C.) the occupants of Talepakemalai received a significant range of materials originating outside the Mussau Islands. Obsidian was imported from two source areas in roughly equal quantities: from the Manus group to the west and from the Willaumez Peninsula on New Britain. Pottery, especially decorated vessels, originated in at least twelve different localities (or at least using twelve different clay sources), whose precise identities we have not been able to pin down but may include Manus, New Ireland, or some of the islands off the northern New Ireland coast (e.g., Tabar, Lihir, Ambitle). Significant quantities of basalt and andesite rocks, for use in the village’s earth ovens, were probably coming in by the basketload. In lesser quantities, chert (for flake tools) and metavolcanic adzes were also imported to Talepakemalai. Based on evidence for high-volume manufacture and on a high ratio of discarded and unfinished rejects to finished artifacts, we also know that the Talepakemalai people made Trochus shell fishhooks and various kinds of rings, beads, and other “shell valuables” from Conus, Spondylus, and other mollusks (fig. 4.18). These shell objects provided at least one kind of export that balanced the numerous imports to Mussau. This exchange network—of which Talepakemalai was just one node—was quite complex, with much content diversity, encompassing many individual nodes, and with multiple, high-volume flows in and out of Mussau.




FIGURE 4.18 Carefully prepared sections of Conus shell, with holes drilled for line attachment or suspension, were among the various kinds of shell “exchange valuables” manufactured at the Talepakemalai Lapita site in the Mussau Islands. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





In a later phase at Talepakemalai (ca. 1000–800 B.C.), the picture of exchange relationships is quite different. Obsidian was still imported but now primarily from the closer Manus source. The number of foreign ceramic sources had dropped to perhaps six. Oven stones were still being imported but probably not chert and metavolcanic adzes. On the export side, there is little evidence for the kind of high-volume shell object manufacture of the earlier period. In short, the network in which the Talepakemalai community participated had been reduced in its content and diversity, as well as in the number of nodes to which it was connected; the overall volume of exchange seems to have declined as well.

These changes at Talepakemalai reflect a simplification and perhaps a shrinking regionalization of long-distance exchange, a pattern repeated in other spheres of the Lapita world. This may be because exchange between Lapita communities was an essential social aspect of their colonization strategy, maintaining linkages between homeland and daughter communities (Kirch 1988b, 1997a). Over time, as new settlements grew and became more independent and less reliant on contacts back home, the need for external exchanges—sometimes maintained by means of rather arduous voyages over open sea—would have waned. In their place, localized exchange networks sometimes developed, such as those in New Caledonia or in the Fiji group (see chap. 5).





ANCESTRAL OCEANIC SOCIETIES


For anthropologists, exchange leads logically to the question, what were Lapita, or more properly, Ancestral Oceanic, societies like?56 Using the data of archaeology, combined with insights from historical linguistics, it is possible to pose a few hypotheses. Archaeological settlement size tells us that these were small-scale societies, in which individual communities ranged from perhaps only two or three households up to 150 households at the most. Although they incorporated relatively small numbers of people, they were not egalitarian. Reconstructions of early Austronesian and Proto Oceanic kinship terms make it clear that there were critical distinctions based on gender, birth order, age, and affinity (marriage). The birth-order distinction between older and younger siblings of the same sex is noteworthy, for this suggests a key element of ranking within Lapita societies.

Linguistic reconstruction, augmented by comparative ethnography, also allows us to infer that the Ancestral Oceanic peoples organized themselves into sets of social groups they called *kainanga (Hage 1999; Kirch and Green 2001; Pawley 1982). These were unilineal descent groups, comprising people who traced their origins back to a founding ancestor and who had rights of access to land by virtue of group membership. Historical linguists have reconstructed two key social status terms: Proto Oceanic *tala(m)-pat, meaning “big, great person,” and *aq adiki, meaning “oldest or firstborn child.”57 This correlates with a widespread and hence presumably ancient Austronesian emphasis on “origin structures,” reflected in a term for “ancestor,” *ta(m)pu, which is based on the root term *tu(m)pu, “to grow.” All this is a part of the founder ideology characteristic of Austronesian cultures in general (Bellwood 1996a). Here then is further evidence for the importance of genealogical order and connectivity to ancestors, additional elements that contribute to a hypothesis of Lapita societies as ranked.

The archaeological evidence is consistent with such a reconstruction. Great emphasis was placed on the laborious decoration of certain ceramics that had a social function, and indeed most likely represented ancestors. This pottery was exchanged among Lapita communities, along with a diverse assortment of other goods. In addition to such functionally useful items as obsidian, chert, and oven stone, exchange goods included a range of shell “valuables,” artifacts of a kind known in ethnographic contexts to have circulated asymmetrically between exchange partners seeking to increase their relative prestige and rank.

What emerges is a picture of Ancestral Oceanic societies as being, in anthropological terms, “ranked” but not sufficiently complex or elaborated as to be “stratified” or “hierarchical.” It may be best to use the term heterarchical for Lapita social organization.58 In a heterarchical society, the fundamental social units (probably extended households)59 are in economic competition with each other, emphasizing minor distinctions in prestige or wealth, particularly as these are played out through formalized exchange. Some groups may achieve higher rank than others, leading to a situation in which incipient chiefship—based on hereditary ranking principles—can readily emerge. The Lapita groups who expanded into the islands and archipelagoes of Remote Oceania were the founding populations from which the later, more complex societies of this vast region ultimately developed. Lapita social structure, as we currently conceive it, contains the necessary germs of ranking, and of intergroup competition based on economic exchanges, from which the diverse array of complex societies of Micronesia, Polynesia, and island Melanesia later emerged.

There is no clear-cut “end” to the Lapita period in Oceanic prehistory. In most archipelagoes, the distinctive dentate-stamped decoration ceased to be practiced within two to three centuries following colonization. The appearance of new ceramic styles—on which archaeologists classically define their cultural sequences—necessitates new labels. In fact, there was continuity between the founding Lapita populations in Remote Oceania and those societies and cultures that follow them on archaeological time charts. Within Near Oceania there was continuity too, but here the matter was more complex, for the Lapita peoples continued to interact—and intermarry with—the older, indigenous Papuan language–speaking peoples. These post-Lapita transformations in both Near Oceania and Remote Oceania are the subject of chapter 5. What may be fairly said of Lapita is that its legacy is the modern ethnographic diversity of Oceania.





FIVE


The Prehistory of “New” Melanesia



All the chief social institutions of Melanesia, its dual organisation, its secret societies, its totemism, its cult of the dead, and many of its less essential customs, such as its use of money, its decorative art, its practice of incision and its square houses, have been the direct outcome of the interaction between different and sometimes conflicting cultures.

W.H.R. RIVERS, The History of Melanesian Society (1914)





THE CULTURAL SYNTHESIS OF Austronesian-speaking “newcomers” and the older indigenous peoples of Near Oceania (the Papuan or Non-Austronesian speakers)—from which the remarkable Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania emerged—forever changed the cultural landscape of the region Dumont d’Urville dubbed “Melanesia” (map 8). Whereas prior to 1200 B.C. humans had been confined to the intervisible archipelagoes west of Makira (San Cristobal) Island in the Solomons, they now rapidly colonized virtually every island within the southwestern Pacific. The verbal, cultural, and genetic interactions between Austronesian- and Non-Austronesian-speaking populations would lead to protean linguistic, cultural, and biological complexity. It is in this sense that I use the terms Old and New Melanesia to speak of the periods prior to and after the emergence and expansion of Lapita.




MAP 8 Island Melanesia, excluding Fiji, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





To canvass the cultural developments that occurred throughout New Melanesia in the period following the Lapita expansion is a daunting task given the enormous ethnographic diversity that emerged within this region over the past three millennia.1 The task is rendered more difficult by the paucity of archaeological work in some areas, such as the Massim or the central Solomons. Nonetheless, the number of well-excavated and analyzed sites has grown steadily (table 5.1). In this chapter, I follow a region-by-region approach, emphasizing aspects of the prehistoric record that are of special interest or have been more thoroughly studied. In the chapter summary, I discuss recurring themes of Melanesian prehistory.


TABLE 5.1

Selected Non-Lapita Sites in Melanesia





TABLE 5.1 (continued)





TRADING SOCIETIES OF PAPUA AND THE MASSIM


When pioneering anthropologists such as Bronislaw Malinowski, C.G. Seligman, and F.E. Williams began systematically to explore and describe the indigenous cultures of southeastern New Guinea and the adjacent Massim Islands (comprising the D’Entrecasteaux, Trobriand, Woodlark, and Louisiade groups), they were struck more than anything else by the highly specialized systems of trade and exchange that dominated the lives of these peoples (fig. 5.1). Malinowski made the kula network of the Massim—with its counter-circulating shell valuables (the ritual epiphenomenon of a highly complex network circulating all manner of goods)—a textbook case of “primitive economics.” Of equal interest were the loosely interconnected trade networks centered on the Mailu and Motu peoples of the southern Papuan coast, especially the annual hiri expeditions that sailed on large seagoing canoes called lagatoi, each voyage transporting as many as thirty thousand clay pots from the Port Moresby area several hundred kilometers west, to the sago swamp–dwelling peoples of the Gulf, returning with quantities of sago palm flour sufficient to provide sustenance for months.2 Many of these coastal and island trading peoples are Austronesian (Oceanic) speakers (although the Mailu and their trade partners in the Gulf are Non-Austronesians).




FIGURE 5.1 High-volume production of pottery for trade characterized many of the coastal societies of Papua in the proto-historic period. (Photo courtesy Jim Allen.)





Beginning in the 1960s and 1970s, archaeological work in the vicinity of Port Moresby, as well as in the Mailu area, began to unearth a 2,000-year-long cultural sequence and to provide crucial evidence for the rise of specialized trading along the Papuan coast.3 Less is known regarding the Gulf end of this trading network, although recent work at sites such as Keveoki, Popo, Kerema, and Emo has begun to provide some insights (David et al. 2009, 2010; Skelly and David 2017). For the Massim and adjacent coast of northeast Papua (the Collingwood Bay area), the archaeological record is spotty, few stratigraphic excavations having been conducted.4

The recent discovery of late Lapita ceramics at Caution Bay (David et al. 2011; McNiven 2011) dating to 950 B.C. demonstrates that the Lapita expansion extended as far as the south Papuan coast (see chap. 4). Prior to this discovery, the oldest known sites along the Papuan coast—such as Oposisi on Yule Island, Nebira 4 near Port Moresby, and Selai in the Mailu area—were dated to between A.D. 50 and 350 (fig. 5.2). Although a sequence linking the South Papuan Lapita to the ceramic assemblages that follow has yet to be elucidated in detail, we can reasonably assume that there was cultural continuity. Vanderwal (1978:418) characterized pottery from the lowest deposits at Oposisi as consisting of three vessel types (open bowls and two pot forms), well-fired and burnished, with frequent use of red slip and decorations (sometimes lime-infilled) made by “pressing the edge and sides of small shells” into the clay. Many motifs are reminiscent of Lapita designs, as is the use of lime-filling and red slip. Vanderwal (1978:424) saw the early Oposisi assemblage as falling “within the Lapita tradition.” Jim Allen (2017) also regards the earliest Papuan coast cultures as derivative from Lapita, marking a phase of expansion of Austronesian-speakers.




FIGURE 5.2 Potsherds from the Nebira 4 site. (After Allen 1972.)





On the northern Papuan coast, in the Wanigela region of Collingwood Bay, Egloff (1979) found no in situ stratified deposits older than about 1,000 years, but he collected surface potsherds that he thought were older. In particular, his “Ceramic Group P” includes pedestaled bowls of striking Lapita affinity (Egloff 1979:70, pl. 8). A connection between Egloff’s Group P and Lapita seems probable (fig. 5.3). Further fieldwork along the northeastern Papuan coast and/or in the Massim Islands may ultimately yield Lapita occupations.5




FIGURE 5.3 A pedestaled bowl from the Collingwood Bay region is strongly suggestive of Lapita connections. (After Egloff 1971.)





Long-distance exchange or trade among these early populations is evident from the presence of Fergusson Island obsidian at several sites. Trochus shell armbands were probably exchange items, and specialized manufacture of shell beads at Nebira 4 suggests that shell “valuables” continued to play a role in exchange, as they had in the earlier Lapita networks (see chap. 4). Bickler (1997) demonstrated that Yule Island pottery moved as far west as the Gulf of Papua during this early period. According to Jim Allen (1982:202), there was increasing formalization of trade until about A.D. 800, when a “disruption” of socioeconomic systems occurred along the entire south Papuan coast.

After A.D. 800, the archaeological records from the Port Moresby (Motupore) and Mailu regions chronicle the rise of highly specialized trade networks, with loose linkages between them. Allen’s extensive Motupore Island excavations document the history of this specialized trading center from about A.D. 1200 to 1700 (Allen 2017). The Motupore inhabitants engaged in high-volume pottery production for export and also manufactured small shell disc beads (S.J. Allen et al. 1997). They imported wallabies from the New Guinea mainland for food and probably sago flour and other perishable foodstuffs. Chemical analyses of potsherds from the Popo site in the Gulf of Papua link Bootless Bay pottery with the Gulf sago producers. However, the ethnographically documented hiri system appears to be only the final phase in a long history of intensification and specialization of trade along the southern Papuan coast (Skelly and David 2017).

Irwin’s research in the Mailu region showed that initially Mailu (an offshore island like Motupore) was only one of several pottery-making villages, enjoying no particular economic advantage. Over time, Mailu became increasingly specialized in ceramic manufacture and eclipsed nearby communities. Combined with a pattern of increased warfare and raiding—leading to changes in settlement patterns from coastal fringe to hilltop locations—Mailu became a central place in the area’s trading system, by European contact achieving a total monopoly on pottery manufacture.

On Wari Island off the eastern tip of New Guinea, excavations by Negishi and Ono (2009) revealed a stratified sequence at the Kasasinabwana shell midden, with three distinct ceramic phases. The oldest, dated to between 850 and 650 B.C., is characterized by plain pottery with everted rims, similar to late Lapita ceramics. The middle phase, dated to 350 B.C. to A.D. 350 has red-slipped pottery with incised decorations, while the most recent phase contains pottery similar to that made on Wari ethnographically. Elsewhere in the Massim, with few excavated sites or continuous sequences, the picture is far from clear. The available data suggest that the kula of the “ethnographic present” has no great time depth and was preceded by more geographically extensive exchange networks. For example, while pottery in the Trobriands came historically from the Amphlett Islands, surface sherds collected from the Trobriands include ceramics deriving from the New Guinea mainland (Collingwood Bay) and from Goodenough Island. Egloff (1978:434) concluded that prior to A.D. 1500 there was a wider system in place, with “increasing localization through time and a constriction of interaction in the north-western sector of the kula islands.” Irwin (1983) suggests that the highly specialized Amphlett Islands pottery producers may be a recent phenomenon, perhaps analogous to the development of Mailu as a central place.

Based on recent work on Rossel and Nimowa Islands, Shaw (2016; Shaw et al. 2016) has outlined a tentative cultural sequence for the Massim region. Although no Lapita site proper has yet been discovered, Shaw (2016:120) believes that “the Lapita culture likely spread to the Massim islands, perhaps from as early as 3000/2900 B.P.” The plain ware pottery at the base of the Wari site is thus probably a late derivative of Lapita. From about 550 B.C. until A.D. 600 there was a process of “regionalization” of cultural traditions, followed from A.D. 600 to 1400 by the development of a “southern Massim pottery tradition.” Shaw (2016:120) concludes that “within the last 1000 years, archaeological evidence indicates that the Massim had developed into a culturally distinctive region, with trade networks linking many of the islands in the northern and southern Massim already apparent by this time.” Continued field and laboratory work in the Massim should in the future continue to refine our understanding of the historical development of the kula and related exchange systems of the Massim and Papuan coast, made famous by Seligman and Malinowski.6





THE LATE HOLOCENE IN HIGHLAND NEW GUINEA


One part of Near Oceania that experienced only indirect impact from the incursion of Austronesian-speaking peoples, and from the emergence of the Lapita cultural complex, is the interior Highlands of New Guinea.7 Nonetheless, the late Holocene period in the Highland valleys witnessed significant changes. Unfortunately, there are too few well-excavated and published sites dating to this period to provide a picture of regional variability within the Highlands, though such regional patterns will doubtless emerge through further work.8 Yet a broad picture can be sketched.

In chapter 3, I discussed the emergence in the Highlands during the early Holocene of incipient forms of cultivation involving drainage of the valley floors, based on the cultivation of Colocasia taro, along with other crops such as Dioscorea yams, Pueraria tubers, and Australimusa bananas. By the late Holocene, the Kuk swamp sequence shows that these systems had become quite sophisticated. Kuk phase 4, dated to A.D. 1–800, is marked by a highly standardized grid of parallel and right-angle ditches enclosing square or rectangular plots. Bayliss-Smith and Golson (1992) argue that Kuk phase 4 represents a new level of intensification based on taro cultivation. Indeed, it may mark a “Colocasian revolution” (18). The phase 4 “agricultural base had the capacity to sustain a high density of pigs and people in stable, sedentary settlements and to permit regular exchange, in what was otherwise a quite empty landscape of degraded grasslands with shifting cultivation in scattered forest swiddens” (18).

Environmental data—especially pollen sequences—reveal that agriculture in the Highlands was not restricted to the swampy valley floors; shifting cultivation was probably far more important overall, at least until the intensive developments of the past 1,200 years.9 These pollen sequences chronicle deforestation and expansion of anthropogenic grasslands and a consistent rise after about A.D. 1000 in the occurrence of ironwood (Casuarina equisetifolia) pollen. Golson (1997: 41) observes that Casuarina is planted today “for its timber and its capacity for soil rehabilitation through nitrogen fixation”; he hypothesizes that its increased frequency in the past millennium marks the development of an indigenous silviculture. Yet in spite of such efforts, over the past few thousand years the net effect of human agricultural practices in the Highlands—especially shifting cultivation—was a cycle leading to ever more intensive forms of cultivation, and to increased investment in a built environment in response to environmental degradation. To quote Golson, “a model incorporating these elements would propose the continuing replacement of older forest by increasingly degraded secondary growth, as cultivation expanded to its local limits and turned back on itself in a tightening cycle of more frequent clearances separated by ever-shortening fallow periods, driven by the pressures of production” (1997:41).

Pigs are essential to Highlands economies. Ethnographically, pigs along with certain imported shell valuables are “accorded marked cultural value by Highlands prestige systems” (Kelly 1988:173). Claims for the presence of Sus scrofa in the Highlands as early as 8000 B.C. are based on rare single teeth or bones in dubious stratigraphic contexts.10 Most likely, pigs were not introduced to New Guinea until after about 3000 B.C.; indeed, “pig bone is only sparsely represented in the Highlands archaeological record before perhaps the past 1,000 years” (Golson 1997:44). Thus the highly intensive systems of pig production—and exchange networks based on pig feasts—are a relatively new feature of Highland societies. Moreover, the systems so well documented ethnographically most likely owe their origins to an event that dates to a mere 300 years ago: the introduction of the sweet potato into the Highland valleys.

When Highland societies were first contacted by whites earlier in this century, it was apparent that their high population densities were dependent on the high productivity of the sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), a crop noted for abundant yields, tolerance of higher altitudes and cooler climates, and adaptability to nutrient-poor or depleted soils. Although the sweet potato was introduced into Eastern Polynesia in prehistoric times (see chap. 7), there is no evidence that it had been transported westward into Melanesia or New Guinea prior to European expansion into the Pacific. Following Yen’s (1974b) “tripartite hypothesis” of I. batatas distribution, the crop arrived in Southeast Asia via two routes, one Portuguese (via the Atlantic and the Cape of Good Hope), the other Spanish (across the Pacific with the Manila Galleon trade). From the Indonesian islands adjacent to New Guinea, where sweet potatoes were present by the end of the seventeenth century, the crop found its way via indigenous networks of trade and exchange into New Guinea and the Highland valleys. There, given the cycle of increasingly intensive agricultural production that had emerged over the preceding millennia, the new crop was a godsend, its productivity spurring what James Watson (1965) first called an “Ipomoean revolution.”

At Kuk, the final phase (A.D. 1750–1900) reflects this Ipomoean introduction, with regularized grid and raised-bed cultivation. For the first time, habitations appear within the field system itself. The emphasis on the sweet potato had direct repercussions for pig production, since it is excellent pig fodder. Golson writes, “In principle, the sweet potato, as prime pig fodder that could be grown over a wider range of soils and environments, extended possibilities for successful pig keeping and offered an opportunity for more men, through the labor of their wives, to enter previously restricted systems of exchange in which pigs were a central item” (1997:49).

A final aspect of late Holocene prehistory in the Highlands is external exchange or trade networks,11 particularly those involving obsidian, stone axes, and shells. Watson (1986) determined that obsidian flakes from open sites in the Eastern Highlands originated at a source on New Britain, although one flake came from Fergusson Island in the Massim. These materials moved over long distances, “probably in incremental steps rather than in a single trade trajectory” (Watson 1986:9). Fourteen stone axe quarries are documented within the Highlands, and sourcing studies link surface-collected as well as excavated axes or axe fragments to the quarries. Burton (1987) demonstrated the appearance of specialized quarrying in the Tuman and Jimi areas, a pattern that may have emerged between about 500 B.C. and A.D. 500. Swadling, Wiessner, and Tumu (2008:290), drawing on stylistic similarities in a variety of stone mortars and pestles, conclude that extensive exchange networks linked the Highlands to the lowlands, via the Sepik-Ramu, with the networks extending even to New Britain: “The presence of stylistically similar stone mortars and pestles in the highlands, the Sepik-Ramu, the Madang-Morobe coastline and West New Britain indicate that ideas and products, such as crops, were being exchanged by the social contact that linked these regions” (see also Swadling and Hide 2005).





THE BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO AFTER LAPITA


No sudden or abrupt “end” to Lapita is evident in the Bismarck Archipleago. Rather, we see a gradual process of “settling in,” accompanied by the development of local or regional cultural spheres. The early system of geographically widespread, highly interconnected, and complex exchanges that characterized Lapita in the Bismarcks (see chap. 4) was gradually transformed into several regional systems, evidenced for example by the sequence from Mussau (Kirch 1990d, 1996a). This process of regionalization is reflected linguistically, in several primary clusters or subgroups of Oceanic languages, resulting from the breakup of the original Oceanic dialect chain and, later, from the expansion of the Meso-Melanesian Cluster in Bougainville and the western Solomons region (Ross 1988, 1989).12 These main, high-order Oceanic subgroups may indeed mirror regionalized exchange networks of the late first millennium B.C. They include a North New Guinea Coast Cluster, a Meso-Melanesian Cluster linking New Ireland and the northern-central Solomons, and a Papuan Tip Cluster (probably correlating with the expansion of Oceanic speakers into Papua and the Massim).

Spriggs (1997:152–61) reviews some cultural processes possibly accounting for the “end” of Lapita, not only in the Bismarcks, but also in the Remote Oceanic archipelagoes. In addition to (1) the contraction or specialization of trade and exchange networks (correlated with dialect differentiation), these include (2) local adaptation; (3) sociopolitical transformation, particularly that resulting from the breakdown of earlier prestige-goods exchange systems; (4) absorption by indigenous, Non-Austronesian–speaking groups; and (5) secondary migrations. All of these factors probably played their roles in the transformation of a widespread Lapita “horizon” into the more highly localized and differentiated set of archaeological cultures, ranging from the Bismarcks out to New Caledonia and Fiji. More elaboration of local archaeological sequences will be necessary to determine which processes were salient in any given region.

Using a classic archaeological approach of indexing cultural change through pottery styles, the transformation of Lapita into a varied set of local ceramic traditions can be traced in several localities in the Bismarcks. In Mussau, a major change occurs between about 1000 and 700 B.C., when the use of dentate stamping declined precipitously, giving way to a high frequency of incising, and slightly later in time to other techniques such as end-tool impressing, punctation, fingernail impression, and shell-stamping (fig. 5.4). There is no evidence to suggest that this ceramic sequence represents anything other than style changes produced by the same people. By the mid-first millennium B.C. in Mussau, sites such as Epakapaka rockshelter (EKQ) exhibit little dentate stamping, with the pottery made up largely of thin-walled, well-fired globular jars decorated with incised motifs, and with crenation or finger-pinching on their rims. The Mussau ceramic sequence is paralleled in other sites in the Bismarcks.




FIGURE 5.4 Potsherds from the Epakapaka rockshelter (site EKQ) in Mussau with incised and punctate designs. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





On New Ireland, the Lesu (or Lossu), Lasigi, and Fissoa sites have yielded pottery similar to the late materials from Mussau.13 At Lasigi, with radiocarbon dates between 750 and 350 B.C., some dentate stamping is present, but much of the pottery is decorated with applied relief and fingernail- or thumb-impressed designs. At Fissoa, applied and incised ceramics date between 50 B.C. and A.D. 450. Off the east coast of New Ireland, on the Tanga Islands, Garling’s (2003) excavations at the Angkitkita site document a similar transition from Lapita to incised and applied relief ceramics between 450 and 50 B.C. On the small island of Watom between New Britain and New Ireland, the ceramic sequence begins with dentate-stamped Lapita and continues with incised, applied-relief, and fingernail-impressed (as well as plain) ceramics, as attested in the Kainapirina (SAC) and Vunavaung (SDI) sites.14

Ceramic production ceased altogether in many parts of the Bismarcks around the end of the first millennium B.C. This was the case in Mussau, which continued to import small quantities of plain ware ceramics from the Manus (Admiralty) Islands 250 kilometers to the west right up into historic times. In Manus, pottery production continued throughout the last 2,000 years, becoming specialized in local communities such as the small islands of Hus and M’Buke.15 Ceramic production on New Ireland apparently ceased around A.D. 450–950. On the southern coast of New Britain, pottery use in the Arawe Islands stopped around 1,500 years ago. Occasional pottery was then imported into this region from mainland New Guinea (Sio Ware), where a pottery industry continued.

The last two millennia of Manus prehistory have yet to be well defined, but some features are noteworthy. Ambrose investigated the Sasi site on Lou Island, an important obsidian source.16 Sasi, dating to 150 B.C., is buried under a massive tephra and ash deposit up to 5 meters thick, the result of an explosive eruption. The Sasi deposits, exposed by sea wave erosion, yielded pottery with incised, applied, and impressed decorations (another instance of late transformation of Lapita wares), along with obsidian blades, stone adzes, and other artifacts. Ambrose recovered from Sasi a small, flat, rectangular piece of bronze, indicating occasional contacts (direct or, more likely, indirect) with bronze-using peoples in island Southeast Asia, evidence paralleled by the discovery of Talasea obsidian in a site of similar age in Sabah (Borneo).17

Cultural change in Manus over the last 2,000 years remains to be worked out in detail. Wahome (1997) examined ceramic assemblages from 116 surface-collected and 10 excavated sites in the group. A correspondence analysis–based seriation of these assemblages yielded four main ceramic groups: (1) Lapita; (2) early post-Lapita from 150 B.C. to A.D. 300; (3) late post-Lapita from A.D. 300 to 1150; and (4) late prehistoric, dating after A.D. 1150. The early post-Lapita pottery is “largely distinguished . . . by the presence of shell impressions” (Wahome 1997:119), although some fingernail impressions are also present. Later-phase ceramics display “a diversification of the Early post-Lapita attributes and attribute combinations, lip and rim forms as well as an increase in the number of vessel forms” (119). Wahome (1997:122) concludes that there is “no evidence for a total break from classic Lapita to post-Lapita” and thinks that Manus parallels Mussau, Lasigi, and Watom with a transitional continuity from Lapita to what came after. At the contact period “ethnographic endpoint,” the archipelago harbored a diversity of localized societies, many of them economically specialized. For example, McEldowney (1995) studied two contrastive groups, the fishing peoples of Andra islet off the northern coast of Manus and the highly intensive yam gardeners of Baluan Island off the southern coast. On both islands, permanent facilities improved production efficiency; on Andra these were stone fish traps on the reef, while Baluan is covered in a reticulate grid of stone-walled garden enclosures.

Another kind of specialization occurred in the Vitiaz Strait region between mainland New Guinea (the Huon region) and New Britain, where the occupants of the tiny Siassi Islands operated as middlemen traders.18 Lilley’s (1986, 1988) archaeological investigation showed that trading connections have an antiquity extending back to Lapita times but that the highly specialized system as known ethnographically dates only to the last few hundred years. This develops out of a “proto-system” operative at about A.D. 400, marked by the appearance of new ceramic styles and by evidence for cross-straits transfer of pottery, obsidian, and chert.

In Mussau, the last 1,000 years are imperfectly revealed by deposits on Boliu Island (site EKE) and elsewhere. Distinctive adzes made from Terebra shell, with the basal whorl ground down to form a concave cutting edge (fig. 5.5), are first dated to A.D. 460–620 in the EHK site on Eloaua. Also common are Tridacna shell adzes made from the dorsal region of giant clam shell valves, an artifact type rare or lacking in earlier Lapita contexts. Terebra shell adzes appear in Solomon Islands and Vanuatu sites at about the same time, suggestive of some communication or interaction between the peoples in these regions. These distinctive artifacts might also signify contact with Micronesian societies to the north, where they are ubiquitous.19 Economic changes in late-period Mussau sites include high frequencies of pig bone, suggestive of the rise of local, prestige exchange systems focused on competitive feasting.




FIGURE 5.5 Terebra shell adzes from post-Lapita sites in the Mussau Islands. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





A number of volcanic events in the Bismarcks during the last 2,500 years disrupted the region’s human populations, including outright destruction of some groups and displacement of others. I have already mentioned the explosive eruption on Lou Island that buried the Sasi site around 150 B.C. In the Hoskins area of West New Britain, there were major tephra-forming eruptions at roughly A.D. 200, 600, and 800 (Machida et al. 1996:77). The last produced a plinian tephra estimated at 20 cubic kilometers bulk volume, but even the lesser events deposited between 0.5 and 3 meters of pyroclastic materials up to 50 kilometers away from the eruption centers. At the northeastern tip of New Britain, Rabaul harbor resulted from a massive and violent eruption around A.D. 600. On Watom, 16 kilometers away, a tephra ashfall led to the temporary abandonment of the island. On New Britain itself, the Rabaul ignimbrite deposit is as much as 0.5 meter thick some 25 kilometers from the caldera. As Spriggs (1997:168) summarizes the effect of this massive eruption, “Anyone remaining on the Gazelle Peninsula would have been killed, a fact seemingly confirmed by the oral traditions of the Tolai people of the Rabaul area . . . who say they moved there from New Ireland subsequent to the eruption.”





THE SOLOMON ISLANDS


The main Solomon Islands extending from Bougainville through Choiseul, the New Georgia group, Santa Isabel, Guadalcanal, Malaita, to Makira—encompassing a total land area of 31,080 square kilometers—occupy a critical geographic position in Oceania. The archipelago is also notable for its ethnic and linguistic diversity. About seventy Austronesian languages are spoken in the Solomons, along with seventeen Non-Austronesian or Papuan languages distributed on Bougainville, in the New Georgia group, and on Russell and Savo Islands. Prior to the Lapita expansion there likely were more Non-Austronesian language groups throughout the Solomons, these being largely replaced or “overprinted” by the Austronesian expansion. The southeastern end of the main Solomons marks the boundary of Near Oceania (and thus of “Old” Melanesia), the limits to human penetration into the island Pacific prior to the late second millennium B.C.

The prehistory of the Solomons holds a key to all of Melanesia, yet this huge archipelago remains one of the least researched by archaeologists.20 While there has been considerable work in the western Solomons, and even more in the far eastern Temotu Province (the Santa Cruz group), large islands such as Choiseul, Santa Isabel, and Malaita in the central Solomons are for the most part archaeological terra incognita. Even though these intervisible islands were likely explored by humans in the Pleistocene (when, indeed, many of them were connected during times of lower sea level), at present we have but a single Pleistocene site in evidence (Kilu on Buka Island). While Lapita sites are well documented for the Santa Cruz Islands, only recently has a late Lapita record emerged for the New Georgia group; Lapita sites are entirely absent for the central Solomons (provoking arguments about whether the Lapita colonists simply “leapfrogged” over them [Sheppard 2011]).

Some of the best data from the Solomons come from its northwestern terminus in Buka, including Nissan Island, which lies halfway between the Bismarcks and the Solomons.21 This is one of the few regions in Near Oceania where a semblance of a continuous archaeological sequence spans the pre-Lapita to early historic periods (Wickler 2001). The phases in the two islands are to some degree correlated, in part reflecting the importation of Hangan-style pottery from Buka to Nissan. On Buka, the Sohano ceramic style represents a continuity out of late Lapita at around 200 B.C., much as there was continuity in post-Lapita ceramic styles in the Bismarcks. Around A.D. 600 another major ceramic style change occurred, marking the Hangan Phase, again a continuity from the previous phase, in turn giving way to the Malasang style (ca. A.D. 1200). The final Mararing/Recent style again reflects a transition from the Malasang style, so in aggregate we have a continuous pottery sequence linking Lapita with the “ethnographic present.”

On Nissan, the situation is slightly different, because there the Yomining Phase ceramics differ from the Sohano style of Buka; Spriggs (1997:170) suggests that Yomining ceramics were probably imported to Nissan from a source on New Ireland or one of the smaller islands off its coasts (e.g., Anir, Lihir, Tabar). According to Spriggs, on Bougainville, Sohano- and Hangan-style potsherds have been found as far south as Teop. Spriggs (1997:171) also reports that in the central Bougainville region he has recovered a “continuous ceramic and cultural sequence spanning the last 1500 years,” with three successive pottery styles (which he labels Sivu, Asio, and Pidia); the details remain to be published. At the southern end of Bougainville, Irwin (1972) documented a pottery sequence from the Shortland Islands that parallels the Buka sequence. To go beyond ceramics to larger patterns of cultural and sociopolitical change poses a challenge; Wickler (2001) discusses changes in nonceramic artifacts and economic patterns, but more research is required.

The New Georgia group of the western Solomons, including the large volcanic islands of Vella Lavella, Kolombangara, New Georgia, and Rendova, along with many smaller ones, has seen more archaeological study than any other part of the main Solomons.22 Surprisingly, there is no evidence for Pleistocene or even early Holocene human activities, with the oldest sites being a number of intertidal zone settlements along the coasts of Vella Lavella, Kolombangara, and New Georgia, all containing late forms of Lapita pottery (see chap. 3) dating from about 750 B.C. to perhaps the end of the first millennium B.C.23 The archaeological evidence is matched by data from pollen cores on Roviana, where a “dramatic rise in charcoal influx” appears at 650 B.C., interpreted as “slash and burn horticulture and the radical transformation of the economy based on a Lapita horticultural complex” (Sheppard and Walter 2006:63).

The first millennium A.D. in New Georgia remains dimly understood, but thanks to the work of the New Georgia Archaeological Survey project (Walter and Sheppard 2001, 2006, 2009), which focused on the Roviana Lagoon region, the period from about A.D. 1200 to European contact is now emerging. Walter and Sheppard (2009) call this the Munda Tradition, which marks the development of a distinctive cultural pattern throughout the New Georgia group (evidently extending as well to Choiseul), one that subsequently became enmeshed with early European trade and was partially described ethnographically in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century (Sheppard, Walter, and Aswani 2004; Sheppard, Walter, and Nagaoka 2000; Walter, Thomas, and Sheppard 2004). This pattern involved interisland raiding, head-hunting, and the taking of slaves, with an emphasis as well on ancestor cults (archaeologically attested by shrines containing ancestral skulls), and large war canoes, as well as the production and circulation of shell valuables (fig. 5.6). The Munda Tradition is subdivided into two periods. The earlier Bao Period (A.D. 1250–1550) is marked by sites consisting “mainly of platforms interpreted as shrines in which basalt is used to create uprights, table stones, cobble flooring and wall components” (Walter and Sheppard 2009:64). An important complex of such platforms is located at Bao, on New Georgia, a place identified in the oral traditions of the Roviana people as the origin place for their religion and politics. The succeeding Roviana Period (1550–1850) is “represented by a much wider range of site types and by a rich material culture” (Walter and Sheppard 2009:64). Shrines continued to be constructed, but coral rubble rather than basalt was the preferred material. Walter and Sheppard (2009:64) report that “the shrines contain human bone, shell valuables and, in the historic period, ceramics, trade axes and muskets.”




FIGURE 5.6 Graphic model of some of the key cultural elements of the Roviana Period in the New Georgia Islands. (Illustration courtesy of Richard Walter, University of Otago.)





Early in my career, I was fortunate to carry out an archaeological reconnaissance on Kolombangara Island in 1971 with Doug Yen and Paul Rosendahl (Kirch 2015:51–54). In the Ndughore Valley of this jungle-clad strato-volcano, we surveyed and excavated hilltop fortified village and hamlet sites with ancestor shrines, indicating that the Roviana period cultural pattern extended beyond the political boundary of the Roviana chiefdom. At one site, the facades of stone-faced platforms were ornamented with human bas-relief face carvings, presumably representing ancestors (fig. 5.7). These hilltop sites were associated with extensive, technologically sophisticated pondfield irrigation in the valley bottoms, a kind of landesque capital intensification also found on parts of New Georgia Island. The ancestral shrines at the hilltop settlements contained burial crypts with human crania and substantial quantities of shell valuables (fig. 5.8), reflecting prestige-goods exchange only partly described in the ethnographic record (Hocart 1922). This settlement system dates to the immediate proto-historic period, and many of the sites contained European trade goods. Thomas (2009, 2014) reports the extension of this apparently widespread settlement pattern involving ridgeline fortified hamlets and ancestor shrines on the islands of Rendova and Tetepare.




FIGURE 5.7 A face sculpted from volcanic rock ornaments the facade of a stone platform on a hilltop site on Kolombangara Island. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 5.8 Ridgetop settlements in the Ndughore Valley, Kolombangara Island, frequently have stone-lined burial crypts containing multiple crania and various kinds of shell-exchange valuables. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Moving to the central Solomons, no Lapita or other ceramic sites have as yet been discovered. On Guadalcanal Island, David Roe (1993) reanalyzed materials originally excavated by British colonial administrators in 1966–68 at the Vatuluma Posovi rockshelter (also known as Poha Cave). Roe excavated a small area of undisturbed deposits in this important rockshelter, and at two new sites, Vatuluma Tavuro and Vatuluma Ngolu, all in the Poha Valley. Although none of these sites was rich in artifacts (and all lacked pottery), “the environmental material is quite eloquent in its expression of human activity in the Guadalcanal landscape” (Roe 1993:179). Roe (1993:182–84) proposed a three-phase cultural sequence for northwest Guadalcanal. In the Hoana Phase (450–250 B.C.), people occupying the Vatuluma Posovi cave used chert tools, along with fishhooks and arm rings of Trochus shells. Human impacts on the environment were “of a low level,” and the subsistence economy revolved around “hunting of forest taxa and the collection of mollusks from mainly fresh and brackish water environments,” along with some use of the Canarium almond (possibly the wild species C. salomonense). Toward the end of this phase, at around 3,000 years ago, there were changes in the sources of chert used for tools, and shell beads and fully polished stone adzes first appear. Were these changes, as Roe suggests, “an echo of changes known to be occurring both north and south of the Solomons and associated with the advent of Lapita?” (1993:182). Quite probably.

The succeeding Hamosa Phase (250 B.C.– A.D. 450) witnessed a major period of impact on the local environment. Roe thinks it is likely that there were “small open settlements” on ridge crests, as known ethnohistorically, although no such sites have been excavated. Sedimentary and pollen evidence from the northern Guadalcanal plains, however, indicates increased erosion on the hillslopes and higher sedimentation rates on the plains, as well as the establishment of extensive Themeda australis grasslands (Roe 1993:183). The pig may also have appeared at this time. Although preliminary, the evidence suggests that the Hamosa Phase witnessed a period of pioneering agricultural economy.

In the final Moru Phase (A.D. 450–1800) on Guadalcanal, inland forest areas were first occupied in a substantial manner, with caves and rockshelters near the coast again being utilized (Roe 1993:183). Agricultural intensification is indicated by irrigation systems in the valleys in the Visale area. According to Roe (1993:83), “Within the last 500 years there is evidence for a renewed assault on the forest,” and for the rise of the ethnographic distinction between “bush” and “salt-water” peoples, with a corresponding diversification of economic strategies. Future research on Guadalcanal and other islands of the central Solomons will doubtless expand and refine Roe’s pioneering effort.

In the southeastern Solomons, a handful of sites have been investigated on Ulawa, Makira (formerly San Cristobal), and Santa Ana, primarily during the first phase of the Southeast Solomon Islands Culture History Program (SSICHP), organized by Roger Green and Doug Yen during the 1970s.24 No Lapita sites are known, although significant quantities of Ulawa and Malaita chert in Lapita sites of the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands farther to the east suggest that Lapita settlements will ultimately be found in the main southeastern Solomons. On the northern coast of Makira, a midden site named Mwanihuki near the village of Pamua has yielded radiocarbon dates calibrated to 1000 B.C. (Blake, Gibbs, and Roe 2015). The site is aceramic but contains a chert lithic industry. A rockshelter on Santa Ana, a small island just to the east of Makira, yielded calcareous-tempered plain ware ceramics dating to the early first millennium B.C., similar to the Kiki Ware of Tikopia and other late Lapita plain wares. A deep midden site in Su‘ena Village on Uki Island off the coast of Makira, excavated by Roger Green, encapsulates a depositional sequence extending back to A.D. 1500 (Walter and Green 2011).25 This was entirely aceramic, indicating that the use of pottery in the region had ceased prior to that date. The Su‘ena midden yielded many chert adzes and a wide range of fishing gear, as well as finely decorated Trochus shell armbands. Green (1976c:191) remarks that “the important thing reflected by this assemblage is a high degree of general continuity between the most recent and the oldest items in the sequence.”

Some 450 kilometers east of Makira lie the Santa Cruz Islands (Nendö, the Reef Islands, Utupua, and Vanikoro) along with the Polynesian Outliers of Taumako, Tikopia, and Anuta. All of these islands were the focus of the SSICHP.26 On Nendö (the largest island in the Santa Cruz group) and in the nearby Reef Islands, the archaeological record commences with Lapita sites dating to roughly 1100–1000 B.C.27 Tikopia and Anuta were both colonized around 800 B.C., by peoples making and using late Lapita plain wares. Excavations on Nendö Island by P.C. McCoy and Cleghorn (1988) demonstrated a continuous plain ware pottery tradition persisting to about 100 B.C., when, as on Tikopia and Anuta (and probably in the Reef Islands), local production of pottery ceased. The later aceramic period on Nendö is partly known from the Mateone Dance Circle site in Graciosa Bay and from the late Dai Village site on Te Motu Island (fig. 5.9), as well as from an inland occupation site (Naiavila) on the limestone plateau above Graciosa Bay (Yen 1976b). A marker of this later period is the Terebra shell adz, also a feature of later prehistory in Mussau and in Vanuatu. Architecturally, stone-walled house foundations characterize the late period on Nendö, as well as unique, coral slab–outlined dance circles such as that at Mateone. Doherty (2009:208), who synthesized materials excavated during the SSICHP of the 1970s, augmented by more recent excavations, concludes that the prehistory of the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands exhibits continuity over three millennia, but at the same time one sees the incorporation of new ideas and technologies, as these islands were “geographically situated to receive castaways as well as purposeful visitors from east and west.”




FIGURE 5.9 Plan of Dai village, Nendö Island, Santa Cruz Islands. (After McCoy and Cleghorn 1988.)





The high volcanic islands of Utupua and Vanikoro, south of Nendö, remain incompletely studied. In 1978 I reconnoitered parts of Vanikoro (Kirch 1983) and excavated at the Emo site, which has a 1.9-meter-deep midden, extending back to A.D. 200. Emo contained incised pottery of nonlocal origin, nearly identical to the Sinapupu Ware of Tikopia, and like it apparently deriving from northern Vanuatu. This trade ware falls in the Mangaasi tradition, evidence of once more extensive connections between Vanuatu and the Santa Cruz Islands. Also present in Vanikoro are Tridacna shell adzes with stylistic features linking them to Vanuatu shell adzes of the post-Lapita period, but Terebra shell adzes appear only late, in the proto-historic period.





VANUATU


Vanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides), almost as extensive as the Solomons, is equally diverse ethnographically and linguistically. Much recent archaeological research in the archipelago has focused on the early Lapita period, with the discovery and excavation of a number of Lapita sites including Teouma (see chap. 4). Initial Lapita arrival in Vanuatu is now dated to no earlier than 1150 B.C., with Lapita sites on Efate, Makelua, and Erromango all dating from 1050 to 750 B.C. (Bedford and Spriggs 2014:4).

Archaeological research on the post-Lapita period in Vanuatu has likewise expanded in recent years (Bedford 2006b). Pioneering field research commenced in 1963–64 with work by Mary Shutler and Richard Shutler (1965) on a number of islands and by José Garanger (1972a) on Efate and adjacent islands of the central region. Garanger established a ceramic sequence, with Lapita at the base, that developed into a locally variable set of incised and applied-relief ceramics that he labeled “Mangaasi” (fig. 5.10), after the site on western Efate where this pottery was recovered.




FIGURE 5.10 Potsherds from the Mangaasi site (EF-17) on Efate Island, Vanuatu. (Photo courtesy José Garanger.)





Significant advances in our knowledge of the post-Lapita ceramic sequences of Efate, as well as of Erromango and Malekula Islands, resulted from a multiyear project beginning in 1996 jointly organized by the Australian National University and the Vanuatu National Museum (Bedford 2006b; Bedford and Spriggs 2000, 2014). The team reinvestigated the eponymous Mangaasi site, extending fieldwork across the small Pwanmwou Creek and discovering even more extensive deposits in an area called Arapus. Mangaasi-Arapus forms a continuous and complex set of archaeological deposits that are stratified horizontally and vertically; the stratigraphy has also been affected by volcanic eruptions, tidal waves, and cyclones (Bedford 2006b:48). Bedford (2006b:161–68) defines five ceramic phases for the post-Lapita period on Efate. The first of these, called Arapus, dates from 950 to 850 B.C. and is characterized by globular pots with outcurved rims, the lips often displaying notching; this phase was short-lived, perhaps lasting less than a century. The following Erueti Phase is divided into early and late subphases, spanning in total the period from 850 to 250 B.C. Erueti ceramics, first recognized by Garanger, consist of a variety of vessel forms with incised motifs and some rim notching. This is succeeded by the Mangaasi Phase, again subdivided into early and late subphases, from 250 B.C. to A.D. 750. Mangaasi decoration includes incised and punctate motifs along with lip notching. According to Bedford (2006b:168), “The ceramic sequence on Efate was dynamic and changing throughout but can be largely shown to have followed a developmental trajectory, from Lapita to the later phases.” After A.D. 750 the manufacture and use of pottery on Efate ceased. Correlating with the end of pottery production in the central islands is the appearance of Terebra shell adzes, a discontinuous but widespread artifact of the past 1,000 years in island Melanesia and Micronesia.

On the large island of Malekula (see map 8), Bedford tested a series of small rockshelters in the limestone topography, along with several open sites. He reported, “The stratigraphy of the Malekulan cave sites was relatively consistent, generally representing intermittent occupation with ash lenses from cooking fires, fire-cracked basalt and or coral cobbles, shellfish, bone, and relatively sparse artifactual material,” although ceramics were present throughout the sequences (Bedford 2006b:71). Initial Lapita pottery is quickly followed by a plain ware phase with infrequent lip notching, termed the Malua Phase, dated to 750–550 B.C. After Malua, the ceramic sequence on Malekula remains poorly defined, although as in some other islands of northern Vanuatu, pottery making continued up until European contact.28

Research on Erromango Island, southeast of Efate, concentrated on the sites of Ponamla and Ifo. Ponamla, situated on a sheltered bay with good canoe access and a freshwater stream, is a “relatively undisturbed settlement site” dating to between 850 and 550 B.C. An areal excavation of a cooking area not only produced a great deal of charcoal, ash, and faunal material, but “thousands of sherds, along with an assortment of other artefacts, such as Tridacna adzes and arm rings, Conus shell rings, shell beads, a drilled shark tooth, bone needles, scoria abraders and stone flakes” (Bedford 2006b:32). The Ifo site contained deposits with Lapita pottery dating to 1050 B.C., followed by later occupations with distinctive fingernail and incised ceramics, which continued until around 250 to 150 B.C. Based on the materials from Ponamla and Ifo, the ceramic sequence on Erromango begins with a short Lapita Phase, followed by the Ponamla Phase (850–650 B.C.) with largely plain ware pots decorated only with lip notching. This is superseded by the Ifo Phase (650–50 B.C.), which is divided into two subphases, with the pottery characterized by fingernail impressions and incising. The last 2,000 years of the Erromango sequence lacks pottery entirely.

One of the most remarkable archaeological sites anywhere in Oceania is the burial ground on Retoka Island near Efate (fig. 5.11), according to local oral traditions the grave of a chief named Roy Mata, famous for instituting widespread peace in the region (Garanger 1972a, 1972b, 1996). According to these traditions, when Roy Mata died his body was displayed in the villages under his suzerainty and then interred on Retoka Island along with the bodies of kinsfolk and representatives of the various clans, some interred involuntarily. Retoka Island remains sacred to this day; it can be visited only during daylight as it is thought to be inhabited by the spirits of the dead.




FIGURE 5.11 Plan of the Roy Mata burial site on Retoka Island, Vanuatu. (From Garanger 1972a.)





Led to the site by his informants, who had related these traditions, Garanger excavated a burial ground (fig. 5.12) with a single central, male skeleton—certainly Roy Mata himself—surrounded by a macabre tableau of paired male and female skeletons, the males supine on their backs in relaxed positions, the females clutching at their partners in positions that strongly suggest they were buried alive. As Spriggs (1997:211) says regarding the Roy Mata tradition, “The men had been drugged with very strong kava, a drink forbidden to women, and so were unconscious at the moment of burial, while the women were fully conscious when they were buried alive and in a state of complete terror as shown by their pitiable contortions preserved in death. One young female appears to have tried to raise herself out of the ground after burial.” The significance of the central burial (Roy Mata) is shown by its position at the base of two large upright slabs, with a young woman laid out at his feet, another man on his right, and a couple on his left. A bundle burial was interred between the outstretched legs of Roy Mata, possibly the bones of one of his own ancestors. Radiocarbon dates place the site between A.D. 1300 and 1550.




FIGURE 5.12 The Roy Mata burial site. Note the prominent central burial with open legs, ornaments on the chest, and a secondary burial between the legs. (Photo courtesy José Garanger.)





The Retoka burials are richly ornamented with shell beads, pig tusks, and shell bands; differences in ornamentation patterns may reflect specific clan insignia. Roy Mata, an older man who had lost most of his teeth, had shell armbands on both arms, along with bracelets of Ovula shells, a bead necklace, a perforated Spondylus shell, and three whale-tooth beads. Rows of shell beads around his waist had presumably been attached to some kind of woven garment. On his wrists were pig tusk bracelets (produced by knocking out the upper incisors of pigs and allowing the lower incisors to grow in a circle), a practice known ethnographically. The Retoka site and Roy Mata’s burial demonstrate the historical validity and persistence of an indigenous oral tradition hundreds of years old.29

The Roy Mata burial ground represents a level of sociopolitical control and hierarchy not evident in earlier time periods in island Melanesia. The unanswered question is whether this was the result of in situ social changes or whether Roy Mata was an immigrant who introduced new social forms and was able to maintain them either by force or by persuasion. Garanger (1972a) thinks it likely that Roy Mata was a Polynesian immigrant. Spriggs (1997:212) points out that the Retoka burial ground—with its evident sacrificial interments—has parallels in a chiefly burial mound on ‘Uvea Island in Western Polynesia (see chap. 7).

As in the Bismarck Archipelago, massive volcanic eruptions devastated parts of the Vanuatu landscape within the period of human habitation, most notably the Kuwae eruption, which literally tore apart the southeastern part of Epi Island, separating it from Tongoa Island.30 The Kuwae eruption ranks as one of the ten largest volcanic events anywhere in the world during the Holocene, probably larger in scale than the well-known Santorini eruption in the eastern Mediterranean around 3600 B.C., which destroyed the Minoan city of Thera, perhaps giving rise to the Atlantis myth. The violent Kuwae eruption, resulting from the interaction of hot magma with seawater, probably occurred in A.D. 1452; it may be responsible for anomalies in the Greenland ice cores dating to A.D. 1452–60. Oral traditions refer to the Kuwae eruption, attributing its origin to a man named Tombuk or Toboka who, angry over being tricked into committing incest with his mother, in revenge used magic to cause the cataclysm (Spriggs 1997:212).

At the southeastern end of Vanuatu lies Aneityum Island, where Spriggs (1981, 1986) made a study of environmental change and agricultural intensification. A pollen core from the Anauwau swamp studied by Hope and Spriggs (1982) exhibits clear signals of human arrival on the island—disturbance to the rainforest and increases in charcoal particles—around 900 B.C., believed to reflect a Lapita colonization. Following initial settlement until around A.D. 1000, shifting cultivation on the island’s volcanic hillsides was the primary mode of subsistence. Centuries of swidden agriculture resulted in a degraded vegetation and heightened erosion rates, leading to alluvial valley infilling and progradation of the island’s coastal flats. During the last millennium, these newly created alluvial soils began to be used for intensive forms of agriculture, particularly irrigated cultivation of taro. During the latest 300 to 400 years especially canals were constructed to cross the divides between separate drainage systems (fig. 5.13). Spriggs traces the development of these irrigation systems in terms of transformations of Aneityumese sociopolitical systems:

The growth of chiefly power and the expansion of irrigation on the island went hand in hand. As a chief’s prestige grew he would become more able to command labor to expand the conditions of agricultural production by the building of new canals and the extension of irrigation systems to the flatter areas of the coastal plains. It was the chief’s power to appropriate surplus production for feasts in order to maintain his prestige which required the expansion of the irrigation systems. An expansion in one district or dominion would necessitate expansion in the others to match food presentations, taro for taro, up to the limits of the productive capacity of the island. (1986:16)




FIGURE 5.13 A prehistoric irrigation canal on Aneityum Island, after excavation. (Photo courtesy M. Spriggs.)





This sequence of late prehistoric agricultural intensification on Aneityum, like that in New Georgia, is one of several cultural developments in island Melanesia reflecting common processes of demographic and sociocultural change.

In sum, while considerable advances have been made in our understanding of the archaeology and prehistory of this extensive archipelago, much remains to be accomplished. Why pottery production persisted in some islands but disappeared in others is a question that has yet to be fully answered. Moreover, the emergence of considerable cultural and linguistic diversity from what appears to have been the same founding Lapita population—a remarkable demonstration of polygenesis—is a research topic that will keep archaeologists in Vanuatu engaged for many years to come.





THE POLYNESIAN OUTLIERS IN MELANESIA


In addition to the more than twenty Polynesian societies found within the “Polynesian Triangle” (with apices at New Zealand, Hawai‘i, and Easter Island), eighteen societies whose members speak Polynesian languages and whose cultural practices include markedly Polynesian features are located geographically west of the triangle. These Polynesian Outliers are found on smaller islands fringing the Melanesian island-arcs but with two also in Micronesia.31 Early twentieth-century diffusionists such as Churchill (1911) saw in the Outliers a trail of Polynesian migration from Asia direct to the main Triangle. More astute observers, such as the German ethnographer Thilenius (1902), recognized that Outlier oral traditions spoke of origins in the east, often resulting from accidental or drift voyages from homelands in “Tonga” or “Rotuma.”32 Indeed, the very names of some Outliers were clearly transferred from a homeland island to a new colony (e.g., Ouvea in the Loyalty group derived from ‘Uvea and Futuna in Vanuatu derived from Futuna in Western Polynesia). Thilenius (1902:83) hypothesized that “the populations of the northwestern Polynesian islands [the Outliers distributed along the Solomons chain] have arisen gradually from small beginnings through the landing of at most a single boat’s crew and through rarer voyages of conquest.” A high probability of drift voyages originating in Western Polynesia making successful landfall on one of the Outliers was demonstrated in computer simulations.33

Archaeological investigation of the Outliers commenced in the 1960s and early 1970s, with studies of Nukuoro (in Micronesia), Anuta, and Rennell-Bellona.34 The second phase of the SSICHP (1977–78) included intensive archaeological studies of Taumako and Tikopia in the outer southeastern Solomons. Fewer than half of the Outliers have been archaeologically investigated; their sequences vary, but they consistently have a late Polynesian phase, sometimes as an intrusion overlying earlier non-Polynesian phases.35

Tikopia encapsulates many key aspects of Outlier history, including interactions between Polynesian and non-Polynesian populations.36 A small (4.6 square kilometers) but topographically dramatic island—featuring steep volcanic hills rimming a deep crater lake (fig. 5.14) that resulted from a cataclysmic eruption—Tikopia is home to about 1,500 Polynesian speakers, organized into four clans (kainanga), each headed by a hereditary chief (Firth 1936). Our work in 1977–78 revealed a well-stratified archaeological record (Kirch and Yen 1982), especially in the Sinapupu sand dune site at Faea, where up to 3.5 meters of continuous deposit encapsulated a 3,000-year sequence, rich in artifacts and faunal materials (fig. 5.15).




FIGURE 5.14 Tikopia consists of a volcanic cone with a central crater lake, resulting from an explosive eruption about 80,000 years ago. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 5.15 The cultural sequence of Tikopia. (From Kirch and Yen 1982.)





Permanent settlement began around 800 B.C., by people making pottery of the Lapita ceramic series.37 The initial Kiki Phase lasted until about 100 B.C. and bears the usual Lapita signature, including a mixed horticultural-maritime economy and—at least in the earliest centuries—external exchange linkages, including the importing of obsidian, chert, and metavolcanic adzes (Spriggs, Bird, and Ambrose 2010). Angling with one-piece fishhooks made of large Turbo shells (fig. 5.16) was an important component of the island’s subsistence economy. Around 100 B.C., several cultural changes mark the beginning of the Sinapupu Phase, which persisted until about A.D. 1200. During the Sinapupu Phase, pottery ceased to be locally manufactured; instead, small quantities of incised and painted pottery were imported, probably from the Banks Islands or northern Vanuatu.38 Other artifact styles also changed, such as shell adzes, which exhibit a distinctive tapered-butt form prominent in Vanuatu adzes of comparable age (fig. 5.17). Most important, substantial quantities of obsidian were imported from the Vanua Lava and Gaua sources in the Banks Islands. In short, during the Sinapupu Phase, Tikopia was linked through regular long-distance exchange with communities in the Banks and northern Vanuatu Islands.




FIGURE 5.16 Turbo shell fishhooks excavated from archaeological sites on Tikopia Island. Both finished hooks and stages of manufacture are illustrated. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 5.17 Tikopia Tridacna shell adzes from the Sinapupu Phase (middle row) have a distinctive tapered and pointed butt similar to adzes from Vanuatu at the same time period. The upper row also illustrates two Terebra shell adzes. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





An abrupt cultural change again occurred around A.D. 1200, with the onset of the Tuakamali Phase and the intrusion of Polynesian-speaking populations from the east. Although contacts with the Banks Islands were not wholly abandoned (some obsidian continued to be imported), no ceramics are present in Tuakamali Phase sites. Distinctive Polynesian material culture appears at this time, such as basalt adzes brought on voyaging canoes from Samoa, ‘Uvea, or other Western Polynesian islands; the classic two-piece Polynesian trolling lure rig; and bone beads. Turtles and sharks—foods that had evidently been taboo during the preceding Sinapupu Phase but that are relished by Polynesian peoples—were once again captured and eaten.

Tikopia oral traditions speak of multiple lineage origins in Western Polynesia (Firth 1961). These traditions relate a series of internal social conflicts and upheavals, some spurred by ecological changes (in particular, the conversion of a marine embayment to the brackish crater lake) but others reflecting aggression by the Polynesian newcomers against the indigenous occupants. Archaeological evidence testifies to the veracity of these traditions, such as the expulsion of the Nga Faea people, whose village site we mapped and excavated. Although after A.D. 1200 Tikopia became culturally and linguistically a distinctly Polynesian place, there was no wholesale replacement of its original population. Genetic continuity is indicated by the presence in modern Tikopia of at least one and probably more marker genes found in Vanuatu but not in Western Polynesia.39

Diminutive Anuta (only 80 hectares in area), 137 kilometers northeast of Tikopia, had regular social relations with the latter; its archaeological sequence in some respects parallels that of Tikopia. Colonization of Anuta occurred around 900 to 800 B.C., with a group making calcareous sand–tempered pottery virtually identical to that found in Kiki Phase sites on Tikopia. Sometime between 500 B.C. and A.D. 580 this population either abandoned Anuta or was wiped out, possibly as a result of a cyclone that left a massive sand deposit in the main An-6 site. Anuta appears to have been unoccupied for some time, then recolonized around A.D. 600, presumably by one or more Polynesian-speaking groups (Kirch 1982b).

Taumako, a Polynesian Outlier situated 300 kilometers northwest of Tikopia, consists of a small chain of nine volcanic islands. The largest of these is just 6 kilometers long and is notable for an artificial islet, Tahua, constructed of coral blocks on the fringing reef, where most of the population resides. The Taumako people were skilled canoe makers and navigators, sailing their large te puke outrigger canoes throughout the Santa Cruz Islands, transporting various exchange valuables within the famed red feather “money” circuit (Davenport 1962; Lewis 1972).

Foss Leach and Janet Davidson (2008) investigated Taumako in 1977–78 as part of the SSICHP, digging at four sites, including a large rockshelter called Te Ana Tavatava and a remarkable burial ground at Namu where 201 skeletons were arrayed with various grave goods, including shell discs, ivory reels, shell money, and “birdman amulets.” The prehistoric sequence begins with the Tavatava Phase, from 800 to 400 B.C. (Leach and Davidson 2008:fig. 8.1).40 Mostly plain pottery, apparently manufactured locally, was found at Te Ana Tavatava, although as at the Kiki site on Tikopia there are a handful of sherds with dentate stamping and incised designs. The Tavatava Phase material culture includes Tridacna shell adzes and Trochus shell trolling hooks similar to those of the Kiki Phase on Tikopia. Pottery ceased to be manufactured after the end of the Tavatava Phase. The succeeding Lakao phase, from 400 B.C. to A.D. 1000, is less well attested, and the Namu Phase, A.D. 1000–1800, is known primarily from the extensive burial assemblage at Namu. The funerary artifacts of the Namu Phase exhibit many parallels with the ethnographically attested material culture of the Santa Cruz Islands, suggesting that the te puke canoe complex and exchange with Nendö, Utupua, and Vanikoro were in place by this period. Stone adzes, most likely of Samoan origin, along with distinctive bone reel ornaments, also appear during the Namu Phase, indicating contact with Western Polynesia or the arrival of drift voyagers from that region. Although as Leach and Davidson (2008:322) point out that “influences from the central Pacific could have been arriving on Taumako at irregular intervals since the time of first settlement,” it seems likely that the incorporation of Polynesian-language speakers into the Taumako population was a phenomenon of the past thousand years.

Contact between Polynesian and Melanesian groups occurred not just in the southeastern Solomons but also in Vanuatu, the Loyalty Islands, and New Caledonia. Spriggs (1997:187–222) discusses the social and cultural effects resulting from interaction between Polynesian Outlier populations and the peoples of eastern Melanesia. Although this is not conclusive, both Garanger and Spriggs attribute the Roy Mata burial site to a Polynesian immigrant group. Although the five documented Polynesian Outliers in central and southern Vanuatu (Emae, Mele, Fila, Aniwa, West Futuna) have yet to be investigated in any detail, they may have had considerable cultural influences during the past 500 years of Vanuatu history. In the Loyalty Islands, a migration from ‘Uvea in Western Polynesia resulted in the takeover of Ouvea Island by Polynesian speakers. Sand (1995:203–12) suggests that the Xetriwaan group of people with immediate origins in southern Vanuatu, who were influential both on Lifou and on La Grande Terre proper, may have had Polynesian associations. As Spriggs (1977:221) remarks, “The migrants inserted themselves within the indigenous economic systems and took them over from the inside.”





ETHNOGENESIS IN LA GRANDE TERRE


At the southeastern terminus of Melanesia lies La Grande Terre (New Caledonia), a long, skinny remnant of ancient Gondwanaland stretching 400 kilometers from northwest to southeast (the total land area is 24,436 square kilometers). To the east, the Loyalty Island chain, comprising Ouvea, Lifou, and Maré, lies about 100 kilometers distant. These islands were administratively joined to La Grande Terre when the French claimed “possession” in 1853, but even prior to European influence the societies of the two island groups had close contacts and relationships.

New Caledonia’s mountainous terrain and mineral-rich soils (it is one of the world’s main sources of nickel) support a unique biota with Gondwanan roots. In the late second millennium B.C., when Lapita voyagers sailed their canoes through the island’s marvelous barrier reef lagoons and hauled ashore, they encountered such bizarre creatures as giant flightless megapodes, terrestrial crocodiles, varanid lizards, and large horned tortoises. These and other creatures, lacking any fear of the new bipedal predators, did not withstand the human onslaught for more than a few centuries; we know them today only from subfossils and remains in archaeological contexts.41 Unlike La Grande Terre, the Loyalty Islands consist of upraised makatea limestone. Maré and Lifou have cliff-bound coasts and extensive flat plateaus with arable soils formed by decomposition of the limestone and organically enriched.

In this new and biotically strange land the Lapita colonists of La Grande Terre and the Loyalties—and the generations of descendants they spawned—gave rise to a remarkable diversity of societies and language groups.42 While all of the languages spoken in these islands are of the Oceanic branch of Austronesian, there are thirty-seven distinct languages classified within seven primary subgroups. And although there is much cultural homogeneity (in material culture, for example, and in subsistence practices), the islands’ populations seem to have consciously differentiated among themselves sociopolitically and ethnically. New Caledonia thus challenges the anthropologist with the extent of ethnogenesis that occurred within a mere three millennia.

This linguistic and cultural diversity intrigued the pioneer ethnographers, who were at a loss to explain it other than through numerous and repeated migrations by groups with varied ethnic and biological origins.43 E.W. Gifford and his student Dick Shutler Jr. carried out the first modern archaeological excavations on La Grande Terre in 1952 (Sand and Kirch 2002). Finding no evidence of a “pre-pottery cultural level,” they rejected any notion of a “Paleolithic stage of culture” in the archipelago’s history (Gifford and Shutler 1956:94). While this should have been the end of the matter, when Jack Golson as well as Luc Chevalier discovered earthen mounds or “tumuli” on the Île des Pins, with radiocarbon ages as old as 10,950 B.C., the question of a preceramic, pre-Austronesian occupation was resurrected. Based on excavations in these mounds by Chevalier (1963) and Golson (1963), Green (1988) came to the realization that the “tumuli” were nonhuman artifacts created by the extinct giant megapode (Sylviornis neocaledoniae). These birds are known to scrape up heaps of earth and leaf litter with their powerful legs, in which they incubate their eggs (pieces of egg shell as well as terrestrial Placostylus snails were found in the mounds).

Thanks to the energetic work of French archaeologists—including Daniel Frimigacci, Jean-Christophe Galipaud, and Christophe Sand—our knowledge of New Caledonian prehistory has improved by leaps and bounds, as extensive excavations and surveys have been carried out throughout the archipelago.44 As elsewhere in the Remote Oceanic parts of island Melanesia, initial settlement of the archipelago was by Lapita people. An extensive series of radiocarbon dates (Sand 2010; Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho 2002) now fixes the date of first settlement of New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands between 1100 and 1050 B.C. The initial Lapita Phase, characterized by diverse vessel forms decorated with the classic dentate-stamped technique, ended by 800 B.C.

The production of pottery, however, did not cease with the end of Lapita proper. As Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho (2011:59) write, “The end part of the Lapita phase is characterised by an increase and diversification of incised motifs, the appearance of a series of simplified dentate-stamped motifs, and the development of more shell-impression in some sites.” The New Caledonian ceramic tradition began to differentiate, with new vessel forms and decorative styles emerging and with the northern and southern sectors of La Grande Terre exhibiting different trajectories. These different ceramic styles provide the basis for a cultural sequence of four periods (fig 5.18). Aside from providing important chronological signposts, the sequence of New Caledonian ceramics offers a material index to the ongoing processes of ethnogenesis or polygenesis.




FIGURE 5.18 The ceramic sequence of New Caledonia, according to Sand et al. (2011). (Courtesy of Christophe Sand.)





Following Lapita, the Koné Period is marked first by the emergence of Podtanean pottery, characterized by paddle-impressing, “mostly on thin-walled pots with light carination and rims with a flat lip” (Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho 2011:60).45 Regional differences first emerge within the Koné Period, with the incised Puen Tradition in the south46 and the Pindai Tradition in the north, the latter marked by “simple ovoid pots with incurved rims, bearing shell-impressed and applied clayband decorations” (60).

The Koné Period ends around 2,000 years ago, and although the transition may not have been simultaneous throughout the archipelago, the succeeding Naïa Period starts at the beginning of the second millennium A.D. and continues until about A.D. 1000. In the northern part of La Grande Terre, a new Balabio ceramic tradition emerges, with roots in the preceding Pindai pottery. Balabio pots are mostly characterized by simple shell impression and incision. In the south, the Puen Tradition gives rise to the Plum Tradition, which has round-bottomed vessels with handles under the rim, decorated with often crude incising (Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho 2011:62). Noting the design similarities between Plum ceramics and a style of petroglyphs, Sand (1995:144) suggests that the rock art might have served as boundary markers, possibly a reflection of growing ethnolinguistic differentiation within the island.

The ceramic chronology enters its final phase at the beginning of the second millennium A.D., with what Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho (2011) call the Traditional Kanak Cultural Complex, which continues into the “ethnographic present” following European contact. The north-south divide continues, with the Nera Tradition emerging out of Plum in the south and with the Oundjo Tradition in the north.47 The Nera Tradition is marked by spherical vessels lacking everted rims, with simple decorations consisting of rows of nubbins and some incising. The Oundjo Tradition has pots with incised, stamped, and relief decorations on the upper parts of the globular pots, below the rim. Indeed, it seems likely that ceramics, as well as other forms of material culture, were actively manipulated by local peoples as symbols of ethnic identity.

This kind of social differentiation, it should be said, had as one underlying basis the growth and expansion of the archipelago’s population (fig. 5.19). The early Koné Period, which lasted perhaps 1,200 years, witnessed the gradual expansion of human settlement throughout New Caledonia and the Loyalty archipelago, at first concentrated along the coasts and in the more horticulturally suited humid sectors but toward the end of the period expanding into interior valleys. Sand (1995:112–13) estimates that by the close of the Koné Period the island’s aggregate population had reached 50,000. Stratigraphic evidence from the Bopope region indicates that by the first few centuries of the Christian era, even interior valleys were permanently occupied, with landscapes increasingly transformed by human actions.




FIGURE 5.19 Major trends in the evolution of New Caledonian culture, according to Sand (1996a).





Significantly, the earliest material signals of social transformation—specifically, indications of hierarchy, competition, and warfare—are found not on La Grande Terre but on the central plain of Maré Island. Two monumental stone structures, built of coral blocks weighing up to 5 tons each, were defensive sites or forts; the rectangular enclosure of Hnakudotit (site LMA016) incorporates 23,000 cubic meters of stone (fig. 5.20). This remarkable construction dates to the first two or three centuries A.D. According to Sand (1995:133), these structures indicate the prior existence of a “political system . . . very different from that known ethnographically in New Caledonia.” The ecological setting of these structures is critical: the upraised, karst limestone plateau of Maré Island is a “dry” and somewhat marginal environment for an agriculturally based economy. The model of contrastive “wet and dry” agroecological regimes proposed for Polynesia by Kirch (1994) predicts that in such environments—where the choice of agricultural strategies is highly constrained toward labor-intensive short-fallow swidden—competition for land and aggressive territorial warfare are most likely to arise. It is not surprising then to find these early indications of competition and territorial marking on Maré, rather than on La Grande Terre, which had a much greater potential for alternative forms of intensification, such as terracing.




FIGURE 5.20 Stacked walls of massive limestone boulders make up the Hnakudotit fortification site on Maré, Loyalty Islands. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Yet if the first signals of ecological and/or demographic stress—and consequent sociopolitical response—arose on the makatea plateaus of the Loyalties, other kinds of intensification soon appeared on the main island. Evidence from sediment cores reveals that the initial Lapita colonists, practicing shifting cultivation, had a noticeable impact on New Caledonia’s vegetation, while the faunal records show that several endemic animals, including the large flightless megapode, a terrestrial crocodile, and the giant horned tortoise, rapidly went extinct.48 But as population increased, the cumulative effects of human actions on the landscape mounted. La Grande Terre has long been noted for its permanent landscape transformation, or what Blaikie and Brookfield (1987) called landesque capital intensification. These include taro irrigation systems—the most extensive in all of Oceania—as well as Dioscorea yam mound systems.49 Anyone who has viewed the magnificently sculpted hillsides of the Col de la Pirogue, with row upon row of descending terraces for taro planting irrigated by a complex network of canals and ditches (fig. 5.21), must be impressed at the scale of landscape manipulation achieved by this preindustrial society.




FIGURE 5.21 Flights of formerly irrigated taro terraces, now in grasslands, cover large sections of the New Caledonian landscape. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Archaeology has offered some indications of the prehistory of these impressive landscapes. Excavations in taro terraces (site WPT069) at the famous Col de la Pirogue irrigation complex near Nouméa yielded a radiocarbon age of A.D. 670–990, the oldest date for a Melanesian irrigation complex.50 Other terraces gave more recent ages, within the last two or three centuries. The Païta data suggest that intensive, canal-fed irrigation was a development of the middle to later phases of island sequences, linked both to demographic pressures and to sociopolitical transformations. Of equal note are vast areas of ancient dryland terracing and mounding that mark formerly intensive systems of “dry” cultivation, focused primarily on Dioscorea yams. The New Caledonian dryland systems rival in scale and complexity those of the New Guinea Highlands. At Tiwaka, a single dryland system includes more than 150 large mounds, totaling at least 35 hectares. Mounds may be 1 to 3 meters high, 10 meters wide, and up to several hundred meters long. The prehistory of these dryland systems remains a problem awaiting further research.

New forms of inland habitation arose during the Naïa Period and the following Traditional Kanak period, in close spatial association with the intensive agricultural systems. While the coastal regions—marked by extensive shell middens—continued to be occupied, the interior valleys and coastal plains came to be dotted with elevated house mounds, frequently organized in linear arrangements of fifteen or more around a central alleyway. The plan of Tipalet (site ETO018) in the Bopope region (fig. 5.22) shows such mounds on either side of an elongate plaza, with a substantially larger mound at each end. Other habitation mound complexes reflect a hierarchy of mound sizes and heights, possible evidence for social stratification or at least for ranking of households. Few such complexes have been excavated, but a charcoal sample from the base of a mound at Pwapwadouhi yielded a calibrated radiocarbon age of A.D. 1290–1470.




FIGURE 5.22 Plan of house mounds at Tipalet in the Bopope region of New Caledonia. (Courtesy Christophe Sand.)





According to Sand (1995:200), “It is the intensification of horticulture which appears the most characteristic” of the last two thousand years of New Caledonian prehistory. He accepts a primary causal role for demographic pressure but cautions that population growth by itself is too limiting an explanatory factor. Indeed, the very existence of these intensive agricultural systems—which are found throughout the interior valleys and plains of New Caledonia—provoked Sand to question long-held ethnographic notions concerning traditional Kanak societies (e.g., Guiart 1963). Rather than regard the sociopolitical systems associated with these intensive systems of agricultural production as “weak chiefdoms,” and the sites themselves as only intermittently occupied by a peripatetic population, Sand asks whether the archaeological evidence might not better support an interpretation of “strong chiefdoms” bolstered by substantial surplus extraction and driven by prestige rivalry.

How can we account for the disparity between the New Caledonian archaeological record, which speaks to the former existence of highly complex sociopolitical formations, and twentieth-century ethnography, which refers at best to “weak” chiefdoms? The answer—still somewhat contentious—may lie in a demographic collapse of hitherto-unappreciated magnitude, immediately after European contact. The crux of the argument is as follows. Based on a narrow reading of the available textual sources—and in particular favoring census data that did not become available until after missionization in the mid-nineteenth century (more than sixty years after initial European contact)—academic demographers maintained that the precontact population of La Grande Terre never exceeded 50,000. In contrast, archaeological data (while too thin to attempt regional population estimates) suggest that the latter figure is way too low to account for the density and intensity of the agricultural and residential landscape. In a case study of the Païta region near Nouméa, Sand (1995) shows that while the ethnologist Guiart estimated the maximum population at perhaps 1,200 persons, the archaeological vestiges of intensive terracing and habitation lead one to a conservative estimate of 8,000, with a strong likelihood of double that number. Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho (2007:325) conclude that even the estimate by the geographer J.C. Roux of 80 to 100,000 persons for New Caledonia at European contact “is far too low.”

How can we account for the disparity in estimates? Sand argues that not only the effects of diseases for which the indigenous Kanaks had no resistance but also the political and military strategies of several decades of whalers, sandalwooders, and outright colonists had far greater impacts than hitherto recognized. The French colonials pursued a strategy of outright destruction of agricultural infrastructure, leading to famine and social collapse. Sand’s dissection of the arguments of Norma McArthur (1968) for low population densities deserves to be read by all anthropologists and historians working in Melanesia. In Sand’s words, “To appreciate the extent of the demographic collapse is to revisit the autopsy of the destruction of a society” (1995:248).





FIJI: AN ARCHIPELAGO “IN BETWEEN”


Fiji offers striking contrasts yet intriguing similarities with New Caledonia (map 9). The archipelagoes are of comparable scale (24,436 square kilometers for New Caledonia, 18,272 for Fiji) and have been inhabited for the same length of time (they were both settled by Lapita peoples), but Fiji’s history does not display the emphasis on small-scale ethnolinguistic differentiation seen in La Grande Terre and the Loyalties. There is, to be sure, intra-archipelago diversity within Fiji, but this is more limited. For example, the Fijian peoples speak only two main dialects, Western and Eastern Fijian; there is a third discrete language on isolated Rotuma Island.51 Culturally, there were important differences between coastal and offshore island dwellers and the “bush people” of the interiors of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu. In addition, the people of the Lau Islands had their own distinctive characteristics, in part derived from regular contact and interaction with Tonga.




MAP 9 The Fiji archipelago, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





Anthropologists have never quite known how to deal with Fiji. It is a sort of “between” archipelago, situated geographically closer to Western Polynesia (with whose societies there were important historical interactions), yet usually classified as a “Melanesian” culture. Of course, such nineteenth-century classifications are of little real historical or analytical value, and perhaps the Fijian case is the best example (see the introduction). Settled at the close of the second millennium B.C.—by a founding Lapita population that quickly expanded to colonize nearby Tonga and other Western Polynesian islands—Fiji shares the same foundation culture with Western Polynesia. At the same time, Fiji continued in later millennia to receive both genetic and cultural influences from the west (i.e., from “Melanesia”), inputs that in part set its historical trajectory apart from those of Tonga, Samoa, or Futuna. There is ample evidence—archaeological, linguistic, and cultural—that the peoples of Fiji, Tonga, Samoa, Futuna, Lau, and other smaller islands in this part of the central Pacific had regular exchanges (material, social, and genetic) throughout prehistory. Thus, in contrast to New Caledonia (which, while not wholly isolated, is set apart in its corner of the southwestern Pacific), Fiji was a sort of “between place”—a foyer of exchange and interaction.

Gifford (1951) pioneered archaeological excavation in Fiji, focusing on the main island of Viti Levu. He dug two sites: Navatu (site 17) on the north coast under the shadow of the imposing volcanic monolith Uluinavatu, an important place in Fijian origin traditions; and Vunda (site 26), near Lautoka. Both sites yielded materials spanning the last two millennia of Fijian prehistory, and later excavations, in the 1960s and 1970s, at the Sigatoka dunes, the Yanuca rockshelter, Natunuku, Naigani Island, and other sites filled in earlier phases of the sequence.52 The Sigatoka site, a sprawling and complex stratified dune of alluvial sands at the mouth of Sigatoka Valley, has continued to yield materials important to defining the Fijian sequence.53 The Australian National University’s Early Prehistory of Fiji Project (1996–2000) added a wealth of new data on early sites, landscape transformations, and faunal changes (G. Clark and Anderson, eds., 2009). In addition to the focus on Lapita and early sites, much emphasis has been placed on inland settlements and fortifications, in such areas as the Rewa and Navua deltas and the Sigatoka River valley on Viti Levu and on Taveuni, Wakaya, and Lakeba Islands.54 Nonetheless, given its geographic scale and number of islands, the Fiji archipelago remains archaeologically underexplored.

Gifford (1951:189) observed that pottery is the “chief characteristic of Fijian archaeology.” As in New Caledonia, ceramics are found throughout the prehistoric sequence and continued to be manufactured after European contact (MacLachlan 1940; Thompson 1938). Based on his excavations at Navatu and Vunda, Gifford defined an early period with “relief”-decorated sherds (fig. 5.23) and a late period with dominantly “incised” sherds. Green (1963b) later showed that Gifford had missed the first third of the Fijian sequence, marked by Lapita pottery, and renamed the phases as follows: Sigatoka (ca. 1200–100 B.C.), Navatu (100 B.C.–A.D. 1100), Vunda (A.D. 1100–1800), and, after European contact, the Ra Phase. This terminology, described by Frost (1979), has been adopted by most investigators and remains a useful culture-historical schema for the archipelago.55




FIGURE 5.23 A paddle-impressed pot from the Sigatoka dune site, Fiji. (After Birks 1973.)





The Fijian archipelago was settled as a part of the Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania at the close of the second millennium B.C. (see chap. 4). Bayesian calibration of radiocarbon dates from the sites of Bourewa, Naigani, and Yanuca put initial settlement at 1100 to 1000 B.C. (G. Clark and Anderson, eds., 2009:175).56 From Fiji, the Lapita expansion continued—seemingly without significant pause—eastward into Tonga and Samoa; contacts between these groups are indicated both in archaeological materials and by historical linguistic evidence.57 As elsewhere in the Eastern Lapita region, decoration of pottery with dentate stamping rapidly declined, so that Sigatoka Phase assemblages of the first millennium B.C. consist largely of plain wares, although with some paddle impressing.

The transition from Sigatoka to Navatu Phases is fairly gradual in terms of the ceramics, marked by an increase in carved-paddle impressions on globular vessels. Shaw, Frost, and others view such ceramic changes as the result of local stylistic developments. However, stylistic changes marking the boundary between the Navatu and Vunda Phases at roughly A.D. 1100 are more abrupt, with the introduction of a whole new array of incised designs. Archaeologists have debated whether these changes reflect external influences, such as the movement or migration of a new group of people into Fiji at this time, most likely from Vanuatu. Green, Bellwood (1979:264–65), and others regarded such a population intrusion likely, pointing to close stylistic similarities between Vunda Phase ceramics and those of the Mangaasi complex of Vanuatu.58 The appearance of Vanuatu obsidian in rockshelters on Lakeba Island around A.D. 250 supports this interpretation (Best 1984: 643). In contrast, Rechtman (1992) expressed profound skepticism about explanations that invoke external influences or migrations, preferring to see all change in the Fijian sequence as stemming from internal dynamics (see also Bedford and Spriggs 2008).

Burley and Edinborough (2014; see also Burley 2005) show that the transition from plain ware to Navatu Phase ceramics at Sigatoka was abrupt, with the interval between these phases having a duration of no more than forty-three years. Given the magnitude of ceramic differences between these phases, they argue that “the abruptness of this change can be explained only by exogenous replacement” (2014:295). Burley (2013) has revisited the issue of Fijian “polygenesis,” and the question of how—given a common Lapita ancestry for Fijians and Polynesians—“Fijians became Fijian and not Polynesians.” Whereas Burley sees the gradual transition from early dentate-stamped Lapita to later plain ware ceramics as a gradual continuum, the sudden appearance of Navatu-style pottery can only be explained, he argues, by intrusion of a new group of people: “The Navatu-phase ceramic assemblage represents an abrupt change, one that succinctly marks a different population of potters living on this site. Whether this population originates ultimately from central Island Melanesia or represents a population movement from within the Fijian archipelago is a central question” (Burley 2013:445). However, given the strong similarities between Navatu ceramics and pottery of similar age in Vanuatu, such a connection seems highly likely.

The cultural developments of the Vunda Phase—roughly the last thousand years—include fascinating parallels with New Caledonia in the extensive modification of landscapes for food production, yet striking differences in residential patterns. Excavations in fortified sites on Taveuni and Wakaya Islands demonstrate that these were a dominant feature of the Vunda Phase. Perhaps the most common form is the “ring-ditch” style enclosing a cluster of habitation sites, the latter often elevated on earthen or stone-faced mounds. Terraced fortifications are present in more hilly topography. Figure 5.24 illustrates a particularly complex ring-ditch site at Lomolomo in the Sigatoka River valley. Ring-ditch fortifications are ubiquitous in low-lying terrain, as on the fertile deltas and floodplains of the Rewa, Navua, Sigatoka, and other drainages. Parry (1977, 1981, 1987) identified large numbers of fortified sites, closely associated with extensive agricultural remains, using aerial photographs. The agricultural remains include reticulate systems of raised beds and intervening ditches, called vuci in Fijian, used to grow Colocasia taro as well as giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis). In hilly areas such as the interior of the Sigatoka Valley, extensive pondfield terraces cascade down hillsides, similar to those in New Caledonia (Parry 1987:pl. 20).




FIGURE 5.24 Plan of a village fortified with ring-ditches, at Lomolomo (site VL 16/57) in the Rewa Delta of Viti Levu, Fiji. (After Parry 1987.)





In an extensive GIS-based survey of the Sigatoka drainage, Field (1998, 2003, 2004) described three modes of habitation/subsistence: territorial strongholds, remote refuges, and constructed fortifications on the valley bottom. Test excavations at various sites indicate that inland habitation and agriculture in the valley did not begin until many centuries after Lapita colonization, between 20 B.C. and A.D. 80. Fortifications making use of natural topography first appear around A.D. 600 and continue throughout the sequence. Roos, Field, and Dudgeon (2016) used stratigraphic records of charcoal and carbon stable isotopes obtained from a core in the lower Sigatoka Valley, finding that “archaeological indicators of resource stress co-occur with persistent swiddening after 1450 cal BP, although these precede the collapse into degraded grassland conditions at 1000 cal BP” (535). Extensive agricultural modifications, along with shifting cultivation, heightened erosion rates in the Sigatoka Valley, leading to increased sediment loads in the Sigatoka River and resulting in the formation of the massive dune field now located at the valley mouth, itself an important archaeological site (Anderson et al. 2006; Dickinson et al. 1998).

The cultural processes associated with the construction of the literally thousands of fortified sites that appeared over the Fijian landscape in the Vunda Phase have been debated. Frost (1974, 1979) invoked the arrival of an immigrant population, bringing the new incised ceramic styles, who “clashed” with the indigenous people, leading to a major period of fort building and warfare. However, while abrupt ceramic changes at around A.D. 1100 may have resulted from external migration, they need not be directly linked to the settlement pattern changes, for which internal demographic, economic, and sociopolitical processes provide more likely explanations. Parry (1981, 1987) and Rechtman (1992) argue that the intensified landscape modifications of later Fijian prehistory are linked to increasing population density, competition for resources (especially prime agricultural lands), and an involutionary spiral of intergroup warfare. Roos, Field, and Dudgeon (2016:550) likewise point to the cumulative effects of landscape transformation: “It is in the context of degraded landscapes of the last millennium that evidence for socio-political inequality is most robust, in the context of further population growth and intercommunity conflict in the last 500–700 years. This pattern generally conforms to the scenario described by Kirch (1994, 2010), in which landscape degradation from swidden intensification drives cycles of interpolity conflict and socio-political complexity.” Field (2004) and Field and Lape (2010) have drawn attention to climate change effects, such as the Little Ice Age (A.D. 1300–1850) and pronounced ENSO conditions, as drivers of change in settlement pattern and fortification. Field (2004:95), for example, notes that in the Sigatoka Valley, the founding of “environmental refuge sites” corresponds temporally with the onset of the Little Ice Age, when cooler and drier conditions may have exacerbated drought and food scarcity.

Rechtman (1992:46–52) regarded the origin of fortified sites in Fiji as owing to “internal development,” spurred in the first instance by population growth and by an increased need for resources. In his view, these processes led, after A.D. 1100, to interregional contact and conflict, marked both by fortification and by the proliferation of ceramic styles, the latter presumably as an index of increased social or ethnic differentiation. As conquest warfare became increasingly common, Rechtman believes, a shift occurred in leadership, from ideological control by sacred leaders to secular control based on force. A corollary of this change was the development of highly institutionalized cannibalism.

While some anthropologists have expressed skepticism that cannibalism actually existed anywhere in the world, the case for cannibalism in late Fijian prehistory seems particularly sound. Gifford (1951:208) observed in his usual terse fashion that “man was the most popular of the vertebrate animals used for food” based on the faunal materials from his Navatu and Vunda excavations. Reanalysis of Gifford’s Navatu collections using modern criteria for evaluating cannibalistic practices confirms his view (DeGusta 1999, 2000). Based on faunal and taphonomic studies of human materials from Wakaya Island, Rechtman is equally convinced that the archaeological evidence supports cannibalism as a major practice in later Fijian prehistory. In his Lakeba Island sites, Best (1984:534) found that bones of Homo sapiens could be interpreted as “food remains,” based on frequent charring, cut marks, and “the underrepresentation of hands, feet, and heads.” Of course, the contact-period historical sources speak to the ritualized and extensive nature of Fijian anthropophagy, which until recent years has not been questioned. In my view, the issue is not whether the Fijians practiced cannibalism but why such practices should have become so pervasive and institutionalized. They may represent a kind of “competitive involution” in sociopolitical evolution parallel to that hypothesized for the Marquesas Islands (Kirch 1991a), where cannibalism is also evidenced archaeologically (see chap. 7).

To the east of the main islands of Fiji, the Lau group consists of dozens of smaller islands (see map 9), some of which have been archaeologically studied. Best (1984) investigated Lakeba, a nearly circular high island of 56 square kilometers in central Lau. Lakeba, as with other Lau islands, had important proto-historic connections to Tonga. Best’s survey of 209 sites and his excavations at six of these produced a cultural sequence commencing in the early Lapita period (ca. 1000 B.C.) that displays many of the key stylistic changes in ceramics found elsewhere in Fiji. Best suggests that population numbers were low in the early phase (settlement may even have been seasonal or intermittent for the first two centuries) but began to increase significantly in his Period II (ca. 500 B.C.), as marked by “a spectacular spread of sites across the landscape” (1984: 592). Given this inland expansion, there is by A.D. 1 a perhaps not surprising degree of environmental degradation, with a “regime of inland burn-off.”59 A population maximum was reached by about A.D. 1000, by which time large forts such as Ulunikoro (site 101/7/47) were constructed. Thus, in the Lakeba sequence, the rise of both forts and cannibalism came after a phase of initial population expansion and possible overexploitation of agricultural resources.

S. Jones (2009; Jones, Steadman, and O’Day 2007) augmented our understanding of Lau prehistory with ethnoarchaeological research on the small islands of Nayau, Aiwa Levu, and Aiwa Lailai, situated north and south of larger Lakeba. Jones’s research focused on marine exploitation and subsistence and on gender roles. Jones and Quinn (2009) used stable isotopes from human skeletal remains combined with faunal analysis to determine that throughout prehistory the Lauan diet was composed of 60 to 70 percent plant foods (primarily root crops), with the remainder made up of reef fishes, shellfish, and reptiles.

Clark and Cole (1997) used archaeological survey combined with palynological analysis of sediment cores to construct a tentative cultural and environmental history of Totoya Island, in the Yasayasa Moala group southeast of Viti Levu. Initial settlement was again by people with Lapita ceramics, “perhaps close to 3000 years ago” (1997:150). Human-induced forest clearance began shortly after colonization, leading to the expansion of grasslands and secondary forest. Settlement was concentrated around the coastal areas until about 50 B.C. to A.D. 250, when there was a “significant move inland and the establishment of inland villages” (1997:152). This change in settlement patterns is coupled with another “round of substantial vegetation disturbance.” Finally, in the second millennium A.D., the final decline of the inland forest—leading to extensive grasslands covering the central hills—corresponds to a period when hilltop forts were constructed at several locations. Clark and Cole (1997:152) suggest that “the expansion of warfare on the island may have been related in part to a large population and pressure on limited resources.”

While internal dynamics such as population growth and resource competition were surely key factors in the transformation of Fijian society over the course of three millennia, there were also external connections that linked Fijian populations with adjacent islands and archipelagoes. In Lapita sites of Fiji, there is evidence for the movement of obsidian, chert, stone adzes, pottery, and other material items between islands, some from outside the Fijian archipelago itself. Fijian potsherds have occasionally been found in Tongan sites,60 and in the proto-historic period there is ample ethnographic and oral tradition evidence for a complex network of exchange relationships linking Fiji with Tonga and Samoa.61 The people of Lau, in particular, served as intermediaries between the chiefly lineages of Tonga and Fiji, and groups of Tongan canoe builders were allowed to take up residence in Lau in order to have access to large timber trees.62 Such regular and frequently systematized contacts no doubt facilitated the spread of innovations ranging from the material to the ideological, and account for parallel cultural developments in Fijian and Western Polynesian cultures.63





LARGER THEMES IN MELANESIAN PREHISTORY


In this concluding section, I draw attention to three themes that run through the prehistory of this vast region, cross-cutting geographical divisions. These are certainly not the only patterns that others may find of interest, but to my mind they are salient.


CHANGE IN CERAMIC SEQUENCESArchaeologists are interested in ceramic change, not only because pottery styles are sensitive temporal indicators and thus form the bases of chronology, but also because ceramic styles may indicate cultural connections over space and time. Throughout island Melanesia, a well-marked ceramic horizon—Lapita—links the entire region at the beginning of the first millennium B.C. Lapita proper, in the sense of dentate-stamped ceramics, did not persist beyond the first two to three centuries, giving way to ceramics decorated with new techniques. In some localities, ceramic production is abandoned altogether after about A.D. 1–200, although pots were frequently imported from neighboring groups who continued to manufacture pottery. This is the case in both Mussau and Tikopia. More interesting, however, are the parallel style changes that occurred from the Bismarcks to Vanuatu and New Caledonia and that are echoed to some degree in Fiji. These are the decline and abandonment of the classic Lapita dentate-stamped technique of decoration and its replacement, initially with paddle impressing and then mostly with incised designs but also with designs executed using other techniques, such as end-tool impressing, fingernail impressing, relief, and appliqué. The Mangaasi ceramic complex of central Vanuatu was one of the first such post-Lapita ceramic groups to be identified, although Garanger (1972a) was uncertain of its relationship to Lapita proper. With the discovery of parallel sequences in Mussau, Manus, New Ireland, Watom, Nissan-Buka, and New Caledonia, however, we now know that Mangaasi is only one of a number of such ceramic transitions. The question thus arises whether these developments—most of which seem to occur in the period from about 550 B.C. to A.D. 250—were in any way related.

One possibility is that similarities in these style changes reflect continued interisland and intersocietal contacts and thus the sharing of technical and stylistic innovations. But incising as a technique was certainly a part of the older Lapita design repertoire; notably, it is far less labor-intensive than dentate stamping. Thus the shift from dentate stamping to incising throughout island Melanesia beginning around 550 B.C. and continuing until about A.D. 250 may simply reflect common responses on the part of potters to the changing social and economic roles and values of ceramics. As the initially widespread Lapita network began to break apart into a series of geographically less extensive, regional networks, the high value formerly placed on the elaborately decorated forms of Lapita pots could have decreased, and indeed the role of ceramics in exchange systems is likely to have declined. Since there is continuity in motifs from Lapita ceramics to the early phases of incised (“Mangaasoid,” or Mangaasi-like) pottery, it may be that potters were no longer interested in, or willing to invest long hours in, decorating their pots.

The shift to incised pottery occurred later in Fiji than in the Melanesian archipelagoes to the west. This raises the question of whether the change in Fiji—which did not proceed, as elsewhere, directly from dentate stamping to incising but rather via an intermediate phase dominated by paddle-impressed pottery—was the result of a population movement or intrusion, possibly from Vanuatu or New Caledonia. This is the position of Best (1984), Frost (1979), Green (1963b), and, most recently, Burley (2005, 2013) but one that is contested by others such as Rechtman (1992) who prefer to see the Fijian sequence in isolationist terms. No doubt the debate will continue. Much more basic field and laboratory work must be done to fill out the ceramic sequences of Melanesia before these fundamental questions will be definitively answered. We must always keep in mind, however, that ceramics have as much to tell us of ancient cultural and social processes as they do of mere chronology.


DEVELOPMENT OF SPECIALIZED TRADE AND EXCHANGE NETWORKSAnother recurrent theme in the prehistory of the “New” Melanesia concerns the rise of highly intensified forms of external exchange and of high-volume specialist trade.64 Several examples are (often still incompletely) known from the archaeological record, including the coastal Papuan systems with their pottery-producing central places (Mailu or Motupore), the antecedents of the ethnographic kula in the Massim, the Siassi middlemen traders, the “red feather money” network of the Santa Cruz Islands and Taumako, the mid–first millennium A.D. network(s) linking Tikopia and Vanikoro to northern Vanuatu, and networks connecting Fiji with the Lau Islands.

Arguably, all of these later exchange or trade systems developed out of antecedents that can ultimately be traced back to the Lapita cultural complex, itself marked by extensive exchange, including at times highly complex (multinodal) and geographically extensive systems. In the Lapita networks as we currently understand them, there was an important social or ritual component, reflected in the movement of such material items as elaborately decorated pottery and a range of finely made shell valuables. In some post-Lapita systems, this pattern was continued and elaborated. Shell valuables, for example, remained an important component of Papuan trading even after the shift to high-volume ceramic production. And one cannot fail to mention the classic kula exchange in armshells and bead necklaces, material forms that may well trace their ultimate ancestry to Lapita shell valuables.

As societies in the archipelagoes of “New” Melanesia began to differentiate and diverge in the centuries following the initial Lapita diaspora, the original widespread exchange linkages retracted to become regionalized or localized. Thus in Papua and the Massim, an earlier system that possibly linked both areas broke down into several regional networks (two of which focused on Motupore and Mailu) about A.D. 800. Jim Allen (1977, 1984b, 2017) developed a model of such transformations in which the spatial extent of networks decreases over time as their complexity (or degree of specialization) increases. This model fits the Papuan data well; further work is required to test its validity for other sequences of changing exchange and trade in eastern Melanesia.


LANDESQUE CAPITAL INTENSIFICATION AND SOCIOPOLITICAL TRANSFORMATIONIn the late phases from New Georgia, Santa Ana, Aneityum, New Caledonia, and Fiji, as well as in the New Guinea Highlands, there were parallel developments of highly intensive agricultural production systems, often accompanied by changes in settlement and residential patterns. The agricultural systems are all types of landesque capital (Blaikie and Brookfield 1987), involving the permanent transformation of a landscape through the construction of facilities such as terraces, canals, and walled garden plots. Once such transformations have been accomplished, landscapes may be put back into use even after periods of disuse or abandonment. Although they may have relatively high associated labor costs during construction, these systems have the benefit of conferring high yields, often at labor input levels that are considerably less than those seen with shifting cultivation and certainly with short-fallow swidden regimes.65

These intensive agricultural systems were something entirely new on the face of post-Lapita Melanesia. We have no evidence that the Lapita peoples themselves practiced anything other than classic shifting cultivation, along with arboriculture and probably the planting of naturally swampy areas in Colocasia or Cyrtosperma aroids. An older notion that the first Austronesian-speaking peoples who moved into Oceania brought with them Asiatic forms of terracing and irrigation technology does not stand up to the scrutiny of either archaeological or linguistic evidence (Kirch and Lepofsky 1993).

Were the terraced, canal-fed irrigation systems of New Georgia, Aneityum, New Caledonia, and Fiji the result of interarchipelago communication and the diffusion of technological innovations, or were they independent but convergent responses to common sets of pressures or challenges? I am inclined toward the latter, seeing these intensive forms of agricultural practice as logical developments out of widespread agronomic and ethnobiological knowledge having an antiquity going back to Lapita, and perhaps earlier.

If this interpretation is correct, what were the push or pull factors, and the changing sociopolitical contexts, that led to these convergent agricultural developments? An underlying factor in all cases is probably to be found in population numbers and densities, but to put the full or even the primary onus on demography is unwarranted. Environmental factors such as resource variability and degradation of landscapes over centuries of shifting cultivation are also salient factors, as both the New Guinea Highlands and Aneityum cases (and probably the New Caledonian one as well) suggest. Moreover, we cannot ignore the complex linkages between production for subsistence and “social” production (Brookfield 1972, 1984; Kirch 1994). As the societies of “New” Melanesia became larger and gradually shifted from being heterarchical to hierarchical, elites benefited incrementally from the surpluses they could extract from intensive agricultural systems and put to social and political ends through competitive feasts or other means.

I have not dealt directly with the topic of sociopolitical transformation in post-Lapita Melanesia, largely because the state of our knowledge of prehistoric social formations remains for the most part rudimentary. But implicit in much of what I have discussed is the notion that the past two and a half millennia witnessed significant transformations of Melanesian societies, with small-scale “house” societies of the Lapita period (see chap. 4) giving rise to large-scale aggregations under the control of elites whom early explorers, missionaries, and later ethnographers were frequently to label “chiefs.”66 The archaeological records of these islands hint at these changes, such as the massive forts of Maré Island, which must have taken centralized labor control to construct; the differentiated habitation mounds of later New Caledonian settlements, in which the residences of elites seem to be set off from or command higher elevations than those of commoners; or the elaborate funerary rites associated with Roy Mata. The challenge for archaeology in Melanesia is to develop the tools of a sophisticated “social archaeology” that can tease out the evidence for such sociopolitical transformation.





SIX


Micronesia


IN THE “SEA OF LITTLE LANDS”



Hidden in the jungle along the shores and in the well-watered interior lowlands of Guam are double rows of upright monuments associated with caps and accompanied by burials, potsherds, and stone and shell implements. These monument sites are called latte or casas de los antiguos by the natives, who believe that they are haunted by Taotao Mana (people of beforetime).

The natives carefully avoid these sites.

L.M. THOMPSON, Archaeology of the Marianas Islands (1932)





MICRONESIA—ONE OF THE THREE divisions of Oceania originally proposed by Dumont d’Urville—encompasses about 2,100 islands, most of which lie north of the equator but below latitude 20° N (map 10). From west to east, the main archipelagoes are Palau (also known as Belau), the Marianas, the Carolines, the Marshalls, and Kiribati (formerly the Gilbert Islands). Tuvalu (formerly the Ellice Islands) lies between Kiribati and Fiji and is considered here in relation to the early settlement of atolls, although its occupants speak Polynesian languages. Despite the great number of islands in Micronesia, in aggregate they total a mere 2,700 square kilometers of land; Guam alone accounts for 582 square kilometers. For this reason an early explorer of Micronesia, F.W. Christian (1899), dubbed it the “sea of little lands.” Many Micronesian islands are atolls, diminutive and low-lying islets encircling a lagoon (see chap. 2). The Marianas chain and some of the Palau group consist of upraised makatea, but outside these western archipelagoes there are only a few high volcanic and makatea islands. Yap, Chuuk (formerly Truk), Pohnpei (formerly Ponape), and Kosrae (formerly Kusaie) are high volcanic islands. Isolated Nauru and Banaba are upraised makatea islands, as are several of the Marshalls.




MAP 10 The islands of Micronesia.





The traditional cultures of Micronesia reflect different origins in Western and central Eastern Micronesia, as well as distinctive environmental adaptations, not to mention the underlying contingencies of history.1 All Micronesian peoples speak Austronesian languages, but not all of these belong to the Oceanic subgroup, a clue to their diverse origins. In contrast to Polynesia, Micronesia does not form a monophyletic cultural group, although its history is shallower and less complex than that of Near Oceania.

Despite important early archaeological work before and soon after World War II, Micronesia has been less studied than Polynesia or Melanesia.2 Alexander Spoehr (1957) excavated in the Marianas in 1949–50, and E.W. Gifford made his third and final Pacific expedition to Yap in 1956 (Gifford and Gifford 1959). These pioneering studies, along with Osborne’s (1966) survey of Palau, all focused on high islands. Until Davidson’s (1967b) excavations on Nukuoro showed otherwise, archaeologists simply assumed that the atolls lacked stratified deposits. Although periodic cyclones do destroy substantial segments of the archaeological record,3 atolls have nonetheless often proved to have rich and surprisingly deep stratigraphic sequences. Beginning in the mid-1970s, Micronesia saw a resurgence of archaeological work, primarily the result of cultural resource management (CRM; see chap. 1). Unfortunately, only a few CRM archaeologists have been diligent about publishing their results in scholarly journals (e.g., Athens 1980, 1984b; Athens and Ward 1995; Butler 1994).4 A list of selected archaeological sites in Micronesia is provided in table 6.1.


TABLE 6.1

Selected Archaeological Sites in Micronesia





TABLE 6.1 (continued)





COLONIZATION AND EARLY SETTLEMENT IN MICRONESIA


Both archaeology and historical linguistics contribute evidence regarding the origins of Micronesian peoples and the directions of early settlement and dispersal through the region. Almost all of the Austronesian languages spoken in the Pacific islands belong to its Oceanic subgroup.5 (See fig. 4.4 for the higher-order subgrouping of the Austronesian languages.) Significantly, however, two exceptions are found in Western Micronesia: Chamorro (in the Marianas) and Palauan.6 These belong to a different high-order subgroup of Austronesian, Western Malayo-Polynesian, which includes a large number of languages today spoken in the Philippines and Indonesia. Blust (2013:113) writes, “Palauan and Chamorro reached their historical locations from the west as a result of separate migrations out of insular Southeast Asia. In the case of Chamorro the movement was almost certainly from the central or northern Philippines.” Reid (1999) argues that Chamorro split off very early from other branches of the Austronesian family. His tentative conclusion is that “Chamorro is an Extra-Formosan language, but that it is a first order branch of the [Austronesian] family, separating from Proto-Extra Formosan, probably from the Northern Philippines, prior to the actual dispersal of the other branches of the family” (Reid 1999:49). In short, on linguistic evidence the origins of the Palau and Marianas islanders most likely are to be found in the Philippine archipelago.

All of the other languages spoken throughout the Caroline, Marshall, and Kiribati Archipelagoes belong to the Oceanic subgroup,7 correlated with the Lapita expansion (see chap. 4). All of the Micronesian languages except Yapese fall together into a single subgroup of Oceanic—Nuclear Micronesian—which has its “center of genetic diversity” in the eastern part of Micronesia, “in the region of Kiribati, Kosrae, Pohnpei, and the Marshalls” (Pawley and Ross 1993:439; see also Jackson 1986). The Nuclear Micronesian group must have split off following the breakup of the Proto Oceanic dialect chain, implying that the first settlement of central Eastern Micronesia was from the region of the initial Lapita expansion, between the Bismarcks and the southeastern Solomons-Vanuatu. Indeed, the Nuclear Micronesian languages share features with the languages of the southeastern Solomons or northern Vanuatu (Shutler and Marck 1975; but see Jackson 1986).

Subgroups within Nuclear Micronesian hint at the process of differentiation once Proto Nuclear Micronesian had split off from early Oceanic. Bender and Wang (1985) find five major branches of Nuclear Micronesian: Kiribati, Marshallese, and Kosraean (all single languages); a Pohnpeic subgroup with four languages; and a large Chuukic subgroup (centered on Chuuk) including perhaps sixty distinct speech communities, primarily on atolls. These five groups have been arrayed by Jackson (1986) and Rehg (1995) in a classic tree model, in which Kosraean, Kiribati, and Marshallese were the first to split off from a Proto Micronesian ancestor, while the Chuukic dialect chain and Pohnpeic both diverged from a Proto Chuukic-Pohnpeic ancestor.

Yapese long defied classification as either Oceanic or non-Oceanic Malayo-Polynesian (e.g., Bender and Wang 1985), but Malcolm Ross (1996a) marshaled evidence that Yapese is an Oceanic language, subsequently influenced by at least four periods of borrowing, two of these from non-Oceanic languages. Such borrowing reflects Yap’s key geographic position in Micronesia and concurs with archaeological evidence for the movement of people and things into Yap over long periods of time. Yapese is evidently a highly conservative Oceanic language, one that diverged early and whose closest relationships are probably with the Admiralty Islands language group. Blust (2013:113) says that Yapese “may have reached Micronesia from the Admiralty Islands soon after the breakup of Proto Oceanic.”

In short, the historical linguistic evidence points to a three-part sequence for the settlement of Micronesia, with people initially moving into the western archipelagoes of Palau and the Marianas directly from island Southeast Asia (most likely the Philippines), another group moving into Yap from the Admiralty Islands, and a third population (or closely related populations) moving up into the central-eastern Caroline Islands from the Solomons-Vanuatu region. The Proto Nuclear Micronesian speech community was rapidly emplaced on more than a single island; it may have constituted a dialect chain spanning at least the high islands (and probably some atolls) of central Eastern Micronesia. Further complexities arose later, for example, with Yapese, which (lying at the interface between western and eastern-central groups) borrowed significantly from Nuclear Micronesian, thus partially masking its Proto Oceanic origins. Having briefly stated the model as derived from historical linguistics, let us examine the archaeological evidence.


THE WESTERN ARCHIPELAGOESRainbird (1994:298) suggests that “the long curve of the [Marianas] archipelago perhaps provided a wide target for early navigators sailing eastwards” on voyages of discovery from the Philippines. In 1949–50, Spoehr excavated at Chalan Piao on Saipan Island in the Marianas, recovering an oyster shell dating to 1527 ± 200 B.C., demonstrating a long prehistory for Western Micronesia—one longer than many at the time were willing to accept, for the date was later repeatedly questioned.8 Renewed work at Chalan Piao in 1987, however, combined with the discovery of other early sites such as Tarague, Mangilao, and Ritidian on Guam, Achugao Point and Unai Bapot on Saipan, and Unai Chulu on Tinian, has produced numerous radiocarbon dates in association with ceramics and other artifacts dating to the initial period of Marianas settlement.9 Butler’s excavations at Achugao Point on Saipan revealed “an intact remnant of a very early occupation surface protected behind a section of raised fossil reef” (1994:15). Although initial dates suggested that the site might be as old as 1930–1630 B.C., Carson (2014:41) believes that the “earliest confirmable site-use” at Achugao Point is probably between 1392 and 1269 B.C. At Unai Bapot, Carson obtained “the oldest known secure radiocarbon dating of any site in the Marianas” (2014:38–40; see also Carson 2008); the dates, on three Anadara bivalve shells, gave a calibrated age range of 1612 to 1558 B.C. However, Petchy, Clark et al. (2016) have shown that the Unai Bapot Anadara shells were likely affected by “hardwater,” yielding dates that are too old. Additional dates on identified charcoal and the bone of an extirpated species of rail now make it clear that Unai Bapot was first occupied between 1250 and 1130 B.C. Thus, although Fitzpatrick (2014) claims that the Marianas were settled by 1550 B.C., there is at present no firm evidence for human occupation predating about 1300 B.C.

The early Marianas sites contain two kinds of ceramics, probably variants of the same ware. Spoehr (1957) labeled these Marianas Red and Lime-Filled, Impressed Trade Ware, although later work indicates that the second type was not a “trade” ware but locally manufactured. Amesbury, Moore, and Hunter-Anderson (1996:60–61) describe the Marianas Red pottery as a “thin-walled, often red-slipped or painted, calcareous sand-tempered [CST] pottery.” The decorated sherds are of the same or similar paste (also CST) and have distinctive designs (circles, lines) that were impressed (or sometimes incised) into the surface and filled with white lime after firing.

Butler (1994:23–33) defined two distinctive styles of “complex incised and stamped (impressed) decoration” at Achugao Point, which he labels Achugao Incised and San Roque Incised. The first exhibits rectilinear patterns, “with the zones between the major elements packed with tiny, delicate punctations” (Butler 1994:27). San Roque Incised sherds (of which only fifteen were found) consist of “bands of curvilinear garlands made by linking incised arches (half circles) with small stamped circles or large punctations placed at the junctions of the arch segments” (Butler 1994:27). According to Carson (2014:67), ceramic vessel forms at the Ritidian and Unai Bapot sites include a slightly restricted bowl or jar with everted rims (in two distinct sizes), a wider bowl with a distinct carination, and a flat-bottomed, shallow bowl or dish (fig. 6.1).




FIGURE 6.1 The earliest ceramic vessel forms from the Marianas Islands, reconstructed from potsherds excavated at the Ritidian site on Guam and the Unai Bapot site on Saipan. (From Carson 2014, fig. 6.14, courtesy of Mike Carson.)





As with Lapita, both Marianas Red and the lime-filled decorated variants most likely stem from a common, older tradition in island Southeast Asia (see Butler 1994:34; Carson et al. 2013; Kirch 1995). The Marianas pottery impressed designs differ from those of Lapita, yet are remarkably similar to motifs found on pottery in island Southeast Asia, such as that from the Sanga Sanga site in the Philippines (Spoehr 1973:184–91) and from the Kalumpang and Minanga Sipakko sites in Sulawesi (Van Heekeren 1972:184–90, fig. 46, pls. 101–2). The latter two assemblages, in particular, exhibit a style of incised designs with small punctations infilling spaces between the lines, similar to the pottery from Achugao Point. In addition, the vessel forms, use of red slip, and calcareous temper that typify Marianas Red are all consistent with Philippines ceramic assemblages of the early to mid-second millennium B.C. (Bellwood 1987a, 2017). Other artifacts found in association with this early pottery include Tridacna shell adzes, Conus shell beads and Conus bracelets, Cypraea shell beads, and rotating fishhooks of Isognomon shell (fig. 6.2). As noted above, the Marianas archaeological record is consistent with linguistic evidence that Chamorro is a Western Malayo-Polynesian language and most probably originated in the Philippines.




FIGURE 6.2 Stone and shell artifacts from early period sites in the Marianas Islands: A, Tridacna shell adz; B, C, chert flakes; D, carved coral pendant; E, Cypraea shell beads; F, Conus shell beads; Conus shell pendants; H, chert adz; I, Anadara shell artifact; J, Isognomon shell fishhooks; K, Conus shell bracelet fragments. (From Carson 2014, fig. 5.1, courtesy of Mike Carson.)





Paleoenvironmental evidence for early settlement of the Marianas comes from sediment cores in Tipalao Marsh (Orote Peninsula) and in the Pago Valley of Guam (Athens and Ward 1995; Ward n.d.).10 The Tipalao Marsh cores encapsulate a record extending back to 5600 B.C.; human arrival possibly as early as 1600 B.C. is signaled by the appearance of charcoal particles suggestive of human burning. By 500 B.C. significant forest clearance was under way, and by A.D. 550 extensive grasslands are evidenced in the pollen record. The Pago Valley core exhibits marked reductions in forest trees and increases in the fire-adapted fern Dicranopteris linearis, a classic signal of anthropogenic disturbance on oceanic islands. Notably, coconut (Cocos nucifera) pollen first occurs at the same time as the initial burning, hinting that this economic plant may have been a human introduction.

In Palau, the chronology of initial human settlement has been less clear. At Uchularois Cave in the southern group of limestone “Rock Islands,” Masse (1990:220) found early ceramics described as “a well constructed and heavily slipped and polished red-ware,” dating to around 50 B.C. The discovery of human burials in Chelechol ra Orrak rockshelter on Orrak Island pushed back direct evidence for settlement of Palau to at least 1050 B.C. (Fitzpatrick 2003:726). Clark, Anderson, and Wright (2006) argue from evidence at Ulong rockshelter, where the basal deposits yielded red-slipped, calcareous sand-tempered ceramics, that the southern limestone islands were settled by about 1150–950 B.C., if not slightly earlier. As Dickinson and Athens (2007) point out, however, geological evidence indicates that Palau is gradually subsiding, affecting archaeological site visibility, especially around the coastline of Babeldaob. Thus early sites on that large island may be buried under coastal sediments and mangrove swamps.

Ward, Athens, and Hotton (1998) recovered twenty-two sediment cores from sites dispersed around Babeldaob Island and analyzed three of them for pollen content and charcoal particle influx. All cores show evidence for “an apparently sudden increase in savanna/grasslands on Babeldaob Island by at least 3100 B.P., with some indication that the western side of Babeldaob may have experienced this change significantly earlier” (Ward, Athens, and Hotton 1998:5). Substantial increases in charcoal particles at the same time make it likely that this was an anthropogenic change. Moreover, pollen of two cultivated plants, coconut and betel nut palm (Areca catechu), appears as early as 2279 B.C. in one core. The authors argue that these data imply “the presence of humans on Palau at least by 3000 cal B.P., and possibly as early as 4200 cal B.P.” (1998:6).

In Yap, the oldest known archaeological assemblages date to about A.D. 1, at the Pemrang site tested by E.W. Gifford (Gifford and Gifford 1959) and later reexcavated by Jun Takayama (1982).11 But as in Palau, palynological and paleoenvironmental evidence (Dodson and Intoh 1999) indicates a likely human presence on Yap beginning around 1350 B.C., marked by “a major period of forest destruction, accompanied by fire.” Thus, as is the case on some other Pacific islands, the earliest part of the Yapese cultural sequence is probably yet to be archaeologically recovered. As Fitzpatrick (2014:5) avers, a “dedicated research effort that incorporates intensive archaeological investigation coupled with coring for paleoenvironmental data would surely be productive.”


THE HIGH ISLANDS OF THE CAROLINESWhereas in Western Micronesia people continued to make ceramics into the period of European contact, this was not so in central Eastern Micronesia, where pottery was entirely unknown. Archaeological work on Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae has shown, however, that pots were at one time in use on the high islands of the Carolines, where suitable clays are available. The later decline in pottery use, and its ultimate abandonment in the Carolines, parallels similar changes in parts of island Melanesia and in Polynesia (see chap. 7). The earliest ceramic assemblages from Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae along with associated material culture strongly suggest that one or more colonizing populations originated from late Lapita cultures in island Melanesia, most likely in the southeastern Solomon Islands.

Along the coast of Fefan Island in the Chuuk lagoon, deposits within the swampy intertidal zone (probably representing former stilt-house villages) yielded CST pottery along with Tridacna shell adzes and Conus shell ornaments (Sinoto, ed., 1984). Radiocarbon dates date these to around 120 B.C. The Fefan pottery consists of plain ware bowls or pots with constricted necks and slightly everted rims; the rims are sometimes decorated with crenations, while a few body sherds have incised lines. The Fefan pottery is similar to Kiki Ware from Tikopia, dated to 900–100 B.C., to plain ware on Anuta, Nendö, and the Reef Islands, and possibly to plain ware from Santa Ana, all in the southeastern Solomons. All these assemblages are associated with Tridacna shell adzes and Conus shell ornaments, strengthening the case for a close connection between Chuuk and the southeastern Solomons.

In Pohnpei, CST ceramics have been recovered from deposits underlying the artificial stone islands of Nan Madol; they have also been recovered from similar contexts at the Lelu site on Kosrae.12 In both cases, the peoples who used this pottery apparently occupied stilt-house settlements, for as on Chuuk the pottery-bearing deposits lie within the intertidal zone.13 Given the presence of Lapita stilt-house villages in Near Oceania, this is another connection between Lapita and early Caroline Islands cultures. The strongest evidence, however, is the CST pottery from levels dated to between 5 B.C. and A.D. 240 in Pohnpei (Athens 1990b:21) and between 108 B.C. and A.D. 244 in Kosrae (Rainbird 1994:299). Pollen cores from Kosrae date initial human disturbance to the island’s vegetation, as well as the introduction of cultivated plants, to the same time frame as the pottery (Athens, Ward, and Murakami 1996). Athens (1990b) identifies two main vessel forms at Nan Madol: globular jars with everted rims and small bowls. Again, the Pohnpei and Kosrae CST ceramics are closest to late Lapita plain wares in the southeastern Solomons (Santa Cruz group, including Tikopia and Anuta) or possibly in northern Vanuatu.14

In short, the archaeological evidence points to settlement of the central Caroline high islands directly from late Lapita pottery-using populations in the southeastern Solomons or immediately adjacent regions, corresponding well with the hypothesis predicted from the linguistic relationships. Athens, who has studied the early Caroline Islands finds closely, reached the same conclusion:

Regarding the origins of the Pohnpei settlers and, perhaps, those of Truk [Chuuk] and Kosrae, it appears that the best case can be made for a linkage with the late Lapita Plain Ware pottery tradition. . . . The chronology is consistent: it begins after 500 B.C. The pottery vessel shapes and decorative techniques are consistent: simple globular pots and bowls with perhaps some rim notching or punctation. Also, its location is consistent: late Lapita Plain Ware pottery is found in the southeast Solomon and New Hebrides Islands where linguistic data suggest the homeland for nuclear Micronesians is located. (1990b:29)

THE ATOLLS Turning from the high islands to the atolls of the central Carolines, Marshalls, and Kiribati, some key environmental factors must be taken into consideration. Evidence has steadily accumulated that the mid-Holocene sea level in the tropical Pacific ranged from 1 to 1.5 meters higher than at present, reaching a peak around 2000 B.C. (Dickinson 2003).15 Sea levels began to rise rapidly around 8000 B.C., from their last glacial maximum low of 100+ meters below present level, and continued to rise unabated for the next six millennia, successively drowning many makatea islands that had been exposed by the lowered sea levels of the late Pleistocene. Before atolls could form on these newly drowned makatea reefs, it was necessary for sea levels to stabilize and to remain stable for some time. This did not occur until sea level fell to its modern position, as early as A.D. 1 in some parts of the Pacific but not until A.D. 800 or so in the Tuamotu Islands. Weisler, Yamano, and Hua (2012) dated foraminifera sands on Utrōk and Maloelap atolls in the Marshalls, showing that islets, or motu, began to form and stabilize between 800 and 450 B.C. The Micronesian atolls were in their initial stages of motu formation and stabilization when late Lapita populations began to explore the seaways north of the equator around two thousand years ago.

These newly formed atolls would have been tenuous environments for human colonization, having but the sparsest vegetation. Atoll vegetation is typically dominated by human-introduced plants, and human manipulation of these environments was necessary to render them suitable as permanent abodes. From high-island bases on Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae, pioneers may have seasonally exploited (or temporarily inhabited) atolls in the vicinity, introducing economically vital plants such as coconut and breadfruit and excavating cultivation pits to tap the freshwater aquifers (Weisler 1999). After generations of intermittent use, atolls might have yielded to permanent settlement, and the more far-flung islands could be inhabited.

While only a few Micronesian atolls have been thoroughly investigated by archaeologists, those with stratified sequences exhibit little evidence of use earlier than about two thousand years ago. In the Marshall Islands, sites on Majuro and Maloelap date to around A.D. 100.16 For both Maloelap and Utrōk, Weisler et al. (2012) show that human colonization occurred between A.D. 100 and 160, some 900 to 600 years after initial islet formation. Beardsley (1994:161–62) reports a calibrated radiocarbon age of 167–124 B.C. from an early cultural deposit on Kwajalein Atoll. Other atolls were not settled until later, such as Ngulu and Imwinyap where the earliest dates are A.D. 800, or Nukuoro at A.D. 713. In short, atoll colonization was probably continuous, with the full spectrum of Micronesian atolls not fully occupied until well into the last millennium.





CULTURAL SEQUENCES IN MICRONESIA


Spoehr (1957) based his cultural sequence for the Marianas Islands on ceramic chronology, with a quantitative change in pottery assemblages from those dominated by Marianas Red to later ones containing only Marianas Plain Ware. The later part of the Marianas sequence was also marked by the construction of limestone-pillar structures termed latte, dominantly associated with Marianas Plain Ware, which Spoehr attributed to the last 850 years.17

For Palau, Osborne’s speculative sequence was based on a dubious ceramic typology (1966, 1979) that proved to be of no lasting value. Masse (1990) outlined an alternative sequence beginning with a “Colonial” Period from A.D. 1 to 650, continuing with a “Resource Intensification” Period (A.D. 650–1200), followed by a “Rock Island Village” Period (1200–1450), a “Transition” Period (1450–1600), and finally a “Traditional” Period (1600–1914). However, work in the Rock Islands by Clark (2005) and Fitzpatrick (2003) demonstrates that settlement of these limestone islands commenced by at least 1000 B.C. Meanwhile, CRM work on Babeldaob shows that the main island was settled by at least 1250 B.C. (Liston 2009).18 A distinctive “thin blackware” type of pottery predates the ubiquitous thick-walled and grog-tempered later Palauan pottery, associated with an early phase of inland (ridgetop) settlement on Babeldaob. At the Ngerulmud Hill site in Melekeok State, sherds of this thin blackware were dated to 230 B.C. (Liston, Kaschko, and Welch 1998:59, 82). On Babeldaob, the interior ridges and hillsides were massively reworked with vast terrace complexes; these are discussed later in this chapter.

Sediment coring and pollen analysis suggest that the first third of the Yapese archaeological sequence remains to be uncovered (Dodson and Intoh 1999). While a rough ceramic sequence beginning with CST pottery and moving to a later Yapese “laminated ware” was demonstrated by Gifford and Gifford (1959) and confirmed by later work (e.g., Intoh 1988, 1990; Intoh and Leach 1985), a complete cultural sequence remains elusive. Yap has extensive stone architectural remains (Hunter-Anderson 1983, 1984; Pickering 1990), but there have been too few excavations to place the development of this architecture—let alone its significance for sociopolitical changes—in proper temporal perspective.

Chuuk’s extensive lagoon (2,125 square kilometers) encompasses a number of small high islands and smaller islets, totaling 120 square kilometers. Thus far, archaeological work has concentrated on Tol, Moen, and Fefan Islands.19 King and Parker (1984:415–41) attempted a synthesis of the Chuuk sequence but could define only two periods, with an intervening “period about which at present we know virtually nothing,” lasting from A.D. 500 to 1300 (see also Rainbird 2004:168–79). They named the early period the Winas Pattern, characterized by CST pottery (such as that recovered from the Fefan Island sites), as well as Tridacna and Cassis shell adzes, Conus shell rings, and other kinds of shell ornaments. Settlements were confined to coastal locations, possibly with stilt-house villages. The later Tonnachaw Pattern, from A.D. 1300 until European contact, lacks pottery but has many kinds of artifacts known from ethnographic collections, such as Cypraea shell breadfruit peelers, coral pounders, slingstones, and Terebra shell adzes. Tonnachaw settlement patterns incorporated not only coastal residential sites but also interior residential and cook-house sites, shell middens on ridges and hill summits, and stone-walled forts on high ridges or summits. The emphasis on ridgetop locations—whether deliberately fortified or not—speaks to the significance of warfare and raiding in the Tonnachaw Pattern (Rainbird 1996; 2004:168–79).

The best-defined sequence for any Micronesian island is that for Pohnpei, proposed by Ayres (1990) and summarized in table 6.2.20 However, Ayres’s speculative “Settlement and Adaptive Integration Phase” is not supported by archaeological evidence; human settlement on the island probably begins about A.D. 1. In material culture, important changes include (1) the decline in ceramic use and its abandonment by A.D. 1500, if not earlier; (2) the appearance of distinctive Terebra and Mitre shell adzes after about A.D. 1000;21 and (3) the development of compound trolling lures of pearl shell after about A.D. 1200. Of particular interest is the Nan Madol Phase, associated with the construction of this massive site, discussed at greater length later in this chapter.22


TABLE 6.2

The Pohnpei Culture-Historical Sequencea





A sequence for Kosrae has not been formally defined, but it might parallel that for Pohnpei. Among the similarities are an early phase with pottery, the later abandonment of ceramics, and the development of complex stone architecture (including a major chiefly residential center at Lelu), especially during the past 500 years. Athens, Ward, and Murakami (1996) trace the history of an intensive “agroforest” or arboricultural subsistence system over 2,000 years of human land use on Kosrae, with breadfruit as a dominant tree crop (see also Levin and Ayres 2016). The transformation of the island’s original vegetation into this agroforest occurred by A.D. 400–600, well before the later “rise of social complexity as evidenced by the Lelu megalithic ruins [that] was not accompanied by any perceptible change in cultigens or agricultural practices” (Athens, Ward, and Murakami 1996:845).

For the Caroline and Marshall Islands, sequences can be constructed for atolls where extensive excavations have been carried out, as with Majuro, Kwajalein, Maleolap, Utrōk, and Arno atolls in the Marshalls or Ulithi, Woleai, Lamotrek, and Mokil in the Carolines.23 For Utrōk, Weisler (2001a; 2001b:123–28, fig. 8.1) traces the culture history of the atoll over the course of two millennia, although he does not divide the sequence into named phases. The material culture, which included shell adzes (made from Tridacna, Cassis, Conus, and Lambis shells), Spondylus shell beads, Conus shell rings, and pumice abraders, remained stable over time. Single-piece fishhooks and trolling lures of pearl shell are known for the past 1,000 years and may date earlier. Inshore fishing and generalized shellfish gathering dominated marine subsistence, while on the coral motu there were gradual increases in swamp cultivation, aroid pit cultivation, and arboriculture. None of the atolls has substantial stone architecture (other than low house alignments), and settlement patterns were highly stable.

Some parallel trends and differences suggest themselves in these island sequences. One difference is the persistence of pottery in Western Micronesia and the abandonment of ceramics in the central-eastern islands. In both regions, specialized architecture developed in later time periods (Morgan 1988). Major architectural traditions are confined to the high islands, presumably because only on the larger landmasses did sizable populations (and population densities) arise. These architectural forms correspond to the rise of powerful and centralized chiefly polities, discussed shortly. In contrast, the atoll sequences display remarkable stability over time with little change, at least insofar as we can detect in their archaeological records.24





TUVALU AND THE POLYNESIAN OUTLIERS IN MICRONESIA


There are two exceptions to the generalization that all of the Micronesian islands east of Yap are inhabited by speakers of Nuclear Micronesian languages: the atolls of Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi, which lie to the south of the main Carolines, are inhabited by Polynesian speakers. These islands are therefore counted among the “Polynesian Outliers” located outside the Polynesian Triangle, of which the Melanesian members were discussed in chapter 5.

It was once thought that all of the Polynesian Outlier languages fell together into a single subgroup of Polynesian, known as “Samoic-Outlier” because it grouped the Outlier languages together with the Western Polynesian languages of Samoa and East Futuna (Pawley 1967). More recently, linguistic research suggests that while many if not all of the Outlier languages in the Solomons–Vanuatu–New Caledonia region are closely related to East Futunan, those of Kapingamarangi and Nukuoro fall into a different subgroup, closely related to the Ellicean language of Tuvalu (Marck 2000; W. Wilson 1985). Rather than having a single common origin, the Outlier populations probably had multiple origins; the Micronesian Outliers may have derived from populations originally located in the Tuvalu group of atolls.

Tuvalu remains almost unexplored archaeologically. Takayama and Saito (1987; Takayama, Eritaia, and Saito 1987) excavated at Temei on Vaitupu Island, finding “deeply stratified cultural deposits” containing pottery and two Turbo shell fishhooks, with an associated shell radiocarbon date of around A.D. 1080. The pottery, based on petrographic analysis by William Dickinson, is of Fijian origin and was probably a trade item.

Intensive archaeological studies have been made of both Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi.25 Davidson’s (1971) excavations on Nukuoro revealed well-stratified occupation deposits, rich in material culture and faunal remains, with initial occupation commencing at A.D. 658–768 (Davidson 1992). She recovered a large assemblage (697 specimens) of pearl shell fishhooks, with several forms that changed over time (fig. 6.3). Takayama and Saito (1987) point out that the two Turbo shell hooks from the Temei site in Tuvalu correspond to Davidson’s Nukuoro Type Ia, adding one bit of archaeological evidence in support of a possible Tuvalu origin for the Nukuoro population. The Nukuoro excavations also produced many other kinds of shell and bone artifacts, including adzes of Tridacna and Terebra shells.




FIGURE 6.3 The sequence of changes in shell fishhook types revealed by Davidson’s excavations on Nukuoro atoll. (From Davidson 1967b.)





Davidson (1992:297) is pessimistic “about the ability of archaeologists to identify Polynesian arrival on Nukuoro,” since she feels that “the point at which Nukuoro became a Polynesian Outlier is no closer to recognition.” However, in light of the revised subgrouping of Outlier languages, and the model for a first millennium A.D. expansion of Proto Ellicean speakers into Tuvalu, there is no reason why the Nukuoro sequence should not be regarded as “Polynesian” from bottom to top. None of the material culture in the Nukuoro sequence contradicts this hypothesis, especially since initial settlement would have been launched from a similar atoll environment. Such an interpretation eliminates the search for an elusive “point” at which Nukuoro became Polynesian.

Kapingamarangi Atoll has remarkably well-stratified cultural deposits, up to 4 meters deep on Touhou Islet, which was built up from a small sand cay to a substantial islet over about 700 to 1,000 years, partly by purposeful addition of sand and gravel retained by seawalls. The early part of the Touhou sequence reflects “transient occupation” much as suggested in the model of atoll settlement discussed earlier, with the formation of an “artificial islet” between A.D. 1300 and 1700, followed by a period of “intensive residential occupation” in the past 300 years (Leach and Ward 1981:53–55). The Kapingamarangi artifact assemblage is not as rich as that from Nukuoro, but a similar range of types is represented, including Tridacna shell adzes and one-piece shell fishhooks, as well as a massive form of trolling lure, possibly made from Tridacna shell.





ATOLL ADAPTATIONS


In 1980, I spent several weeks on Arno in the Marshalls, experiencing atoll life while supervising the first archaeological survey of that island (Dye, ed., 1987). One quickly becomes aware that the ocean is never more than a few meters—horizontally and, especially, vertically—distant. Walking across an atoll islet, from the calm lagoon beach with its powdery sands through the jungle-covered interior to the wave-battered seaward coast with its coral rubble ramparts thrown up by storm surges takes no more than a few minutes. The roar of the surf is incessant, particularly at night, after the sounds of the village have died down. Everything underfoot consists of coral: coral reef, coral boulders, coral sand. There is no other kind of stone. The atoll soil itself is formed of calcareous sand, enriched only with organic matter, including the detritus of human habitation.26

On such tenuous heaps of coral and sand rimming productive lagoons and extensive reefs, the early Micronesian colonizers worked out a set of cultural adaptations enabling them not only to survive but also to live a satisfying life. Obtaining freshwater is the single greatest challenge to atoll life, not only water to drink, but also water to sustain crops. Traditional atoll subsistence in Micronesia focuses on a few main plants: coconuts, essential for drinking fluid, nutritious “meat,” and leaves used for plaiting and weaving; and Pandanus for food and leaves. Both of these are naturally adapted to the coralline, halophytic (high-salt) environment of the coastal strand. Also common are breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis) and giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis), neither of which is a strand plant in its natural state. Certain varieties of breadfruit can be grown on the larger atoll islets, where a substantial, rain-fed freshwater lens (the Ghyben-Herzberg aquifer) supplies the trees’ roots with water. Swamp taro, on the other hand, must be cultivated in artificial pits excavated down to this aquifer, mulched with leaves and other organic debris (fig. 6.4). This method of pit cultivation developed early in the sequence of atoll settlement, as Weisler (1999) demonstrated for Maloelap Atoll in the Marshalls (where pit cultivation is virtually contemporaneous with first settlement), and which Yamaguchi, Kayanne, and Yamano (2009) also showed to be the case for Majuro Atoll.




FIGURE 6.4 Excavation through the berm of a Cyrtosperma cultivation pit on Maloelap, Marshall Islands. The man is standing on the edge of the pit, with Cyrtosperma plants behind him. (Photo courtesy Marshall Weisler.)





Atoll islets are consummate man-made environments. In addition to digging Cyrtosperma pits, or on some atolls constructing seawalls for sand retention, humans have extensively modified both the physical and biotic environments of atolls. Atoll vegetation is dominated by plants purposively introduced by humans, and most of the terrestrial fauna (e.g., rats, snails, and geckos) is also synanthropic, or human-associated.27 Even atoll soils are anthropogenic. The richest soils on atoll islets are those that have formed on calcareous sands through centuries of continuous human habitation; they are essentially midden deposits that have been continually reworked through cultivation of abandoned house sites.

Lacking stone, atoll dwellers made extensive use of shell. The Lapita peoples had already developed a sophisticated shell technology (see chap. 4), which doubtless preadapted the first atoll colonists to survive without access to stone. But the range of material culture utilizing shell (and coral) expanded in atoll societies. Adzes were manufactured not just from giant Tridacna clams but also from Terebra, Mitre, and Cassis shells; a diversity of forms developed. Fishhooks were made from pearl shells, not only one-piece angling hooks, but also trolling lure rigs. Large helmet shells (Cassis cornuta) were adapted for use as containers (Dye, ed., 1987:362). Pestles and pounders for processing Pandanus were worked from coral heads or from reef limestone.

Equally essential to atoll existence were adaptations in social organization and in interisland relations and communications. In sailing and navigation, the Caroline islanders developed the most sophisticated outrigger canoe technology and star-compass systems known in Oceania (fig. 6.5).28 As Alkire (1965:171) points out, “Human survival on small islands often depends on a maximum exploitation of available resources. Emergencies [such as cyclone or tsunami damage, or drought] . . . may take large areas of the island out of production for extended periods of time.” Such conditions encouraged interisland contacts, and even the dispersion of social units across more than a single island. The Carolinean system of long-distance voyaging was one kind of adaptation to the environmental hazards of life on atolls.




FIGURE 6.5 A sailing canoe of the central Caroline Islands, as drawn by the early nineteenth-century French artist Louis Choris, who accompanied the Russian explorer Otto von Kotzebue. (Collection of the author.)





LATER PREHISTORY IN WESTERN MICRONESIA


While questions of origins and cultural sequences have often dominated Micronesian archaeology, prehistorians are increasingly engaged in reconstructing prehistoric sociopolitical systems. One might suppose that the accounts of early Western observers and later ethnographers would be sufficient to understand traditional Micronesian societies, but such is far from the case. In the Marianas Islands, Spanish contact began with Magellan in A.D. 1521, and by 1668 a permanent Spanish settlement was flourishing on Guam. Over the following two decades, the indigenous Chamorro people were reduced to a mere fraction of their original population, their settlement patterns forcibly disrupted as they were resettled in villages formed around newly constructed churches; their culture was irrevocably transformed. Elsewhere in Micronesia, contact was not as early or always as brutal in its consequences, but successive Spanish, German, Japanese, and American mercantile, missionary, and colonial incursions exacted their toll. Thus ethnographic accounts such as the monumental German Südsee-Expedition (Thilenius 1913–36) document societies already transformed—sometimes radically—through decades or centuries of depopulation and sociopolitical upheaval. It therefore falls to archaeology to inquire into the nature of these societies prior to Western intrusion, and how they changed over the millennia.


LATTE AND SOCIAL COMPLEXITY IN THE MARIANASScattered across the Marianas archaeological landscape are numerous double rows of three to seven hewn limestone columns or uprights each, the columns often surmounted by carved capstones; these structures are called latte in the Chamorro language (fig. 6.6). The columns and capstones, or capitals, were quarried from exposures of upraised reef limestone; quarry sites with unfinished columns and capstones in situ have been recorded. A few eyewitness accounts from the early Spanish period associate latte with dwellings, such as that from the Miguel de Legaspi expedition of 1565: “Their houses are high, well kept and well made. [They] stand the height of a man off the ground, atop large stone pillars, upon which they lay the flooring” (quoted in Morgan 1988:119). Latte drew the attention of early investigators like Hornbostel (Thompson 1932) and Spoehr (1957), and continue to attract archaeological work, figuring prominently in debates on Chamorro sociopolitical organization.29




FIGURE 6.6 The Tapony latte site on Guam, Marianas Islands. Note the row of standing uprights and the two large mortars in the foreground. (Photo courtesy Steve Athens.)





Latte sites, found on all of the main islands in the Marianas group, vary considerably in form, size, and layout but consistently follow the same basic pattern of two parallel rows of upright columns with a rectangular plan. Based on a sample of 234 latte sets on Guam, Graves (1986b:table 5) showed that the number of columns ranges from 6 (3 per row) to 14 (7 per row), with the most common number of columns being 8 (152 sets, or 65 percent of the sample). Butler’s sample from the small island of Aguiguan is similar, although the mean number of columns there is 10 (1988:table 9.1). In both samples, there was only a single site with 14 columns. Other features, such as the height of columns and the area encompassed by the rows, also vary. Smaller latte have shaft heights of less than 1 meter, but heights in the 2- to 3-meter range are not uncommon; the impressive House of Taga site on Tinian has columns 5.33 meters high. The number of columns correlates with interior surface area, which ranges from about 18 square meters in small latte up to 61 square meters or more in the largest cases.

Latte sets typically occur in clusters, presumably representing hamlets or villages; Morgan (1988) illustrates several typical plans. Small clusters have only a few latte sets, whereas others such as the Mochong site have as many as 52 sets. The long axes of latte usually parallel the coastline, and there is some formality of community patterning. In the Taga site, the imposing House of Taga sits midway along a single alignment of latte structures, all parallel to the coast, and faces a single isolated latte seaward of it, the latter perhaps having some special function. At Mochong, the largest latte (a 14-column structure) is likewise centrally situated.

Excavations at latte complexes provide data on chronology and function. Graves (1986b) argues that latte are securely dated to as early as A.D. 1000–1100. For the northern and more marginal islands of Pagan and Sarigan, Athens (2011) suggests that latte construction did not begin until around A.D. 1300. The quantities of residential midden surrounding these structures—including Marianas Plain Ware potsherds, other artifacts, and shell and bone refuse—make it clear that they were habitations. Numerous burials are directly associated with latte, primarily of adults and with both sexes about equally represented. The nature of the perishable superstructures that latte supported is a matter of speculation, but some kind of A-frame structure seems likely. Figure 6.7 shows Morgan’s conjectural reconstruction of such a pole-and-thatch building atop the truly monumental House of Taga latte.




FIGURE 6.7 Reconstruction of the House of Taga latte site. (From Morgan 1988, courtesy of W. N. Morgan.)





Based on evidence obtained from excavation at two adjacent latte structures in northern Guam, where there were striking differences in the distribution of ceramics, faunal remains, fishhooks, and other artifacts, Bayman et al. (2012:267) argue that there was “an institutionalized system of gendered labor.” Further: “Differences in craft and subsistence activities at the two adjacent and contemporaneous latte buildings imply that their occupants were members of a single cooperative household” (267). Other work at latte sites by Dixon et al. (2006:67) showed “sharing of food preparation, cooking and storage, eating, tool manufacture and use, and human burial between habitations regardless of structure size or date of occupation.”

Latte provide significant archaeological evidence for the development of Chamorro social complexity during the last millennium. The nature of Chamorro society is debatable, with Thompson (1945) arguing for a three-class status hierarchy and other scholars such as Cordy (1983) suggesting that only two classes (chiefs and commoners) were present. Early contact-period records are so vague as to permit either argument. Graves (1986b:149) inferred that latte were the residences of “high-ranking members of kin-based corporate groups, . . . [who] could have best afforded the expenditure of resources in support of the additional labor required to construct latte sets, labor most likely drawn from low-ranking families within the lineage as a form of solidarity and support.” Certainly such a model fits with known ideological uses of monumental architecture to differentiate social strata in other Oceanic societies. Drawing on ethnographic data on the cultural significance of height in Oceanic societies (greater height correlates with higher rank or with sacredness), Graves (1986b:153) suggests that the construction of particularly large and high latte sets such as the House of Taga may reflect “the elaboration of another level of status ranking among a limited set of communities on Tinian and Rota.”

Graves’s model was challenged by Craib (1986), who argued that all residences in the late prehistoric period were raised on latte and that the use of these structures was therefore not confined to an elite class.30 Indeed, Craib (1986:173) suggests the archaeological pattern of latte is consistent with “a society lacking a centralized authority and . . . instead, organized on a local autonomous level.” Following Craib’s lead, the concept of heterarchy, or horizontal differentiation among local corporate groups—each competing with the others through ritual exchange—might provide a better model for late prehistoric Chamorro society than one of hierarchy. Moreover, Hunter-Anderson and Butler (1995:35) suggest that latte may have served “more than one function, simultaneously and over time.” They argue that latte sets, when not used to support dwellings, may have been material symbols legitimizing land claims or places in which to bury deceased lineage members. We have not heard the last word on this debate, which may require further fieldwork such as extensive, fine-grained horizontal excavation to resolve.


THE TERRACED LANDSCAPES OF PALAUNowhere else in the Pacific does one encounter such totalizing transformations of volcanic landscapes as in Palau, where entire ridges, hills, and valley slopes were completely reworked and shaped. In 1976 I spent a few days conducting a reconnaissance survey of several terrace complexes in the Airai region of southern Babeldaob. Slashing my way through tall savannah grass, then scrambling up 3- or 4-meter-high terrace facings, I was astounded by the sheer scale of these marvelous architectonic works (fig. 6.8). While the statues of Easter Island and the artificial islets of Nan Madol are often called the greatest monumental constructions in the Pacific, these pale in comparison to the Palauan earthworks. The enigmatic puzzle posed by the terraced landscapes of Palau have finally begun to yield their secrets to archaeology.




FIGURE 6.8 The terraced landscape at Airai, Babeldaob, Palau, showing a crown-and-brim arrangement surmounting a series of terraces; the scale is indicated by the author at the base of the first terrace. As is typical of these terraced landscapes, the dominant vegetation consists of swordgrass and scrub Pandanus. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The Palau terraces cover extensive areas on the principal island of Babeldaob (fig. 6.9), many of which were initially surveyed, and some later tested, by Osborne (1966, 1979). Osborne describes the characteristic form of the upper hilltop terraces as follows:

At many of the larger sites is found an arrangement of the penultimate and ultimate terraces which conforms to a widespread pattern. The two superior terracings resemble a hat, and I have adopted the descriptive terminology therefrom. The final terrace remnant I have called the crown, and the next to the final one the brim. . . . A few crowns possess a central depression or pond which could have served as a water storage reservoir, or as a semisubterranean defensive or other structure. At one end of the crown is often seen the peak, a small embankment which runs the width of the crown. . . . They appear to be defensive, a small redoubt embankment or breastwork. The brim and crown terraces contribute a spectacular quality to the Babeldaob skyline: when viewed from a distance they have the quality of Mexican pyramids. (1966:151)




FIGURE 6.9 Aerial photograph of a terraced landscape at Aimeliik, Babeldaob, Palau. Note the double crown surmounting the terraces. (Photo courtesy Jolie Liston.)





Significant advances in our understanding of the chronology and function of these massive earthworks have come from CRM archaeological investigations associated with the construction of the circum-island Compact Road on Babeldaob (Liston 2009, 2013). Excavations at a number of earthwork complexes, augmented by an impressive 213 radiocarbon dates and an extensive program of coring wetlands to obtain paleoenvironmental records, have allowed a four-phase sequence of earthwork construction to be defined for Babeldoab. Initial human use of the island’s interior for shifting cultivation begins around 1250 B.C. and continues until about 450 B.C., when the first earthworks appear on the landscape. Liston succinctly summarizes the ensuing “Earthwork Era” in terms of three phases:

This approximately 1200-year long era is divided into three loosely bounded phases. The Early Phase (ca. 2400–2150 calBP) refer to a period of growth and development of a variety of earthwork shapes and functions. The Middle Phase (ca. 2150–1500 calBP) saw the advent of monumental architecture in the form of massive earth structures and large expanses of modified terrain. The Late Phase (ca. 1500–1200 calBP) marks the decline of the powerful interior districts accompanied by the comparatively minor construction of inland earthworks beyond the old district boundaries. (2009:69)

The final period in Palau’s sequence is called the Stonework Era (ca. A.D. 1250–1800), during which “the population returned to a coastal settlement pattern and a subsistence economy based on pondfield cultivation” (Liston 2009:69).

What purposes these massive earthworks served has been vigorously debated. Potsherds lie everywhere on them, as I observed during my Airai survey, but often these are in reworked contexts such as terrace fill. Most likely, the terrace complexes had multiple functions and internal spatial differentiation. Many terraces—especially those cascading down hillsides—may have had an agricultural function; the disposal of residential refuse from habitation terraces (perhaps as mulch?) could account for the widespread distribution of potsherds. The crown-and-brim arrangements seem to have had some defensive function, or possibly they were centers of ritual activity. Liston (2009:67) reports that “whole or almost complete ceramic vessels” have been recovered in earthworks where they “are found between burial pits, on small pavings potentially associated with interments, on prepared surfaces and in caches beneath earthwork construction fill,” as seen for example in figure 6.10.




FIGURE 6.10 Whole pots on a prepared surface under earthwork fill in a terrace complex at Roismelech, Babeldaob, Palau. (Photo by C. T. Emesiochel, courtesy of Jolie Liston.)





The history of human occupation of the interior of Babeldaob Island, which begins with low-intensity shifting cultivation around 1250 B.C., then moves through phases of increasingly intensive cultivation and massive earthworks, and ends with abandonment of the interior and a move back to the coastal margins of the island around A.D. 750 seems to represent a classic “boom and bust” cycle. Intensified cultivation of the interior apparently led to the degradation of inland soils, which may in turn have precipitated a population decline. Meanwhile, erosion and alluvial deposition along the coastal margins created new opportunities for pondfield cultivation. As elsewhere in the Pacific, dynamic coupling of human activities and the natural environment on Babeldaob played out in a reciprocal feedback manner.

Although less pervasive than the ubiquitous terraces, a second category of monumental architecture in Palau also commands attention: anthropomorphic stone monoliths (fig. 6.11), distributed primarily on Babeldaob but also on Oreor (Koror) Island.31 These range from small uprights only 40 centimeters in height to larger ones, reaching 2.93 meters; they are generally made of andesite. A variety of human face designs are represented, including an “owl” face, a “fanged mouth” face, and a “quadruped-face” combination. At Melekeok on the east coast of Babeldaob a group of nine stone sculptures is known as the Great Faces. The single most impressive megalithic complex is Bairulchau near the northern tip of Babeldaob. Here, situated on a leveled plaza south of a large terraced crown, are fifty-two megaliths (fig. 6.12). Twenty-five of these are arranged in a colonnade extending over 70 meters. These colonnaded stones have shallow grooves on their top surfaces, seemingly to receive horizontal wooden beams for some kind of immense structure. Morgan (1988:16) and Osborne (1979:178–80) both suggested that the Bairulchau colonnade represents an early version of the traditional Palauan bai, or village council house. Also present on the Bairulchau site are six large carved Great Faces with rather demonic appearances. Osborne excavated at Bairulchau but obtained only two radiocarbon dates with widely differing ages, 1800 ± 80 and 285 ± 80 B.P., leaving the chronology of the site unresolved.




FIGURE 6.11 An “owl”-face stone sculpture at Ngereklngong, Ngeremlengui State, Palau. (Photo courtesy J. Van Tilburg.)





FIGURE 6.12 The Bairulchau site on Babeldaob, with its megalithic carvings. (Photo courtesy J. Van Tilburg.)





The chronology of the Great Faces and other megaliths and their function(s) within prehistoric Palau society remain conjectural and speculative. Oral traditions suggest they may be guardian deities, and one category of megalith is termed chesuch, “owl”; other names have sexual connotations. Van Tilburg (1991:57) sees the Palauan sculptural tradition as “an integrated expression of local artistic concepts demonstrating formal and symbolic continuity as well as [a] transformation over time.” She believes that there are stylistic and iconographic connections between the megaliths and the designs found on ethnographically documented bai.


THE “YAPESE EMPIRE”Yap occupies an ambiguous position in Micronesian culture history. The Yapese language long defied classification as either Western Malayo-Polynesian or Oceanic, because it has extensively borrowed from both of these groups (Ross 1996a). This linguistic ambiguity is not surprising, for ethnographically Yap was the hub of an amazing long-distance communication network, referred to as the “Yapese Empire” (Hage and Harary 1991:17–18, 105–8; 1996:30–35). To the southwest, Yap was connected with Palau, where aragonitic limestone quarries produced the famous stone “money” essential to internal exchange relationships in Yap (Fitzpatrick 2001, 2007; Gilliland 1975). The quarrying of these stone discs evidently began in precontact times but was greatly elaborated after Western contact, partly due to the introduction of metal tools. A period of “hyperinflation” followed, with the stone discs becoming larger and larger (fig. 6.13). Fitzpatrick (2007:137) writes, “Exchange between Yap and Palau (and the extension of these interactions with Outer Islanders and Europeans) appears to have developed as a means to enhance prestige in the competitive political environments of both island societies and maintain social (and probably kin) relationships. . . . [T]hese relationships were not asymmetrical, but bilateral and mutually beneficial and involved two-way movements of material goods, cross-cultural marriage, and alliance formation.”




FIGURE 6.13 A Yapese stone “money” disc of aragonitic limestone in a village plaza. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





To the east of Yap, an elaborate communication structure linked Yap’s Gagil District with a succession of fourteen Carolinean atolls, stretching from Ulithi all the way to Puluwat and Namonuito, a total distance of 1,200 kilometers. This exchange system, the sawei, has been described as “a bicultural system of tribute offerings, gift exchange, and disaster relief” (Hunter-Anderson and Zan 1996:1). It also resulted in considerable “male-based gene flow,” as Lum (1998) showed by analysis of molecular genetic variation in central and Eastern Micronesia. Further long-distance exchange relations linked the Carolinean atolls with the Marianas archipelago (and thus indirectly with Yap).

The “Yapese Empire” was simultaneously a system of areal integration and a prestige-goods exchange network, in which certain elite groups on Yap controlled the flow of goods necessary for their social reproduction. As Hage and Harary, who have studied the system from a graph-theory point of view, describe it:

In the Yapese tribute system, 14 low, coral, islands and atolls stretching some 1,200 kilometers eastward were joined to the Gagil District of Yap by three types of gift relation. In the pitigil tamol relation, the low islanders paid tribute to the highest-ranking matrilineal chief of Gagil. In the sawei relation, individual low island matrilineages paid “rent” to individual Gagil patrilineages that owned (at least nominally) individual districts of the low islands. In a symbolic replication of intercaste relations, the low island tenants stood as “children” to their Yapese landlords and “fathers.” In the mepel relation, low island matrilineages made religious offerings to Yapese ancestral ghosts. Tribute gifts consisted of woven fiber cloth, mats, coconut-fiber rope, and shell valuables. The sawei gift was reciprocated by “optional” Yapese gifts of food, including taro, yams, sweet potatoes, and bananas, craft goods, and raw materials such as basalt, timber, and turmeric, all of which were scarce or unavailable on the low islands. (1996:31)

The navigation and sailing technology enabling the sawei was controlled by the atoll dwellers. The system had advantages both for the Gagil people of Yap, who used the externally obtained prestige goods to enhance their status locally, and for the atoll dwellers, who needed access to high-island resources. What were the origins of this remarkable long-distance network? How long has it been in place, and has its configuration changed over time? Data from excavations on a number of atolls within the ambit of the “Yapese Empire” are beginning to provide tentative answers, although much more work is required.

On Ngulu Atoll between Yap and Palau, Intoh (1984) tested deeply stratified cultural deposits, the earliest of which predate A.D. 300. Connections with both Palau and Yap are indicated by potsherds of Palauan Ware, Yapese Early Calcareous Ware, Yapese Unlaminated Ware, and Yapese Laminated Ware. The Yapese pottery predominates, but a phase of regular contact with Palau between A.D. 800 and 1400 is also indicated. Intoh (1991, 1996) excavated as well on Fais Atoll to the east of Yap, where she found stratified deposits dating to around A.D. 300. She found a direct connection with Yap in about a dozen pieces of greenschist, a rock type occurring within the Micronesian area exclusively on Yap. The settlement of Fais was presumably from Yap, as a high-island origin is indicated by the presence of pig bone. Continuous contact with Yap is indicated by more than eight hundred potsherds of Yapese origin, including CST and later laminated wares.32

On Mogmog Islet of Ulithi Atoll, Descantes (2005) found evidence for the importation of Yapese ceramics into Ulithi, beginning as early as the seventh century A.D. Using mineralogy and chemical composition analyses, Descantes sourced the Yapese ceramics to the Gachpar area. He also suggests that exchange contacts between Yap and Ulithi intensified around A.D. 1400.

Additional evidence from within the “Yapese Empire” network comes from Faraulep, Woleai, and Lamotrek Atolls located farther to the east. Fujimura and Alkire (1984) test-excavated on these islands in 1975–76. Faraulep and Woleai produced only shallow deposits, suggesting a late protohistoric settlement, but Lamotrek had well-stratified deposits, with radiocarbon dates to A.D. 1000–1100 and possibly earlier. Pottery of both Yapese and Palauan origin was recovered from the Sabaig and Polipi sites on Lamotrek (Dickinson 1984). In the excavators’ words, “Ceramic and stone materials, obviously of foreign origin, indicate that voyaging and trading ties have long existed . . . between Lamotrek and Yap, Palau, and Truk. Ties to all of these volcanic islands appear to be of equal antiquity, dating to at least A.D. 1200” (Fujimura and Alkire 1984:125).

Lingenfelter (1975) and Alkire (1980) offered explanations for the origins and function of the sawei system, seeing this alternatively as a matter of political power relations or as an economic system of tribute relations. Hunter-Anderson and Zan (1996) critiqued their models and suggested a new explanation. They see the sawei as having originated within Yap itself, where “competition over land . . . gave rise to a cultural regime characterized by warfare, shifting defensive-offensive alliances among socioterritorial units, and conventions by which socioterritorial units communicated their worthiness as alliance partners” (Hunter-Anderson and Zan 1996:1). By assuming sawei obligations with the atoll dwellers, the Gagil people purportedly strengthened their internal position in Yap, communicating their “worth as an alliance capable of supporting the large Carolinian dependency” (Hunter-Anderson and Zan 1996:1). While intriguing, Hunter-Anderson and Zan’s model is no more compelling than the alternatives. Indeed, Descantes’s work on the long-term history of exchange relationships between Ulithi and Yap highlights the need for a dynamic model, since the relations between these two modes clearly changed in nature over time, from “infrequent gift-giving” early on to a later “formal and intensive exchange system” (1998:264).

For Yap Island, our current archaeological knowledge is too embryonic to trace the internal sociopolitical or economic transformations linked to the external prestige-goods network. Labby (1976) advanced a model of changing modes of production (from initial shifting cultivation to intensified taro cultivation in swamps) linked to changes in social structure and land tenure that is worthy of archaeological testing through a study of changing settlement patterns.33 To date, however, work on Yapese settlement patterns has been entirely synchronic (ethnoarchaeological) or limited to minor tests of structures dating only to the proto-historic period (e.g., Hunter-Anderson 1983; Intoh and Leach 1985).

The Yapese landscape is remarkably structured, with elaborate stone constructions, including stone house platforms and stone-paved terraces with backrests that serve as meeting areas, linked by networks of paved trails connecting plazas lined with aragonite disc “money” (rai). In 1977 I had the pleasure of carrying out a reconnaissance survey in the Rull and Kanify areas on Yap Island. The density and complexity of structural remains encountered in my survey strongly impressed me with the potential for landscape archaeology on Yap. The built environment of stone constructions, and its integration with the textured mosaic of orchard gardens, swamp-taro cultivations, and grassland-savannas in the interior (the setting for clusters of burial mounds), would amply repay inves-tigation from a landscape archaeology perspective.





DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIOPOLITICAL COMPLEXITY IN THE CAROLINE HIGH ISLANDS


Across the Caroline archipelago, complex societies—marked by elaborate ranking or stratification and by economic specialization—developed exclusively on the high islands. This reflects the extreme resource limitations and restricted land area of atolls, which prohibited the buildup of sizable populations. In the Pacific islands generally, atoll societies—always ranging in the low hundreds of persons at most—never exhibited elaborate hierarchy, although some were involved in complex external exchange relationships like the sawei. But on high islands such as Pohnpei and Kosrae, populations numbering in the thousands were in place by the end of the first millennium A.D., if not earlier. The history of amalgamation and organization of these sizable—and very dense—populations under various forms of hierarchical and centralized control is a story now beginning to be tackled by archaeology.

Before turning to the specifics of sociopolitical evolution in the various islands of Eastern Micronesia, Glenn Petersen’s (2009:53–63) idea of a “breadfruit revolution” should be mentioned. Noting that breadfruit plays a fundamental role in the subsistence economies of this region, Petersen argues that it was the development of certain hybrid varieties (crosses between Artocarpus altilis and the seeded A. mariannensis) that underpinned this arboricultural “revolution.” Some of these varieties were salt-tolerant, permitting breadfruit to flourish on the atolls, while others were high-yielding and well adapted to high islands such as Pohnpei and Kosrae. Citing archaeological evidence from Chuuk, where pounders and other artifacts associated with breadfruit appear around A.D. 1200–1300, Petersen maintains that a new emphasis on breadfruit had far-reaching implications for Micronesian societies. Larger populations made possible by breadfruit’s high productivity “were successful enough to produce significant surpluses of a limited range of goods for exchange” (2009:63), leading in turn to systematic linkages across the Carolines and extending even to Yap and Palau. “Eastern Micronesian societies have become so dependent upon breadfruit that it seems fair to assume the hybridization of the two species that took place in east-central Micronesia was both a product of the peoples’ deliberate efforts and a source for profound transformation in their societies” (2009:63).


POHNPEI AND NAN MADOLAt 310 square kilometers, Pohnpei, the largest high island in central Eastern Micronesia, has a nearly circular plan, with rugged mountains rising 550 meters above sea level and a radial pattern of stream drainages. High rainfall and fertile soils supported an agricultural system based on orchards of breadfruit and other tree crops, as well as root and tuber crops (especially yams), and an extensive barrier-reef and lagoon system provided rich fishing grounds. As with most Pacific islands that suffered massive depopulation after first contact with Europeans, the maximum population of Pohnpei is not certain, but Ayres, Haun, and Severance (1979:table 17) estimate it to have been between 20,000 and 30,000, a size corresponding with many of the larger Polynesian chiefdoms. In early historic times, five independent districts (wehi) were under the control of a diarchy of sacred and secular lords (the nahmwarki and the nahnken, respectively).34 Each district was partitioned into smaller named land sections under the charge of lesser chiefs, who paid tribute to the dual paramounts through a seasonal round of feasts. A focus of these feasts was the competitive cultivation of giant yams (Dioscorea alata) using specialized techniques. While this hierarchical sociopolitical system compares favorably with many of the midrange chiefdoms of Polynesia (e.g., those of the Southern Cook Islands or the Australs), there is evidence—both in Pohnpeian oral traditions and in archaeology—for an older system in which the entire island was unified under a single dynastic rule. The seat of this ancient Saudeleur dynasty is Nan Madol, adjacent to the small islet of Temwen in the district of Madolenihmw (fig. 6.14).




FIGURE 6.14 Aerial view of part of the Nan Madol site on Pohnpei, with the Nandauwas islet and tomb complex visible in the foreground. (Photo courtesy Steve Athens.)





William Morgan claimed that “no site in Oceania surpasses the dramatic beauty of ancient Nan Madol,” which because of its artificial islets and intervening canals has sometimes been called the “Venice of the Pacific.” Morgan wrote of how—despite having seen drawings and photos of the site beforehand—he was emotionally unprepared for the grandeur of the site when he first glimpsed it. The great tomb islet of Nandauwas (fig. 6.14), he said, is “powerfully conceived, sensitively sited, and skillfully executed. . . . Passing jungle-covered islets on both sides of the canal, we caught our first glimpses of Nandauwas’ southwest corner through the trees. A few moments later the canoe turned to the left, slowed, and stopped before the main entry landing of the west front. For several minutes I sat quietly in the boat, gazing at the magnificent west facade, the stately podium, the noble entryway, and the ascending steps that led to the interior courts, enclosures, and tombs” (Morgan 1988:68).




FIGURE 6.15 Perspective view of the Nandauwas tomb complex at Nan Madol, Pohnpei. (From Morgan 1988, courtesy of W. N. Morgan.)





Nan Madol covers 81 hectares of sheltered reef area off the southern side of Temwen Island and comprises no fewer than ninety-three artificial islets constructed of stone with coral and rubble fill, the entire complex bounded on the west, south, and east by massive seawalls or breakwaters, some of them also incorporating islets. The German ethnographer Paul Hambruch made the first accurate map of Nan Madol in 1910 (see Hambruch 1911, 1936); his cartography still forms the basis for modern surveys, which have added much fine-grained detail.35 Morgan (1988:66–67) provides a “provisional” map of Nan Madol incorporating Hambruch’s data and later information.36

Nan Madol is laid out formally, as seen in the site plan (fig. 6.16); although it developed over a long period, some degree of overall planning is evident. As the administrative center of the Saudeleur polity, the islets functioned primarily as the residences and burial facilities for members of the Saudeleur elite. Nan Madol was divided into two named sectors (this ethnographic information was obtained by Hambruch and other investigators): Madol Pah to the west (with thirty-four islets) and Madol Powe to the east (with fifty-eight islets). Four large, square islets dominate Madol Pah, a residential ward. Madol Powe, in classic binary structural opposition, was a ritual ward incorporating several large tombs as well as priestly residences. At the southeast corner of Nan Madol and dominating Madol Powe is Nandauwas, the massive royal mortuary compound of the Saudeleurs (fig. 6.17).




FIGURE 6.16 Map of the Nan Madol site complex by the German ethnographer Paul Hambruch. (From Hambruch 1911.)





FIGURE 6.17 View of the Nandauwas tomb complex from the adjacent canal. Note the distinctive style of construction using prismatic basalt columns. (Photo courtesy Steve Athens.)





Part of what makes Nan Madol so architecturally impressive—aside from its massive scale—is the use of large columnar basalt stones in wall construction. On some islets, the construction technique consisted of dry-fitting large basalt boulders; on others, a highly distinctive method of wall construction using columnar basalt slabs in a header-stretcher technique was employed. This latter technique was used in the Nandauwas tomb complex. Nandauwas islet has a base or podium measuring 79 by 63 meters; the outer enclosing walls, set back from the podium facing, rise 7.6 meters above the canal level. Within the enclosing walls are crypts, including a main central crypt, covered with columnar basalt lintel stones. M.D. McCoy et al. (2016:301) used pXRF to analyze the geochemical signature of a sample of building stones, finding that a significant quantity of the columnar basalt derived from a source on the opposite side of the island. As these authors remark, “The high transport cost of transporting PM [Pwisehn Malek] columnar basalt to Nan Madol makes it a good metric for the authority of the island’s first chiefs” (2016:301).

A tentative chronology for the construction of the Nan Madol complex has emerged from the work of Steve Athens, Bill Ayres, and others. Initial occupation at the site was coeval with human colonization of Pohnpei itself, around A.D. 1. This is possibly one reason that Nan Madol became such an important ritual center: it may be the “ur-settlement” of the island. It is conceivable that the first occupation at Nan Madol, which has been revealed by ceramic-bearing deposits within the tidal zone under artificial islet fill, consisted of stilt houses of Lapita type situated over the reef flat. By A.D. 900–1100 construction of artificially elevated islets had commenced, although this probably did not involve megalithic construction. A phase of truly megalithic building begins around A.D. 1200–1600, correlating with the Saudeleur period as recorded in Pohnpei oral traditions (Bath and Athens 1990). The central burial on Nandauwas islet was in use by A.D. 1180–1200, based on recent high-precision U/Th dating of branch coral in the building fill (M.D. McCoy et al. 2016). There was continued use of Nan Madol, and more construction, after A.D. 1650, but by the time Europeans visited in the mid-nineteenth century, the vast complex had been abandoned, with the Pohnpei people greatly fearing and respecting this sacred place.

Nan Madol is remarkable for its close correlations between oral traditions and archaeology.37 Pohnpei history is indigenously conceived as falling into four successive ages: the Age of People, the Age of Saudeleur, the Age of Nahnmwarki, and the Age of Foreigners (the period of historic contact with Europeans). Primarily associated with the Age of Saudeleur, Nan Madol is said to have been constructed by two brothers who, using supernatural powers, built it as their place of prayer. Tradition records a succession of eight Saudeleur rulers, who held supreme power over the entire island, with the different districts providing tribute. The Saudeleurs resided on Pahnkedira islet; they were interred in Nandauwas after death. Among the rituals enacted within the sacred sector of Nan Madol were ceremonial turtle sacrifice and the care of a sacred eel kept in a pond in Ideht islet. Excavations by Smithsonian Institution archaeologists in the 1960s in a mound of oven debris (the Ideht Mound) resulting from successive turtle sacrifices yielded three radiocarbon ages ranging between A.D. 1180 and 1430.

According to the oral traditions, the Age of Saudeleur and its dynasty came to an end when the last ruler, infused with arrogance, attempted to capture one of the gods, Nan Sapwe; the latter escaped to a place in the sky called Katau,38 where he inseminated a woman who bore him a son named Isokelekel. Isokelekel, after coming of age, voyaged to Pohnpei with a magical contingent of 333 warriors and engaged the last Saudeleur in battle, defeating him. Isokelekel is credited with instituting the modern chiefly system with its dual sacred-secular positions of Nahnmwarki and Nahnken.

Archaeological surveys in parts of Pohnpei outside Nan Madol, such as in the Awak Valley and the Kiti District, have added data on the distribution of megalithic “Nan Madol style” architecture of (e.g., using columnar basalt construction) and on the presence of administrative or ritual centers below the level of Nan Madol itself. Joyce Bath (1984a, 1984b) investigated the ridgetop center of Sapwtakai in the Kiti District, shown in perspective view in figure 6.18. Sapwtakai incorporates columnar basalt in its construction, with a major central tomb structure similar to that of Nan Madol. Radiocarbon dates indicate occupation at Sapwtakai from about A.D. 1325 to 1700, roughly the same time span as that for the major development of Nan Madol.




FIGURE 6.18 Perspective rendering of the Sapwtakai site in the Kiti District, Pohnpei. (After Bath and Athens 1990.)





Although the rise of complex sociopolitical structures on Pohnpei was largely a matter of internal processes, the possibility of external inputs or influences cannot be discounted. Ayres and Mauricio (1987) pointed to an unusual basalt adz from Nan Madol with closest parallels in Type I/III adz forms in Samoa, possibly an import from Western Polynesia. Pohnpei and Kosrae are the only two islands in Micronesia where kava is consumed. The Pohnpei term for this psychoactive plant, sakaw, is almost certainly a Polynesian borrowing (from te kava, with the article te being fossilized in the Pohnpeian loanword; Geraghty 1994). In short, contact between Western Polynesia (most likely Samoa) and Pohnpei seems likely, although determining its impacts is more problematic.

Several archaeologists have advanced models for the transformation of Pohnpeian society over the course of two millennia. Ayres (1990) and Bryson (1989) have explored “peer-polity interaction” theory, drawing on the concept developed by Colin Renfrew (1982). According to Ayres (1990:202), “The primary hypothesis is that Nan Madol’s development as a chiefly and priestly center reflects an evolving chiefdom that controlled a Pohnpei polity from ca. A.D. 1000 to 1500”; however, the significance of “religious motivation [i.e., ideology] versus commanded labor [coercion]” is unclear to him. Peoples inclines against a “functionalist” model in which chiefs increased their power through administrative control in favor of a coercive model: “Multilevel political structures evolved as a consequence of the geographic expansion of power of some local groups led by chiefs” (1990:299). Bath and Athens (1990), integrating Pohnpeian oral traditions with archaeological evidence, opine that there may have been a phase of centralized power (the Saudeleur period) with a four-level hierarchy that failed to sustain itself and collapsed back to a three-level system, with independent districts. Although Ayres and Haun (1985, 1990) have pointed to agricultural intensification as a significant aspect of the Pohnpeian economy, more information on the chronology of such intensification could provide critical evidence for interpreting the megalithic centers, as would better control over prehistoric population sizes and rates of change.


KOSRAE AND LELUSome 550 kilometers east-southeast of Pohnpei and closer to the equator lies Kosrae, a high island with rugged mountains (the highest peak is 629 meters above sea level), at 109 square kilometers somewhat smaller than Pohnpei. Fringing reefs encase its narrow coastal flats, but Kosrae lacks a lagoon. Fertile volcanic soils support an agroforest with breadfruit as the staple and significant plantings of giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis) under the orchard canopy.39 Politically, the island is divided into four districts, each corresponding to a major drainage basin. At initial contact with Europeans in 1824, a single paramount chief controlled Kosrae, under whom subchiefs managed individual land units called facl, which ran from the mountains to the reef. The contact population of Kosrae is debated. Most estimates have ranged around 3,000 persons, but these may underestimate the maximum population prior to the ravages of European-introduced disease. Ritter (1981) suggests that a figure of 6,000 may be more accurate, although Athens (2007a:276) doubts that the maximum population at the “time of the paramount chieftaincy formed in the fifteenth century” exceeded 3,000.

In 1824, La Coquille, under the command of Louis Duperrey, arrived off the eastern coast of Kosrae. The French explorers were taken to a remarkable stone-walled “city” situated on the point of a small islet named Lelu, capital and chiefly center of the Kosrae polity. In the words of First Officer Dumont d’Urville, “As we approached the shores of Lelu, a new scene presented itself to us: beautiful houses enclosed by high walls, well-paved streets, and on the beach was gathered the entire population of Lelu, at least 800 people, who had come to be present at our disembarkation” (quoted in Cordy 1993:54). The French could hardly believe the scale of construction, as remarked by the ship’s doctor, René Lesson: “We observed with total bewilderment a wall, composed of blocks, of truly cyclopean size, and we wondered how and why they had been able to erect such masses to a 15 foot height. The elegant houses of these islanders lined the streets on elevated mounds” (quoted in Cordy 1993:55). A view of these houses from a later Russian expedition is shown in figure 6.19.




FIGURE 6.19 A residential compound at Lelu, Kosrae, as recorded during the early nineteenth-century Russian visit of Lütke. (From Lütke 1835.)





Similar to Nan Madol in its construction on a reef flat, the presence of canals, and its megalithic construction, yet different in other important details, Lelu was the residence of the paramount Kosrae chief and of the facl subchiefs, who were required to live with him. Fortunately, much ethnographic information about Lelu and its occupants was obtained from the visits not only of La Coquille but also of later European ships, such as that of the Russian explorer Fyedor Lütke in 1827.40 By the late nineteenth century, Kosrae was severely depopulated, the traditional sociopolitical structure had collapsed, and Lelu had become an abandoned ruin.

In its newly ruined state, Lelu was visited by F.W. Christian (1899), who drew the first map of the site. In 1909–10, when the German Südsee-Expedition explored Kosrae, Paul Hambruch (1919) accurately mapped the ruins and excavated in several tombs, and Ernst Sarfert (1919) obtained a great deal of additional “salvage” ethnographic material. These early studies have been expanded with a thorough survey by Cordy (1985, 1993) and deep stratigraphic excavations by Athens (Athens, ed., 1995), which yielded early CST pottery at the base of several residential compounds. Morgan (1988) described the site from an architect’s viewpoint.

The ruins of Lelu, covering 27 hectares, are made up of a series of walled compounds, most of which were residential but some of which contain tombs. A canal traverses the center of the site: “Navigable throughout at high tide, the canal system gave maritime access to many of the compounds and numerous boat landings. Tribute of food and goods from the land sections on Kosrae were brought by boat to Leluh daily” (Morgan 1988:97). Cordy and Athens outlined a construction sequence for Lelu based on radiocarbon dates they obtained, as shown in figure 6.20. Initial occupation or use of the area around the first century A.D. is indicated by the early pottery; it is possible that there was a stilt-house village in this vicinity. However, construction of the artificial islets and walled compounds did not commence until about A.D. 1250–1400, in the Finlas sector. From A.D. 1400 to 1600 there was a major building effort, with two components. One set of compounds (the Finbota to Katem area) was built using stacked prismatic basalt walls, and a western extension was built on the north end of the island. Walls enclosing the Kinyeir and Lurun compounds rose to heights of 6 meters. This left an open space in the middle of the site, which was filled in during the next phase, from about A.D. 1600 to 1650. A change in construction style ensued, incorporating rounded basalt boulders, with walls constructed to heights as great as 4 to 5 meters. Finally, the remaining compounds were constructed from A.D. 1650 to 1800, using mixed coral stones and with low wall height (1–1.4 m). Recent U/Th dating of corals used in the construction of three tombs at Lelu yielded ages between A.D. 1310 and 1387 (Richards et al. 2015).




FIGURE 6.20 The construction sequence for the Lelu site, as determined by Ross Cordy. (After Cordy 1993.)





Lelu, which required a great deal of labor to build and which also evinces centralized planning, holds a key to understanding the development of a complex chiefdom polity on Kosrae. Cordy (1993) proposed a model for the evolution of Kosraen society in which an older (pre–A.D. 1000) system with only two social strata (local chiefs and commoners) was first transformed through district-level unification and the addition of a third tier. Finally, through islandwide consolidation, a fourth tier was imposed, that of the island paramount. Cordy links this final change to the period of greatest construction at Lelu, between A.D. 1400 and 1600. He sees population growth leading to resource imbalance combined with competition between district-level polities as key processes underlying these sociopolitical changes. In his words:

I suggest that certain areas included more land (e.g., a larger valley) enabling the growth of a larger population center and thus providing more warriors. Such areas would have advantages in competing society situations and could eventually incorporate neighbors (through conquest, marriage, etc.). As geographic area would increase, local chiefs needed to supervise (to collect information for the ruler and to disseminate information for the ruler). This need for a lower decision-making level would lead to three strata (ruler, local chief, and commoner).

I suggest some of these “district” society areas would also have more contiguous flat, fertile land, enabling greater populations to build up. Lelu and Utwe particularly fit this pattern. Population imbalances among the competing “district” societies would in turn be critical factors in war. I suggest they tipped the balance in favor of Utwe and Lelu, and finally in favor of Lelu. With island-wide conquest, territorial and population sizes would increase requiring three decision-making levels (king, high chiefs controlling many [facl], their managers controlling individual [facl]). Accordingly, four [social] strata would form. (Cordy 1993:259)

Cordy calls his model a “competition hypothesis” in which “population imbalances” are the key variable leading to territorial conquest, a model in many respects similar to one proposed by Peoples (1990). Ueki (1990:fig. 2) advances a similar model for the evolution of Kosraen society and social stratification, in which population increases triggered changes in the system of land management as well as increased competition over rights to land and sea. The latter in turn led to conflict and territorial conquest, and ultimately to the emergence of a new class of managers.

A definitive test of the Cordy-Peoples-Ueki model requires evidence from sites other than Lelu itself; a broad settlement-pattern approach throughout Kosrae is necessary. Ueki (1990:311–12) discusses some limited evidence of this kind, based on a survey in the Utwa Valley, where he identified the Nefalil site as a district-level center dating to between A.D. 940 and 1470. Athens’s landscape archaeology approach also provides evidence to test the Kosrae model (Athens, ed., 1995; Athens 2007b), with evidence for population growth and for agricultural intensification and changing patterns of land use. Based on 109 radiocarbon dates from Kosrae Island, Athens derived a cumulative frequency plot of the calibrated age probabilities (fig. 6.21). While such a graph does not directly track human population numbers, it may reflect general occupation density over a landscape. Athens (1995:27) observes that “the earliest inflection point [in the curve] just after 500 A.D. is interpreted to represent the first indication that population is starting to grow on the main island. This rate of growth continues, with perhaps something of a spurt about 800 A.D., until about A.D. 1200. At A.D. 1200 the frequency of radiocarbon dates increases sharply, suggesting a rapidly growing population.” The fit between this proxy population curve and the Lelu construction chronology is remarkably good, with the major inflection in the curve and the onset of megalithic construction both occurring around A.D. 1200–1300. This finding offers strong support for population growth playing an important role in the transformation of Kosrae society.




FIGURE 6.21 Radiocarbon frequency distribution for Kosrae Island. (After Athens 1995.)





External influence possibly affected the course of sociopolitical evolution on Kosrae. Several scholars have pointed to similarities between Nan Madol and Lelu, suggesting that there was a connection between the two groups of people responsible for their construction. For example, the mythical Isokelekel—overthrower of the Saudeleur dynasty of Nan Madol—has been identified in some sources as coming from Kosrae. But the name used for Isokelekel’s homeland in the Pohnpei traditions is “Katau,” which refers to a mythical “sky world” and not to any particular island. Indeed, Goodenough (1986:562) suggests that if anything the direction of influence may have been the other way around: “If the massive stone structures at Lele on Kosrae have any connection with those of Nan Madol on Ponape, the direction of influence must have been . . . from Ponape, perhaps along with the introduction of kava drinking.” Now that construction chronologies have been archaeologically determined for the two sites, this scenario seems more likely, since the major construction phase at Lelu lags behind that at Nan Madol by one to two centuries. Hence in addition to demographic and social pressures within Kosrae itself, external connections between Kosrae and Pohnpei may have played some role in Kosrae’s history of sociopolitical transformation.


CHUUKThe third high island within the Carolines, Chuuk, poses a striking contrast to Pohnpei and Kosrae; it exhibits none of the megalithic architecture or other material manifestations of stratified, complex chiefdoms found in the latter two islands. Ethnographically, Chuuk society was not strongly hierarchical and had a low degree of political integration. Peoples (1990:294) points out that the typical autonomous political unit in Chuuk was small, about 0.8 square kilometer in area and containing perhaps 100 people; there were many such units distributed throughout the islands of Chuuk Lagoon. Archaeological evidence supports the idea that this kind of system also was in place in prehistory. As King and Parker (1984:456) write, “We see no evidence in the archaeological record known thus far to indicate that efforts to impose a three or four strata society in Truk, if they occurred, were ever successful.” What one does clearly see in the Chuuk archaeological record is the pervasiveness of raiding and interpolity warfare, manifested in numerous forts and in residential sites situated in naturally defensive positions (Rainbird 1996).

Why did Chuuk society not follow the same kinds of pathways of sociopolitical change leading to increasing integration and hierarchy that we see in Pohnpei and Kosrae? Peoples (1990) suggests that the answer lies in Chuuk’s geography of many small, dispersed islands rather than one larger island, which permitted defeated groups simply to flee to another island. “The warring ‘mini-chiefdom’ stage persisted on Truk because no [one] chiefdom was in a position to permanently incorporate and subordinate its neighbors. Losing groups had other choices as well as a chance to acquire allies on other islands for a reconquest” (Peoples 1990:298). Moreover, due to the small size and resource limitations of the individual Chuuk high islands, none ever amassed a critically large population base.





SEVEN


Polynesia


ORIGINS AND DISPERSALS



Earlier historical theories explained diversity in Polynesia from diffusion—from supposed waves of immigrants, each bringing in new cultural traditions and new levels of complexity; all present evidence, whether from genetics, linguistics, or culture, including ethnology and archaeology, converges towards the conclusion that the major Polynesian diversities have arisen from internal differentiation.

I. GOLDMAN, Ancient Polynesian Society (1970)





AT THE EASTERN END OF THE SAMOAN archipelago lies a cluster of three small islands—Ta‘u, Olosenga, and Ofu—collectively known as the Manu‘a Islands (fig. 7.1). Ta‘u was the location of Margaret Mead’s trend-setting ethnographic research on Samoan adolescent girls in the early 1920s, but little was known of the islands’ archaeology. Yosihiko Sinoto and Bill Kikuchi of the Bishop Museum had reconnoitered the Manu‘a group in 1962 but had come away disappointed, finding neither pottery nor fishhooks in the sites that they tested (Emory and Sinoto 1965:45–48). Given that pottery sites dating to the first millennium B.C. had been located on the larger islands of ‘Upolu and Savai‘i in Western Samoa, this was surprising. I thought that a second look at Manu‘a might be warranted.




FIGURE 7.1 The beach at To‘aga, Ofu Island, in the Manu‘a group of American Samoa. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





In 1986 the opportunity for a new look at Manu‘a came when the American Samoan Historic Preservation Office offered funds for a survey of archaeological sites. Assisted by graduate student Terry Hunt and Epi Suafo‘a, a young Samoan woman eager to learn about archaeology, we spent several weeks exploring the narrow coastal plains and slogging up the steep, jungle-covered slopes. We discovered lots of stone house platforms and some “star mounds” (platforms with curious spokelike arms) but no pottery. Then, on Ofu Island near the end of our trip, I came across a deep cut in the narrow coastal plain at To‘aga, which had been bulldozed by the public works department for a landfill. As I examined the 8-foot-high wall of the dozer cut, I noticed a grayish-brown midden deposit sandwiched between white beach sand below and a thick layer of clay above. A quick test pit adjacent to the landfill turned up a handful of thick, coarse pottery of the type known as Polynesian Plain Ware; later, a Turbo shell from the pottery-bearing deposit gave a radiocarbon age of between 28 B.C. and A.D. 108.

In 1987 and again in 1989, I returned to excavate more extensively across the To‘aga coastal plain.1 Prior experience in Futuna, Tikopia, and Tonga had taught me that Polynesian landscapes were often surprisingly dynamic: in just a few thousand years changing sea levels could shift shorelines tens or even hundreds of meters, while the clearing of forests for gardens exposed steep hillslopes to erosion, resulting in thick accumulations of clay on adjacent coastal plains. Evidently at To‘aga we had just such a situation, where the earliest villages—occupied by the makers of the Polynesian Plain Ware—lay some distance inland of the present beach, buried under two or more meters of heavy clay and boulders eroded from the steep hillsides. It took backbreaking work with picks, shovels, and iron crowbars to dig through this overburden to get down to the ancient occupation strata (fig. 7.2).




FIGURE 7.2 Excavations in the coastal plain at To‘aga, Ofu Island, revealed deeply buried cultural deposits containing an early form of Polynesian pottery. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





When we did reach the sandy cultural deposits, we were rewarded with a rich assemblage of artifacts and faunal remains dating to the early phase of Polynesian culture in Samoa. Not just lots of pottery—the oldest consisting of a thin, fine-ware—but also many one-piece fishhooks of Turbo shell, stone and shell adzes, beads and rings of Conus shell, sea urchin spine and coral abraders, drilled sharks’ teeth, and more. The faunal assemblage was rich in fishbone and shellfish, offering insights into early Polynesian subsistence strategies. Radiocarbon dates revealed that the narrow To‘aga plain had been occupied since about 800 B.C. Our discoveries at To‘aga opened a window on a critical phase in the prehistory of Polynesia, during which a distinct “Ancestral Polynesian” culture arose from its Lapita predecessor in the Western Polynesian “homeland” region.





POLYNESIAN ORIGINS


The idea that the Polynesian homeland lies within the Polynesian Triangle itself, in the region of the Tongan and Samoan archipelagoes (along with Futuna and ‘Uvea), emerged from archaeological research in the 1950s and 1960s (see chap. 1). Earlier scholars had sought the answer to the “problem of Polynesian origins” by searching for an external homeland, usually in Asia, or in the case of some theorizers (e.g., Heyerdahl 1952), in the Americas. Te Rangi Hiroa (1938b), for example, believed that the Polynesians had migrated in large fleets from an Asiatic homeland, passing through Micronesia to enter the Polynesian Triangle via Samoa and on to the Society Islands, which he called the “hub” of the Triangle. Most scholars agreed with some version of an Asiatic homeland scenario. What all the theories had in common was the notion that Polynesian culture had existed in all its essential elements in some other region of the world—on either side of the Pacific basin—at an earlier point in time. Migration was invoked to bring Polynesians into the Pacific, with culture change seen as the outcome of an overlaying of successive waves of migration (e.g., Handy 1930a).

Kenneth Emory, originally schooled in the migration paradigm, was one of the first to grasp the significance of the new archaeological finds from Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa when he predicted that the origins of the Polynesians would be found “in a western archipelago in the Polynesian area about 1500 B.C.” (1959:34). When Jack Golson, Roger Green, Jens Poulsen, and others began to excavate in Samoa and Tonga in the late 1950s and 1960s, their finds showed that distinctly “Polynesian” cultural traits had emerged within these archipelagoes over more than a thousand years.2 Green (1967a:237) summed up this new understanding of Polynesian origins: “There never was a Polynesian migration from elsewhere; becoming Polynesian took place in Polynesia itself as the archaeology of Tonga and Samoa over the last 3,000 years readily attests. One begins with Eastern Lapita, and ends with Polynesian.”3

Lapita pottery-making peoples from the southeastern Solomons and/or northern Vanuatu, crossed the 850-kilometer water gap to arrive at the Fiji archipelago around 1100–1000 B.C. (see chap. 4). Discovery and settlement of the Lau Islands and then Tonga quickly followed, by 896–880 B.C. in the case of Tongatapu, where the Nukuleka site has been identified as the probable founding settlement (Burley, Weisler, and Zhao 2012; Burley et al. 2015). Pottery from Nukuleka exhibits decorative motifs similar to those found in Lapita sites in the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands (see fig. 4.9). Lapita colonization proceeded rapidly up the Tongan island chain, with dates for the Ha‘apai group of 822–809 B.C. and for Vava‘u of 855–810 B.C. (Burley et al. 2015). Samoa was settled around 900–850 B.C., based on dates from Mulifanua, the only Early Eastern Lapita site currently known from that island group (Petchy 2001). The more isolated islands of Futuna, ‘Uvea, and Niuatoputapu were all also settled early in the first millennium B.C. (Kirch 1988c; Sand 2000a). The similarities in Early Eastern Lapita ceramics on all of these islands, as well as direct evidence for transport of obsidian, chert, and stone adzes between communities, reveal an interaction network between these newly founded settlements.4 Over time, however, breaks in this chain of Lapita communities arose, first between Fiji and Tonga and later between Tonga and Samoa.5 Such breaks were not absolute, for interaction between the peoples of the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa region continued throughout prehistory. But isolation was sufficient to give rise to local variation—especially in the pottery—by the end of the first millennium B.C. (Kirch 1988c). Out of such partial isolation, combined with adaptation to new environmental and social conditions, a distinctively Polynesian culture emerged.

The pottery sequences of Western Polynesia evolved gradually out of their Eastern Lapita antecedents. The classic dentate-stamped decoration disappeared fairly quickly, followed by gradual reduction in the range of vessel forms (fig. 7.3).6 A distinctive Polynesian adz kit likewise developed out of Lapita prototypes, in part as a response to the need to produce adzes from the dense basalt stone found on such high islands as ‘Uvea and Samoa.7 Other aspects of material culture, such as shell ornaments and fishing gear, show continuity. In short, the Polynesians trace their origins to the Eastern Lapita expansion, becoming distinctly Polynesian—in language and culture—during the course of the first millennium B.C. Tonga and Samoa and their close neighbors Futuna and ‘Uvea constitute the immediate Polynesian homeland—what generations of later Polynesian peoples would call, in their myths and traditions, Havaiki.8




FIGURE 7.3 The gradual transition from Early Eastern Lapita to Polynesian Plain Ware ceramics took place over more than one millennium. This diagram shows changes in vessel forms. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





POLYNESIA AS A PHYLETIC UNIT


Of the three categories into which Dumont d’Urville subdivided the Oceanic peoples—Polynesia, Melanesia, and Micronesia—only Polynesia has stood the test of time as a meaningful unit for culture-historical analysis. As we have seen, the cultural history of Melanesia is exceedingly complex, extending back in time 40,000 years or more, incorporating peoples of highly diverse origins, genetic makeup, linguistic affiliation, and cultural patterns. It makes no sense whatsoever to speak of a unified “Melanesian culture,” for the peoples and cultures of Melanesia are strongly multiphyletic. Micronesia lacks the great time depth and complexity of Melanesia, but even there we find peoples speaking languages from two major subgroups of the Austronesian family (Oceanic and Western Malayo-Polynesian); at least four population movements into Micronesia can be identified linguistically and archaeologically. Only in Polynesia do we find a group of peoples and cultures who share a common history.9 All of the Polynesian cultures known ethnographically (and the languages spoken by them) derived from a common ancestral culture (and proto-language) over a period of about 2,500 years (Kirch and Green 1987, 2001). It is in this sense that one can speak of Polynesia as a phyletic unit, a “segment of cultural history” to which a phylogenetic approach to historical anthropology may fruitfully be applied.10

Language provided the first clue to the essential unity of Polynesia. Beginning with Captain James Cook, astute explorers observed that languages as far-flung as those of New Zealand, Rapa Nui, and Hawai‘i were very similar. Lieutenant King of HMS Resolution wrote that “the same language . . . hardly requires any other proof of those who speak it being the same people, and originating from the same country” (Beaglehole, ed., 1967:1392). J.R. Forster, naturalist on Cook’s second voyage, published a “comparative table of the various languages in the isles of the South-Sea,” documenting the many similarities (Forster 1996 [1778]:188–89). Today we would not call Maori, Rapanui, and Hawaiian a single language; rather, we regard them as closely related languages sharing a high degree of cognate vocabulary, as well as similar grammatical patterns. But it was precisely this relatedness of speech that allowed Cook, King, Forster, and other early observers to recognize that the Polynesian languages were all of one “stock.”

Exhaustive linguistic research in the latter part of the twentieth century yielded a fine-grained understanding of the subgrouping, or internal relationships, of the Polynesian languages. Although refinements continue to be made, the linguistic phylogeny for Polynesian has been well understood since the pioneering work of Biggs, Green, and Pawley.11 As a group, the thirty-six extant or recorded Polynesian languages12 are most closely related to Fijian and Rotuman, with which they form the next higher-order subgroup of Oceanic languages, Central Pacific. Proto Central-Pacific was presumably the language spoken by the Eastern Lapita colonists of the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa area, and at first would have formed a dialect chain throughout this region. Fairly quickly, however, “weak links” where speech communication was less frequent led to sound and word changes across the dialect chain; Proto Central-Pacific began to differentiate into distinct Proto Fijic and Proto Tokalau-Polynesian languages (Geraghty 1983). Continued change within the latter linkage would lead to successive language interstages within the Tonga-Samoa region.

Figure 7.4 shows the internal relationships of the extant Polynesian languages. Two points relevant to prehistory are evident in this linguistic tree. First, all known Polynesian languages can be traced back to Proto Polynesian, confirming the existence of a monophyletic unit. Second, the branching structure of the tree provides a model for successive stages in the differentiation of Polynesian subgroups. While the early split of Proto Polynesian into Proto Tongic and Proto Nuclear Polynesian branches surely occurred within the Western Polynesian homeland, subsequent splits in the tree presumably resulted from populations moving out of this core region, primarily into central Eastern Polynesia, and later to the more distant and isolated islands and archipelagoes.




FIGURE 7.4 The subgrouping of the Polynesian languages. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





Biological anthropology also affirms the essential homogeneity of Polynesian populations. Despite some variation, many morphological features denote a common Polynesian phenotype, such as large body size and a high incidence of the “rocker jaw” and of a strongly “pentagonally” shaped cranium (Houghton 1996). Studies of metrical and nonmetrical traits, measured on both living Polynesians and skeletal populations, yield statistical groupings in which Polynesian samples consistently link more closely with each other than with external populations.13 Recent genetic studies, including DNA sequencing, reinforce this homogeneity within the Polynesian genotype.14 The likely explanation for this high degree of biological homogeneity—reflected both phenotypically and genotypically—is that the parental population from which all Polynesian groups derive went through a “bottleneck” during the initial colonization of Fiji and Western Polynesia (Kelly 1996; Martinson 1996; Martinson et al. 1993), resulting in the well-known “founder effect.”15

Comparative ethnography—a third line of evidence regarding Polynesian relationships—likewise documents the set of shared, systemic cultural patterns inherited by Polynesian cultures from their common ancestor. Marshall Sahlins, in his classic comparative analysis of Polynesian cultures, invoked a biological metaphor when he wrote that “the Polynesian cultures derive from a common source; they are members of a single cultural genus that has filled in and adapted to a variety of local habitats” (1958:ix). These shared systemic patterns include the basic kinds of social groups (the kainanga and the kainga) and land tenure patterns, the concepts of mana (spiritual power) and tapu (sacredness), cosmogonic origin myths, and the ubiquitous presence of hereditary chiefs (all called by some variant of the word ariki), as well as more prosaic aspects of material culture (Burrows 1938).

In sum, the evidence of linguistics, biological anthropology, and comparative ethnography all demonstrate that Polynesia’s modern languages, populations, and cultures descended from a common proto-language, parental population, and ancestral culture. Polynesian cultural differentiation took place over two and a half millennia, due to geographic expansion out of an original homeland combined with a variety of evolutionary processes and historical contingencies (Kirch 1984a; Kirch and Green 1987, 2001). The geographic homeland of the parental population was the Tonga-Samoa region, and the time frame for the emergence of Ancestral Polynesian culture was the second half of the first millennium B.C.

Western and Eastern Polynesia, referred to previously, require formal definition, for they have much historical significance. The distinction was first examined critically by Edwin G. Burrows (1938), who recognized that aspects of material culture, systemic social structures, and religious beliefs displayed consistent geographic distributions. Western Polynesia encompasses Tonga, Samoa, Futuna, ‘Uvea, Niue, and Tokelau; Eastern Polynesia encompasses the central archipelagoes of the Societies, Cooks, Australs, Marquesas, Tuamotus, and Mangareva, along with the more remote Hawai‘i, Rapa Nui, and New Zealand. In religion, the Eastern Polynesian cultures share a pantheon of first-order, functionally differentiated, anthropomorphic gods—including Tāne, Tū, Rongo, and Tangaloa—whereas only one of these (Tangaloa) is known in Western Polynesia (Marck 2000). Similarly, the marae as a formal temple with enclosed court and raised altar (ahu) is exclusively an Eastern Polynesian phenomenon; in Western Polynesia the malae is an open-air assembly area.16 Burrows inferred that Western Polynesia was the area of the Polynesian homeland, with the Eastern Polynesian cultures deriving from later migration and expansion out of that homeland, a scenario later confirmed by archaeology.

That the Eastern Polynesian cultures share many traits, as well as innovations in language, indicates that there was also an Eastern Polynesian homeland prior to dispersal to the more remote archipelagoes. This need not have been a single island or even archipelago; it could readily have encompassed most of the tropical core of central Eastern Polynesia, given extensive interisland voyaging and communication. Abundant evidence for regular voyaging and interaction among the archipelagoes of central Eastern Polynesia has emerged from the geochemical analysis and sourcing of basalt adzes that moved between these early communities.17

Cultural divergence within Polynesia did not result solely from successive “branchings,” or from increased isolation. Linguists can show that borrowing sometimes occurred between languages, demonstrating contact between speech communities (Marck 2000). Oral traditions and archaeological evidence both demonstrate long-distance contacts between islands and archipelagoes at various times in prehistory and proto-history (Weisler, ed., 1997). Such contacts were sometimes significant, as in Tonga, where the proto-historic polity relied on a prestige-goods economy of long-distance exchange to reinforce its hegemony (G. Clark et al. 2014). But the existence of interisland linkages does not obviate Polynesia’s basic phyletic structure, nor does it require a “tangled bank” metaphor for the region’s cultural history.





ANCESTRAL POLYNESIA


As a phyletic unit, Polynesia is especially well suited to a phylogenetic approach, “a method for inferring cultural history . . . , establishing phylogeny, and permitting the disentanglement of homology [common origins of a trait] from analogy [independent origins of a trait]” (Kirch and Green 1987:434). Central to this approach is “triangulation,” in which independent lines of evidence from historical linguistics, comparative ethnology, archaeology, and biological anthropology are applied to the reconstruction of an earlier stage in the history of a group of related cultures, such as Ancestral Polynesia (Kirch and Green 2001). Some aspects of a reconstructed culture—such as artifacts, diet, or settlement patterns—may be evidenced by archaeological materials as well as inferred from linguistic reconstructions and comparative ethnography. However, not all aspects of culture leave material traces. In the case of early Polynesian religious beliefs, there is scant archaeological data (except the negative evidence of the absence of formal temple structures), hence triangulation must rely on linguistic and comparative ethnographic data. Despite such limitations, by using the triangulation method—in a phylogenetic model where the internal relationships of the descendant cultures have been specified—it is possible to put forward detailed and nuanced cultural histories.

Kirch and Green (2001) systematically applied a phylogenetic model and the triangulation method to reconstruct the Ancestral Polynesian culture that was shared by the societies of the Western Polynesian homeland region from the middle to the end of the first millennium B.C. We use the plural societies because a number of geographically localized communities had emerged by this time. Because these societies were in regular communication through interisland voyaging, linguistic and cultural innovations were mostly shared. Archaeologically, more than twenty-five sites dating to this time period have been identified (fig. 7.5), each representing a social community. All are small hamlets or villages, mostly situated on or near the coast, although inland settlements also existed, as in the Falefa Valley on ‘Upolu, Samoa. A mixed horticultural-maritime economy supported these Ancestral Polynesian communities—much as it had their Lapita ancestors. They cultivated tuber and root crops such as taro and yams and tree crops such as coconut, breadfruit, bananas, Vi apple, and Tahitian chestnut. There is no evidence for large-scale canal or pondfield irrigation at this early date. Most likely, shifting cultivation was used for field crops such as taro, yams, and bananas, and tree crops were planted in and around villages and along coastal plains. These early Polynesians kept pigs, dogs, and chickens, but only chickens are well represented in the archaeological faunal remains. Fish and shellfish provided most of the protein in the Ancestral Polynesian diet, augmented by hunting birds. Linguistic reconstructions indicate a wide range of fishing methods, as well as more than 150 terms for different kinds of fish (R. Clark 1991; Hooper 1994).




FIGURE 7.5 Excavation through a large earthen mound (SU-Va-2) at Vailele, ‘Upolu Island, Western Samoa. At the base of this mound is a layer with Polynesian Plain Ware pottery dating to the Ancestral Polynesian period. (Photo courtesy Roger C. Green.)





Ancestral Polynesians made and used plain ware pottery (largely simple bowls and cups), adzes of Tridacna shell and (increasingly over time) of basalt, one-piece fishhooks of Turbo shell, beads and rings of Conus shell, hammerstones, files or abraders of sea urchin spine and of coral or pumice, and amorphous scrapers or other ad hoc tools made from flakes of basalt or obsidian (fig. 7.6). The triangulation method allows us to enumerate other aspects of material culture that—being made of wood or vegetable fibers—did not preserve in the archaeological record. Entering an Ancestral Polynesian dwelling, one would have found mats woven from coconut and Pandanus leaves, wooden bowls and containers, coconut water bottles, baskets, and clothing (loincloths and skirts) made from paper mulberry bark (Broussonetia papyrifera) and other plants. Fishing gear stored among the rafters would have included poles and lines, along with several kinds of nets made from Pipturus bark cordage. Gardeners used digging sticks (which often doubled as coconut-husking poles) and transported the harvest back to their cook-houses with carrying poles. Dwellings and cook-houses alike were fashioned with stout timber posts and rafters and thatched with sago palm or Pandanus leaves.




FIGURE 7.6 Artifacts from the Ancestral Polynesian site of To‘aga, Ofu Island: a, basalt adz with plano-convex section; b, shell adz; c, basalt adz of triangular section; d, unfinished Tridacna shell ring; e, abrading stone; f, Conus shell ring fragment; g, sea urchin spine abrader; h, i, Turbo shell fishhooks; j, unfinished fishhook; k, Turbo shell fishhook; l, bone chisel fragment; m, drilled shark’s tooth; n, Conus shell bead; o, cut pearl shell. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The archaeological record is largely mute with respect to kinship, social organization, and religion, requiring us to rely on the Proto Polynesian lexical reconstructions, aided by comparative ethnography to flesh out semantic history hypotheses (Green 1994). Marck (2000), for example, reconstructed Proto Polynesian kinship, finding that relatives were classified principally on a generational basis and that birth order (i.e., senior/junior distinctions) and gender distinctions were significant. The primary social group in Ancestral Polynesia was called the *kainanga (the asterisk denotes a reconstructed term), which indicated a unilineal descent group whose members traced their lineage back to a founding ancestor (*tupunga). At the head of such a *kainanga was the *qariki, in most cases a senior (ranking) male, who served as the group’s secular and ritual leader. Nothing suggests, at this early stage in the development of Polynesian societies, a separate status category of priest. There are, however, special terms for an expert or knowledgeable craftsperson (*tufunga), sea expert or navigator (*tautai), and warrior (*toa). A smaller social group was the *kainga, a coresidential group holding an estate of land as well as other tangible and intangible property and rights.

While ethnographic cognates of the term *qariki (such as Hawaiian ali‘i) are associated in proto-historic Polynesian societies with chiefship, we cannot naively project back onto Ancestral Polynesian societies a notion of complex social stratification or rigid hierarchy. Rather, simple ranking based on the hereditary principle of seniority (birth order) seems to have been key; given the small size of these communities (as indicated by the archaeological settlements), it is reasonable to think of them as heterarchical rather than hierarchical.18 Nonetheless, subtle differences in ranking and access to resources by different *kainga and *kainanga and their leaders provided the structural basis for the evolution of hierarchy and stratification after large and dense populations had arisen and competition for land and resources intensified. This trend toward increased social stratification in many Polynesian societies is an issue I take up in chapter 8.

What of Ancestral Polynesian religious concepts, their calendar, and their ritual cycle? The pan-Polynesian concepts of *tapu and *mana were central to their belief system (Shore 1989). *Mana flowed to this world from the spirit world, particularly via the efficacy of ancestors (*tupuna); indeed, ancestors were arguably at the core of Ancestral Polynesian ritual life. Functionally diversified anthropomorphic gods—such as Tāne, Tū, and Rongo, so well known from Eastern Polynesian societies (e.g., Hawaiian Lono)—had not yet been invented, for these were decidedly a later, early Eastern Polynesian innovation, accompanied by changes in ritual architecture and the beginnings of a formal priesthood. Only Tangaloa seems to have been known as a deity to the Ancestral Polynesians. They also told tales of a culture hero, Maui, who performed magical feats to do with bringing order—and culture—into the world.

Ritual activity in Ancestral Polynesian communities was most likely conducted in a house (*fare) much like an ordinary dwelling—perhaps the residence of the *qariki or ritual elder—and on an open, cleared space (*malaqe) to the seaward side of that house. Either key posts within the house or simple upright stones placed around the perimeter of the *malaqe, or both, represented specific ancestors or spirits, to whom prayers and invocations were directed. Deceased ancestors were probably buried beneath the house floor. The psychoactive kava (Piper methysticum), domesticated in Vanuatu and likely brought to the Western Polynesian homeland by the first Lapita colonizers, certainly played a role in Ancestral Polynesian ritual because of the trancelike state it induced.19 We can only guess about other ceremonies, although there are at least ten Proto Polynesian words for kinds of rituals, prayers, and rites. There is a hint of an important ceremonial feast, perhaps a first-fruits ritual. The year was organized around a lunar calendar of thirteen months (fig. 7.7), indexed to the rising and setting of the star cluster Pleiades (*Mata-liki) and to the annual spawning of the reproductive segments of the *palolo sea worm. The lunar month names are concerned in large part with the annual wet-dry seasonality critical to the planting and harvesting of the yam crop.




FIGURE 7.7 The Ancestral Polynesian lunar calendar and ritual cycle, as reconstructed using the “triangulation” method. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





Such was the shared culture of the small communities that occupied the scattered islands of Tonga, Samoa, and their immediate neighbors in the late first millennium B.C. As the centuries passed, Ancestral Polynesians in Tongatapu or Ha‘apai or Samoa increasingly developed distinctive local variations in speech and in cultural practice, different from those in ‘Uvea or Futuna or Niuatoputapu. By the close of the first millennium B.C., sufficient lexical innovations had occurred at the southern and northern ends of the Proto Polynesian dialect chain to result in distinct Proto Tongic and Proto Nuclear Polynesian languages. I turn now to the history of differentiation and cultural change within Western Polynesia, as evidenced by archaeology.





CULTURAL SEQUENCES IN WESTERN POLYNESIA


In 1956 Jack Golson (1961) pioneered stratigraphic archaeology in Tonga and Samoa (map 11), discovering the first pottery in Samoa and showing that in both archipelagoes ceramics defined the earliest cultural stages. Golson’s efforts were followed by a multiyear settlement-pattern study in Western Samoa, directed by Roger Green, and by Jens Poulsen’s excavations on Tongatapu.20 Subsequent studies have extended our knowledge of the Samoan archaeological record, with surveys and excavations by several archaeologists on Tutuila and in the Manu‘a group of American Samoa, as well as continued research in ‘Upolu and Savai‘i.21 In the Kingdom of Tonga, I investigated Niuatoputapu Island in 1976, while David Burley has directed a long-term project from Tongatapu, through Ha‘apai, and up to Vava‘u. Recently, Geoff Clark and his students have focused on the emergence of the Tongan archaic state on Tongatapu.22 In ‘Uvea and Futuna, my pioneering surveys in 1974 were amplified by a French team under the direction of Daniel Frimigacci.23 The isolated makatea island of Niue, lying 400 kilometers east of Vava‘u, has had more limited archaeological study.24 We can now define cultural sequences for most islands in Western Polynesia, beginning with initial Lapita settlement through the development of Ancestral Polynesian culture and the emergence of regionally distinctive cultures characterized by complex chiefdoms in later prehistory.25 Some of the key Western Polynesian sites are summarized in table 7.1.




MAP 11 The islands of Western Polynesia, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





TABLE 7.1

Selected Archaeological Sites in Western Polynesia





In both Tongatapu and Samoa, the cultural sequences commence with Early Eastern Lapita pottery, as they do in the smaller islands of the Ha‘apai group, Vava‘u, and Niuatoputapu, Futuna, and ‘Uvea. Throughout the first millennium B.C.—the period during which Ancestral Polynesian culture emerged—the region’s ceramic sequences show parallel changes. Despite local differences in vessel forms (such as a distinctive handled, narrow-necked jar in Niuatoputapu and Futuna) and surface treatment, all of the ceramic sequences go through the following succession of stages: Early Eastern Lapita (ca. 900–700 B.C.), Late Eastern Lapita (ca. 700–300 B.C.), and Polynesian Plain Ware (ca. 300 B.C.–A.D. 300), as shown in figure 7.2. Moreover, in all of these groups—and in striking contrast to nearby Fiji—the manufacture and use of pottery disappear early in the first millennium A.D.26

Ceramics are one of the most important human inventions, and to give them up willingly strikes most of us as peculiar. The loss of pottery among Polynesians cannot be explained by the absence of suitable clay or temper, because ceramics were, in fact, manufactured in Western Polynesia using local materials for more than a thousand years. Thus we must seek nontechnological reasons. Early changes in the ceramic sequences included the abandonment of decorated vessels, which, as argued in chapter 4, were used in long-distance exchange. Probably these early ceramic changes were responses to innovation in exchange systems; pottery may have become “proletarianized,” as Doug Yen once suggested. Once decorated pottery had been lost and ceramics no longer figured as prestige goods or high-status items, they would have become strictly utilitarian. The Ancestral Polynesians did not need pottery for cooking (they preferred the earth oven), and they had an abundant supply of coconut shells for water storage and wooden bowls for food serving and pudding preparation. Wooden bowls are more durable than pottery; one can readily stone-boil liquids such as coconut cream in them. Thus the abandonment of pottery was probably linked with the nature of the Polynesian culinary complex (H. Leach 1982).

The period after the abandonment of ceramics in Western Polynesia but before the development of later sites with monumental archi-tecture corresponds roughly with the first millennium A.D. and has been called the “dark ages” (Davidson 1979:94–95), reflecting a dearth of excavated sites and lack of information. In part, this is a direct consequence of the abandonment of pottery, because sites become less visible on the archaeological landscape. However, some sites are known, such as Niutoua on Niuatoputapu and the Luatuanu‘u complex on ‘Upolu, and these suggest much cultural continuity. But there were also changes during the first millennium A.D., such as innovations in the Samoan adz kit, particularly the new triangular and trapezoidal-sectioned forms made in basalt, which began to replace older plano-convex sectioned types.27 On the whole, the first millennium A.D. in Western Polynesia is a period that calls for more primary excavation.

Sites dating to the last thousand years, what Davidson (1979:95–107) termed the “recent period” in Western Polynesia, are more frequent and better studied. In virtually all islands, specialized, monumental architecture, linked with the rise of complex chiefdoms based on large populations and intensified forms of food production, marks this period. From oral traditions and ethnohistoric sources, augmented by archaeology, we know that toward the end of the second millennium A.D. the Western Polynesian islands were linked by a long-distance prestige-goods exchange network, whose center of gravity was Tongatapu. The later prehistoric transformations of the Western Polynesian societies, including the emergence of an “archaic state” in Tonga, are discussed in greater detail in chapter 8.

In the cultural sequences of Western Polynesia—despite distinctive regional and local differences—the main trends are remarkably parallel, suggesting that similar processes of change were at work throughout the entire region. In part, the synchronous nature of cultural change in Western Polynesia reflects continued interisland contact and the sharing of cultural and social innovations. There was also the imposition of cultural practice by conquest and force, particularly through the late expansion of the Tongan polity to such islands as ‘Uvea and Niuatoputapu (see chap. 8). But other changes reflect the gradual buildup of large and densely settled populations in Samoa, Tonga, Futuna, and ‘Uvea, along with the intensification of agricultural production, accompanied by increased hierarchy and political centralization. Warfare and force played a role in political change, evidenced by fortifications throughout the region. These matters are explored in greater detail in chapter 8, when the transformation of Polynesian sociopolitical structures is considered.





THE SETTLEMENT OF EASTERN POLYNESIA


Archaeologists, historical linguists, and comparative ethnographers concur in identifying Western Polynesia as the immediate Polynesian homeland, where a distinctive Polynesian culture and language emerged during the first millennium B.C. The timing and sequence of subsequent dispersals out of this homeland—especially into the archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia—have been the focus of much debate over several decades. The idea that Eastern Polynesia was settled from Western Polynesia has not been in doubt, but only in recent years have the particulars of sequence and chronology been resolved to the satisfaction of most scholars.

In part, uncertainties regarding the chronology of initial Eastern Polynesian settlement stemmed from a dearth of archaeological fieldwork in many Eastern Polynesian islands; for example, the Austral Island chain, one possible corridor of early expansion into southeastern Polynesia, still remains only partly explored. Archaeologists have also debated the kinds of evidence required to establish the chronology of human settlement on islands.28 Some archaeologists insist that only artifactual evidence—that found at a primary habitation site—can pin down the date of human colonization of an island. Others argue that indirect environmental evidence for human disturbance on fragile island ecosystems (e.g., increased charcoal influxes in sediment cores, pollen evidence for forest clearance and expansion of grass- or fernlands, or the appearance of commensal animals such as the Pacific rat) offer proxy indicators of human arrival. On large islands (such as Hawai‘i or New Zealand), where physical remains of the first settlements may be elusive, environmental indicators may offer a better means for tracking the chronology of human arrival. But the most important methodological advances have been in the use of radiocarbon dating.

In the 1960s, Kenneth Emory and Yosihiko Sinoto developed a model of Polynesian dispersals that privileged the Marquesas Islands as the first archipelago to be settled by voyagers moving out from Western Polynesia.29 Their model invoked successive dispersals radiating from the Marquesas to the Society Islands and subsequently from both of these archipelagoes to the other Eastern Polynesian islands (see fig. 1.15). This “orthodox scenario” reflected the richness of the early Marquesan archaeological record but was hampered by incomplete knowledge of the initial settlement period in other islands.30 In recent years, the discovery and excavation of additional early sites in the Cook, Society, Austral, and Mangareva Archipelagoes has revealed that the entire central Eastern Polynesian region was colonized very rapidly. The small founding settlements established in these islands remained in communication with each other for some time, forming an Eastern Polynesian homeland region.

The debate regarding Eastern Polynesian settlement revolved around the so-called long pause, a temporal gap between the arrival of Lapita populations in the Western Polynesian homeland and the later expansion of Polynesians into the islands of Eastern Polynesia.31 While Tonga, Samoa, and other Western Polynesian islands were colonized by 900–800 B.C., based on radiocarbon dates obtained during the 1950s to 1980s, it seemed that the earliest sites in Eastern Polynesia dated to around 200 B.C.–A.D. 1. This left a “pause” of around six to nine centuries between the settlement of the Polynesian homeland and the later diaspora to Eastern Polynesia. Indeed, there was good reason to believe that such a pause did occur. Historical linguists such as Pawley (1996) and Marck (2000) argued that a period of common development in the Western Polynesian homeland—prior to later dispersals—was necessary to explain the many innovations in Proto Polynesian language (approximately 1,300 lexical innovations have been cataloged) and to allow time for the differentiation of the Proto Tongic and Proto Nuclear Polynesian languages (see fig. 7.3).

The length of the pause between settlement of the ancestral homeland and the colonization of Eastern Polynesia was greatly extended when Spriggs and Anderson (1993)—influenced by radiocarbon dating developments in New Zealand—suggested a very late colonization of those large islands. Arguing that many of the original radiocarbon dates from Eastern Polynesian sites were inaccurate and too old, Spriggs and Anderson proposed applying “chronometric hygiene,” eliminating dates that did not meet certain strict criteria. Applying such “hygiene,” Spriggs and Anderson (1993:211) claimed that the Marquesas were colonized by ca. A.D. 300–600, while the “central, northern, and eastern archipleagoes” had not been settled until ca. A.D. 600–950, with New Zealand being the last to be discovered around A.D. 1000–1200.

Why did the radiocarbon dates obtained by such pioneering archaeologists as Kenneth Emory, Robert Suggs, and Yosihiko Sinoto prove to be inaccurate? One issue had to do with laboratory methods; others concerned sample type and collection. Many of the early radiocarbon dates had large standard errors, a reflection of the crude solid-carbon counting methods first used by Willard Libby and other radiocarbon-dating pioneers. The shift to new liquid scintillation methods later reduced such errors, but the greatest advance came with the development of accelerator mass spectrometry in the 1990s. AMS dating not only allowed for greatly reduced standard errors (as low as ± 15 years) but also permitted the dating of very small samples. With sample sizes as small as 10 milligrams for carbonized plant materials, individual seeds or small twig fragments could be directly dated.

Archaeologists in the Pacific increasingly paid close attention to the kinds of samples they selected for dating, in the case of wood charcoal identifying the species of wood being submitted. In the early years of radiocarbon dating there had been a tendency to select the largest pieces of charcoal. Often, the entire contents of hearths or earth ovens (including tens or even hundreds of individual charcoal fragments) had been submitted in bulk. We now realize that such samples often included old-growth timber, with an “in-built” age older than the time at which the wood was gathered and burned. At coastal sites, there was also the likelihood of old driftwood having been used for fuel. Identifying individual charcoal specimens for AMS dating and selecting only short-lived species eliminated the problem of old wood that was not directly related to the age of human occupation of a site. These methodological advances revolutionized the radiocarbon chronology for Eastern Polynesia. A new consensus has recently emerged around a “short chronology” in which the central archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia did not begin to be settled until after A.D. 900.32

For the Society Islands, possibly the first archipelago to be discovered by canoes exploring eastward from Samoa or Tonga, Kahn and Sinoto (2017) argue that revised dating of early sites indicates Polynesian arrival around A.D. 1000–1100. Sediment coring and pollen analysis at Lake Temae on Mo‘orea likewise documents initial human presence, and cultivation of Colocasia taro, by A.D. 1000 (Stevenson et al. 2017).33 The chronology of Marquesan set-tlement has also been shortened. Initial dates as old as 150 B.C. in the case of Suggs’s excavations at Ha‘atuatua (Suggs 1961) were certainly due to the “old wood” problem. Sinoto (1966) proposed a Marquesan settlement date of A.D. 300–600 based on his initial dates from the Hane site on Ua Huka, but when Anderson and Sinoto (2002) redated ten samples from Hane, none were earlier than A.D. 1000. In 2009, Conte and Molle (2012) reexcavated at Hane, obtaining a new series of AMS dates from the lowest deposits of A.D. 900–1000. This is consistent with dates for the earliest levels at Hanamiai on Tahuata Island, bracketed between A.D. 1025 and 1300 (Rolett 1998:241, table 4.1).

Recent chronologies for other Eastern Polynesian islands likewise support initial settlement between A.D. 900 and 1100. In the Southern Cook Islands, the Tangatatau rockshelter on Mangaia has been extensively redated using AMS on identified, short-lived plant remains and on the bones of the Polynesian-introduced Pacific rat; these dates indicate initial human arrival between A.D. 906 and 1180 (Kirch, ed., 2017:85). On Aitutaki Island in the Southern Cooks, the base of the Moturaku rockshelter dates to A.D. 1047–1297 (Allen and Morrison 2013), whereas the Ureia site on the main island is slightly later in age, A.D. 1225–1430 (M. Allen and Wallace 2007). AMS dates from the Onemea site on Taravai Island in the Mangareva (Gambier) Islands indicate Polynesian colonization around A.D. 950 (Kirch et al. 2010), while Weisler’s dates from Henderson Island to the east of Mangareva are no earlier than A.D. 1050 (Weisler 1995:389, table 2). Although Hunt and Lipo (2006, 2011) claim that Rapa Nui was not settled until A.D. 1200, the full set of AMS dates from the Anakena dune site (including those of Steadman, Vargas, and Cristino 1994) suggest colonization between A.D. 1000 and 1100. To sum up, the central and southeastern archipelagoes and islands of Eastern Polynesia now have well-supported radiocarbon chronologies converging on the period from A.D. 900 to 1100.

What of the timing of Polynesian expansion to the most remote archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia, those of Hawai‘i and New Zealand? Some Hawaiian sites previously regarded as dating to the early part of the Hawaiian sequence, such as Kuli‘ou‘ou on O‘ahu and Hālawa on Moloka‘i, are now known to be younger in age (Kahn et al. 2014; Kirch and McCoy 2007). The oldest reliably dated occupation site in the Hawaiian Islands, the Bellows Beach (O18) site on O‘ahu (Pearson, Kirch, and Pietrusewsky 1971), has AMS dates of A.D. 1040–1219 (Dye and Pantaleo 2010:113). Paleoenvironmental evidence including dates on bones of the Pacific rat and on Polynesian-introduced plants such as candlenut likewise bracket the settlement of Hawai‘i between A.D. 940 and 1130 (Athens, Reith, and Dye 2014; see also Dye 2011, 2015). The large islands of New Zealand were evidently the last to be colonized. Extensive AMS dating of Polynesian-introduced Pacific rat bones indicate that this animal was established in New Zealand by A.D. 1280 (Wilmshurst et al. 2008), while seeds displaying rat gnawing have been dated to A.D. 1140–1340 (Wilmshurst and Higham 2004). Thus the time frame for the settlement of New Zealand is currently regarded as being sometime in the thirteenth century (Anderson, Binney, and Harris 2014:21).





EARLY SETTLEMENT SITES IN EASTERN POLYNESIA


A number of sites dating to the initial phase of settlement in Eastern Polynesian have been excavated over the years (table 7.2). In contrast to later Eastern Polynesian settlement patterns in which habitation sites are typically dispersed (with a few exceptions, such as New Zealand and Rapa), these early settlements were mostly nucleated hamlets or small villages, usually on or near the coast. On the tropical and subtropical high islands, early communities chose to situate their hamlets or villages in favorable ecological zones, such as well-watered windward coasts adjacent to freshwater streams and close to reef and lagoon resources.


TABLE 7.2

Selected Early Eastern Polynesian Archaeological Sites





Many of the early Eastern Polynesian sites are found in sand dune or beach terrace geomorphological contexts, such as Ureia on Aitutaki, Hane on Ua Huka, and Onemea on Taravai. The stratigraphy in such sites is often complex (fig. 7.8), with reworking and redeposition of deposits that can confuse archaeologists, as may have happened at Ha‘atuatua on Nuku Hiva (Rolett and Conte 1995; Suggs 1961). The Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia site on Huahine (Society Islands) occupies low-lying terrain that was part of an infilling lagoon; its waterlogged, anaerobic deposits preserved many wooden artifacts (Sinoto 1979a; Sinoto with Aramata 2016; Sinoto and Han 1981; Sinoto and McCoy 1975). In addition to wooden bowls, a hafted adz, and cordage, this remarkable site yielded wooden planks that were probably part of a large canoe, as well as the framing timbers of a wooden storage hut.




FIGURE 7.8 The Hane site on Ua Huka Island, Marquesas, exhibits complex stratification typical of such coastal sand dune localities. Two buried stone pavements are evident. (Photo courtesy of Guillaume Molle.)





These communities seemed to have separate dwelling and cooking spaces, as well as a variety of domestic architecture. Some dwellings were raised on low stone pavements, as at Hane (fig. 7.8), while others had gravel floors. There were rectangular as well as round-ended house forms. There are no known religious or ceremonial structures, although historical linguistic evidence suggests that the initial stages of the Eastern Polynesian marae probably developed at this time (Kirch and Green 2001). There is ample evidence for horticulture and domestic animals (especially dogs and pigs, as well as chickens), as the colonization strategies originally worked out during the Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania were successfully continued in Eastern Polynesia. The early Eastern Polynesian colonists experimented with fishing techniques, developing a wider range of fishing gear than had been present in immediately preceding Ancestral Polynesian communities in Samoa or Tonga (fig. 7.9). Early sites in the Marquesas, the Southern Cook Islands, Mangareva, and the Hawaiian group display a remarkable diversity of one-piece fishhook types as well as trolling rigs; both angling and trolling hooks were made from pearl shell (Pinctada sp.) where available but also from bone (fig. 7.10). Where good-quality shell was not available, as in Hawai‘i, larger angling hooks were manufactured (usually from bone) by a clever two-piece method, with the point and shank carved of separate pieces lashed together at the bend.




FIGURE 7.9 Early Eastern Polynesian fishhooks from the Marquesas Islands display a great diversity of styles. (After Suggs 1961.).





FIGURE 7.10 One-piece fishhooks of pearl shell from the Tangatatau rockshelter site on Mangaia Island, Southern Cook Islands. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Many stylistic innovations set off the material culture of these early Eastern Polynesian sites from its Ancestral Polynesian antecedents. New forms of basalt adzes were invented (fig. 7.11), with incipient tangs to assist in lashing the stone blade to the wooden haft, and displaying a range of triangular, trapezoidal, and quadrangular cross sections. There is a diversity of ornaments (including whale-tooth pendants or necklaces), tattooing needles, coconut grater heads in pearl shell and basalt, and net sinkers and weights. Sinoto (1970, 1983, 1996b) labeled these distinctive early Eastern Polynesian assemblages as an Archaic Phase (see also Walter 1996). However, not all of the artifact forms are shared by all early Eastern Polynesian assemblages.




FIGURE 7.11 Basalt adzes of Early Eastern Polynesian style, with incipient tangs, from the Tangatatau rockshelter site on Mangaia Island, Southern Cook Islands. (Drawing by Judith Ogden.)





POLYNESIAN VOYAGING


The first Europeans to explore Polynesia had no doubts that the Pacific peoples arrived in the islands through purposive voyaging, for they witnessed firsthand the remarkable seagoing double-hulled and outrigger canoes, such as that encountered at sea between Tonga and Samoa by the Dutch voyagers Schouten and Le Maire in 1616 (fig. 7.12). But in the early nineteenth century indigenous Polynesian canoe-building industries collapsed; traditional navigational lore was almost completely lost. By the mid-twentieth century a new generation of scholars was proposing that the Polynesians had arrived in the islands primarily by chance, riding prevailing winds and currents. Heyerdahl (1952) pushed this idea with his Kon-Tiki raft voyage from South America to the Tuamotus, arguing that the Polynesian ancestors were American Indians who drifted into Polynesia from the Northwest Coast and from Peru. Though widely acclaimed in the popular press, Heyerdahl’s theory was never taken seriously by scholars, since it ignores the mass of linguistic, ethnographic, ethnobiological, and archaeological evidence in support of a western (Asiatic) origin for the Polynesians. Another theorist who proposed that the Polynesians had settled their islands by drifting was Andrew Sharp (1956). He did not derive the Polynesians from the Americas but argued that they were incapable of long-distance purposive navigation against prevailing winds and currents. In Sharp’s opinion, the Polynesians had colonized the eastern Pacific islands through a lengthy succession of chance or drift voyages.




FIGURE 7.12 A Polynesian double-hulled canoe at sea between Tonga and Samoa, as seen by the Dutch voyagers Schouten and Le Maire in 1616. (From Burney 1806.)





Sharp’s thesis was tested in an early application of computer simulation by Levison, Ward, and Webb (1973). Using a massive probability matrix of current and wind speed and force for specific areas of the Pacific Ocean obtained from naval hydrographic records, these geographers ran 101,016 simulated drift “voyages” from many Polynesian islands. Although the simulations showed that there is a good possibility of successful drift from east to west, as would account for the settlement of the Polynesian Outliers (see chaps. 5 and 6), it is virtually impossible to go in the opposite direction without purposive sailing. Not a single simulated voyage out of 16,000 computer trials from various starting points in central Eastern Polynesia managed to end up in Hawai‘i. This led Levison et al. to conclude that Hawai‘i had been colonized “by crews who intended to follow a northerly course, which implies a motive such as seeking new lands” (1973:53; emphasis added).

Computer simulation continues to aid our understanding of ancient voyaging in the Pacific. Taking advantage of new, high-resolution databases of wind, currents, precipitation, and land distribution in the southwestern Pacific, Montenegro, Callaghan, and Fitzpatrick (2016) simulated the settlement of Remote Oceania in terms of “shortest-hop trajectories.” For Polynesia, the results indicate that Samoa was the “most probable staging area for the colonization of East Polynesia” and that remote Rapa Nui was more likely to have been settled from Mangareva than from the Marquesas. The Hawaiian Islands could have been settled from either the Marquesas or the Society Islands; although voyages from the former would require “more efficient windward sailing capacities,” they would also have been considerably shorter in duration. In a separate study, Goodwin, Browning, and Anderson (2014) explored the effects of the Medieval Climate Anomaly (A.D. 800–1300) on voyaging routes to the more remote islands of southern and eastern Polynesia. Their results suggest that “intensification and poleward expansion of the Pacific subtropical anticyclone culminating in A.D. 1140–1260 opened an anomalous climate window for off-wind sailing routes to New Zealand” (Goodwin, Browning, and Anderson 2014:14716), with likely source areas in the southern Austral Islands and the Southern Cook Islands.

Intentionality in voyaging had long been indicated by Polynesian oral traditions, rich in accounts of the discovery of certain archipelagoes and subsequent interarchipelago return trips.34 Hawaiian traditions speak of great navigators such as Mo‘ikeha and Pā‘ao, who made round-trip voyages between the ancestral lands of “Kahiki” (Tahiti) and the Hawaiian group. Pā‘ao quarreled with his older sibling Lonopele in Kahiki and fled to new lands in the north, introducing the cult of the war god Tū (Kū in Hawaiian), along with human sacrifice.

Geoff Irwin (1989, 1990, 1992), an archaeologist and a deepwater yachtsman, built on the pioneering work of Levison et al. to develop a sophisticated theory of Polynesian voyaging and colonization. Irwin argues that the purposive colonization of Eastern Polynesia was the final stage in a long process of Pacific exploration, enabled by gradual improvements in voyaging skills, originating in the “voyaging nursery” of the Bismarck Archipelago (see chap. 3) and elaborated during the Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania. A key element in this process was a “survival sailing strategy” (fig. 7.13). Taking advantage of predictable westerly reversals of the prevailing east-to-west trades (Finney 1988, 1994), Pacific peoples learned to sail eastward in search of new landfalls, always relying on regular trade winds to return them to their home islands. They discovered how to fix latitude by the stars, enabling them to run back to a home island on the proper latitude; in this strategy, knowing longitude was not necessary. Effectively, exploration and the discovery of new islands proceeded as a series of “arcs of exploration,” becoming wider in angle and deeper in their distance of penetration into the unknown as canoe technology and navigational skills improved with accumulated experience (fig. 7.14).




FIGURE 7.13 Geoff Irwin’s model of survival sailing strategy. (Courtesy G. Irwin.)





FIGURE 7.14 Geoff Irwin’s model of arcs of exploration. (Courtesy G. Irwin.)





Gradual developments and improvements in sailing abilities as the Lapita voyagers and their Polynesian descendants moved from west to east across Remote Oceania were accompanied by technical advances in canoe design and performance. One of the most significant innovations was that of the double-hulled canoe, in which the outrigger was replaced by a second hull, creating what Western sailors call a catamaran. Stout timbers connecting the twin hulls were decked over to increase carrying capacity, and the hulls were enlarged and given increased freeboard by adding wash strakes attached with sennit lashing. Other advances included changes in sail design and in the hydrodynamic performance of hulls with V-shaped cross sections (Irwin and Flay 2015). The double-hulled canoe was most likely developed in the Western Polynesian homeland during the late first millennium B.C. to early first millennium A.D. (Finney, in Howe, ed., 2006:127). All of these developments, but especially the double-hulled canoe, provided the technological ability for Polynesian explorers to expand beyond the confines of the Tonga-Samoa region and to discover and colonize the myriad islands and archipelagoes of central and marginal Eastern Polynesia.

Computer simulations and theoretical models can also be tested by practical experiment. In 1976, the Pacific world took notice when the replicated 19-meter Polynesian voyaging canoe Hokule‘a (fig. 7.15) made a successful round-trip voyage between Hawai‘i and Tahiti.35 Subsequent voyages, many made without the aid of any Western navigational devices, have covered the seaways between Samoa and central Polynesia, Rarotonga and New Zealand, and Hawai‘i and central Polynesia. A major voyage to Rapa Nui by the Hokule‘a was successfully completed in October 1999. These voyages constitute a kind of “experimental archaeology,” adding insight into the seaworthiness of traditional Polynesian watercraft and the effectiveness of noninstrumental navigation. The voyages have had a dual effect, for as Finney (1996b:372) writes, “in addition to helping to make voyaging once [again] more central to the study of Polynesian prehistory, our experimental initiative has also led to a voyaging renaissance whereby empowered Polynesians are now seeking to learn about their maritime past by sailing Hokule‘a and other reconstructed canoes over the sea roads pioneered by their ancestors.” By the time this book appears in print, Hokule‘a will have completed an unprecedented, three-year, 47,000-nautical-mile circumnavigation of the world.




FIGURE 7.15 The replicated voyaging canoe Hokule‘a has sailed on numerous experimental voyages throughout Polynesia. (Photo courtesy Bishop Museum.)





Being made of perishable materials, canoes or their components rarely survive in archaeological contexts, but parts of two early Eastern Polynesian canoes have been recovered from waterlogged deposits in the Society Islands and New Zealand. At the Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia site on Huahine Island, Sinoto (1979a) discovered the planks and mast of a double-hulled canoe estimated to have a length of 25 meters. “The planks have lap-joint ends, indicating that they were joined together longitudinally, and they are drilled along the sides for lashing to planks above and below them” (Finney, in Howe, ed., 2006:103). Even more remarkable was the discovery at Anaweka, on the northwestern coast of New Zealand’s South Island, of a large section of a complex composite canoe (fig. 7.16). The canoe was made in New Zealand from native matai wood (Prumnopitys taxifolia); radiocarbon dates on both the wood and the caulking indicate that the canoe was in use around A.D. 1400 (Johns, Irwin, and Sung 2014). The sophistication of the craftsmen who built this canoe is evident in the exquisite bas-relief carving of a sea turtle that graces the hull (fig. 7.17).




FIGURE 7.16 An internal view of the canoe hull found at Anaweka, New Zealand, showing the pointed end and butt end and lashing holes for attachment of other timbers on all sides. (From Johns et al. 2014, courtesy of Dilys Johns.)





FIGURE 7.17 A sea turtle is carved in raised relief at the shaped end of the Anaweka canoe strake, and a ridge behind it extends to the end of the strake. B shows a detail of the raised relief turtle. (From Johns et al. 2014, courtesy of Dilys Johns.)





CONTACTS WITH THE AMERICASAdvances in our understanding of Polynesian voyaging, combined with archaeological discoveries, have turned the tables on Thor Heyerdahl’s theory of an American origin for the Polynesians, suggesting instead that it was the Polynesians who reached the coast of South America and successfully returned, bringing both the sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) and the bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria) with them (Green 1998). The sweet potato was domesticated in South America (Yen 1974b), but for a long time it was uncertain whether the plant had been introduced to Polynesia by early Spanish explorers. When the late eighteenth-century botanists Solander and Forster on Cook’s voyages first documented the flora of Polynesia, they found that the sweet potato was intensively cultivated, especially in Hawai‘i, Rapa Nui, and New Zealand (Merrill 1954). Yen’s (1974b) extensive research on sweet potato distribution and variation led him to propose a “tripartite hypothesis” of the plant’s distribution, in which sweet potato arrived in Eastern Polynesia in pre-European times, with the Polynesians themselves as the most likely transferors, a model recently confirmed by molecular genetic analysis (Roullier et al. 2013).

The discovery and dating of carbonized sweet potato tubers (parenchyma) in the Tangatatau rockshelter on Mangaia in the Southern Cook Islands (Hather and Kirch 1991; Kirch, ed., 2017) provided direct evidence that sweet potato had been transferred into central Polynesia no later than the end of the fourteenth century A.D. Subsequently, many archaeobotanical samples of sweet potato have been radiocarbon dated to precontact periods in New Zealand and Hawai‘i. Given the evidence for rapid Polynesian expansion throughout southeastern Polynesia between about A.D. 900 and 1100, it is entirely plausible that at least one voyaging canoe reached South America to establish contact and return with sweet potato tubers. Polynesian adoption of the sweet potato (as opposed to other American crops such as maize or beans) is culturally plausible, given that the plant is both morphologically and ecologically similar to the Dioscorea yams with which the Polynesians were already familiar. The Proto Eastern Polynesian word for sweet potato, *kūmara, seems to be a borrowing from a South American dialect in which the term for the crop is kumar (Yen 1974b; Green 2005). The importance of sweet potato introduction into Eastern Polynesia cannot be underestimated, for in the subtropical islands and in temperate New Zealand it became a major crop, underwriting the staple economy of island societies.

The bottle gourd, a useful plant known to have been present in the Americas by at least 9,900 years ago, was also introduced into Eastern Polynesia well before European contact (Clarke et al. 2006). Archaeobotanical remains of bottle gourd (gourd fragments and seeds) have been found in Hawai‘i and elsewhere in Eastern Polynesia. A recent effort to test the hypothesis of a pre-Columbian American origin for the Polynesian bottle gourd using molecular evidence (Clarke et al. 2006) proved inconclusive, due to the likelihood of postcontact hybridization with Asian cultivars. Nonetheless, bottle gourd remains a likely candidate for Polynesian transfer from South America.

If Polynesians made contact with coastal peoples in the Americas, the question arises whether this resulted in the flow of ideas, organisms, or even genes into the New World. One recent claim for such a Polynesia-to-America transfer concerns the jungle fowl (Gallus gallus), which was carried from Southeast Asia throughout the Pacific during the Austronesian expansion. Whether chickens were present in South America in pre-Columbian times has itself been debated, but Storey et al. (2007) reported AMS-dated chicken bone from the El Arenal site in south central Chile, which they argue is evidence for Polynesian introduction of chickens. The reported date, calibrated to A.D. 1321–1407, falls toward the end of the period of extensive Eastern Polynesia voyaging but predates Spanish occupation (Pizarro reached Peru in 1532). This claim has provoked strong debate (Gongora et al. 2008; Storey et al. 2008), and more evidence from additional sites will be required before a pre-Columbian transfer of chickens from Polynesia to South America can be firmly accepted.

A second case for Polynesian cultural influence in the New World has been made by Jones and Klar (2005), who argue that the sewn plank canoes of the Channel Islands region of California resulted from Polynesian contacts. They adduce archaeological and linguistic evidence in support of their argument, again spurring vigorous debate (Anderson 2006; Arnold 2007).

In short, some contact between Eastern Polynesians and indigenous American populations seems incontrovertible based on the evidence of the sweet potato, and probably the bottle gourd (Jones et al., eds., 2011). But more research is necessary to refine our understanding of such contact, and whether or not the Polynesians made any significant contributions to New World culture history.


INTERACTION SPHERES IN EASTERN POLYNESIAWhen stratigraphic archaeology commenced in Eastern Polynesia in the 1950s and 1960s, connections between island groups had to be inferred on the basis of stylistic similarities between artifacts such as fishhooks36 and adzes (pottery being absent, except for a few sherds in early Marquesan sites).37 These comparisons hinted at a close relationship between early sites in the Marquesas and Hawai‘i and similar linkages between the Society Islands and New Zealand, as well as the possibility of a later connection between Hawai‘i and the Society Islands (Emory and Sinoto 1965). Despite trial experimentation with petrographic analysis of adz rock, however, there was no effort to trace the physical movement of individual artifacts between islands.

The development of high-precision geochemical characterization and sourcing of stone using energy-dispersive and wave-length-dispersive X-ray fluorescence (ED-XRF, WD-XRF), along with isotopic analysis, has provided the means to determine the source localities of basalt adzes and adz flakes, as well as of oven stones.38 Analysis of adzes and adz flakes from early deposits at the Tangatatau rockshelter on Mangaia Island demonstrates that while some stone tools were being produced from locally available basalt, adzes were also being imported from Rurutu in the Austral Islands, from Eiao in the Marquesas, and from at least two sources in Samoa (Weisler and Kirch 1996; Weisler et al. 2016). That the early Mangaian population was linked into a long-distance interisland exchange network was also suggested by quantities of pearl shell (Pinctada margaritifera), used to make fishhooks and other artifacts. Pearl shell does not occur locally on Mangaia and would have had to be imported from an island with a lagoon, perhaps Aitutaki or one of the Tuamotu atolls. Imported basalt and pearl shell also occur on Ma‘uke Island and on Aitutaki.39 On these Southern Cook Islands, the early patterns of extralocal linkages and importation of exotic materials gave way in later prehistory to replacements with strictly local materials (e.g., the use of inferior Turbo setosus shell for fishhooks on Mangaia). Thus an early period of interaction gradually shifted to a later phase of increased isolation.

More dramatic evidence for long-distance movement of stone artifacts has been obtained through analysis of adzes and oven stones from Mangareva and Pitcairn in southeastern Polynesia and from Mo‘orea in the Society Islands (Weisler 1993, 1998a). Weisler documented regular movement of oven stones from Mangareva and of basalt and pitchstone (a kind of volcanic glass) from Pitcairn to the remote makatea island of Henderson between about A.D. 800 and 1450. Adz stone quarried from Eiao in the Marquesas was transported to Mo‘orea in the Society Islands, to Mangaia in the Cooks, and to Mangareva in the Australs (Weisler 1998a; Weisler et al. 2016). These results confirm that the central Eastern Polynesian archipelagoes were in regular communication during the early settlement period.

Another innovative approach to the study of prehistoric interaction in Eastern Polynesia uses the sequencing and comparison of mitochondrial DNA in populations of the Pacific rat (Rattus exulans). Work by Matisoo-Smith et al. (1998) with populations of this commensal species—which was widely spread by the Polynesians—suggests that there were multiple contacts between some island groups. On the other hand, certain islands (e.g., the remote Chathams) have only a single rat lineage, suggesting isolation. Matisoo-Smith’s research also shows a link between the Hawaiian and Marquesan rat populations, confirming independent archaeological and linguistic evidence for the initial settlement of Hawai‘i from the Marquesas.





SUMMARY


Since the first edition of this book was written, almost twenty years ago, the evidence for the chronology and sequence of Polynesian settlement has accumulated substantially, with a new consensus emerging, closing the debate over “long” and “short” chronologies for Eastern Polynesian colonization. There is no doubt that the Western Polynesian archipelagoes of Tonga and Samoa, along with smaller islands such as Futuna and ‘Uvea, were settled early in the first millennium B.C. by Lapita voyagers. In the case of Tonga, the early Nukuleka site has been precisely dated to 896–880 B.C. Within probably no more than a century, small settlements had been established on all of the main islands throughout this region. A long period of gradual cultural change and adaptation to truly “oceanic” environmental conditions ensued, with the emergence of a distinctive Ancestral Polynesian culture and Proto Polynesian language by the close of the first millennium B.C. Archaeologically, these changes are marked among other things by the gradual loss of ceramic technology and by the development of distinctive adze types made from basalt.

The development of the double-hulled sailing canoe and enhanced navigational skills during the Ancestral Polynesian period led to the capacity to undertake exploratory voyages of long duration, transporting dozens of people and their cargo. By around A.D. 900–1000 these voyaging skills permitted an expansion out of the Western Polynesian homeland region into the central archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia. Computer simulations as well as linguistic evidence suggest that Samoa may have been the origin point for voyagers exploring eastward. The large and fertile Society Islands group was perhaps the first to be discovered, although near-simultaneous dates for early settlement sites in the Society Islands, Marquesas, Southern Cook Islands, and Mangareva indicate that all of central Eastern Polynesia was rapidly explored, with colonies established on many islands by A.D. 1100–1200. Even the Hawaiian Islands, 3,500 kilometers north of the Marquesas, had been discovered and colonized by A.D. 940–1130.40 The large islands of New Zealand were the last to have been settled, between about A.D. 1200 and 1300.

The incredible “explosion” of canoes and people out of Western Polynesia at the close of the first millennium A.D. did not end with the discovery of remote Rapa Nui or Hawai‘i, for it is clear that one or more canoes reached the shores of South America (and possibly the California coast of North America as well). At least one canoe returned carrying the sweet potato, a South American crop that flourished in the subtropical islands of Eastern Polynesia and that in New Zealand provided the basis for the local economy. With these contacts between Polynesia and the Americas, the vast Pacific world had finally been crossed by the tentacles of a human migration that began millennia earlier in the balmy waters of the South China Sea.





EIGHT


Polynesian Chiefdoms and Archaic States



As to why in ancient times a certain class of people were ennobled and made into ali‘i [chiefs], and another class into subjects (kanaka), why a separation was made between chiefs and commoners, has never been explained. Perhaps in the earliest time all the people were ali‘i and it was only after the lapse of several generations that a division was made into commoners and chiefs.

D. MALO, Hawiian Antiquities (1951)





ESCORTED BY PERHAPS THREE thousand canoes, His Britannic Majesty’s ships Resolution and Discovery, Captain James Cook commanding, came to anchor in a fine broad bay, “in 13 fathom water over a Sandy bottom” at 11:00 o’clock on Sunday, January 17, 1779.1 The reception accorded them by the Hawaiians was enthusiastic. “They express’d the greatest Joy & satisfaction, by Singg & Jumping, of our coming to Anchor,” wrote Lieutenant King (Beaglehole, ed., 1967:503). Never before in his three Pacific expeditions had the veteran navigator Cook witnessed such a welcome. In addition to the thousands of canoes, “all the Shore of the bay was covered with people and hundreds were swimming about the Ships like shoals of fish” (1967:490–91).

A delegation of priests and chiefs boarded the flagship. Draping a red cloth—symbol of divinity and kingship—over Cook’s shoulders, the aged priest Koa “kept repeating a pretty long oration or prayer” (Beaglehole, ed., 1967:504). When Cook later arrived on the beach the large multitude fell prostrate on their faces, while the priests “who held wands tipt with dogs hair” kept repeating a phase that included the word Erono (Lono). Cook was conducted to the summit of a temple platform, whereupon he was accorded the ceremony of hānaipū, the “feeding of the god,” part of the annual Makahiki fertility rituals.2

On that day in the sacred bay of Ke-ala-ke-[a]kua, “The Path of the God,” the Hawaiian priests moved to incorporate (and presumably neutralize) these strange new beings into their mytho-praxis. Only later would the reigning Hawaiian paramount, Kalani‘ōpu‘u, return from his battles against his archrival Kahekili, paramount of neighboring Maui Island (fig. 8.1), to greet Cook in Kealakekua. Within a few short weeks, however, Cook and Kalani‘ōpu‘u came to a cultural collision resulting in Cook’s death and his subsequent deification among the pantheon of Hawaiian gods. For some time afterward, Cook’s sennit casket–bound bones would be paraded around the island of Hawai‘i annually during the Makahiki rites of Lono.3




FIGURE 8.1 The paramount chief of Hawai‘i Island, Kalani‘ōpu‘u, arrives in Kealakekua Bay to greet Captain James Cook in 1779. Engraving after drawing by John Webber for the atlas of Cook’s third voyage. (Collection of the author.)





Kalani‘ōpu‘u ruled a kingdom numbering between 120,000 and 150,000 persons, which was arguably the most complex of any indigenous polity ever to develop within Oceania. But other Polynesian islands and archipelagoes had also evolved hierarchical sociopolitical structures, ranging from smaller chiefdoms to the archaic states of Hawai‘i and Tonga. This chapter explores some key findings of modern archaeology with regard to the development of the Polynesian chiefdoms and archaic states.





POLYNESIAN CHIEFDOMS: ETHNOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND AND ANTHROPOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE


Anthropologists have classically looked to Polynesia for the “type” examples of ranked societies, or what are more commonly known as chiefdoms.4 Chiefdom societies, typically made up of a few thousand to a few tens of thousands of people, are headed by chiefs who come to the chiefship by virtue of birth; that is, they inherit the chiefly title because their genealogies link them directly to eponymous ancestors, and above them to the gods. Chiefs control the power to organize labor and receive tribute. With chiefdoms, human organization moved from a strictly “domestic mode of production,” inherently anti-surplus, to a political economy in which surplus is extracted from the society’s producers to finance and support the activities and political aspirations of its elite.5 Larger chiefdoms often display functional differentiation of farmers, fishermen, craftspersons, and warriors and have intensified production systems.

Although they are all chiefdoms, Polynesian societies exhibit a great range of variation. In the simplest Polynesian societies, particularly those of the atolls and some of the smaller high islands, such as Tikopia, distinctions between chief and commoner were minimal. Tribute was limited to ritual “first fruits” offerings, while production was only rarely organized on a supra-household level (usually in response to a communitywide disaster). In striking contrast, in the Hawaiian society that Cook witnessed in the late eighteenth century, the chiefly class regarded themselves as descended directly from the gods, and they were internally ranked in seven or eight different grades. The highest-ranked Hawaiian chiefs practiced sibling or half-sibling marriage to concentrate the bloodline, and controlled corvée labor on a massive scale, building temples and irrigation works. They wore feathered cloaks and ate from finely carved wooden bowls. Between these extremes lay a range of intermediate societies, so that in the Polynesian region virtually the entire range of variation possible within a chiefdom social formation is evidenced.

In a now-classic work of comparative ethnography, Marshall Sahlins (1958) classified Polynesian societies according to their degree of hierarchy or stratification. The smallest-scale chiefdoms were represented by the atolls societies, with populations of a few hundred up to perhaps 2,000 persons. In the midrange were societies with a paramount chief and subchiefs, generally situated on midsized high islands, such as Futuna, ‘Uvea, Mangaia, and Mangareva. At the pinnacle were Tonga, Hawai‘i, the Society Islands, and Samoa, all with polities encompassing from 10,000 to 40,000 (or more) individuals, with marked indices of stratification. Sahlins (1958:249) argued that these differences in social stratification were directly related to economic productivity: “the greater the productivity, the greater the differentiation between distributors (chiefs) and producers (nonchiefs).”

Irving Goldman (1970) offered an alternative classification of Polynesian societies based on a comparative study of “status rivalry.” He divided the Polynesian chiefdoms into Traditional, Open, and Stratified categories. The Traditional chiefdoms (which included Tokelau, Tikopia, and Tongareva) were conservative, retaining an older style of organization in which the chief combined both secular and sacred duties (Goldman 1970:20). In the Open societies, the “system is more strongly military and political than religious and stability in it must be maintained more directly by the exercise of secular powers.” Open chiefdoms included Samoa, Rapa Nui, Mangaia, and the Marquesas. Finally, the Stratified chiefdoms (Tonga, Hawai‘i, the Society Islands, and Mangareva) were “characterized by clearcut breaks in status that are far-reaching in their impact on everyday life” (20). In these latter social formations, “high rank holds the rule and possesses the land title: commoners are subject and landless” (20). While Goldman’s neo-evolutionary theory may be outdated, his three classes of Polynesian chiefdoms are based on real ethnographic insights; they remain useful categories for structuring a discussion of sociopolitical change in these island societies.

Timothy Earle (1997) added to our understanding of chiefdoms by drawing attention to the different sources of power that chiefly elites draw on to enforce their authority. In Polynesia, authority was inherent in the Ancestral Polynesian status category of *qariki, the hereditary leader of a *kainanga descent group, by virtue of birth order and hence access to spiritual power, or mana (see chap. 7). As Polynesian chiefdoms became larger and more hierarchical in structure, mere ties of kinship were not a sufficient basis on which to build the power relations necessary to command labor and tribute, or to exercise—as was the case in some societies—the right of life and death over others. Earle (1997:6) identifies three “primary sources of power—economic, military, and ideological.” All three sources played significant roles among Polynesian chiefdoms, but the emphasis given to any of these, or whether one or more were employed, varied with local circumstances and the contingencies of history.





THE “TRADITIONAL” ATOLL SOCIETIES


Although most of the best-known Polynesian societies are situated on high, volcanic islands, there are also nearly one hundred atolls dispersed over a wide sector of the tropical core of the Polynesian Triangle. The largest cluster of atolls, about eighty in all, constitute the Tuamotu Islands of French Polynesia, forming a 1,600-kilometer-long arc from just east of Tahiti extending southeast as far as Mangareva (map 12). Several other atolls comprise the Northern Cook Islands (including Manihiki, Tongareva, Pukapuka, and Rakahanga), while a third cluster located just north and south of the equator (Fanning, Malden, Christmas, and others) is known as the Line or Equatorial Islands. Both the Tuamotu and the Northern Cook islands have flourishing Polynesian cultures. The Line Islands have archaeological vestiges of former Polynesian habitation (Emory 1934a) but were all abandoned by the time of European contact. All of the ethnographically documented atoll societies were classified by Goldman (1970) as falling within his “Traditional” category. With limited land area, these societies never exceeded about two thousand people within a single polity, and the degree of social stratification and hierarchy was minimal.




MAP 12 The central Eastern Polynesian archipelagoes and islands. Insets show the Society Islands and the Marquesas Islands, with the location of key archaeological sites.





Despite its geographic extent and number of islands, the Tuamotu Archipelago remains underexplored archaeologically. Emory (1934a, 1947) surveyed marae, or ritual, structures, which are the most ubiquitous archaeological feature on these atolls. Although there is considerable variation in form (Molle 2014), Tuamotu marae typically consist of a rectangular court defined by low enclosing walls or alignments of coral slabs, with an elevated altar platform (ahu) at one end. These structures were constructed entirely of coral or beachrock and did not achieve the large proportions of marae in the Society Islands. Conte and Dennison (1995, 2005) excavated at a marae on Tepoto Atoll, revealing thirty-two burials laid out within the court. Another important aspect of the archaeological landscape is the presence of extensive pits excavated down to the freshwater lens and used to cultivate taro (Chazine 1977).

Emory (1934a) made archaeological surveys of several of the Equatorial Islands, finding marae structures and Polynesian artifacts on Fanning and Malden Islands in particular. “The large number of maraes on Malden Island,” he wrote, “indicate that the people lived on the island for several generations. In the end, however, they were overcome or forced out by the inhospitable environment” (1934a:40). Emory pointed to the extreme drought conditions that frequently beset the Equatorial Islands as the likely cause “for the disappearance of its marae builders” (1934:38). Surveys and excavations on Kirimati (Christmas) Island by Anderson, Martinsson-Wallin, and Wallin (2002) revealed a number of sites, including simple marae structures, radiocarbon dated to between A.D. 1250 and 1450. Di Piazza and Pearthree (2004) explored the Phoenix Islands, which again display a variety of marae structures. In a limited excavation on Manra Island, they exposed an earth oven and trash pit with several basalt flakes (clearly imported from a high island source), with an associated radiocarbon date of A.D. 1175–1405 (2004:91). The dates from both Kirimati and Manra suggest that many of the Equatorial Islands were occupied by Polynesians around the thirteenth to fourteenth centuries but were abandoned soon after. The harsh environmental conditions—especially the lack of rainfall—was the most likely reason for their abandonment.





SOCIOPOLITICAL TRANSFORMATION IN THE OPEN SOCIETIES


The Open societies, in Goldman’s original conception, lay midway on an evolutionary continuum from Traditional to Stratified. But it is more productive to envisage them as headed not toward increased hierarchy but toward a more “fluid” social structure in which there was intense competition between different social groups and categories. All of the Open societies share certain environmental features and ecological conditions, which, it appears, influenced their histories. These societies all arose on midsized islands,6 where populations in the low thousands could develop but also where resources were restricted. Ecologically fragile, these islands were prime for intensive resource competition once a “full-land” population density had been achieved. Rather than attempt to theorize them further, let us review their individual histories as revealed by archaeology. (Selected archaeological sites are listed in table 8.1.)


TABLE 8.1

Selected Later Prehistoric Sites in Eastern Polynesia





TABLE 8.1 (continued)





MANGAIA (SOUTHERN COOK ISLANDS)Mangaia, southernmost of the Cook Islands (map 12), is a smallish island of 52 square kilometers, with a deeply weathered volcanic core surrounded by a rampart of elevated makatea limestone, up to 2 kilometers wide (fig. 8.2). Narrow streams incised in the volcanic hillsides pond against the sheer limestone wall of the makatea, creating deep sedimentary archives of environmental events that transformed this landscape over the millennia. The potential for decoding this sedimentary record, and for intensive archaeological study, enticed David Steadman and me to bring an interdisciplinary team of researchers to Mangaia in 1989 and 1991.7




FIGURE 8.2 The island of Mangaia was traditionally subdivided into six districts, following the natural stream drainages. This settlement pattern map shows archaeological sites mapped in 1989 and 1991. (Map by P. V. Kirch.)





At the time of European contact, Mangaia’s population (estimated to have been at least three thousand) was organized into six districts (see fig. 8.2), each under the control of a chief and corresponding to one of the main valleys. The entire island was controlled by a paramount chief named Te Mangaia.8 Rather than being hereditary as in many Polynesian societies, the title of Te Mangaia was achieved through war and legitimated by human sacrifice offered at the principal temple of Orongo. This sacrifice was directed to Rongo, god of both war and agriculture. Oral histories recount the succession of forty-two Te Mangaia prior to European contact. A triad of priest-chiefs called ariki (the Inland High Priest, the Shore High Priest, and the Ruler of Food) assisted these paramount war leaders and enforced the religious ideology that legitimated the rule of Te Mangaia.

This fluid sociopolitical system was based on a highly intensive production system. The swampy valley bottoms, modified by terracing and canalization of streams into a reticulated network of pondfields, produced the island’s staple crop, taro. The pondfields were also an important source of freshwater fish and eels. War victors seized control of these puna lands, along with hillside orchards of breadfruit, Tahitian chestnut, and coconuts. Defeated groups struggled to make a living in soil pockets on the karst makatea, cultivating yams and sweet potatoes. The severe limitation of prime agricultural land was critical: only 2 percent of the landscape could be irrigated, and dryland agriculture could be practiced on perhaps another 18 percent.

But the island was not always so environmentally impoverished. Deep cores extracted from the valley bottoms yielded a 7,000-year history of vegetation and geomorphological changes. When Polynesians first set foot on Mangaia—around A.D. 1000—they found the central volcanic hills well forested, probably ideal for shifting cultivation. But a lack of soil nutrients in the deeply weathered laterite inhibited forest regrowth. Tropical storms washed the exposed, thin organic soil layer blanketing the hillslopes down into the valley bottoms. Within a relatively short time the hills, deprived of their soil cover, became worthless for agriculture, a kind of no-man’s-land. Meanwhile, the narrow valleys were converted through terracing into the main centers of agricultural production.

In a spacious rockshelter called Tangatatau (site MAN-44) along the makatea escarpment in the Veitatei District, our excavations uncovered a rich archaeological record of adzes, fishhooks, and other artifacts, along with abundant faunal and floral assemblages, that spans most of the island’s prehistory (fig. 8.3). Based on the finds from Tangatatau and other sites, a four-phase sequence can be outlined for Mangaia (Kirch, ed., 2017). The initial Vairorongo Phase (A.D. 1000–1300) is represented by a coastal midden with artifacts typical of Early Eastern Polynesian assemblages (Katayama and Shibata, eds., 1999). By the succeeding Tangatatau Phase (A.D. 1300–1400), people had moved inland, living around the swampy wetlands and establishing the island’s horticultural production system. They cultivated Colocasia taro, giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chammissonis), bananas, sugarcane, coconut, Tahitian chestnut, and breadfruit; raised substantial numbers of pigs; and also kept dogs and chickens.




FIGURE 8.3 The large Tangatatau rockshelter in Veitatei District, Mangaia, contains a well-stratified sequence of occupation deposits. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Tangatatau Phase material culture is similar to that from other early central Eastern Polynesian sites. Basalt adzes included untanged quadrangular forms but also quadrangular tanged adzes, and others with triangular cross sections. The fishhooks were made mostly from pearl shell, which does not occur locally on Mangaia and had to be imported, most likely from other islands in the Southern Cooks (see fig. 7.10). The adzes were imported from Samoa, the Marquesas, and Rurutu (Austral Is.), indicating that the small community on Mangaia was connected to a wider network via interarchipelago voyaging (Weisler et al. 2016).

The Ngaaitutaki Phase (A.D. 1400–1600) is represented by four sites in different parts of the island, attesting to the expansion of settlement over the island’s interior. Mangaia may have achieved a population peak by the early 1400s, supported by the irrigated taro pondfields in the valley bottoms. Evidence from the swamp cores and pollen analysis reveals that the indigenous forest of the volcanic hillsides had been replaced by fire-resistant fernlands and scrub Pandanus. Production of pigs declined but—at Tangatatau at least—was offset by increases in marine mollusk and fish exploitation. The indigenous fruit bat (Ptero-pus tonganus) had become extirpated, along with many species of rails, doves, pigeons, and lorikeets, by human predation combined with the indirect impacts of forest clearance and habitat alteration. Whereas 19 species of land birds and 12 species of seabirds were present on the island in A.D. 1000, only 5 and 6 of these species, respectively, survived into the historic period (Steadman 2006). Dogs dropped out of the archaeological record by the end of the Ngaaitutaki Phase. The bones of rats, however, are abundant in the Tangatatau strata for this phase, having become a regular part of the diet.

During the Ngaaitutaki Phase, fishhooks, which previously had been manufactured mostly from the imported pearl shell, were now made almost entirely from the locally available Turbo setosus shell. This suggests a decline in external contacts with other islands, hinting that Mangaia was beginning to close in on itself socially. The basalt adze complex also exhibits major changes, with the untanged quadrangular adzes that were so prevalent in the preceding phase being replaced by highly distinctive tanged adzes with either quadrangular or, more often, triangular cross sections (fig. 8.4).




FIGURE 8.4 Selected artifacts from the Tangatatau rockshelter site, Mangaia: top row, bone awls, coral abraders, sea urchin spine abrader, bone plaque; second row, basalt coconut grater head, basalt awl; third row, coral gaming disk, coral abrader; bottom row, basalt adz sections. (Drawings by Judith Ogden.)





The Ngaaitutaki Phase was also a time of heightened interpersonal violence, warfare, and possibly cannibalism. The strongest evidence for this comes from the Ana Manuku rockshelter (site MAN-84), where forty-one human bodies, including both sexes and ranging in age from newborns to adults, were cooked in earth ovens and their bones disposed of in a midden context (Steadman, Antón, and Kirch 2000).

The final phase of the Mangaia sequence—the Tautua Phase (A.D. 1600–1830)—takes up the last two centuries preceding contact with Europeans and missionization (beginning in 1824). Key evidence for the Tautua Phase comes from a large refuge cave (site MAN-54, Tautua Cave) and from several open habitation terraces (Endicott 2000). In Mangaia’s late prehistoric settlement pattern, habitations were concentrated in clusters of artificial terraces on ridges adjacent to irrigated taro fields, with marae or lineage temples as central foci. These simple marae consisted of earthen terraces paved with coral gravel, and with upright speleothems (stalactites and stalagmites) removed from makatea caverns placed as godstones. During warfare, groups took refuge in caves in the makatea. The large Tautua refuge cave studied by our team contained stone house foundations and cooking areas (fig. 8.5).




FIGURE 8.5 The interior of Tautua refuge cave in Tamarua district, Mangaia, with platforms constructed of speleothems. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Pigs had been eliminated from the island’s subsistence system by the end of the Tautua Phase. With dogs and fruit bats already extirpated in earlier times, this left the diminutive Pacific rat as the only mammal (other than, potentially, humans) available as a protein source. As we know from the ethnohistoric records, rats had indeed become a major food item. Most land birds had been extirpated, but interestingly the faunal record at Tangatatau exhibits a late phase of targeting nesting or roosting seabirds in remote parts of the makatea. The exploitation of marine shellfish and fish declined in intensity during this phase, with evidence for resource depression both in the marine mollusk Turbo setosus and in certain reef fish.

Rather than evolving toward ever-increasing hierarchy, Mangaian society had followed its own distinctive trajectory, constrained by the cumulative actions of previous generations. The Mangaian polity had moved away from a rigid hierarchy based on hereditary power to one in which overt military power was to the fore. The Mangaian elites used ideological control, to be sure, as in the mytho-praxis that put the Janus-like god of war and taro, Rongo, at the center of the principal cult (fig. 8.6). But there was little “materialization” of ideology (e.g., monumental temples or sculpture) as seen in other Polynesian societies. Perhaps the Mangaians could not afford such a luxury; their backs were up against a wall, with a severely resource-limited environment in which—lacking sufficient cultural controls on population growth—the only outlet appeared to be intense competition for land. Late precontact Mangaian society had become, to a pervasive degree, a society controlled by warriors and based on terror (see Kirch 1997b).




FIGURE 8.6 A complex set of ideological relationships linked the paramount chief of Mangaia (Te Mangaia) to the god Rongo in proto-historic Mangaian society. (From Kirch 1997c.)





THE MARQUESAS, TE FENUA ‘ENATA“Land of men” is the name given by the Polynesians to the Marquesas Islands (map 12), seven midsized high islands lying northeast of Tahiti and the Tuamotus, with a land area of 1,048 square kilometers (330 square kilometers are taken up by the largest island, Nuku Hiva). The cold Humboldt Current sweeping up on the islands from Peru inhibits coral growth, leaving the Marquesas bereft of reefs or lagoons. Valleys descend to deep bays, with rocky headlands separating one valley from another (fig. 8.7). Most Polynesian crops thrive in the fertile volcanic terrain, but periodic droughts beset the archipelago, sometimes lasting years.




FIGURE 8.7 The Marquesas Islands lack developed reefs and have amphitheater-headed valleys with deep bays, as seen in this view of Ua Pou Island. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Although its people share a common language and culture, the archipelago was never politically unified. The occupants of particular valleys typically formed independent polities, which were frequently at war with one other. As in Mangaia, the proto-historic social structure was fluid, but there was no paramount chief comparable to the Te Mangaia.9 Power was shared, uneasily, among three main status groups: the hereditary chiefs (haka‘iki), the inspirational priests (tau‘a), and the warriors (toa). The toa frequently raided neighboring valleys, seeking human sacrificial victims for the memorial feasts of deceased chiefs and priests; if the accounts are accurate, their flesh was frequently consumed in cannibalistic rites (Handy 1923:218–21). Breadfruit was the main orchard crop, and the Marquesans elaborated pit storage and fermentation of breadfruit to a greater level than anywhere else in Remote Oceania, digging subterranean silos with capacities of up to 200 cubic meters. Located in the deep recesses of valleys or on fortified ridges, these ma pits provided food reserves in times of drought and famine.

The Marquesan archaeological record is among the most thoroughly investigated in Eastern Polynesia.10 Robert Suggs (1961) first divided Marquesan prehistory into four periods; his basic sequence, with modification and amplification over the years, remains a useful framework. However, advances in radiocarbon dating have compressed the sequence to about one-half of the time span originally proposed by Suggs (fig. 8.8).




FIGURE 8.8 Chart showing how redating of Marquesas settlement has greatly shortened the length of the cultural sequence. (Courtesy of Melinda Allen.)





The Marquesas archipelago was first settled around A.D. 850–1000 (M.S. Allen 2014; Anderson et al. 1994; Conte and Molle 2014), with a few coastal hamlets at the mouths of the larger and more fertile valleys. The earliest sites reveal a typical Eastern Polynesian material culture, with one-piece fishhooks of pearl shell, plano-convex and incipiently tanged basalt adzes, abraders of Porites coral, and other objects. A handful of sherds of plain ware pottery have been found at four sites, including Ha‘atuatua and Hane (Allen, Dickinson, and Huebert 2012). The sherds at Ha‘atuatua were imports from Fiji; the other sherds may also be from imported vessels, although local manufacture has not been entirely ruled out.11

The Developmental Period, from A.D. 1100 to 1300, continued the cultural pattern set in the preceding Settlement Period. Rolett (1998) sees little evidence of artifactual change between the Settlement and Developmental Periods in the Hanamiai site on Tahuata (fig. 8.9). There were, however, changes in resource exploitation. Endemic and indigenous land bird and seabird populations were greatly reduced (Steadman 2006). A sharp decline in sea mammal and turtle bones between the Settlement and Developmental contexts and later deposits is also evident.12 At the same time, pig bones appear in some quantity in late Developmental Period sites, reflecting efforts at establishing more intensive agricultural production systems, including pig husbandry. At the Hanamiai site, a succession in the land snail assemblages from endemic and indigenous species to introduced species reflects the Polynesian establishment of a “transported landscape” (Rolett 1992). The Hanamiai faunal record amply documents bird extinctions and extirpations, with the greatest impact occurring within the first three hundred years following human settlement (ca. A.D. 1025–1300) (Steadman and Rolett 1996). Rolett comments on these changes as follows:

Local increases in the density of human populations occurred rapidly, and simultaneously with the local depletion of wild species originally abundant in newly settled valleys. In the absence of a well developed food production system based on agriculture and domestic animals, the declining availability of wild species presumably stimulated human populations to seek out new resources. Population shifts to previously unsettled valleys would have alleviated pressure on subsistence systems in both old and new communities, prolonging the viability of a broad spectrum subsistence strategy. The initial settlement of Hanamiai, around A.D. 1000–1100, apparently represents one such population movement in this process of range expansion. (1996:538)




FIGURE 8.9 The Hanamiai dune site on Tahuata Island yielded important information on the early phases of the Marquesan cultural sequence. Note the exposed stone pavement. (Photo courtesy Barry Rolett.)





The Expansion Period (A.D. 1300–1600) witnessed the greatest transformation in Marquesan society, setting the stage for the Open society documented in the proto-historic era. Suggs (1961:182) wrote that “the population of Nuku Hiva, which had been increasing in the large verdant valleys on the south and east coasts, suddenly broke out,” with sites now appearing even in the most marginal areas. Rolett (1989:108) concurs that the “settlement pattern of this period reflects rapid population growth.” In material culture, basalt adzes distinctive to the Marquesas now appear in quantity, as well as the jabbing form of pearl-shell fishhook, replacing a wider diversity of hook forms in earlier periods. New kinds of architecture make their appearance in the Expansion Period, such as ridgetop fortifications (often with breadfruit storage pits), stone house platforms (paepae), temple foundations (me‘ae), and dance or feast centers (tohua). The tohua are rectangular courts (fig. 8.10), often constructed as leveled terraces, surrounded by house platforms and other structures (and sometimes incorporating me‘ae). As Suggs (1961:183) observed, “The construction of such ceremonial centers by subtribes marks the beginning of the intergroup rivalry that was so marked in the Historic period.”




FIGURE 8.10 Plan map of the Vahangeku‘a tohua site in Taipivai Valley, Nuku Hiva, Marquesas. (After Suggs 1961.)





Suggs (1961:183) had little doubt that the causes of the “sudden appearance and proliferation of settlements in the marginal areas” were fundamentally linked with the population explosion of this phase. This demographic transition coincided with the depletion of wild faunal resources; no doubt food stress was periodically exacerbated by the archipelago’s droughts. Certainly the Marquesan population was making substantial efforts to intensify and augment agricultural production by constructing irrigated terraces (Addison 2001) and food storage pits. During the Expansion Period, Marquesans also intensified their pig husbandry and engaged in competitive pig feasting (West 2007). However, the appearance of fortifications signals territorial aggression and raiding, the dark side of a society that increasingly pushed the ability of its island ecosystem to sustain a burgeoning population.

During the Classic Period (A.D. 1600–1790), patterns that arose during the Expansion Period came to florescence. Settlement distribution remained widespread and dispersed, with one exception: “the beaches were generally shunned, and the entire population seemed to gravitate inland, moving up high into the valley heads for protection from increased raiding from the sea” (Suggs 1961:185). Classic Period architecture was elaborated further, reflecting the power of chiefs, inspirational priests, and warriors to command the labor of their followers. Tohua platforms reached truly massive proportions, as in the Vahangeku‘a site in Taipivai Valley on Nuku Hiva or at Ta‘a‘oa on Hiva Oa (fig. 8.11). On some tohua, or on me‘ae temples where the inspirational priests officiated, large anthropomorphic statues were erected (fig. 8.12). House platforms of the elites reached “megalithic” proportions. Associated with these constructions were many breadfruit storage pits, some with cavernous capacities. The material arts of the Classic Period attest to a florescence of craft specialization by experts (tohunga) under elite patronage (fig. 8.13). Chiefs and warriors sported finely carved bone ear plugs and hair spools, while anthropomorphic designs graced the heads of food (popoi) pounders. Early European accounts and drawings attest to the artistic apogee achieved by Marquesan tattooing during the Classic Period.




FIGURE 8.11 A view of the central ceremonial plaza on the Ta‘a‘oa tohua site on Hiva Oa Island, Marquesas. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 8.12 A large anthropomorphic statue, carved from red volcanic tuff, at Puamau, Hiva Oa Island, Marquesas. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 8.13 A small tiki, or human figure, carved in the late Classic style, in the Hane Valley of Ua Huka, Marquesas. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The historical trajectory of the Marquesas reflects the limiting constraints of the environment (including the effects of human-induced resource reduction), combined with population growth to a high density level, spurring intense competition for land and other resources. In the social arena of everyday life, this competition played itself out in continuous prestige rivalry between the hereditary elite and the achieved-status elite of warriors and inspirational priests. Suggs (1961:186), nonetheless, reminds us that there was a deeper level of causation: “The cause of the intense prestige rivalry may be seen in the relation of the population to the habitable land. As the population increased beyond the point at which all possible ecological niches became filled, intergroup conflicts over land would have increased. . . . The need to acquire and hold the land necessary for existence and to increase the areas held to accommodate population increases intensified to an extreme the rivalry apparently present in most Polynesian societies.”13 In an analysis of the Marquesan sequence, I described what transpired in the later prehistoric periods as a kind of “competitive involution,” in which “a dynamic context of rapid population growth, pervasive environmental hazards (especially drought), ecological degradation, and acute competition over productive resources fostered rivalry between inherently contradictory hereditary and achieved status positions. The result was an involuted cycle of prestige rivalry and competition that led as often to the destruction of the very means of production which were the objects of competition” (Kirch 1991a:144).

Comparing the archaeological records of Mangaia and the Marquesas, both of them Open societies in Goldman’s conception, similarities as well as striking differences are evident. In both cases, initial human actions led to resource depletion, partially offset by intensification of agricultural production. Population growth and, eventually, high density levels unquestionably played an important role in the transformation of both societies. In both cases, military power, exercised by a warrior class (toa), came to challenge the traditional authority of the hereditary chiefly elite as warriors and chiefs vied with the spiritual authority of priests. In Mangaia, however, while a unifying polity—if always a fragile and temporary one—was achieved through conquest, there was little of the material elaboration of visual power displays, whether in personal ornamentation (including tattooing as well as mobiliary art) or in standing architecture, that characterizes the Marquesas. This may be primarily a matter of scale and of the available resource base. During hard times of drought and famine, the Marquesans found themselves in difficult straits, yet at other times their economy was able to support a level of craft specialization, as well as labor investment in monumental public works, that was never present in Mangaia. Parallels, yet differences: such contrasts offer clues to the essentials of Polynesian history.


MANGAREVA AND THE PITCAIRN GROUPMangareva (also known as the Gambier Islands) consists of an “almost-atoll” of ten small volcanic islands contained within a vast barrier reef and lagoon. The largest island, Mangareva (which lent its name to the group), was the seat of the most powerful chiefdom and location of the sacred marae Te Kehika at Rikitea. The Mangareva islands are severely deforested, although coastal sediments containing the shells of now-extinct endemic land snails indicate the former presence of forest cover. Small taro patches in the narrow valley bottoms and breadfruit groves along the coastal plains provided the main food supply. The ethnographically described society was characterized by food scarcity, endemic warfare, and occasional cannibalism (Hiroa 1938a).

Emory (1939) reported that almost all of the Mangarevan marae had been destroyed by nineteenth-century Catholic missionaries, with the exception of the abandoned, nearby atoll of Temoe, where these religious structures remained intact. Roger Green initiated modern archaeology in 1959, excavating rockshelters on Kamaka and Aukena Islands, but his results remained unpublished for many years.14 Since 2001, renewed investigations under the direction of Eric Conte and Kirch have greatly increased our understanding of Mangarevan prehistory (Conte and Kirch, eds., 2004; Kirch, Conte, et al. 2010; Kirch, Molle, et al. 2015).

The Onemea site on Taravai Island (site TAR-6), a fishing camp situated atop a sand dune, was utilized from A.D. 950–1000 until about A.D. 1400 (Kirch, Conte, et al. 2010). In addition to pearl-shell fishhooks of Early Eastern Polynesian style (fig. 8.14), the Onemea deposits yielded numerous bones of the Tahiti petrel (Pseudobulweria sp.) and other species of shearwaters and petrels, suggesting that Mangareva was a significant seabird rookery at the time of early Polynesian colonization. The Nenega-Iti rockshelter (site AGA-3) on Agakauitai Island was occupied from A.D. 1300 up to European contact (Kirch, Molle, et al. 2015). Here again, seabird bones decline dramatically from the early to later deposits, matched by a sequence of vegetation change from indigenous forest to a landscape dominated by Polynesian introduced plants. The deep, stratified deposits of Kitchen Cave (site KAM-1), a rockshelter on Kamaka islet reexcavated by Kirch in 2012 and 2014, yielded more than sixty pearl-shell fishhooks, along with a faunal sequence showing a major decline in seabirds and heavy reliance through time on fish and shellfish resources.




FIGURE 8.14 Pearl-shell fishhooks from the early Onemea dune site on Taravai Island, Mangareva (Gambier) Islands. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The faunal assemblages from the Onemea, Nenega-Iti, and Kitchen Cave sites document a dramatic reduction in populations of nesting and roosting seabirds on the Mangareva islands. This decimation of seabirds had serious consequences for Mangareva’s terrestrial ecosystem, as the birds played a keystone role in bringing a steady flow of nutrients to the islands through deposition of their guano. Stable isotope analysis of rat bones from these sites shows a decline in nitrogen levels correlated with the extirpation of the bird populations (Swift, Miller, and Kirch 2016). The near-total deforestation of Mangareva in late prehistory was at least in part a consequence of this interruption of seabird nutrient cycling.

Although the late precontact settlement landscape of Mangareva was heavily affected by missionary activity such as the destruction of marae, some vestiges of these settlement patterns remain intact, such as the Atituiti area on Mangareva Island, with a complex of habitation sites and agricultural terraces (Conte and Kirch, eds., 2004:47–60). At Atituiti, on a plateau overlooking the lagoon, a large square paepae about 23 meters long and wide, paved on top and with a massive basalt “seat” in the center (fig. 8.15), matches a description by the Catholic priest Laval of an “observatory” for marking the winter solstice. According to Laval, the Mangarevans annually calibrated their lunar calendar by observing the solstices (Kirch 2004).




FIGURE 8.15. Large stone seat atop a stone platform, or paepae, at Atituiti, Mangareva. This site served as an observation point for the winter solstice, which determined the Mangarevan year. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Some 400 kilometers farther east from Mangareva lie Pitcairn Island (of Bounty mutineer fame) and Henderson, both of which were unoccupied at the time of early European exploration.15 The most complete data come from Henderson, where Weisler (1994, 1995, 1996b, 1998b) carried out archaeological surveys and excavations in 1990–92. An upraised makatea block with limited reef (much of the coast consists of sea cliffs), Henderson has almost no soil and surface water is entirely lacking. Despite these limitations, well-stratified deposits in rockshelters and one beach site testify to a continuous Polynesian presence on the island from A.D. 900 until perhaps 1500. Throughout most of this period, the occupants imported pearl shell for fishhook manufacture, basalt and pitchstone for adzes and flake tools, and volcanic oven stones. The volcanic imports came from nearby Pitcairn and from distant Mangareva. Around A.D. 1450, these imported items disappear from the stratigraphic sequence on Henderson. The uppermost strata instead contain distinctive artifacts utilizing locally available materials (inferior Isognomon shell for fishhooks, fossilized Tridacna shell for adzes), reflecting an effort to adapt to strictly local resources. But the sites were soon abandoned; the island was devoid of people when first sighted by Europeans.

What happened on Henderson—or for that matter on Pitcairn, an island somewhat larger and better endowed with soil and water, but which was also unoccupied when, in 1790, the Bounty mutineers came ashore to seek refuge from the long arm of the British Admiralty? The answer appears to lie in Mangareva, to which these outposts were for several centuries vitally linked. As Weisler (1996b:627) argues, these “so-called ‘mystery islands’ with their marginal ecological conditions and isolation taxed the capabilities of Polynesian colonization strategies to the physical and social limits.” Only through continued interaction with larger Mangareva—source not only of oven stone, but presumably also of continuing economic, demographic, and social support that has left no direct material traces—could human existence on these isolated specks of land be long sustained. Internal strife, combined with deforestation and a lack of timber to build voyaging canoes, probably led the Mangarevans to abandon their long-distance voyaging to remote Pitcairn and Henderson. When that lifeline was severed, the human populations on Pitcairn and Henderson soon perished or abandoned the struggle.


THE AUSTRAL ISLANDSThe Austral Islands, an age-progressive archipelago of five high islands strung out over 1,000 kilometers, define the southern fringe of central Eastern Polynesia (map 12). The youngest island, Rapa, lacks a coral reef, while the next oldest, Ra‘ivavae, is a high island surrounded by an extensive barrier reef and lagoon. The oldest islands (10 million to 20 million years old), Rurutu and Rimatara, have volcanic interiors encircled with aprons of uplifted makatea. Although never politically unified, Tubuai, Rurutu, and Rimatara had regular contact with each other and with Mangaia and other islands in the Southern Cooks, sharing aspects of their cultures. Ra‘ivavae, and especially Rapa, being much more isolated, developed distinctive cultural and linguistic traits that set them apart.

The Australs have been among the most archaeologically neglected islands of Eastern Polynesia.16 Vérin (1969) investigated the Classic Period of Rurutu with a study of the Vitaria site complex whose numerous large, oval-ended house foundations and associated marae (fig. 8.16) were associated with the island’s paramount chief. The Peva sand dune site on the east coast, excavated by Bollt (2008), takes the archaeological record back to the Archaic Period between A.D. 1280 and 1410, characterized by an adze kit dominated by untanged, quadrangular forms. The following Classic Period (A.D. 1410–1821) was marked by population growth, agricultural intensification, and internal struggles for political hegemony. The rise to power of the Vitaria group was probably aided by their control over the major basalt adze quarry; Rolett et al. (2015) have shown that Vitaria adzes were at one time exported well beyond the Austral Islands.




FIGURE 8.16. Large round-ended chief’s house and associated pavement at Vitaria, Rurutu, Austral Islands. (Photo courtesy Barry Rolett.)





Tubuai and Rimatara in the western Australs have been less intensively studied. On Rimatara, Eddowes (2004) recorded numerous marae, whose forms resemble those of Mangaia and other Southern Cook Islands temples. On Tubuai, an important, well-stratified coastal site at Atiahara, dated to the settlement period (A.D. 1215–1390) and containing Early Eastern Polynesian artifacts, has been excavated repeatedly, yet remains incompletely reported (Hermann, Bollt, and Conte 2015). The Tanataetea adze quarry was the source of many adzes finished at Atiahara (Hermann 2013). When fully analyzed and published, the Atiahara site will doubtless expand our understanding of Tubuai’s early history. The large high island of Ra‘ivavae boasts distinctive marae, some of which were outfitted with impressive anthropomorphic statues reminiscent of Marquesan tiki (Edwards 2003). Until excavations are undertaken, however, the precontact history of Ra‘ivavae will remain enigmatic.

Rapa Island lies far to the southeast and hence has a subtropical to temperate climate in which Polynesian crops such as coconut or breadfruit will not grow or bear fruit. Lacking a coral reef, the marine biodiversity is also limited. The alluvial valley bottoms, converted into intensive taro irrigation systems, were thus the central focus of the subsistence economy. Overlooking the irrigated lands, the several tribes occupied fortified ridgetop villages (called pare, the Rapan variant of fare, the ubiquitous Polynesian word for “house”). Twenty-five hill forts sit atop defensive positions on the island’s circular volcanic crater rim. The Norwegian Archaeological Expedition in 1956 excavated the Morongo Uta hill fort (fig. 8.17), radiocarbon dated to the proto-historic period (A.D. 1640–1740). The fortified peak has a central tower surrounded by tiers of stone-faced habitation terraces extending outward on three ridges (Heyerdahl and Ferdon, eds., 1965).




FIGURE 8.17 The fortified ridgetop village site of Morongo Uta, Rapa Island, after the completion of excavations by the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition in 1956. Note the stone-faced terraces and the central tower. (From Heyerdahl and Ferdon, eds., 1965; courtesy Kon Tiki Museum, Oslo.)





In 2002, Anderson and Kennett (2012) obtained new data on Rapa, including extensive radiocarbon dates from the fortified village sites. Excavations in Tangarutu Cave, combined with coring and pollen analysis of the coastal taro swamps, indicate initial colonization of Rapa between A.D. 1100 and 1200 (Anderson and Kennett, eds., 2012:196). Taro irrigation began almost immediately. Given the lack of suitable large pearl shell or even Turbo shell to make fishhooks, Rapan fishermen innovated by carving small angling hooks out of hard candlenut shells (2012:figs. 9.1, 9.2). Nonetheless, with subsistence heavily dependent on the narrow, irrigated valley bottom, competition and conflict over land did not take long to develop. The first two fortified hilltop settlements (Noogurupe and Ruatara) were constructed between A.D. 1300 and 1400, followed by more forts between 1400 and 1650, and then even more rapid expansion of fortified redoubts during the 1700s (2012:201). Much like Mangaia, then, the history of Rapa was one of intense competition in the face of environmental constraints and limited resources:

It can be hypothesized the levels of competition for resources had reached quite extreme levels by late prehistory. On Rapa, there may have been 10 competing polities, each the proud lords of, on average, fewer than 4 km2 of land, nearly all of it steep and largely barren. Perhaps only such a level of competition can have made the labour and inconvenience of building and living in the skyline forts seem at all worthwhile (Anderson and Kennett, eds., 2012:254–55).


RAPA NUI: “NAVEL OF THE WORLD”The Dutch voyager Jacob Roggeveen bestowed the appellation “Easter” on this remote speck of land on Easter Day, 1722 (map 13). More evocative is the islanders’ own name, Te Pito-te-Henua, deriving from the Polynesian words for “land” (henua) and “navel” (pito). Although often translated as “Navel of the World,” pito also means “end,” hence a rendering as “Land’s End” might be more appropriate (Métraux 1940:34–35; Routledge 1919:209–10). Rapa Nui, the name commonly used today, probably arose in the nineteenth century in order to distinguish Easter Island from Rapa Iti in the Austral chain. (To make matters more confusing, the name of the language spoken by the Polynesian inhabitants of Rapa Nui is typically spelled Rapanui.)




MAP 13 Rapa Nui (Easter Island), showing the location of key archaeological sites.





The early work of Katherine Scoresby Routledge (1919) in 1914–15 (see chap. 1) was followed by the valuable salvage ethnography of Alfred Métraux (1940) and Père Sabastian Englert (1948, 1970),17 but not until the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition of 1955–56 were modern stratigraphic excavation techniques brought to bear on the enigmas of Rapa Nui history. A great deal of intensive work has followed, providing the outline of a precontact sequence for the island.18 Intensive archaeological survey, commenced by Patrick McCoy, was continued by Claudio Cristino and Patricia Vargas of the University of Chile, and more recently by other teams, resulting in a record of more than twenty thousand sites.19 The island’s famous stone statues were studied by Van Tilburg (1986, 1987, 1988) and Vargas (1988). Paleoecological research, including sediment coring of the island’s crater lakes to obtain a record of vegetation change through pollen analysis, provides a critical history of human-induced environmental change.20

Over the past quarter century Rapa Nui has occupied center stage in a debate over the role of humans in changing the earth’s ecosystems. Paul Bahn and John Flenley, in Easter Island, Earth Island (1992; see also Flenley and Bahn 2002), first launched the idea that Rapa Nui’s history might stand as a parable for the planet at large. Jared Diamond, in his widely read Collapse (2005), invoked Rapa Nui as an ultimate case of “ecocide”—“a society that destroyed itself by overexploiting its own resources” (118). But there has been substantial pushback to the “collapse” scenario. The archaeologists Terry Hunt and Carl Lipo, in The Statues That Walked (2011), invoke an almost diametrically opposed history, in which the island’s population never exceeded three thousand persons, practiced highly productive horticulture, and was mostly peaceable. According to Hunt and Lipo, “collapse” came only after European contact, with disease and slave raiding.21 In my view, “what really happened” on Rapa Nui lies somewhere between these extreme scenarios.22

Excavations at Anakena Bay (Steadman, Vargas, and Cristino 1994:table 2)—according to oral traditions the site of the first landing by the navigator-chief Hotu Matua—yielded radiocarbon dates between A.D. 980 and 1280, consistent with recent evidence for initial Polynesian settlement early in the second millennium A.D. in the Marquesas and Mangareva.23 The deep layers at Anakena contain abundant seabird bones of at least twenty-five species, of which only a single species survives. Pollen cores obtained from the crater lakes, as well as macrofossil seeds, testify to an island originally cloaked in a palm forest (with the dominant palm [Paschalococos disperta] being related to the large, erect Chilean oil palm), completely unlike the treeless landscape that greets modern visitors. As in Mangareva, the seabirds surely played an important ecological role by depositing nutrient-rich guano that fertilized and sustained the original forest; when the bird populations were decimated following human settlement, the nutrient content of the island’s old soils gradually declined.24

During the course of Polynesian occupation, the original forest cover was virtually eliminated, with consequences that are only partly understood. While clearance for gardening, using stone adzes and fire, was undoubtedly a major cause of deforestation, the Polynesian introduced Pacific rat (Rattus exulans) may also have fed on palm seeds and seedlings, hindering forest regrowth.25 The removal of the palm forest had negative repercussions for fuel and construction needs, and certainly also for timber with which to transport the statues.26 More critical may have been the exposure of the island’s landscape to erosion by wind and sheet wash, reducing soil fertility and agricultural productivity. The Anakena deposits revealed a substantial reduction in seabirds over time. Given that Rapa Nui has almost no true coral reef and an impoverished marine fauna, birds were probably a key protein source in the early years of human colonization, one that was virtually eliminated by later prehistory.

Rapa Nui, at 160 square kilometers, is more than three times the size of Mangaia, and virtually all of its land surface (except the crater lakes) is arable. Thus, whereas a maximal population of perhaps three thousand struggled to produce sufficient food on Mangaia, the population of Rapa Nui at its peak certainly was much larger.27 There is no agreed-upon estimate for the island’s precontact population, but given the density of archaeological remains that literally cover the island’s surface, a figure of ten thousand persons (a density of 62.5 per square kilometer) or possibly more is in my view reasonable. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive of the scale of monumental public construction works undertaken on the island as feasible without a labor force of less than that magnitude.28

Just when statue carving first began is not certain, but by A.D. 1100 small statues were already being quarried from the soft tuff of Rano Raraku volcano (fig. 8.18) and transported to and erected on temple platforms (ahu), ushering in what has been called the Ahu Moai Period (A.D. 1100–1500). The earliest ahu were small and utilized mostly natural stone in their construction, while later temples (at many ahu there is a stratified construction sequence) were larger and more elaborate, incorporating cut and dressed basalt and red scoria in their facings. At the apogee of this local sequence of architectural development stand such magnificent constructions as Ahu Tongariki (fig. 8.19) and the famous Ahu Vinapu, whose closely fitted slabs have sometimes erroneously been compared with Inca stonework. Ultimately some 245 ahu were constructed, primarily on the coast around the island’s perimeter (although there are a few inland ahu); 324 statues were erected on them (another 200-odd statues remain unfinished in the Rano Raraku quarry).




FIGURE 8.18 Excavation by Jo Anne Van Tilburg and Cristián Arévalo Pakarati of an unfinished moai (6.6 meters high) at the interior quarry of Rano Raraku, Rapa Nui, in 2011. The moai base is inserted in prepared bedrock, and the upper dorsal side is embellished with petroglyphs. (Courtesy of Jo Anne Van Tilburg and the Easter Island Statue Project).





FIGURE 8.19 The restored ahu of Tongariki, the largest statue temple ever constructed on Rapa Nui. The temple platform supports 14 moai, or statues. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The oldest ahu—those that through continued rebuilding gradually became the largest, with the greatest number of statues—are found at the best embayments around the island. Each of these marked the center of a territorial unit (kainga) constituting the estate of a “tribe” or descent group (Métraux 1940, 1957). As these social groups splintered, subsidiary temples were built at distances to either side flanking the coast, marking subgroup territories. The statues represented deified ancestors. The chiefly elite constructed their houses with foundations of cut and dressed basalt immediately inland of the ahu plazas, and thus literally under the gaze of the ancestors.29

Stretching inland from these elite centers—dominating the bays and visually “controlling” access to the limited marine resources—were the habitations and gardens of the common people. These were clusters of small round, oval, or rectangular houses with rough stone foundations, a cooking facility marked by a stone-outlined oven, and cultivation features such as manavai, walled pits that protected bananas or other plants from incessant winds (Yen 1988). The most important crop was the sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), which had been introduced into Eastern Polynesia from South America (see chap. 7). Sweet potatoes thrived in the relatively dry and subtropical conditions of Rapa Nui. Joan Wozniak, Chris Stevenson, and others have shown that the Rapa Nui farmers developed innovative methods of “rock mulching” to enhance the nutrient properties of the island’s otherwise relatively poor soils.30

Statue quarrying seems to have ceased as intertribal raiding and warfare became pervasive, during what has been called the Huri Moai Period,31 from about A.D. 1500 to 1722. In all likelihood, this transition was not abrupt, for the incorporation of older statues into the foundations of more recent temples suggests that raiding and overthrowing of the ancestral figures began even while the carving of new and ever larger statues continued. However, the rise of endemic warfare is clear from the late precontact archaeological record. The finely worked basalt foundation slabs of elite houses were pulled apart and used to fortify subterranean lava tubes and caves. Late-period sites are replete with obsidian spear heads (mata‘a); lashed to short sticks, these could lacerate an enemy in close combat (fig. 8.20).32 Whatever economic power the hereditary elite once commanded, inducing their people to erect ideologically legitimating symbols of their and their ancestors’ glory, became thoroughly eroded. Power increasingly fell to the warrior class, the matatoa, or as they were figuratively called, tangata rima toto, the “men with bloody hands.”




FIGURE 8.20 Mata‘a, obsidian spearheads, were used in the frequent intertribal conflicts of late prehistoric Rapa Nui. (After Métraux 1957.)





Nonetheless, the popular notion that Rapa Nui society experienced a total “collapse” is not supported by the archaeological record. Rather, a series of economic, social, political, and religious transformations drastically changed the island’s culture in the last couple of centuries prior to European contact (Mulrooney 2012, 2013). By the proto-historic period, quarrying and the erection of new statues had come to a halt, although some statues were still standing when the first Europeans arrived. The ahu continued to hold some importance, with the dead now buried in crude stone-faced crypts erected under and between fallen statues. But the island’s ritual focus shifted to a narrow ridge on the crater rim of Rano Kau volcano, high above the sea, overlooking the offshore islets of Motu Iti and Motu Nui, the last refugia of the island’s once vast seabird populations. A bizarre cult of the manutara (sooty tern, Sterna fuscata) arose, with its ceremonial center at Orongo on the crater rim. There, in a cluster of subterranean stone houses, the representatives of the island’s tribes would gather annually to await the arrival and first egg-laying of the manutara on the offshore islets. The first contestant to retrieve such an egg and return with it to Orongo was proclaimed the tangata manu, “bird man,” bringing prestige and privilege to his people. The “bird man” himself would be secluded for one year in a special house at the now-silent statue quarry of Rano Raraku. Grant McCall has summarized this remarkable religious transformation:

It is not surprising that the Rapanui, faced with an ecological crisis that threatened their entire social order, if not their very lives, should take the initiative to fashion a new religion more suited to their precarious times. Instead of a king for life, they opted for one elected by ordeal. Instead of many ancestors who descended from many ancestors, they propounded a single god [Makemake], whose image they carved in deserted rocks, on the bases of feud-toppled figures, and even around water-holes. (1980:38–39)

One final aspect of Rapa Nui culture is the enigmatic rongorongo script, preserved primarily on wooden boards but appearing on other objects as well, such as staffs, pectorals, and statuettes (Barthel 1974; Fischer 1997). Given that the script does not appear on precontact stonework, it is likely to have been a proto-historic invention, possibly inspired by Rapa Nui elite being “made to witness, in pen and ink, the Spaniards’ deed of cession on 20 November 1770” (Fischer 1997:552). The script, nonetheless, is strictly an indigenous invention, with the individual glyphs probably originating in the “inventory of the island’s rock art” (Fischer 1997:553). The rongorongo texts, which were presented in a singing voice, encapsulated ritual or sacred recitations, including procreation chants. It is telling that the word rongorongo has cognates in other Eastern Polynesian languages, such as those of Mangareva and the Marquesas, where the related terms refer to genealogical chants (Kirch 1984a:273–74).


SOUTHERN POLYNESIA: NEW ZEALANDIn 1642, the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman came upon a great “continental” land, which he took to be an extension of Australia, naming it Staten Land, later changed to Zeelandia Nova, or New Zealand (map 14). Its Polynesian inhabitants, the Maori, called the land Aotearoa, the “Long White Cloud.”33 Not until Cook’s navigations, almost a century and a half after Tasman, would the West learn that New Zealand consisted of two great islands, encompassing between them 501,776 square kilometers. Truly continental in their geography, North and South Islands are partly made up of fragments of the ancient Gondwanaland that broke apart from Australia millions of years ago and gradually migrated eastward (see chap. 2). What the Polynesians who ventured south in their exploring canoes must have thought upon first reaching these shores we can never know, but this new land—this whenua hou—confronted them and their descendants with wondrous surprises as well as formidable challenges.




MAP 14 New Zealand, or Aotearoa, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





As Anderson, Binney, and Harris (2014:76) aver, the huge islands of New Zealand were “an altogether different proposition for early settlement than any encountered previously by Polynesians.” The islands are temperate, the only part of Polynesia lying outside the tropical-subtropical zone in which Ancestral Polynesian culture developed. While the climate of the northern part of North Island is relatively mild—frosts, for example, are rare except in the central areas—climatic conditions become increasingly harsh as one moves south. For Polynesians with a tropical horticultural economy, this temperate climate posed a tremendous agronomic challenge, one successfully met only in parts of North Island and marginally in the northern part of South Island. Most Polynesian crops did not survive transplantation to New Zealand, and those that did (taro, Dioscorea yam, bottle gourd, paper mulberry, Cordyline fruticosum, and sweet potato) were confined to the milder regions of North Island, with one great exception: the sweet potato. A South American domesticate introduced prehistorically into central Eastern Polynesia (see chap. 7), the sweet potato was “preadapted” to a temperate climate, in part due to its seasonal growth habit and the annual dormancy of its tuber, permitting over-winter storage. The sweet potato became the staple basis of Maori economy where horticulture was feasible. Of the Polynesian domestic animals, only the dog was transferred to New Zealand.

The colonizing Polynesians did not confine themselves to those parts of New Zealand where cultivation was feasible. Certain groups settled areas lying beyond the limits of sweet potato farming and occupied even the harshest parts of South Island, such as the magnificent fjord country. In a reversal of the general cultural evolutionary trend from hunting and gathering to agriculture, these Polynesians gave up an agricultural existence for a life based on hunting and intensive collecting, particularly of rich maritime resources. What made this economic shift possible in the first place was the presence of a remarkable food resource: several species of flightless birds known collectively as moa (see chap. 2). Another group split off from New Zealand around A.D. 1300 to sail 860 kilometers eastward and settle the Chatham Islands (Sutton 1980), where they developed a unique adaptation to a “cold water atoll.” Evidence from the mtDNA of Polynesian rats on the Chathams (Matisoo-Smith et al. 1998) suggests that there was but a single colonization of these remote islands, which were thereafter isolated until European contact. The indigenous Chatham Islanders, called Moriori, were largely exterminated by their Maori cousins in a devastating raid in 1835.

This story of Polynesian migration from a tropical homeland to a challenging temperate landscape, filled with giant birds and strange plants, has gradually unfolded through a history of archaeological research that is one of the longest in Oceania. As early as 1848, W.B. Mantell observed the co-occurrence of moa bones and artifacts at Awamoa in South Island. In the 1870s, Sir Julius Von Haast (1872) investigated sites around Canterbury, developing a theory that the “Moahunters” had been a Paleolithic people responsible for exterminating the moa who were replaced much later by the Neolithic Maori. Twentieth-century ethnologists (who also undertook archaeological excavations) such as H.D. Skinner (1923–24) and David Teviotdale demonstrated that the “Moahunter” phase culture was actually of Polynesian origin and that there was no break between the Moahunters and the later Classic Maori.

While there was much unsystematic digging in New Zealand prior to the 1950s, Jack Golson and Roger Green revolutionized the study of Maori archaeology, in terms of both field methods and conceptual frameworks (e.g., Golson 1959; Green 1963a; see chap. 1).34 With strong academic programs at the University of Auckland and the University of Otago, augmented by research at museums in Dunedin, Wellington, Canterbury, and Auckland, a prodigious amount of primary field and laboratory work has been carried out, far more than can be discussed here. And, as in Hawai‘i, a vigorous program of cultural resource management, or “contract” archaeology, has been added to the academic research program, largely funded by the Department of Conservation.35

Early efforts to outline culture-historical sequences for New Zealand prehistory included Green’s influential synthesis (1963a) for the Auckland Province and that proposed by Leach (1981) for the southern Wairarapa. Recently, Anderson, Binney, and Harris (2014:73) put forward a simple, three-phase sequence for the entire archipelago: Colonization Phase (A.D. 1200–1400); Transitional Phase (A.D. 1300–1600); and Traditional Phase (A.D. 1500–1800). The temporal overlap between phases reflects some degree of regional variation over these vast islands.

Artifact assemblages of the Colonization Phase are Early Eastern Polynesian in style, including tanged adzes, one- and two-piece fishhooks, bone reels, tooth pendants, and tattooing needles. These point to an immediate homeland for New Zealand’s colonizing population somewhere in central Eastern Polynesia, possibly the Southern Cook Islands, the Society Islands, or even the Australs (Green 1975; Sutton, ed., 1994). As noted in chapter 7, initial Polynesian arrival was not earlier than about A.D. 1200, making Aotearoa one of the last places on earth to be settled by preindustrialized humans.

The Colonization Phase is especially well documented in South Island, where Polynesians arriving from the tropical islands made a rapid transition from a horticultural to a hunting and gathering economy. With this new economic base, population size and density in South Island remained relatively small, but sizable multifunction base villages were established at the mouths of river valleys, such as at Shag River Mouth, Wairau Bar, Murdering Beach, Papatowai, and Little Papanui.36 From these permanent base settlements, some of which covered several hectares, the interior regions were seasonally exploited for moa and other resources (including stone from nephrite and silcrete quarries). The moa, primary targets of this hunting strategy, comprised about thirteen species ranging in size from smallish birds about the size of a brush turkey up to Dinornis giganteus, which stood perhaps 3 meters tall (fig. 8.21).




FIGURE 8.21 The largest moa towered over their Polynesian hunters. (After Cumberland 1962.)





Among the Colonization Phase sites, Wairau Bar stands out as especially notable, in part because it may be a true founding settlement (Anderson, Binney, and Harris 2014:77). Originally excavated by Roger Duff (1942, 1950), this settlement covering more than 7 hectares included three discrete burial areas. One group of seven individuals, interred with an unusually rich array of grave goods including stone adzes, bone ornaments, and perforated moa eggs, may be original colonists who spent their childhoods elsewhere, based on recent analysis of stable isotopes in their bones (Kinaston et al. 2013). The Wairau Bar midden also underscores the immense quantity of moa exploited: 33 tons of bone representing possibly as many as 12,000 birds, along with 2,400 eggs (Anderson, Binney, and Harris 2014:77).

Within a few centuries, the moa had been virtually exterminated through direct predation combined with extensive habitat disturbance. Fire was a main cause of habitat change, and fires were probably lit as a hunting strategy. Vast tracts of the South Island landscape were transformed from forest to grassland, as revealed in many pollen sequences.37 South Island settlement patterns changed in response, with a shift from the permanent village settlements to a more transient settlement pattern (Anderson and Smith 1996). But climate change is also likely to have played a role in driving cultural shifts beginning in the Transitional Phase. As Anderson, Binney, and Harris (2014:84) write, “Climate change probably played a significant role through declining temperatures in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries in the southern hemisphere analogue of the Little Ice Age.”

Over most of South Island, human population never reached high densities, with a total overall population on the order of 3,000 to 10,000, all that its hunting and gathering economy could sustain. In North Island, which had a horticultural economy based on sweet potato production, the situation was entirely different, and there was significant population growth. North Island’s maximal population prior to Tasman’s visit is still controversial. Davidson (1984:58) favors a figure of 125,000, but authorities such as Lewthwaite (1950) have argued for as many as 250,000 people. Archaeological surveys in the more agriculturally favorable parts of North Island reveal an amazing density of sites, and locally it would seem that population densities of 60 persons or more per square kilometer were frequently achieved (Jones and Law 1987).

North Island’s larger population was directly related to the development of a horticultural economy, fueled by the sweet potato. Prehistoric Maori gardening systems, such as those at Palliser Bay and in the Auckland region,38 were frequently intensive, involving permanent stone and earthen field boundaries, mounds, and various kinds of mulch (including artificial gravel mulches). The sweet potato growing season lasted 6 to 7 months, dictating that the harvested tubers be stored for 5 to 6 months. The Maori stored their crop in subterranean pits of various shapes and sizes, often with internal drains and covered with thatched roofs supported by wooden posts.

This horticultural economy, combined with dense settlement and the need to store key food resources during the winter months, led to a unique settlement pattern dominated by fortified hamlets or villages, known as pa.39 Displaying great variation in size and specifics of construction, pa were situated on naturally defensible hills, ridges, or headlands, modified by the excavation of ditches and other earthworks and by the erection of palisades (fig. 8.22). Such defense works typically enclosed a complex of storage pits, dwelling houses, cooking areas, and other activity spaces (fig. 8.23). There were also undefended settlements, however, as well as defensive positions enclosing clusters of storage pits (such as Taniwha Pa; see Kirch 1984a:fig. 66).40




FIGURE 8.22 View of a hilltop pa site in the Pouto region of North Island, New Zealand. (From Irwin 1985b, courtesy of G. Irwin.)





FIGURE 8.23 Plan of Tiromoana pa site, New Zealand, showing the defensive earthworks and numerous storage pits for sweet potatoes. (Courtesy of Roger C. Green.)





The temporal development of pa has long been a focus of archaeological research in New Zealand.41 Anderson, Binney, and Harris (2014:89) date the origins of large storage pits to the Transitional Phase, but the main period of pa construction was certainly during the Traditional Phase, the sixteenth to seventeenth centuries. At several sites, unfortified hilltop settlements incorporating storage pits preceded the construction of earthworks and palisades. Irwin’s study of the Pouto region provides data on the temporal development of pa and their relationship to environmental resources. As Irwin (1985b:77) observes, “In the Pouto study area pa are dense; there is approximately one per square kilometer.” Based on the excavation and radiocarbon dating of twelve pa, Irwin found “the clear possibility that a majority of them were occupied at once,” between about A.D. 1650 and 1800 (1985b:fig. 47). He suggests that “at some point late in the prehistory of Pouto, the settlement system passed through some kind of stress threshold which resulted in a spate of pa building” (1985b:98). Such a threshold could have been the advent of a “full-land” situation (Kirch 1988a), based on Robert Carneiro’s general model of “social circumscription” in chiefdom-level polities.42 Schmidt (1996), based on a review of all radiocarbon dates then available from pa sites, argued for a shorter chronology of pa construction, commencing around A.D. 1500.

North Island settlement patterns, dominated by defensive settlements distributed through an intensified horticultural landscape, correlate with ethnographic descriptions of proto-historic Maori warfare in which raiding frequently escalated to full-scale wars of territorial conquest. Vayda (1960, 1961) interpreted such warfare as a response to population pressure and competition for the best agricultural lands, a process that intensified once a region was fully occupied and territorially claimed by contending social groups. Roger Duff (1967:116), a longtime scholar of Maori prehistory and ethnography, viewed the critical causal linkages this way: “If we have to assign a specific reason for the evolution of warfare in the North Island rather than in the South or the Chathams, we can find it in the buildup of population which followed the adaptation of kumara [sweet potato] growing to a still marginal environment. If we have to explain the distinctively chronic nature of Classic Maori warfare, we may seek it in the inherent competition for good kumara land and in the one-crop season.” Yet as Mark W. Allen (1996) rightly argued, there was also a sociopolitical and economic aspect to pa development, not just a demographic and ecological context. Allen (1996:178) believes that “participation in regional polity formation, pa construction, and increased investment in horticulture and storage” consisted of “a negotiated partnership between ambitious leaders and wary but worried groups of followers.”

Despite the sizable population of North Island in late prehistory, the Maori never amalgamated into large polities, nor did they undergo a sociopolitical transformation from a simple chiefdom level of organization to a complex, hierarchical social formation, as seen in Hawai‘i or the Society Islands. The main social group above the level of the extended family was the hapu (“clan” or “subtribe,” actually a cognatic descent group), usually numbering a few hundred individuals. The higher-level iwi (“tribe”) rarely if ever acted as a unified political entity, although limited regional alliances sometimes formed. Thus Goldman (1970) classified Maori society as another instance of an Open chiefdom in which social relations were fluid and marked by intense competition between status groups. Davidson writes:

Maori society in the eighteenth century was small-scale and fragmented, and there is no reason to suppose that it was different in earlier times. . . . In later times, particularly in northern regions, groups of up to several hundred people sometimes lived and worked together, at least for a time, and built and maintained fortifications for their own protection. However, the society was inherently unstable, and closely related groups quarreled among themselves when they were not united against a more distant enemy. (1984:178)

New Zealand adds yet another variant in the range of Polynesian societies, one in which ecological constraints were posed not by island size but by a marginal climate that challenged traditional Oceanic horticulture. In these vast southern islands, the convergence of high population density, intensive agricultural production, and social competition and conflict (especially over arable land) led not to an evolutionary process favoring increased hierarchy and the development of large polities but to an inherently dynamic and oscillating social formation.


FUTUNA AND ALOFIAll of the societies discussed thus far are situated in Eastern Polynesia, but the smaller twin Western Polynesian islands of Futuna and Alofi (also known as the Hoorne Islands) were also classified by Goldman (1970) as being of the Open type. These were among the first Polynesian islands visited by Europeans, with the arrival of the Dutch explorers Schouten and LeMaire in 1606. The Dutch found both islands heavily populated, each controlled by a rival chief. By 1837, when the Catholic missionary Père Chanel arrived, the population of Alofi Island had been decimated by warfare and the island was abandoned.

My pioneering archaeological research in Futuna and Alofi in 1974 was later augmented by Daniel Frimigacci and his team.43 The islands were settled early in the first millennium B.C. by Lapita colonists, with the Tavai site on Futuna representing a later stage of Ancestral Polynesian culture (see chap. 7). By around A.D. 700, extensive taro pondfield irrigation systems had been constructed in the valleys and coastal plains of the Sigave District on Futuna, taking advantage of alluvium that had been deposited following forest clearance and erosion of the steep hillsides. In Alo District and on Alofi Island, which consist mostly of upraised limestone karst terrain lacking streams, intensive walled field systems for dryland yam cultivation covered large tracts.44 Fortifications were emplaced on defended hillslopes and ridges, such as the site of Mauga and another redoubt overlooking the Sausau Valley. The rise of powerful chiefs is indicated by monumental architecture such as the Loka village complex on Alofi Island, which includes a malae plaza with an alignment of cut and dressed limestone backrest slabs, a large chiefly house foundation, and several elite tombs (fig. 8.24). In my analysis of “the wet and the dry” in Polynesian agro-ecosystems, I argued that it was the constraints and limitations of intensive dryland cultivation on Alofi and in Alo that led the chiefs of those areas to attempt territorial conquest of the irrigation chiefdom of Sigave (Kirch 1994). While the Alofi chiefdom was defeated, in the end neither Alo nor Sigave was victorious; the two polities remain independent although closely linked to this day, each headed by its own sau, or paramount chief.




FIGURE 8.24 The ceremonial plaza (malae) of the late prehistoric village site at Loka on Alofi Island is lined along one side with quarried limestone slabs, which served as backrests for the high chiefs during kava ceremonies. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





THE EMERGENCE OF STRATIFIED CHIEFDOMS


Whereas in the Open societies of Polynesia hierarchy tended to be fluid, spurring competition between status groups (hereditary elite, priests, warriors) for control of resources and the exercise of power, in the Stratified societies elite power became ever more concentrated, with the distinctions and distance between elites and commoners increasingly pronounced. These Stratified Polynesian societies exemplify what anthropologists call “complex chiefdoms,” and in the case of late precontact Hawai‘i and Tonga, “archaic states.” Whereas the Open societies arose in settings where there were ecological constraints such as limited land area, lack of reef and lagoon habitats, or subtropical to temperate climates, the Stratified societies were all located in large, resource-rich archipelagoes. This does not mean that the rise of stratification was in some crude way “environmentally determined,” but it does suggest that abundant arable land and other resources were a necessary precondition to the emergence of the most hierarchical societies.


TAHITI AND THE SOCIETY ISLANDSTahiti, with its coalescing twin volcanoes and land area of 1,040 square kilometers, dominates the Society Islands archipelago (map 12), which total eleven islands with a combined land area of 1,628 square kilometers. Tahiti, along with Mo‘orea and the smaller islands of Me‘etia, Maiao, and the atoll of Tetiaroa, comprise the windward isles. The leeward isles, Ra‘iatea, Taha‘a, Huahine, Porapora, Tupai, and Maupiti, are drought-prone but enjoy expansive barrier reef–lagoon systems. The size of the archipelago’s population at European contact—prior to the ravages of disease that such contact inevitably wrought—has been the subject of considerable debate. Oliver (1974) suggests a population for Tahiti of 35,000, but given the density of archaeological remains revealed by recent surveys (Hamilton and Kahn 2007; Orliac 1997), this figure is clearly too low. Forster’s original 1774 estimate of 120,000 may be closer to the mark. The population of the entire archipelago might then have approached 200,000.

No island society was more influential in forming eighteenth-century European conceptions of Polynesia and the “noble savage” than “Otaheite.” Oliver’s masterful ethnohistoric synthesis (1974) reveals a rigidly hierarchical society with three classes: ari‘i, or principal chiefs; ra‘atira, or lesser chiefs, who were the titleholders to estates; and manahune, or commoners, many of whom were landless. Chiefs received obligatory tribute payments of food, barkcloth, and other materials or artifacts from the manahune. Maohi chiefs also exercised military and ideological power, manifest in the cult of the war god ‘Oro, to whom regular human sacrifices were made. Tahiti, although the largest island in the archipelago, was not the center of political or religious power. That was Ra‘iatea, where ‘Oro was said to have been born of the god Ta‘aroa (the Tahitian variant of Tangaroa) and where the most sacred temple (marae), Taputapuātea, was located (fig. 8.25).




FIGURE 8.25 A view of part of the Taputapuātea temple (marae) complex on the island of Ra‘iatea, seat of the ‘Oro cult. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Kenneth Emory (1933) pioneered archaeological survey in the Society Islands, focusing on marae temple foundations. Modern archaeology commenced in the early 1960s but has been quite uneven across the archipelago. The most research has been carried out on Mo‘orea, the second largest island, especially in the large ‘Opunohu Valley, where Roger Green introduced settlement pattern archaeology to Polynesia in 1960 (Green 1961; Green et al. 1967). Subsequent work on Mo‘orea has addressed coastal deposits (Kahn 2012; Kahn, Nickelsen, et al. 2015; Kahn and Sinoto 2017), inland agricultural systems (Lepofsky 1994, 1995), residential sites and landscapes (Kahn 2005, 2007; Kahn and Kirch 2004, 2013), and marae (Kahn 2010, 2011; Kahn and Kirch 2011, 2014; Sharp et al. 2010). Huahine and Maupiti Islands in the leeward group have also enjoyed some attention (Kahn, Dotte-Sarout et al., 2015; Sinoto 1979a, 1996a; Sinoto and Han 1981; Sinoto and McCoy 1975; Wallin and Solsvik 2010).45 Nonetheless, the archipelago’s archaeological record remains less well documented than that of many other Polynesian islands.

With some modifications, the cultural sequence outlined by Green (1996b) for the ‘Opunohu Valley encapsulates many of the cultural changes that took place throughout the archipelago. Early Polynesian presence on Mo‘orea beginning around A.D. 900–1000 is indicated by anthropogenic changes, including charcoal influxes and vegetation clearance in sediment cores taken from Lake Temae (Parkes 1997; J. Stevenson et al. 2017). Occupation deposits dating from the eleventh to the thirteenth century A.D. are known from two coastal localities (sites GS-1 and ScMf-5) and from the base of Ana Paia rockshelter (Kahn and Sinoto 2017). As the population expanded, shifting cultivation on the island’s ridges and inland slopes led to erosion and deposition of sediments on the coastal plains and in the ‘Opunohu Valley floor by A.D. 1400 (Kahn, Nickelsen et al. 2015; Lepofsky, Kirch, and Lertzman 1996). In the later part of Green’s Atiro‘o Phase (A.D. 1000–1650) stone structures appear the valley interior, including streamside agricultural terraces and associated simple marae in the Tupa‘uru‘uru area (e.g., site OPU-159). The existence of both rectangular and round-ended houses in the ‘Amehiti sector of the valley suggests “a well-established community with status individuals” toward the later part of the Atiro‘o Phase (Green 1996b:218). It was also during this period that an arboricultural complex including large orchard stands of Tahitian chestnut (Inocarpus fagifer) and breadfruit, along with extensive dryland and irrigated terracing for root crops, was developed (Lepofsky 1994, 1995; Lepofsky and Kahn 2011).

The onset of the Marama Phase (A.D. 1650–1788) correlates with the conquest of the ‘Opunohu Valley, as described in oral traditions, by the Marama line of coastal-dwelling chiefs. By this time, the valley was politically divided into the Tupa‘uru‘uru and ‘Amehiti sectors, with the Marama elite centering their attention on Tupa‘uru‘uru. Elaborate marae were constructed (fig. 8.26), along with numerous smaller household marae and round-ended houses (with associated storage pits), which were the residences of the elite. The presence of a high-ranking titleholder in the valley is indicated by marae with stepped ahu, or altars. The final Pomare Phase (A.D. 1788–1812) reflects the tumultuous events of the early contact period, during which ‘Opunohu became a refuge for chiefs who resisted European intrusion, ending with the conversion of King Pomare II to Christianity in 1812.




FIGURE 8.26 Plan of sites ScMo-124 I and J, two adjacent marae in the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea Island. (Plan by P. V. Kirch.)





The ‘Opunohu Valley sequence suggests that increased hierarchization of society went hand in hand with intensification of the agricultural production system. Lepofsky (1995) dates the onset of agricultural terracing to around A.D. 1200. Over time, a highly intensive system of land use, combined with orchard gardens focused on breadfruit and Tahitian chestnut, came to replace an earlier emphasis on shifting cultivation. An additional aspect of economic intensification was the emphasis on breadfruit storage pits associated with elite residences.

Enhancement and control of economic production was not the social elite’s only strategy for gaining power. Ideological control is manifest in the proliferation of temples, the architectonic elaboration of marae serving as a material index of the increasing role of religion. Emory (1933) posited a temporal sequence for marae, from simple terraces with upright stones to enclosures with a simple altar platform (ahu) to the most elaborate forms with stepped ahu but lacked the means to develop an “absolute” chronology. Using high-precision U/Th dating on coral blocks incorporated into the facades of ahu on twenty-two marae on Mo‘orea, Sharp et al. (2010) showed that the elaboration of marae architecture took place over a period of about one and a half centuries prior to European contact. The earliest temples, dated to A.D. 1620, are relatively small enclosures with simple, low platform ahu. By the 1760s, impressive marae with massive, multistepped ahu had been constructed at several places along the Mo‘orea coast. A similar sequence of marae elaboration has been documented for Huahine Island, although the radiocarbon dating sequence there has less chronological precision (Wallin and Solsvik 2010).

Maric’s (2012) study of three valleys on Tahiti adds a perspective on sociopolitical developments from the fourteenth century on. The Teva chiefdom, which had just constructed the huge marae at Maha‘iatea prior to Captain Cook’s arrival (fig. 8.27), controlled the fertile coastal plains from the Papara to Papeari Districts at the time of early European contact. In contrast to the massive chiefly marae of the Papara coast, the inland Taharu‘u Valley had only smaller marae, reflecting its commoner, or manahune, population. A similar pattern is evident for Punaauia, where the monumental coastal marae contrast with the interior, less architecturally elaborated temples. The Papeno‘o Valley, a vast amphitheater that occupies much of the interior of Tahiti Nui, seems to have been divided into zones with particular economic specializations: basalt extraction and tool making in the Ahiopoahi sector and horticultural activities in other areas.




FIGURE 8.27 Engraving of Marae Mahiatea on Tahiti Island, as seen on the voyage of the Duff in 1797. (Collection of the author.)





Based on oral traditions, Maric (2012) dates the spread of the ‘Oro cult from its origin place at ‘Opoa on Ra‘iatea to Tahiti and Mo‘orea at between A.D. 1650 and 1750. The cult was adopted by the ranking chiefly lines and was associated with the arioi social phenomenon (see Oliver 1974). Archaeologically, these transformations are manifested in changes in marae architecture, such as the use of pecked basalt stones (symbolizing turtle heads) in marae walls and cut-and-dressed coral blocks in ahu facades. Typically thought to be associated with the ‘Oro cult, these architectural features, Maric argues, might equally be related to competition between chiefs for status. Indeed, various important marae on several islands, all taking the proper name Taputapuātea, seem to be linked to the expansion of the ‘Oro cult.

In addition to economic and ideological power, warfare and territorial conquest played a key role in the transformation of Society Islands polities. Emory (1933:45) mentions fortifications, but these were not elaborated as in some Open societies such as Rapa or the Marquesas. But we know from oral traditions and early ethnohistoric sources that interdistrict and interisland rivalries and wars of conquest were prominent (fig. 8.28). Tellingly, the aggressive war cult of ‘Oro arose not in the larger, resource-rich and populous islands of Tahiti or Mo‘orea, but in the leeward group, especially on Porapora and Ra‘iatea (Oliver 1974, 2:890–912). Oliver remarks that “the low productivity of Porapora seems to have predisposed its inhabitants to the foreign conquests which led to their chiefs’ political superiority over nearby lands” (1974, 2:1131). The Society Islands provide an important instance of a fundamental tension between “wet” and “dry” production systems (Kirch 1994), the former emphasizing landesque capital intensification (primarily taro irrigation) and the latter the labor-intensive cultivation of dryland crops, such as yams and sweet potatoes.




FIGURE 8.28 The Tahitian war fleet assembled at Opare‘e, Tahiti, as seen on Captain James Cook’s second voyage in 1774. The engraving is by William Woollett after a painting by William Hodges, artist on Cook’s second expedition. (Collection of the author.)





THE SAMOA ISLANDSAlthough Goldman (1970) placed Samoa in his Open category of Polynesian chiefdoms, Samoan sociopolitical organization was in fact more similar to that of the Society Islands, as Sahlins (1958) recognized; it is therefore properly regarded as another example of a Stratified society. Among the chiefly class, there were two main kinds of titles, chiefs (ali‘i) and “talking chiefs” (tulafale). The relative rank of chiefs depended on their genealogies, with the highest ranked, such as the Tu‘i Manu‘a, being regarded as descended from the gods, enjoying privileges similar to those of the high-ranked chiefs of the Society Islands or Hawai‘i (Sahlins 1958:36–37; Mead 1930).

As discussed in chapter 7, Samoa was first settled as part of the Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania. Settlement pattern surveys have shown that the ethnographically documented pattern of coastal villages was a post-1830s adaptation to European contact, following major depopulation, abandonment of interior settlements, and missionization.46 Prior to European contact, many inland areas were densely inhabited, such as in the Falefa Valley or in the Mount Olo tract on ‘Upolu. In these late prehistoric settlements, individual household units are delineated by elevated stone or earthen foundation mounds, often separated by walls and joined by raised causeways or pathways. Houses were paved with floors of rounded river or beach gravel (‘ili‘ili); excavations at Folasa-a-Lalo revealed repeated occupations with successive pavings. In these settlements, relative rank of households was indexed by the size and height of house mounds. Such densely settled landscapes included intensive agricultural production systems, as in the drained garden-island taro cultivation features on the swampy floor of the Falefa Valley. Recent work by Quintus and colleagues on the islands of Ofu and Olosega in the Manu‘a group shows that even on these small islands, settlement patterns were complexly structured, with intensive dryland terracing, ditches, star mounds, and other features covering the steep mountain slopes (Quintus 2012, 2015; Quintus and Clark 2012, 2016)

Associated with these dense habitation landscapes are large mounds having a specialized function, signals of heightened social stratification. Many have a “star” plan, with spokes radiating out from a central platform (Herdrich 1991) (fig. 8.29). Some star mounds were the foundations for god houses; others were used for the chiefly sport of pigeon snaring, as in Tonga. One of the most impressive sites is the great rectangular mound of Pulemelei on Savai‘i Island, incorporating 30,000 cubic meters of stone (fig. 8.30) and rising to a height of 10 meters above the surrounding terrain. The site is linked by a causeway to a smaller but nonetheless substantial mound to the north. Detailed survey and excavations by Martinsson-Wallin (2016; Martinsson-Wallin, ed., 2007) indicates that Pulemelei was first constructed between A.D. 1100 and 1400, further elaborated between 1400 and 1600, and abandoned between 1700 and 1800. The function of this huge monument, which must have required control over a substantial labor force to construct, is not entirely clear. It most likely served as a residential platform for a high-ranked and powerful chief, possibly a high chief of the Lilomaiava lineage or a holder of the Tafa‘ita title (Martinsson-Wallin 2016:21).




FIGURE 8.29 Perspective sketch of a Samoan star mound at Vaito‘omuli, Savai‘i Island. (Courtesy of Roger C. Green.)





FIGURE 8.30 View of the massive stone mound named Pulemelei on Savai‘i Island, one of the largest monumental structures in Western Polynesia. (Photo courtesy Helene Martinsson-Wallin.)





The importance of warfare in later Samoan prehistory is indicated by the presence of fortifications, typically ridges protected by transverse trenches (fosses) or other earthworks (fig. 8.31). Other than Luatuan‘u, few forts have been excavated or dated, but the Tatangamatau site on Tutuila, incorporating fortified habitation terraces and adz-quarrying facilities, had been in use for at least two millennia (Leach and Witter 1987, 1990).




FIGURE 8.31 Perspective sketch of a walled fortification at Uliamoa, Savai‘i Island. (Courtesy Roger C. Green.)





FROM CHIEFDOM TO ARCHAIC STATE: TONGA AND HAWAI‘I


While most of the societies of Polynesia are regarded as chiefdoms, two of the most hierarchical and complex—those of Tonga and Hawai‘i—arguably crossed a threshold to become what anthropologists call “archaic states.” Marcus and Feinman, who have compared archaic states in various parts of the world, describe some of the main characteristics of these societies as follows:

In contrast to modern nation states, archaic states were societies with (minimally) two class-endogamous strata (a professional ruling class and a commoner class) and a government that was both highly centralized and internally specialized. Ancient states were regarded as having more power than the rank societies that preceded them, particularly in the areas of waging war, exacting tribute, controlling information, drafting soldiers, and regulating manpower and labor. . . . For some well-known states where texts are available, one could add to this stipulation that archaic states were ruled by kings rather than chiefs, had standardized temples implying a state religion, had full-time priests rather than shamans or part-time priests, and could hold on to conquered territory in ways no rank society could. (1998:4–5)

In recent years, archaeologists working in both Tonga and Hawai‘i have advanced cogent arguments that these two societies stand out within the Polynesian spectrum, exhibiting a range of features that justify classifying them as archaic states rather than complex chiefdoms. In a study of Hawaiian archaic states (Kirch 2010), I set out the following characteristics of such sociopolitical formations: (1) they had well-developed class endogamy; (2) they were ruled by kings who traced their origins directly to the gods, and who were often regarded as instantiations of deities on earth; (3) their political economies were to a large degree centrally controlled by the king’s bureaucracy; (4) the king’s status and power were legitimated by state cults involving a formalized temple system, overseen by full-time priests; (5) the king’s power was maintained by a monopoly of force, involving a full-time warrior cadre or standing army; and (6) the king and his court occupied special residential quarters (palaces) and enjoyed various privileges and material luxuries supplied by a cadre of full-time specialists and craftspersons. In the following two sections, I discuss how Tonga and Hawai‘i were transformed from complex chiefdoms to archaic states. Although both societies became states, the processes underlying state development and the configurations of these hierarchical societies exhibit interesting differences.


THE TONGAN “MARITIME EMPIRE”The late prehistoric period in Tonga is characterized by monumental architecture, although the forms differ from those in Samoa (Burley 1998). Several kinds of mounds were constructed, some, called sia heu lupe, for use by chiefs in their sport of snaring pigeons, others as sitting places or for elite burial. Davidson (1969) excavated two burial mounds at ‘Atele on Tongatapu and showed that these had grown in size and elevation over several periods of use. Recent survey of the Tongatapu landscape using LiDAR (Freeland et al. 2016) shows that the terrain is densely covered in such mounds (fig. 8.32). Yet another class of burial mound was reserved for the interment of chiefs; typically rectangular in plan, these burial mounds were faced with cut-and-dressed slabs of coral limestone. Quarrying and transporting the facing slabs required substantial labor, especially for the largest mounds, in which the highest-ranking elite were buried, including the Tu‘i Tonga, or sacred paramount.




FIGURE 8.32 LiDAR image of a portion of Tongatapu Island, showing the density of mound sites. (Image produced by Travis Freeland, used with permission of the Government of Australia and the Government of Tonga.)





Political power in proto-historic Tonga centered on the large island of Tongatapu, 257 square kilometers in area. In spite of its makatea geology, Tongatapu has fertile soils enriched by volcanic ashfalls and organic nutrients, as well as an extensive lagoon-reef ecosystem on its northern coast. Tongatapu’s terrestrial resources, although not as rich as those of some other high islands, were sufficient to permit the growth of a prehistoric population numbering at least 40,000. Tongan oral traditions, augmented by archaeology, indicate that three or more independent and competing chiefdoms on the island gradually amalgamated into a single polity, largely through territorial conquest.

By proto-historic times, there were at least two distinct levels of chiefs: the hou‘eiki, or lesser chiefs, who were in charge of managing local estates; and the Tu‘i Tonga, or sacred paramount lord of Tonga and his immediate household. As in Hawai‘i, the commoner population had become alienated from direct control of the land, holding usufruct rights by virtue of regular tribute payments to the hou‘eiki and through them to the Tu‘i Tonga.

Tongan oral traditions describe how the chiefship was elaborated in the final centuries prior to European contact: following the reign of the twenty-third Tu‘i Tonga (Takalaua), his senior son, Kau‘ulufonuafekai (later the twenty-fourth Tu‘i Tonga), initiated a campaign of territorial conquest extending beyond Tongatapu to encompass the Ha‘apai and Vava‘u groups, as well as farther-flung Niuatoputapu and even ‘Uvea. Sites on Niuatoputapu and ‘Uvea (Frimigacci and Hardy 1997; Kirch 1988c; Sand 1993c, 1998b; Sand and Valentin 1991) reveal extensive evidence of a Tongan intrusion around A.D. 1500–1600, in the form of elaborate Tongan-style burial mounds, pigeon-snaring mounds, and fortifications. According to the oral histories, Kau‘ulufonuafekai implemented a significant structural change in the chiefship, reserving for himself (and subsequent Tu‘i Tonga titleholders) the sacred kingship while creating the office of the hau, or secular paramount, who became known as the Tu‘i Ha‘a Takalaua. The first titleholder of the hau-ship was Kau‘ulufonuafekai’s younger brother Moungamotu‘a. This diarchy of sacred and secular leaders came to an end with the thirty-ninth and final Tu‘i Tonga, Laufilitonga, who died in 1865.

The residential and ritual center of these political elites was at Mu‘a, fronting the Tongatapu lagoon, where the dual paramounts occupied separate residential compounds, surrounded by earthen moats (fig. 8.33). This extensive complex was mapped and described by the pioneering archaeologist W.C. McKern in 1920 and recently has been the subject of renewed investigations directed by Geoff Clark (Clark 2016; Clark, Burley, and Murray 2008; Clark et al. 2014; Clark, Reepmeyer, and Melekiola 2016). At Mu‘a, successive generations of Tu‘i Tonga were interred in massive burial mounds (langi) faced with slabs hewn from coral limestone (fig. 8.34). Lapaha, the residential compound of the Tu‘i Tonga line, includes twenty-six langi mounds, the largest fronting a great ceremonial plaza. In 1777, Captain James Cook and his crew witnessed the annual rites of tribute called ‘inasi taking place at this plaza, a scene illustrated by the expedition’s artist (fig. 8.35). A stone pier or dock projected 200 meters into the lagoon, a symbol of the external power base that the Tongan elite had achieved through their wars of interisland conquest. Each year double-hulled canoes brought tribute to Mu‘a from these outlying islands, to be offered up to the Tu‘i Tonga at the ‘inasi ceremony.




FIGURE 8.33 Archaeological plan of the Mu‘a site, Tongatapu Island, seat of the Tu‘i Tonga in prehistoric and proto-historic times. (After McKern 1929.)





FIGURE 8.34 Tomb J9, known as Tauatonga, at Mu‘a, Tongatapu. This classic langi structure has four tiers of cut-and-dressed limestone facings. (Photo courtesy Geoff Clark.)





FIGURE 8.35 In 1777, Captain James Cook and his crew arrived at Tongatapu in time to witness the annual tribute presentations on the great plaza fronting the burial mounds of the Tu‘i Tonga at Mu‘a. Engraving after drawing by John Webber for the atlas of Cook’s third voyage. (Collection of the author.)





Archaeological research by Geoff Clark and colleagues has established a firm chronology for the rise of the Tongan archaic state. The origins of the Tu‘i Tonga archaic state can be traced to an even older complex on Tongatapu, the site of Heketa, long noted for the presence of a massive “trilithon” called the Ha‘amonga a Maui (fig. 8.36), which was probably the gateway to the royal compound (Clark and Reepmeyer 2014). This monument incorporates three blocks of quarried limestone with a combined total weight of 55 tons. Radiocarbon dates indicate that the stone architecture at Heketa, which includes the first known langi, dates to between A.D. 1320 and 1390. Oral traditions state that Heketa was occupied by the tenth through twelfth Tu‘i Tonga, after which the royal seat was moved to Lapaha at Mu‘a.




FIGURE 8.36 The trilithon known as Ha‘amonga-a-Maui at Heketa, Tongatapu. This structure probably served as a gateway to the royal compound. (Photo courtesy Geoff Clark.)





Soon after the move to Lapaha, one of the largest langi, a tomb measuring 28 by 41.5 meters with three tiers of cut-and-dressed limestone slabs weighing an estimated 700 tons, was constructed on reclaimed land extending into the Tongatapu lagoon (Clark, Reepmeyer, and Melekiola 2016). Radiocarbon dates put the construction of this langi, known as Paepaeotelea, at between A.D. 1300 and 1400. The Tongan archaic state achieved its height between 1400 and 1650, during which numerous other langi were constructed as burial monuments for successive Tu‘i Tonga. It is estimated that more than 2,500 tons of limestone blocks were quarried and hauled to Mu‘a to construct the tombs. Geochemical analysis of stone tools recovered from excavations at Lapaha also reveal the extent of the Tongan state’s external exchange relationships, with 66 percent of the tools coming from locations beyond Tonga, including Fiji, Samoa, and even the Society Islands (Clark et al. 2014).

According to Aswani and Graves (1998:155), the evolution of precontact Tongan society resulted from the “dialectical interaction” of “two integral and inflationary processes: intra- and intergroup competition.” The proto-historic Tongan chiefdom had evolved into a kind of “maritime empire,” maintained by emplacing junior-ranking members of the Tongatapu elite on outlying, conquered islands.47 These junior chiefs, removed from Mu‘a where they might threaten or subvert the power of the Tu‘i Tonga or of the hau, married local chiefly women of the islands they governed, enforcing the authority of Tongatapu. This elite system established connections ranging far beyond the Tongan archipelago, to Fiji in the west and Samoa in the east (Kaeppler 1978; Kirch 1984a). Regular long-distance voyaging to these foreign islands—along with carefully arranged chiefly marriages—assured a flow of prestige goods (fine mats, feathers, sandalwood, barkcloth, canoes, pottery) into Tongatapu, providing “wealth finance” that underwrote the political strategies of the Tongan elite (see Earle 1997:73).

Two isolated islands that came under the sway of the Tongan “maritime empire” in later prehistory were Niuatoputapu and ‘Uvea; both have provided archaeological evidence of their integration into the Tonga state. In 1976 I mapped the settlement pattern of Niuatoputapu (Kirch 1988), which had an independent polity prior to about A.D. 1550 but then came under Tongan political hegemony. During this late period, mounds and monuments of various kinds were constructed throughout the island, as shown in figure 8.37. The distribution of these monuments suggests that the island was subdivided into several territories, each with its own elite burial facilities, pigeon-snaring mounds, and chiefly sitting mounds. With permission of local Tongan authorities, I excavated a large stone-faced burial mound at Houmafakalele, dating its construction to the fifteenth century A.D. (fig. 8.38). This mound contained the extended skeletons of at least four adults, buried without grave goods. Black stains surrounded the skeletons, suggesting burial in charcoal-blackened mats, a practice known ethnographically.




FIGURE 8.37 The settlement pattern map of Niuatoputapu Island shows a distribution of burial mounds and other monuments, suggesting that the island was subdivided into several territorial units. (After Kirch 1988a.)





FIGURE 8.38 The Houmafakalele burial mound site on Niuatoputapu Island, a chiefly burial mound in Tongan style with cut-and-dressed facing stones of quarried limestone, contained several extended burials. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





‘Uvea Island was also an independent polity in its earlier history, but like Niuatoputapu it fell under the hegemonic expansion of the Tongan chiefs in late prehistory (Sand 1998b). Tongan domination is reflected linguistically, because ‘Uvean is a Nuclear Polynesian language with heavy borrowing from Tongan. Archaeological evidence corroborates the oral traditions of Tongan conquest, with various monumental sites including Tongan-style chiefly burial mounds and large fortifications. One of the most remarkable is the Petania burial mound, measuring 18.5 by 16 meters, with a central coral slab–lined vault. Surrounding this vault, which held one or more chiefly burials, were no fewer than 150 other individuals, “buried in six successive stratigraphic levels, placed in circles around the burial vault. . . . Most of them had been placed one body partially over another, that is, the head of one person was placed over the femora of the skeleton behind and below” (Sand and Valentin 1991:239–41). Most, if not all, of the individuals were interred at the same time, possibly as a mass sacrificial offering to the high-ranking individual in the central vault.

Daniel Frimigacci (Frimigacci and Hardy 1997) studied fortifications in the southern part of ‘Uvea, including Lanutavake (which encloses a crater lake), Makahu, Atuvalu, and the remarkable site of Kolonui. Kolonui, “Great Fort,” has defensive walls of stacked basalt boulders up to 15 meters wide and 4 meters high enclosing a large area, with a chiefly residential complex (Talietumu) in the southwest corner. These sites reveal that the proto-historic ‘Uvean society was strongly hierarchical, with chiefs who could command the labor of large numbers of subordinates and, at times, exert absolute power over life and death.

In sum, while the makatea environment of Tonga might seem insufficient to underwrite a strongly hierarchical, centralized polity, through the military integration of an entire archipelago and the careful manipulation of external sources of prestige goods, the Tongan chiefs transformed their society into one of Polynesia’s archaic states.


THE ARCHAIC STATES OF HAWAI‘IAnthropologists have long regarded proto-historic Hawai‘i as the most highly stratified of all Polynesian chiefdoms. Summarizing his lengthy research into Hawaiian society and economy at the period of initial European contact, Sahlins writes:

Everything looks as if Hawaiian society had been through a history in which the concepts of lineage—of a classic Polynesian sort, organizing the relations of persons and tenure of land by seniority of descent—had latterly been eroded by the development of chiefship. Intruding on the land and people from outside, like a foreign element, the chiefship usurps the collective rights of land control and in the process reduces the lineage order in scale, function, and coherence. (Sahlins, in Kirch and Sahlins 1992, 1:192)

In most Polynesian societies, land and resources were classically controlled by structures of kinship, especially lineage groups. In Hawai‘i, however, a structure of kingship had emerged in late prehistory (Hommon 2013; Kirch 2010, 2012). As Goldman (1970:200) summed it up, “Polynesian social evolution reached its greatest development in the Hawaiian Islands, where all changes in direction or further elaborations of traditional forms under way elsewhere finally came to fruition.” Ethnographers such as Sahlins and Goldman could only speculate on how such a transformation from kinship to kingship occurred in Hawai‘i. Rich oral traditions of chiefly marriages and alliances, wars and conquests, and other political events assembled by nineteenth-century Hawaiian scholars provide important clues from an “insider” perspective (Cachola-Abad 2000; Kamakau 1961; Malo 1951). But only archaeology provides direct historical evidence to track such fundamental changes through time, even though the processes underlying change must be inferred from the material correlates of social action.

Hawai‘i boasts the richest archaeological record for any Pacific archipelago.48 Pre–World War II surface surveys focused on monumental stone architecture, especially the numerous and structurally varied heiau, or temple sites.49 During the 1950s and 1960s, major excavation programs of the Bishop Museum and the University of Hawai‘i outlined a material culture sequence,50 later augmented by settlement pattern studies and increased attention to sociopolitical, economic, and demographic changes.51 Aggressive economic development in Hawai‘i, spurred by statehood in 1959, has led to thousands of CRM projects; while variable in quality and research orientation, these have resulted in masses of new data.52 The archaeological record from Hawai‘i is so extensive that the following overview merely touches on some highlights.

Excepting temperate New Zealand, the Hawaiian Islands, with 16,692 square kilometers of land area, constitute the largest archipelago in Polynesia (map 15). With a subtropical climate and fertile volcanic soils, the Hawaiian Islands were ideal for growing most of the Oceanic root, tuber, and tree crops. This environment posed none of the constraints to the rise of large, complex societies that we see in other Polynesian islands. And indeed, the precontact population of Hawai‘i is likely to have numbered a half million or more when Cook arrived in 1778–79.53




MAP 15 The Hawaiian Islands, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





Because the archipelago has a linear age progression (owing to its hot-spot origin; see chap. 2), the older islands, Kaua‘i, O‘ahu, and Moloka‘i, along with the western half of Maui, display deeply weathered and dissected landforms, with valleys and permanent streams well suited to irrigated pondfield agriculture. These older islands have more developed coastal reefs, with better fishing and the potential to construct large fishponds for aquaculture. In striking contrast, geologically younger east Maui and Hawai‘i—while they account for 74 percent of the total land area—mostly lack permanent streams and have large tracts of young lava flows (Kirch 2014). On those younger landscapes only dryland, rainfed cultivation was possible, and the cliff-bound coastlines lacking reef flats were not conducive to fishpond construction.

Kirch (1985a) proposed a cultural sequence for Hawai‘i, with four periods (Colonization, Developmental, Expansion, and Proto-Historic), beginning with initial Polynesian settlement around A.D. 300.54 For reasons explained in chapter 7, we now know that this date is too early; the first arrival of Polynesians occurred considerably later, around A.D. 1000.55 This has required a reevaluation of the Hawaiian sequence (table 8.2), with a collapsing of the original Colonization and Developmental Periods into a revised Foundation Period, followed by Early Expansion, Late Expansion, and Proto-Historic Periods (Kirch and McCoy 2007). The Marquesas Islands have long been posited as the immediate source for the first Hawaiian colonizers, both on the evidence of material culture (fishhooks, adz forms) and on linguistic grounds (Green 1966; Marck 1999). However, Hawai‘i did not become immediately isolated from central Eastern Polynesia. Hawaiian oral traditions speak of a “voyaging period” during which great navigator-chiefs such as Mo‘ikeha, La‘amaikahiki, and Pā‘ao made voyages to “Kahiki” (i.e., Tahiti) and back.56 Long-distance voyaging ceased after about A.D. 1400, after which the Hawaiian Islands became completely isolated from the rest of Polynesia. “Kahiki” became a distantly remembered homeland from which the great anthropomorphic god Lono returned each year during the Makahiki season to ritually fertilize and renew the land.


TABLE 8.2

The revised Hawaiian cultural sequence.





Sites of the Foundation and Early Expansion Periods, such as the Bellows Beach (O18) site at Waimānalo on O‘ahu Island, the Hālawa Valley dune site (Mo-A1–3) on Moloka‘i, and sites at Waiahukini, on Hawai‘i Island,57 have yielded fishhooks, basalt adzes, ornaments, and other artifacts that exhibit local stylistic elements (fig. 8.39), differentiating them from styles in central Eastern Polynesia. Settlements typically were nucleated hamlets in coastal settings. The Hālawa dune site contains round-ended house foundations quite different from later prehistoric Hawaiian dwellings, which were characteristically rectangular in form (fig. 8.40). At Waimānalo the dead were interred under house pavements, a practice that ceased in later times. Pigs, dogs, and chickens were all present from the earliest period. Pollen and micro-charcoal evidence from sediment cores on O‘ahu indicate extensive forest clearance for agriculture by A.D. 1200.58




FIGURE 8.39 Artifacts from the early Bellows Beach sand dune site (O18) at Waimānalo, O‘ahu Island, included pearl-shell fishhooks, coral and sea urchin spine abraders, ornaments, a coconut grater, a bracelet of pig tusks, basalt adzes, and a basalt awl. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 8.40 The early Mo-A1–3 dune site at the mouth of Hālawa Valley, Moloka‘i, contained small round-ended house structures of a form not seen in later Hawaiian settlements. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The Late Expansion Period (A.D. 1400–1650) was a time of exponential growth when the archipelago’s population expanded out of the most ecologically favorable areas (what Hommon [1986] called the “salubrious cores”) into the drier, leeward, and more marginal regions. During this dynamic period, production systems were intensified, ritual architecture was elaborated, and a system of hierarchical territorial land units was formalized. In tandem, these changes radically transformed Hawaiian society.

The demographic transition in Hawai‘i is better attested through archaeological evidence than for almost any other Polynesian group. Early attempts to trace the trajectory of Hawaiian population, such as Hommon’s (1986) influential model of “inland expansion,” were based on house count data. These pointed to rapid, exponential population growth beginning after A.D. 1200, possibly peaking or even declining prior to European contact.59 An alternative approach used the curves generated from the cumulative probability distributions of radiocarbon dates as a proxy for population growth.60 This also showed an exponential increase in population after A.D. 1200 but with a peak at around A.D. 1450 and a decline thereafter. Kirch (2010:135, fig. 4.3) assembled a suite of 1,036 radiocarbon dates from four of the main Hawaiian islands, which shows the dramatic increase in numbers of dates—and by inference, in overall population—that begins around A.D. 1200 and continues up through the final century prior to European contact. These data all support an interpretation of exponential population increase, although the rate of growth may have slowed in some regions prior to European contact. Finer-grained studies of population trends have focused on local regions, such as Kirch’s (2007b, 2014) reconstruction of population trends in Kahikinui, Maui, based on radiocarbon-dated habitations, and Field et al.’s (2011) investigation of population trends in leeward Kohala, Hawai‘i Island. For Kohala, a maximum population density seems to have been achieved within the core of the leeward Kohala Field System by around A.D. 1650, with subsequent population increases being absorbed by the southern margins of this vast dryland agricultural system.

Intensification of production went hand in glove with the demographic transition, beginning during the Early Expansion Period and continuing throughout later periods; indeed, population growth and agricultural intensification were arguably linked processes (see Kirch 1994:310–12). Hawaiian agro-ecosystems were of two major kinds: irrigated and dryland (rain-fed). In the western islands—where topography and hydrology permitted—valley floors and lower hillsides were converted to ranks of terraced pondfields, irrigated by diverting streamflow into stone-lined canals (fig. 8.41). On both O‘ahu and Moloka‘i, irrigated terrace construction was well under way by A.D. 1200–1300.61 In the geologically younger eastern islands, irrigation was feasible only in limited areas, but where rainfall and substrate age were conducive to cultivation, extensive leeward slopes were converted into intensive agricultural landscapes dominated by field systems with reticulate grids of stone walls and embankments that broke up the terrain into individual garden plots. Extensive dryland field systems have been archaeologically documented for Kohala and Kona on Hawai‘i Island, for Kahikinui and Kaupō on Maui, and for the Kalaupapa Peninsula on Moloka‘i.62 The leeward Kohala Field System (fig. 8.42), which has been the most intensively studied by archaeologists, began with widely spaced field boundaries around A.D. 1300, becoming increasingly intensified after A.D. 1450 (Ladefoged and Graves 2008). The Late Expansion Period also witnessed the construction of large fishponds for aquacultural production of mullet and milkfish (Kikuchi 1976; Summers 1964) wherever coastal conditions permitted, such as along the protected southern coast of Moloka‘i (fig. 8.43).




FIGURE 8.41 Hawaiian valley floors became intensively cultivated through the construction of pondfield irrigation systems, such as the one depicted in this archaeological plan from the Anahulu Valley, O‘ahu. (After Kirch and Sahlins 1992.)





FIGURE 8.42 LiDAR imagery of a small section of the leeward Kohala Field System on Hawai‘i Island, showing the recticulate grid of north-south trending field embankments, intersected by east-west trending territorial boundary walls and trails. Several walled house compounds are also visible. (Photo from Hawai‘i Biocomplexity Project, courtesy of P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 8.43 Another form of landesque capital intensification in later Hawaiian prehistory was the construction of large fishponds on reef flats, such as this pond on the southern shore of Moloka‘i Island. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





Both irrigation works in the western isles and dryland field systems in the eastern group constitute forms of landesque capital intensification but with rather different socioeconomic outcomes due to their different labor input-to-yield ratios and their abilities to produce a surplus above individual household requirements. Irrigation permitted higher yields per unit of labor, hence greater surpluses that could be extracted by the chiefs. In the dryland field systems, higher labor inputs were required, and the limits to intensification were more quickly approached, making the extraction of a surplus that could be put to political purposes more contentious. Two contrasting pathways to political (and ideological) transformation emerged.63 The chiefly elite of the western islands invested heavily in irrigation, and their religious system emphasized Kāne, god of flowing waters and procreation. On Maui and Hawai‘i Islands, in contrast, the chiefs oversaw the development of vast field systems in which the primary crop was sweet potato, augmented by dryland taro in the higher elevations. In these dryland regions, moreover, there was frequent war and efforts at territorial conquest, promulgating a legitimating ideology based on the cult of Kū, a human sacrifice–demanding god of war, who seasonally alternated with Lono, god of rain and thunder (Valeri 1985).

Major advances in our understanding of the dryland field systems of Hawai‘i and Maui—how they operated in relation to the “biogeochemical gradients” of these geologically youthful islands and the chronology of their development—have come from the work of the Hawai‘i Biocomplexity Project (Kirch, ed., 2011; Vitousek et al. 2004). This interdisciplinary team of archaeologists, ecologists, soil scientists, and quantitative modelers demonstrated that the dryland field systems were positioned to take advantage of a “sweet spot” running in a continuous band along the leeward volcanic slopes of these islands, a zone in which rainfall was sufficient but not too high to have leached out essential soil nutrients. In essence, the Hawaiians had learned how to “farm the rock” so as to extract high yields of sweet potato in closely spaced plots, divided by low embankments planted with rows of sugarcane.

Increased hierarchization of the Hawaiian chiefly class, combined with the use of religious ideology to legitimate chiefly dominance over the common people (the maka‘āinana), is reflected in the archaeological record through the temple (heiau) system, which became greatly elaborated during the Late Expansion and Proto-Historic Periods. Diachronic studies of heiau are less common than surface surveys, but excavations document successive rebuildings of heiau over time, incorporating increasingly elaborate architecture and greater size (both area and volume of stone).64 High-precision U/Th dating of branch coral offerings from heiau in the Kahikinui District of Maui shows a dramatic increase in the number of temples constructed from the late sixteenth century and continuing for the next 150 to 200 years (Kirch and Sharp 2005; Kirch, Mertz-Kraus, and Sharp 2015). This phase of temple building correlates with the consolidation of Maui Island as a single kingdom under the Pi‘ilani dynasty of rulers, as described in the oral traditions (Kirch 2010, 2014). Most of the temples functioned as heiau ho‘o ‘ulu‘ai, or agricultural temples, important both in the ritual regulation of cultivation and in the annual collection of tribute (fig. 8.44). The largest heiau, such as Pi‘ilanihale in the Hāna District, covering an area of 12,126 square meters, or Lo‘alo‘a in Kaupo (4,160 square meters), incorporated massive volumes of stone fill. These impressive structures were luakini, temples associated with paramount chiefs and the cult of war, at which human sacrifices were offered to the god Kū (fig. 8.45).




FIGURE 8.44 An aerial view of a midsized temple (heiau) in the ahupua‘a of Kipapa, Kahikinui, Maui. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 8.45 The massive luakini war temple of Pu‘ukoholāat Kawaihae, Hawai‘i Island. The Hawai‘i Island king Kamehameha I had this temple constructed to ensure success in his intended conquest of the Hawaiian archipelago. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





It was probably during the Early Expansion Period that the distinctive Hawaiian system of land tenure—the ahupua‘a system—first developed. Ahupua‘a (literally, “pig altars”) were territorial units that ran from the mountain ridges down to the sea, cross-cutting the ecological grain of an island to include all of its main resource zones. Whereas in other Eastern Polynesian islands such radial land sections were typically controlled by descent groups or lineages, in Hawai’i ahupua‘a were under the control of lesser chiefs (ali‘i ‘ai ahupu‘a), who in turn held these territories at the pleasure of the king (ali‘i ‘ai moku) to whom the chiefs owed material support, especially in times of war. All of the ahupua‘a under a paramount chief constituted the kingdom at large, called in Hawaiian the moku, derived from the old Polynesian word for “island.” The commoners, for their part, held rights to work lands within an ahupua‘a in return for tributary payments of produce and labor to the chief. Thus land became alienable and the entire system one of enfeudation, tied together by reciprocal rights of tribute and protection (Hommon 2014; Kirch 2010; Kirch and Sahlins 1992).

Another distinctive transformation in Hawai’i was the elaboration of the kapu system, a complex set of prohibitions and cultural practices that differentiated Hawaiians by gender and by rank. The highest-ranking chiefs, for example, were accorded the kapu moe, “prostrating taboo,” by the commoners. Women were forbidden to eat certain foods, such as pig, bananas, and some fish, and were obligated to prepare their food in separate earth ovens. Late precontact habitation sites in the Kahikinui region of Maui exhibit evidence of such separate cooking facilities (Kirch 2014). Precontact Hawaiian houses, household clusters, and chiefly heiau all display certain structural similarities in their spatial layout, reflecting pervasive “organizational principles predicated upon notions of ritual offerings and the observance of the kapu system” (Ladefoged 1998:70).

By the Proto-Historic Period (A.D. 1650–1778) the ahupua‘a and kapu systems had become increasingly entrenched and elaborated. Thanks to the rich body of indigenous oral traditions relating to these final centuries before European contact, as well as the material evidence of archaeology, a great deal is known of the political history of this period, including the economic, military, and religious forms of power employed by the chiefly class (Cachola-Abad 2000; Kirch 2010, 2012). Social stratification reached a level at which the chiefs (ali‘i) distinguished themselves as a class from the commoners (maka‘āinana); although endogamy was not absolute, it was strongly encouraged. Chiefs claimed descent from the gods and internally differentiated among themselves through elaborate genealogies and a ranked gradation of levels. In addition to controlling the land and material apparatus of production, the chiefs encouraged and supported craft specialists who produced sumptuary items that visually reinforced their status.65 Most remarkable among these material symbols were finely executed feathered girdles, helmets, capes, and cloaks.

Wars of territorial aggression between competing chiefdoms and a progressive amalgamation of formerly independent chiefdoms into ever larger polities mark the political history of the Late Expansion and Proto-Historic Periods. By the late seventeenth century, four separate polities had emerged, focused on the main islands of Kaua‘i, O‘ahu, Maui, and Hawai‘i; the contested smaller islands were incorporated into one or another of the main units. However, the political dynamism of Hawai‘i in late prehistoric and early historic times emanated primarily from the two largest and youngest islands, Maui and Hawai‘i. Sahlins (1985:20) put this in social terms in Islands of History, when he observed that “the oldest and most senior [chiefly] lines are in the western islands, Kaua‘i and O‘ahu, whence originate also the highest tabus. But then, the historical dynamism of the system is in the east, among Maui and Hawai‘i chiefs, who are able to differentiate themselves from local competitors, or even from their own dynastic predecessors, by appropriating ancestry from the ancient western sources of legitimacy.” The Maui and Hawai‘i chiefs coveted the generously endowed irrigation systems that these western islands offered. Not long before Cook’s fateful visit in 1778–79, the Maui paramount Kahekili expanded his polity to encompass all of the islands to the west and was engaged in a fierce succession of wars with his archrival Kalani‘ōpu‘u of Hawai‘i. After the fateful encounter with the West, Kalani‘ōpu‘u’s successor—the famous Kamehameha I—made shrewd use of Western arms to bring the entire archipelago under his hegemony.

Various explanations have been offered for the rise of sociopolitical complexity and eventual transformation from complex chiefdoms to archaic state in Hawai‘i. Hommon (2013) puts emphasis on what he terms the “hard times” hypothesis. He sees the archaeological evidence from regions such as Kohala on Hawai‘i Island as indicating that the development and intensification of the dryland field systems “resulted in hard times comprised of increased workloads for men and women, rapid population growth, and diminished productivity due to a loss of soil fertility, and that by the late eighteenth century the limits of high-potential land had been reached or exceeded” (2013:259). This condition provided opportunities for chiefly elites that “resulted in escalated coercive development that contributed to the emergence of the Hawai‘i Island state” during the period from A.D. 1680 to 1790. Kirch (2010) suggests that the factors contributing to state formation in Hawai‘i included both “ultimate” and “proximate” forms of causation. Ultimate causes included exponential population growth and the pressure this put on resources (as well as the labor supply thus created), the intensification of wet and dryland agro-ecosystems, and the creation of significant surplus that could be extracted to fuel the political economy. Proximate causes—what is often referred to as “agency” in anthropological theory—included the status rivalry deeply ingrained in Polynesian social structures, as well as the strategies of marriage alliance and conquest warfare used by the elites to gain hegemony over their populations.





POLYNESIAN HISTORY: A CONCLUDING NOTE


In a classic early effort to compare the varied social and political structures of Polynesia, the pioneering ethnologist R.W. Williamson expressed his regret that it would not be possible to ever trace out “what actually had been the history” of these Polynesian societies (Williamson 1924:428). Writing in an era when archaeology had scarcely commenced in the Pacific—it was restricted in its methods to surface surveys with no temporal controls—Williamson believed that it would be impossible to obtain direct evidence of the history of Polynesian social transformations. He was wrong. Williamson could not envisage that the material remains of those societies themselves encapsulated a historical “text,” which in time would be accessible with improved methods and with more sophisticated theoretical paradigms enabling its interpretation. While we still have much to learn of the sociopolitical histories of the Polynesian chiefdoms and archaic states, we have traveled a great distance from Williamson’s speculative “history” based solely on comparative ethnography.

What makes the historical study of the Polynesian chiefdoms so intellectually engaging, in part, is the opportunity to compare both the varied outcomes—the specific social formations, whether Traditional, Open, or Stratified—and the underlying processes and trajectories responsible for those outcomes, all of which derived from a common Ancestral Polynesian culture over the course of two and a half millennia. Because Polynesia constitutes a well-defined phyletic unit (see chap. 7), it offers possibilities for comparative analysis not often found elsewhere. I have sketched some of the historical sequences of sociopolitical transformation that archaeology has begun to reveal and pointed to a few of the fundamental contexts, constraints, and processes that have influenced such changes. I have also endeavored to show how specific elite social groups used alternative forms of power—economic, military, and ideological—in their attempts to exercise authority and control over society at large. There is much scope for alternative—one hopes mutually enlightening rather than competitive—models of social change in Polynesia. After a half century of study, the search is becoming truly exciting.





NINE


Big Structures and Large Processes in Oceanic Prehistory



Historically grounded huge comparisons of big structures and large processes help establish what must be explained, attach the possible explanations to their context in time and space, and sometimes actually improve our understanding of those structures and processes.

CHARLES TILLY, Big Structures, Large Processes,

Huge Comparisons (1984)





SOMETIMES, THE MERE telling of a history is sufficient. Much satisfaction and pleasure may be had from teasing out the tiny dramas of human existence, as well as the grand sweep of the longue durée. In this sense, the preceding chapters stand fully on their own, requiring no further summation or exegesis. But an anthropological history carries the weight of a proud tradition of comparative analysis. Anthropology’s history (as opposed, with much deference to the late Greg Dening, to “history’s anthropology”)1 can have no special claim on historical understanding without comparison. And so, in this final chapter, I offer some observations on the long run of Pacific history, observations not tied to any one time or place, because indeed there are trends and movements that transcend the particular. It is in these “big structures” and “large processes” that any deeper insights may be discovered. They invite us to embark on a voyage beyond time to see—in the common experiences of human existence—some larger truths that might in small ways enlighten us.





VOYAGING AND THE HUMAN “CONQUEST” OF THE PACIFIC


The history of the Pacific is more than anything a history of voyages, and all that word entails: curiosity, courage, skill, technique, stamina, doubt, hope, and more. In their initial expansion out of Africa, commencing perhaps 100,000 years ago, our ancestors—modern Homo sapiens sapiens—moved on foot, spreading into the Near East, Europe, the Indian subcontinent, and Asia. Their expansion paused, for a time, on Asiatic shores now drowned beneath the warm waters of the Sunda Sea. But neither curiosity nor ingenuity could be kept in check forever; in due course some of those coastal-dwelling people invented the means to begin moving out beyond the continental margins, into the island world of the Pacific. In reality, we know next to nothing about this earliest phase in the history of seafaring technology, other than that it had developed at least by 47,000 years ago. But the explosive appearance of human populations throughout Sahul and Near Oceania at this time can only be explained by the existence of some forms of simple watercraft. Bark-boats, rafts, simple dugouts—all of these are possibilities; to say more is sheer speculation. Whatever the technology, it was sufficient to move people across water gaps of 90 kilometers or more. In most cases, the voyaging targets were visible from the starting shore: the object loomed above the horizon, enticing them with promises of a rainforest rich in edible marsupials, birds, and reptiles, or of pristine reefs where mollusks and sea urchins teemed.

Further development of voyaging technology and skills was painfully slow. Twenty thousand years after the first humans moved into the Bismarck Archipelago and the Solomons, we have the simplest hints of advances in voyaging (or at least in the frequency of movement between islands). The evidence is indirect and highly inferential: the appearance of obsidian hundreds of kilometers beyond its source and of animals “translocated” from their endemic homes. But something more profound is hinted at, a subtle difference in the way that people were beginning to perceive their island environments as well as themselves. As Chris Gosden observed, rather than always moving themselves to new resources, people began to apply voyaging technology to the movement of resources. The idea seems simple, almost trivial, but it underlies all that would come later, for the “conquest” of Remote Oceania could never have been accomplished without the ability to transport an arkful of biotic resources, from dogs and pigs to taro and breadfruit seedlings.

Transport distances in Remote Oceania are an order of magnitude greater than those within the Near Oceanic “voyaging nursery.” They could never be successfully crossed with the simple technology we infer for early humans in the Pleistocene, or even the early Holocene. Sophisticated open-water craft were called for; insofar as we can reconstruct its history, the sailing outrigger canoe complex emerged in the relatively calm waters of island Southeast Asia, perhaps between 4000 and 2000 B.C. The early Austronesian voyaging canoe, the *wangka, which we reconstruct largely from linguistic and comparative ethnographic evidence, was a marvel of “neolithic” technology. Its hull was probably a simple dugout (perhaps with greater freeboard achieved by lashing on separate washstrakes); the addition of the outrigger float gave it both stability and the possibility of carrying added cargo (on platforms lashed to the outrigger booms). The lanteen sail made of plaited mats harnessed the wind, freeing the canoe from mere drifting currents. The sailing outrigger canoe became a sharp instrument of exploration, discovery, and colonization, in the space of a few short millennia propelling people to the farthest ends of the Pacific Ocean.

The great expansion of Austronesian-speaking voyagers into Remote Oceania, after about 1200 B.C., was underwritten by more than just new and vastly improved technology. There was as well a new ideology, a different way of looking at the ocean, of envisioning lands the eye could not see but which the mind could populate with generations of descendants. This was the vision not of hunter-gatherers always moving on to new resources but of horticultural people tied to the land, for whom cultivated territory provided the fundamental basis of social life. This was, moreover, an ideology bound to a particular kind of social structure, one in which siblings were ranked by birth order and elder brothers became founders of descent lines, claiming the best lands and other resources as their own. Thus while the human settlement of Oceania is often thought of in maritime terms, as constituting a succession of great voyaging feats, these voyages were also the means to an end: the discovery of new landscapes that could be claimed, named, divided, planted, managed, and inherited.

Islanders were not content to always sit at home and tend their crops, or fish the reefs and lagoons of the inshore waters. In exploring and populating the Pacific, they gradually built up another ideology, one of the sea as highway, with myriad routes connecting one’s own island to many others. Sometimes these highways were so long and the voyages necessary to traverse them so arduous that the desire or ability to keep up contacts with one’s relations on other islands gradually waned. Thus the most remote islands and archipelagoes of the Pacific (such as Rapa Nui and Hawai‘i) after a time became isolated worlds unto themselves. But throughout much of the Pacific, a complex network of interconnections developed, maintained by seafarers and wayfinders who became transportation specialists, keepers of esoteric knowledge of star paths and wind compasses, such as Tupaia, who met Captain Cook in Tahiti, or the modern Satawal navigator Mau Piailug. These networks were not random; indeed, they became highly regularized through repeated economic and social transactions. By the time Europeans entered the Pacific, most (but not all) of its islands were connected to at least some other islands through intermeshed networks.

Yet the reticulate grid of complex voyaging networks linking many Pacific islands in late prehistory should not mislead us to conclude that things were always in flux, that the deeper history of cultural, linguistic, and biological differentiation among Pacific peoples had been wholly swamped by a frenzy of social (or, for that matter, sexual) intercourse. Contact was important, for trade and exchange, and sometimes for marriage partners. Most often, contact was with nearby islanders who shared a common history and who were closely related—linguistically, biologically, and culturally. Thus Tongans voyaged to Samoa and Fiji; the people of Nendö interacted mostly with those of nearby Utupua, Vanikoro, and the Reef Islands; the Yapese went to Palau or the closer atolls of the central Carolines. Moreover, interisland connections, although frequently valorized in song and myth, were the purview of a privileged few; most members of Oceanic societies commanded neither the skills nor the physical equipment (voyaging canoes were expensive items of property) to make overseas voyages themselves. Further, would-be voyagers were not always welcomed at their intended destinations: the Mangaians, for one, aggressively repulsed efforts at contact. A great deal of linguistic, cultural, and biological distinctiveness was thus maintained—and often consciously enhanced—by the peoples of the many Pacific islands.





HISTORY WRITTEN IN THE PRESENT: CORRELATIONS BETWEEN LANGUAGE, BIOLOGY, AND CULTURE


Despite the fundamental tenet of twentieth-century anthropology that race (i.e., human biological variation), language, and culture are independent, it has long been evident to historical anthropologists that for many regions of the world, and for certain periods of time, biology, language, and culture have significantly covaried. In a pioneering application of phylogenetic models in anthropology, Kimball Romney argued:

Physical type and language, we would say, have no causal relationship; there is no functional reason why a given physical type should occur with a given language family. Therefore, when these two variables do show significant concordance in their distribution this may well represent an important historical fact, namely that the explanation for their concordance can be traced to a common point somewhere in the past. A demonstration that these two factors are also uniquely accompanied by a systemic culture pattern . . . would strengthen the belief in a common origin. (1957:36)

Romney called this kind of concordance between biological, linguistic, and cultural patterns a “segment of cultural history,” arguing that the Uto-Aztecan-speaking peoples of North America constituted just such a segment.

Whether or not such segments of cultural history (or, as I have called them in this book, “phyletic units”) can be identified in the Pacific and, if so, what they have to tell us about human history in Oceania have invoked controversy and debate for more than a century. The greatest agreement focuses on the Polynesians, whose linguistic and cultural unity was observed well before anthropology became an academic discipline, and whose biological homogeneity has been extensively documented. The many Polynesian societies and cultures together form a robust phyletic unit—all speaking historically related languages, with common cultural patterns and a high degree of biological similarity—who descended from a common ancestral group. The application of a phylogenetic model to Polynesia is therefore not particularly controversial.

When it comes to other regions within Oceania, the degree to which biology, language, and culture are correlated has at times been hotly contested. The debate centers on the issue of whether the patterns of distribution and relationship among the Austronesian and Non-Austronesian languages of Oceania correspond, in any significant manner, with patterns of human biological variation, and with systemic cultural patterns, particularly as these are reflected in archaeological cultures.

Many pioneering ethnographers and linguists who worked in the western Pacific thought that they could detect such correlations. W.H.R. Rivers, who attempted a historical reconstruction based solely on comparative ethnography (a Pacific archaeological record did not exist in Rivers’s day), was well aware of the “great variety of physical characters of the Melanesian people,” opining that they displayed “a greater variety than the peoples of Europe” (1914, 1:582). Rivers explained this variation largely as a “result of mixture of peoples differing widely from one another in physical character.” Likewise, he recognized that language and biology can have radically different outcomes in the course of interaction between two groups, as in the case of a large local population adopting the language of a small (but socially dominant) immigrant group, yet having “relatively little effect on the physical appearance of those among whom they settled” (Rivers 1914, 1:594). His particular narrative of an ancient “dual people” who were successively influenced by new immigrant groups (the “kava-people” and the “betel-people”) may strike us as quaint, yet given his limited comparative data Rivers’s speculative “history” makes considerable sense; when its antique terminology is recast in modern terms, his sequence bears much in common with modern syntheses. The German linguist Otto Dempwolff (1934–38) developed similar ideas. He thought that the initial spread of Austronesian language speakers could be correlated with certain biological populations, although he argued that where malaria was rife, the malaria-resistant genes of the original, “darker-skinned and frizzy-haired” populations tended to dominate. Dempwolff, Rivers, and others of their day were greatly constrained in their ability to refine and test their theories, both by the lack of an archaeological record and by the “typological” (indeed, sometimes racist) approach then dominant in physical anthropology.

Some scholars argue that efforts to correlate biological, linguistic, and cultural patterns of variation in Melanesia or elsewhere in the western Pacific merely perpetuate an outdated paradigm of anthropology (e.g., Terrell 1986:63; Terrell, Hunt, and Gosden 1997). But new and more powerful analytical and comparative tools than were available to Dempwolff, Rivers, or their peers allow us to test phylogenetic hypotheses that “segments of cultural history” can be delineated in Melanesia. The results indicate that even in Melanesia—where the degree of biological, linguistic, and cultural variation is enormous—historically meaningful patterns of covariance do exist and can be detected.

Compelling evidence for correlations between language groups and biological variation in Melanesia has come, for example, from the long-term Solomon Islands Project (Friedlaender, ed., 1987, 2007), which examined patterns of human variation among eight populations including both Austronesian and Non-Austronesian speakers. Summarizing a wealth of detailed biometric and genetic evidence, Friedlaender (1987:354–57) drew several noteworthy conclusions. First, the large island of Bougainville, which includes Non-Austronesian language groups, and which “from a biogeographical perspective, is a logical place for relic populations to persist,” exhibits the greatest range of variation, with a “very distinctive biological population.” Second, the biological diversity of Bougainville, and to some extent that of its nearest neighbors, “suggests that the pre-Austronesian settlements in island Melanesia are very old, and possibly are the result of a number of separate migrations, and subsequent significant differentiation in situ of a lesser magnitude.” Third, the “Austronesian-speaking populations in Melanesia tend to show biological similarities in spite of their strong resemblances to immediately neighboring groups.” For example, there are virtually perfect correspondences between the presence or absence of certain Gm alleles and the distribution of Austronesian and Papuan languages. Likewise, fingerprint patterns show clear-cut distinctions that correlate with these major language distinctions (Froehlich 1987); and again, tooth sizes (odontometric patterns) “lend strong support to the . . . interpretation that [Non-Austronesian]-speaking peoples of Bougainville Island have an origin and history in Oceania significantly different from that of the more recent [Austronesian]-speakers” (Harris and Bailil 1987:259). Thus Friedlaender (1987:356–57) concludes that in Melanesia, “although the correspondence is hardly perfect, biologic and linguistic variation are often reflections (sometimes sharp, sometimes dim) of migrational histories.” Friedlaender modestly says that he is simply “restating a now obvious truth of anthropology,” yet it seems that such truths need to be periodically revalidated with empirical evidence for each new generation of anthropologists.

The big structure here is that the cultural, biological, and linguistic patterns characteristic of Oceania (and not just of Polynesia) are far from random. They are, rather, highly structured and, despite the complexities of their patterning, display regular correlations and concordances. This is precisely because they reflect a real history of human movements or migration into the Pacific, of dispersal or diaspora over its many islands. That such movements must have occurred, and were responsible for regularities in cultural patterning, was only roughly grasped by the pioneering ethnographers and linguists of the early twentieth century. What they lacked were the more sophisticated methodologies at our disposal today and—even more critically—a direct archaeological record. They struggled to infer a “migrational history” solely from synchronic patterns of variation, from history written in the present. It has been the contribution of archaeology to provide the properly diachronic evidence of human history in Oceania, against which the synchronic patterns in language, culture, and biology can be more fully interpreted. Knowing as we now do that the history of Near Oceania runs deep indeed—well into the Pleistocene—we can finally explain the great genetic and linguistic diversity that already existed in this region when the Austronesian-speaking peoples voyaged into the Bismarck Sea around 1300 B.C. The discovery of the Lapita cultural complex as well provides the archaeological signature of that particular human diaspora, which not only added to the heterogeneity and complexity of Melanesia but also was responsible for the peopling of the vastness of Remote Oceania.





THE ROLE OF DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITIONS IN OCEANIC HISTORY


I turn now, in Tilly’s phrasing, from large structures to big processes, commencing with an essential demographic cycle that backgrounds the histories of a great many (possibly the majority of) Oceanic societies. First, however, we must revisit a critical contrast between the population structures of Near Oceania and those of Remote Oceania, a striking difference demanding a historical explanation. According to their ethnohistorical and archaeological records, the large archipelagoes of the Bismarcks, Solomons, and Vanuatu never supported high-density human populations, other than in very local areas. Vast parts of these islands remained in climax rainforests, which, although hardly pristine (for low-density human settlements are dispersed within them), remained largely untransformed by human activities, despite thousands of years of human presence. The absence of large populations in these fertile islands—even after indigenous food production systems arose in the Holocene—poses a puzzling contradiction. In Remote Oceania beyond Vanuatu the situation is reversed. Human populations again and again reached high density levels over relatively short time spans, even on such large landmasses as New Caledonia and Fiji.2 Moreover, these dense populations wrought enormous and often irrevocable changes in vegetation and other aspects of their ecologies.

Why this difference in population structures between the large archipelagoes of the western Pacific and those of Remote Oceania? What could possibly account for the disparity in population densities? Malaria—probably combined with other kinds of parasitic and infectious diseases. The geographic distribution of malaria in the Pacific corresponds closely to the distribution of the population structures just observed: it is found in lowland and midaltitude Near Oceania and within Remote Oceania only in the Santa Cruz Islands and Vanuatu. The effects of this disease, which one expert in the field claims has “probably resulted in more mortality in human populations than any other disease” (Livingstone 1984:413), are not to be underestimated. The one place in Near Oceania where malaria is absent—the New Guinea Highlands—is also the only region in which large and dense human populations did arise following the development of intensive agricultural production. In short, on a broad canvas the demographic history of Oceania has been intimately linked with the history of disease, especially malaria.

Once they entered Remote Oceania, human populations found themselves in a significantly healthier environment. While some Plasmodium parasites would at first have been carried in their bloodstreams, there were no Anopheles mosquitoes to act as vectors; the chain of malarial transmission was broken. These more isolated islands also lacked the diverse intestinal protozoa, bacteria, hookworms, and other disease-causing microorganisms of Near Oceania. Key conditions that had held human growth rates in check in Near Oceania were now lifted. In addition, the new islands discovered by the Lapita colonizers and their descendants were devoid of other human occupants; there were no others to fight with over territory. Rich in natural food resources (especially birds and seafoods), the high islands were well suited to planting food crops. In addition to the lack of epidemiological or environmental constraints on population increase, there were strong cultural pressures favoring high reproduction rates. With founding populations on new islands being initially small (in many cases probably consisting of the complement of but a single voyaging canoe), the risks of extinction were substantially lessened with each new birth.3 In short, conditions prevailing during the initial phases of human expansion into Remote Oceania—both environmental and cultural—almost ideally favored high rates of population increase.4

Many years ago, I put forward a model for human demographic transitions on Polynesian islands (Kirch 1980, 1984a), equally applicable throughout Remote Oceania (except Santa Cruz and Vanuatu, which lay within the malarious zone, and the temperate, nonagricultural cases of South Island and the Chathams). In the early stages of island colonization and settlement, the lack of constraints on population growth, reinforced by the obvious social advantage of increasing one’s own population (and economic production) base, favored a high intrinsic growth rate (symbolized in demographic equations by r) complemented by relatively low mortality. After some time, however (and this would vary depending on local conditions, especially island size and resources), Remote Oceanic populations typically increased to the point where human numbers began to exert various kinds of pressure (although these populations need not have reached the theoretical level of maximal “carrying capacity,” symbolized by K). The most immediate pressure would be that on food supply, although this might often be offset by intensifying production. The social marking and claiming of all available territory brought to bear another kind of pressure. That is to say, people may begin to perceive population pressure due to such socially and culturally defined criteria well before any absolute biological limits of food supply (K) are reached. In any event, during the later time periods on many Polynesian and Remote Oceanic islands, human populations clearly reached quite large numbers (in the hundreds of thousands on larger islands and archipelagoes) and—more significantly—high densities per area of arable land. Population densities frequently reached or exceeded 100 persons per square kilometer; in some cases, such as Tikopia, densities were much higher (Kirch and Rallu, eds., 2007). Under these conditions, high intrinsic rates of population increase (r) could not be sustained or tolerated, and cultural controls on population growth were implemented. As ethnographically documented, such controls included means of reducing fertility (celibacy, contraception, abortion), as well as of increasing mortality (infanticide, suicide voyaging, war, expulsion of certain groups, ritual sacrifice, and even cannibalism).5 The later stages in the demographic cycle of most Remote Oceanic islands are thus characterized by a reduced rate of population increase, in many cases probably oscillating around periods of growth and decline. In at least some cases there seems to have been dramatic decline following an actual overshoot of a diminishing or degraded resource base.

This kind of demographic cycle is sometimes referred to as an “r to K” transition, and in classical evolutionary ecology is described by a sigmoidal or S-shaped curve (the logistic), in which high initial r gradually declines as population approaches carrying capacity. MacArthur and Wilson (1967) argued that such r to K transitions were common in the evolutionary histories of island biota. More recently, the theory of “panarchy” has characterized entire ecosystems and the human social systems with which they are dynamically coupled as undergoing such r to K phase transitions (Gunderson and Holling, eds., 2002). As new models developed by the Hawai‘i Biocomplexity Project suggest, however, these demographic cycles can best be explained in terms of food availability and its effects on mortality and fertility (Kirch et al. 2012; Puleston and Tuljapurkar 2008). In the early stages of island colonization, when the population was small, available labor rather than land was the key limiting variable. Once large populations had built up, usually after at least three to four centuries, agricultural land became the limiting factor, as labor was abundant but food often in increasingly short supply. With persistent hunger—exacerbated by environmental perturbations such as drought, cyclones, or tsunamis—came damping of the population growth rate due to increased mortality (especially of infants and older people) and depressed fertility.

Some form of demographic transition—with initial high population growth rates followed by lowered rates in response to periodic food shortages as populations began to reach or oscillate around carrying capacities—seems to have been the case on most Remote Oceanic islands, even though there must have been innumerable variations on this overall theme (see Green 1993:229–30). A demographic shift from high-growth, “density-independent” to lowered-growth, “density-dependent” populations is one of the big processes underlying the histories of hundreds of Oceanic societies. I am not, however, asserting that the demographic histories of individual islands were completely identical, for everything depends on local conditions of founding group size, land and resources, elapsed time, and particular cultural and social behaviors in which reproduction and death are embedded. But I am more than ever convinced that the underlying cycles were frequently similar and had structurally similar consequences and outcomes. Among these were heightened competition for land and resources, technological and social measures to increase production, and increased impacts on the natural biota and landscapes of islands.

In highlighting an r to K population cycle as a big process of Oceanic history, I nonetheless emphatically reject a simple demographic determinism, or a unicausal explanation for the transformation of Oceanic societies. Population growth can never be a sufficient prime mover to explain cultural change; what it offers is a necessary condition without which other kinds of social, technological, ideological, or political changes are highly unlikely to occur. Here I draw insight from Ernst Mayr, whose clearheadedness has more than once enlightened evolutionary thinking, and who observed that there are nearly always both proximate and ultimate causes for any given phenomenon. What is more, “many famous controversies in the history of biology came about because one party considered only proximate causations and the other party considered only evolutionary [ultimate] ones” (Mayr 1997:67). In my view, the r/K cycle of population growth that has now been empirically demonstrated for a number of Remote Oceanic islands (and probably holds true for most others) is one fundamental kind of “ultimate” causation in the history of Oceanic peoples.6





OCEANIC POPULATIONS ON THE EVE OF EUROPEAN CONTACT


Douglas Oliver, a master of Oceanic ethnography, wrote that “estimating the number of pre-European inhabitants of Oceania is like trying to photograph a fast-moving train broadside, with a Brownie camera” (1989:27). Yet this did not stop historical demographers from “playing the numbers,” by reworking the estimates and rough census counts made by the early European explorers and missionaries. Demographers and statisticians such as McArthur (1968), Rallu (1990), and Schmitt (1968) expended much effort deriving estimates of Oceanic island populations at the time of initial contact with Europeans. Their estimates were based on a presumption that the earliest European accounts (usually made by explorers whose visits were fleeting) were typically inflated. They assumed that the depopulation that occurred following European contact (due primarily but not exclusively to the introduction of diseases to which the indigenous peoples had little or no resistance), while substantial, was not acute. Greater reliability was placed on the head counts made by missionaries who, unlike explorers, lived among their converts for extended periods and were often obsessed with quantifying the number of “pagan souls” to be saved. But in most island groups these missionaries arrived decades—and in some cases, a century or more—after initial contact with Europeans,7 leaving what happened during the intervening period a matter of dispute.8

As Pacific archaeologists increasingly turned their attention to the distribution of sites over whole landscapes and to paleodemography, these issues have come to the fore (Kirch and Rallu, eds., 2007). Consider the case of New Caledonia. Although the island was “discovered” by James Cook in 1774, the first attempt at census taking did not occur until 1887, with an estimate of 42,519 persons (Rallu 1990:272). Despite a total absence of data on what happened between 1774 and 1887, historical demographers were content to estimate the 1774 population of La Grande Terre at somewhere between 40,000 (Shineberg 1983) and possibly as high as 80,000 (Rallu 1990). Only the geographer Roux (1990), based on an evaluation of land and traditional subsistence practices, cautiously pushed the precontact population estimate as high as 100,000. The archaeologist Christophe Sand (1995:281–309), awed by the abandoned terraces that cover large expanses of the New Caledonian landscape, challenged the veracity of these estimates, suggesting that even the 100,000 figure was too low. He argued that the effects of epidemic disease were grossly underestimated, and that the demographic collapse suffered by the inhabitants of La Grande Terre after 1774 was truly catastrophic.

Spriggs (1997:253) echoed Sand’s comments for the rest of island Melanesia, pointing to the “archaeological evidence of massive population disruption and decline attendant upon European contact.” Among the archaeological signals of “catastrophic collapse” that Spriggs sees in the Melanesian archaeological record are “the abandoned village sites deep in the forests, the disused irrigation systems and other manifestations of once-intensive agricultural systems, and the marked discontinuity in settlement pattern often found between sites with European artifacts on them and those from the period immediately before contact” (1997:253–54). Such evidence occurs throughout Remote Oceania.

In Samoa, settlement pattern surveys reveal extensive and dense inland occupations, extending in some cases right up to the ridgetops.9 Yet the earliest missionary accounts of Samoa paint a landscape portrait of coastal villages with vacant interiors. Based on these vague accounts and on census counts made decades after first contact, McArthur (1968:115) suggested a maximum population for Western Samoa (‘Upolu and Savai‘i Islands) of no more than about 38,000.10 This figure represents a population density of just 13 persons per square kilometer on these fertile volcanic islands, an absurdly low figure given the high density of inland settlement revealed by archaeological survey. Ethnographically documented Polynesian subsistence agriculture regularly supported population densities of 100 persons per square kilometer; densities as high as 242 persons per square kilometer are recorded for favorable environments such as Tikopia (Kirch and Yen 1982:56). Thus it is hardly conceivable—especially in light of the archaeological evidence for dense inland settlement—that the maximum population of Samoa was less than 100,000; it might have been as great as 300,000 or more prior to European contact.11 To be sure, this hypothesis must be tested with further research.12

For no other Pacific archipelago has debate over the size of the indigenous population on the eve of Western contact become so intense as Hawai‘i. Lieutenant King, officer on Cook’s expedition at first contact in 1778–79, estimated 400,000 persons for the total population of the archipelago. Later demographic scholarship by Schmitt (1968, 1973) reduced this to 250,000 to 300,000, a widely quoted number. According to David Stannard (1989:27), however, “All the evidence available to us regarding the credibility of King’s 1778 population estimate points in precisely the opposite direction from that which most subsequent writers have alleged: King’s 400,000 estimate was, if anything, a serious under estimate of the actual figure. But how short was he?” Stannard answered his own rhetorical question by contending that the pre-1778 Hawaiian population reached a maximum of at least 800,000, and perhaps more than one million persons (1989:30). His argument turned largely on archaeological evidence, especially for dense inland agricultural field systems and settlements, and for a high windward regional population. Paleodemographic estimates of particular regions in Hawai‘i, such as Kahikinui on Maui and leeward Kohala on Hawai‘i Island (Kirch and Rallu, eds., 2007) have added empirical support for the claim that even in fairly marginal areas, the contact-era population of Hawai‘i was dense and large. Further research will be necessary before an acceptable estimate of the total population of the Hawaiian Islands at contact can be achieved. But that estimate will undoubtedly be much larger than the low numbers put forward by the late twentieth-century historical demographers.





THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DYNAMIC LANDSCAPES


If most Remote Oceanic islands were densely populated at the time of European intrusion in the sixteenth through eighteenth centuries, their landscapes had also been irrevocably transformed by generations of human effort. In Near Oceania, landscape transformation seems not to have been so pronounced (although the New Guinea Highlands, with their anthropogenic grasslands and intensively cultivated valley floors, are more like Remote Oceania in this regard), for as I have argued, population densities in the Near Oceanic region generally did not reach the levels seen in Remote Oceania. Even in the Bismarcks and Solomons, however, the hand of Homo sapiens left its mark in many ways, from the extinction of bird species to the translocation of the cuscus and other animals (even land snails) to the modification of lowland vegetation communities. But in Remote Oceania, impacts wrought by human populations on island ecosystems were often far-reaching and—if viewed from the perspective of the natural biota—frequently disastrous. The wholesale decimation and extinction of many species of sea- and land birds from these islands, the removal of vast tracts of indigenous forest and their replacement with pyrophytic grass- and fernlands (fig. 9.1), erosion and alluviation in valleys and along coastal plains—these and other impacts are now well documented for many islands (Kirch 2007a, 2007c; Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1997; Steadman 2006). Indeed, it can fairly be said that the island ecosystems of Remote Oceania exemplify what has recently been called the “Anthropocene Epoch” in geological history, an era in which humans have become the dominant force shaping the earth’s landscape, its biota, and even its climate (Rick et al. 2013).




FIGURE 9.1 The fern-covered hills of Mangaia Island, dotted here and there with scrub ironwood trees, typify the fire-resistant, degraded landscapes of many tropical Pacific islands. Note the coconut palms, which are restricted to the narrow valley bottom. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





In part, such cultural modifications of the natural ecology of islands stemmed directly from the food-getting and food-producing activities of Pacific islanders, whether hunting birds or clearing forest for shifting cultivation. Other impacts were indirect and followed from the introduction of domestic plants and animals, and of “weed species” (like the ubiquitous Pacific rat). Cumulatively and incrementally, even small inroads to natural biotic communities had far-reaching effects over time. Islands such as Mangareva and Rapa Nui were largely denuded of all arboreal vegetation prior to European contact; even on large high islands such as Viti Levu the lower-elevation vegetation communities were thoroughly modified (Ash 1992). Once again, this is a big process, an ecological process with enormous consequences for island landscapes and for island cultures.

Establishing a paleoenvironmental record for the Pacific islands—one that includes the role of indigenous human populations as major players in the transformation of insular ecologies—has been one of the more significant contributions of Oceanic archaeology, in collaboration with the natural sciences, over the past four decades. Not only has Pacific archaeology overthrown the old ethnographic bias of “static” island cultures (in which change was seen to derive primarily from migration; see chap. 1); it has demonstrated that in the process of transforming themselves, island cultures forever changed their microcosmic worlds (Kirch 1997b).

The outcomes of ecological change on islands differ radically depending on whether these are viewed from the perspective of the natural flora and fauna or the people who initiated these changes. For a species of flightless rail or native lorikeet, or for an endemic lobelia or palm, the outlook after the arrival of humans on its island home was frankly bleak. It is no exaggeration to say that among the Remote Oceanic islands, the “biodiversity crisis” began not recently but 3,200 years ago with the Lapita expansion. It now seems certain that literally thousands of endemic species of plants and animals (especially birds, insects, and land snails, as well as vascular plants and ferns) underwent extinction or local extirpation as a consequence—direct and indirect—of the human “conquest” of the Pacific islands.

Viewed from the perspective of the human “conquerors,” the transformation of island landscapes was altogether different, for the most part a highly desirable series of modifications, improvements, innovations, and intensifications that quite literally made the islands habitable. For indeed, oceanic islands—despite their famously salubrious climates, lack of disease-inducing organisms, and physical beauty—were not naturally well suited to supporting dense human populations. True, many islands abounded in birds, fish, and shellfish, which offered ample supplies of protein (at least in the early phases of colonization when human numbers were relatively low, prior to the effects of “resource depression”), but vegetable foods—especially the staple starches on which every complex society has ultimately been built—were entirely lacking. It was essential, as human populations burgeoned on these islands, for their landscapes to increasingly undergo a transformation from natural to cultural, from merely extractive to highly productive resource bases.

On many islands, the process of creating a productive infrastructure of gardens and fields was remarkably successful, evoking admiration from anyone who has ever struggled to wrest food from the ground, whether in an urban backyard plot or on a grander rural scale. The agroforests, or “orchard gardens,” of Tikopia, Pohnpei, and Kosrae are marvels of “sustainable agriculture,” and the irrigated taro pondfields of Hawai‘i, Mangaia, and Rapa were so efficient and successful that they continue to be used by contemporary farmers virtually without modification. The development of these and other innovative and intensified production systems literally fueled the rise of large and complex societies throughout the oceanic world. Processes that could be so destructive to nature (in its “pristine” manifestation) were simultaneously the foundation of culture.

But not every experiment in the conversion of island ecosystems to productive economies was entirely successful.13 Rapa Nui has been held up by some as a case in which the anthropogenic transformation of an island went too far, in which initial success led to a population expansion that overwhelmed the island’s capacity to sustain it (Bahn and Flenley 1992; Diamond 2005). More recent research has questioned this doomsday scenario. While the island was undoubtedly deforested as a consequence of human actions (probably aided by the effects of the human-introduced Pacific rat), its islanders also developed innovative strategies—such as rock mulching—to counteract these effects and maintain horticultural production. Rapa Nui’s history is mixed in its successes and failures, including great artistic and cultural accomplishments (of which the statue complex is only one) combined with dark moments inscribed in the archaeological record of obsidian spearheads, fortified refuge caves, and toppled statues. Yet the Rapa Nui people inevitably survived all this (and even more terrible deeds done to them at the hands of Europeans after their isolated world was shattered); today they aspire to rebuild the greatness of their island culture. Similar narratives could be related for other island peoples, in which the endless struggle to produce and reproduce, to build a life rich in cultural meaning, has more than once embraced severe challenges. For most Mangaians in late prehistory, theirs was a world of lurking terror punctuated by fierce intertribal wars for control of land (Hiroa 1934; Reilly 2003, 2009). Other stories have yet to be told. Why were the vast sculptured landscapes of Palau abandoned centuries before European contact? What history of human effort gone awry in the face of environmental constraints might be encapsulated in those Miscanthus grasslands covering rank after rank of terraces? Such unanswered questions simultaneously chasten and challenge us.

Some historical trajectories were evidently greatly influenced by fundamental contrasts in island environments, such as those provided by different geological origins and ages or different climatic and seasonal regimes. One such underlying contrast is between “wet” and “dry” environmental zones, a structural aspect of environment with great significance for agricultural production, as Barrau (1965b) first recognized. Interactions between “the wet and the dry” in many islands constituted a dynamic cycle that fundamentally influenced the course of sociopolitical change (Kirch 1994). These contrasts played out on different scales and in different configurations, ranging from the windward/leeward distinctions that mark Viti Levu and many other islands to contrasts on the scale of an entire archipelago. The Hawaiian Islands offer a classic case, where the largest yet youngest islands had only limited possibilities for intensive irrigation, necessitating that their economies be based on intensive “dryland” (i.e., rain-fed) field systems (Ladefoged et al. 2009; Vitousek et al. 2004). In contrast, the older, westerly islands with valley topography and permanent streams enabled extensive irrigation works to be developed. The political economy of late precontact Hawai‘i, in which the leaders of the Hawai‘i Island and Maui kingdoms were frequently at war with each other—while both competed for control of irrigation-rich Moloka‘i, O‘ahu, and Kaua‘i—owes much to this fundamental wet/dry contrast (Hommon 2013; Kirch 2010). In these large environmental “structures” one seeks clues to certain big processes of political economy.

I hasten to add a caveat: to assert that the history of Oceanic cultures is intimately bound up with the historical ecology of island landscapes is emphatically not to espouse an environmentally determined model of change. Island environments posed constraints, some of which were impossible to overcome given the limitations of a “neolithic” technology; the “reversion” of South Island Maori to a hunting and gathering mode of existence is a case in point. Other constraints were hardly absolute. Productive landscapes could be created in many environments—given sufficient labor—often under the aegis of increasingly hierarchical social formations. Most often, Pacific landscapes were what people made of them. By the end of “prehistory” the Pacific world was a constructed world, an ocean full of thoroughly modified, transformed, anthropogenic islands. In this respect too the Pacific world offers a lesson for the larger history—and future—of our species.





INTENSIFICATION AND SPECIALIZATION IN ISLAND ECONOMIES


Peering back along the dim corridor of history’s longue durée, one glimpses other reflections of large structures and big processes; one is a proclivity for island economies to undergo both intensification and specialization over time. These are indeed big concepts in anthropology and archaeology. I cannot review here all of the nuanced theoretical arguments that scholars have advanced regarding such processes and their significance in prehistory.14 But no overview of grand patterns in Oceanic history would be adequate without at least some consideration of these trends.

Building on work by Boserup (1965), Brookfield (1972, 1984), Yen (1971, 1973), and others, the variety of changes in economic systems (and here we are concerned especially, though not exclusively, with agricultural systems) usually subsumed under the rubric intensification may be parsed into several kinds of rather different processes (Kirch 1994, 2006, 2007a). By “intensification,” we mean some increased level of output (usually crop yield), typically measured against a constant area of land. But increased yields per unit area can be achieved in many ways. For example, higher-yielding varieties of crops may be developed: this is not a phenomenon limited to modern plant breeders or genetic engineering. For thousands of years, gardeners and farmers improved their crops through the simple process of selection (sometimes called “Burbankian selection,” after the famed California orchardist Luther Burbank). This was certainly the case in the Pacific, with well-documented examples of selection for improved cultivars (e.g., Lepofsky, Kirch, and Lertzman 1998; Yen 1974a, 1974b). Yields may also be increased through improved technology or by new agronomic methods. While these changes result in higher yields, it may be best to think of them as innovations rather than as intensification proper (Kirch 1994:18–19, fig. 5).

Distinguishing innovation from intensification allows us to reserve the latter term for processes involving increased input of human effort—in a word, labor—to achieve the desired goal of increased yields. But even so, two significantly different kinds of intensification can be identified; both were operative in Pacific island economies. The first involves the construction of agronomic facilities, permanent modifications to the landscape that result in higher levels of agricultural production. Excellent examples are the irrigated pondfield terraces and canals constructed on many islands, such as Kolombangara, Aneityum, New Caledonia, Fiji, Futuna, Rapa, Mangaia, Hawai‘i, and elsewhere in Oceania (fig. 9.2). Less well known are the dryland field systems of Hawai‘i, New Zealand, and other areas, or the yam mounds of New Caledonia. The extensive nonirrigated terraces of Palau are yet another case. This kind of intensification has been called landesque capital intensification because it involves a permanent modification of the landscape (Blaikie and Brookfield, eds., 1987). Yet what is too frequently overlooked about landesque capital intensification is that while substantial labor inputs may be required to construct terraces, canals, field boundaries, or other facilities, once in place the labor required to maintain them is relatively low. This is especially true for pondfield irrigation of Colocasia taro, which produces significantly higher yields than dryland cultivation but does not require greater labor once the terraced pondfields have been constructed (Kirch 1994; Spriggs 1981, 1982).15




FIGURE 9.2 Irrigated taro pondfields of Tamarua Valley, Mangaia Island. Such intensive agricultural landscapes were developed in late prehistory on many Pacific islands. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Contrasting with landesque capital intensification is cropping cycle intensification, the classic Boserupian mode of intensification (Boserup 1965) through reduction of fallow length and increased application of labor, especially in such activities as weeding and mulching (Kirch 1994). Here labor is invested not in permanent improvements to an agricultural landscape but in seasonally repetitive activities, in order to gain increased yields per unit area. This kind of intensification was commonly present in Pacific island economies and is the sort of process we reconstruct for Rapa Nui and for the dry, leeward parts of Hawai‘i Island, to name just two cases.

Why did Pacific islanders undertake major projects of landesque capital intensification that even today leave their indelible marks on island landscapes? Why, when the construction of physical infrastructure was not possible due to environmental constraints or other reasons, did people feel compelled to invest greater and greater labor in agricultural production? Were these kinds of intensification linked to particular sorts of economic or social or political structures? These are big questions—and complex at that—but they go to the core of Oceanic cultural history.

The simplest explanation for intensification of island economies is surely demographic, invoking increased populations as the underlying “cause” for change, and indeed at a basic level population pressure was probably in most cases an “ultimate” form of causation (again, see Mayr 1997:67). As island populations burgeoned, increased food production was a necessary consequence. But to leave the explanation at this would both ignore the fact that population is not a wholly independent variable (for, after all, people have many cultural and social means for regulating population growth) and miss what is all the more interesting from an anthropological perspective: the linkages between production and power.

Here it is instructive to invoke Brookfield’s (1972) concept “social production,” as differentiated from “production for use” (i.e., that which is necessary merely to keep the population fed and healthy, and able to reproduce itself). Any complex social formation invariably places demands on the household economy that go beyond immediate production for consumption by its members. Contributions to village feasts (fig. 9.3), tribute offerings to chiefs, taro and pigs for religious ceremonies, production for external exchange—all of these combine to create an economy of surplus, or perhaps we should say, of the ceaseless extraction of surplus from individual households that otherwise might be thought of as intrinsically anti-surplus. As Marshall Sahlins (1972:82) put it, a “society’s economic destiny is played out in its relations of production, especially the political pressures that can be mounted on the household economy.” Moreover, “the development of rank and chieftainship becomes, pari passu, development of the productive forces” (Sahlins 1972:140). Brookfield noted this equation too, observing that throughout the Pacific islands the development of intensified agricultural systems always correlated with the creation of a surplus, which indeed seems to have been the principal objective. And furthermore, all these cases “seem to have been accompanied by social differentiation, if not also stratification” (Brookfield 1984:23). While increased population numbers provided a necessary condition for intensification (and also a requisite labor force that could be controlled by political leaders), and thus an ultimate form of causation, the more immediate, proximal causes of intensification were typically social and political. Power flowed from production and in turn encouraged greater efforts at intensification.




FIGURE 9.3 A katoanga, or village feast, in Sigave District, Futuna Island, in 1974. Each basket contains yams and a roasted pig. Note the rows of kava plants in front of the house, where the chiefs and lineage elders are assembled for a ritual kava ceremony. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Intensification too has its limits; long before these are reached the burdens of intensified labor can become enormously oppressive. It is in such considerations that the most significant relations of production in ancient Oceanic societies may be discovered. Consider once again the case of Rapa Nui. At some early stage in the island’s history, social groups were clearly able to produce sufficient surpluses to underwrite the enormous tasks of quarrying, sculpting, transporting, and erecting multi-ton statues that glorified collective ancestors and marked lineage territories. The island’s weathered volcanic surface and reasonably fertile soils favored the high-yielding sweet potato, cultivated in a short-fallow rotation. But as the island’s population grew ever larger, the margin between production and simple auto-consumption (what we call “surplus”) dwindled,16 even as chiefs and priests felt compelled to exhort their followers to undertake yet grander works. The people were pressed to produce an ever greater surplus—requiring increased labor inputs in a classic mode of cropping cycle intensification—at the same time that the ability of the island’s somewhat marginal environment to give up ever higher yields was pushed to its limit. Despite innovations in horticultural practice (notably the rock mulch gardens), the elasticity of the Rapa Nui system eventually reached its limit. Not all at once, presumably, but certainly within the span of a few short generations all statue carving ceased; Rapa Nui society was plunged into a period of endemic warfare, raiding, and social terror.

What of specialization, as distinct from intensification? During the early stages of Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania (as certainly in the long pre-Lapita period before it), specialist activities are likely to have included ceramic production as well as the manufacture of shell exchange valuables, and possibly other crafts such as weaving, featherwork, and tattooing. Some craft specialization at the village or hamlet level was present in Lapita communities, and we can infer that some communities were ceramic producers and others manufacturers of shell objects. Networks of exchange linked these specialized communities into larger systems of economic integration. Earle and Spriggs (2015) have suggested that control over such exchange commodities could have played some role in the Lapita political economy. But for the most part Lapita communities appear to have been self-sufficient, certainly as regards food production, if not the production of every manner of material goods.

When we turn to the ethnohistorical record of island societies at the time of early European contact, however, we find many examples of highly specialized economies, particularly in the western Pacific, where shorter interisland distances made communication and transport relatively feasible. This is the case with the specialized trading societies of the Papuan coast and the Massim, or the Siassi traders. In some cases, specialization of production resulted in significant dependence for food supplies on external sources. In late precontact Hawai‘i, another kind of specialization emerged with the production of elaborate feathered garments (cloaks, capes, and helmets) that were highly prized by the chiefly elites; indeed, possession of these symbols was essential to establishing one’s legitimacy as a member of the ali‘i class. As I have argued elsewhere (Kirch 2010, 2012) the emphasis accorded such featherwork along with other prestige items (fine bark cloth, mats, wooden bowls, etc.) created a “wealth economy” that was grafted onto the older agricultural (“staple”) economy of the islands. Archaeology has only begun to trace the specific and localized histories whereby such specialization arose; whether there are common conditions that might provide a convincing causal model for specialization only further work will tell. But specialization is certainly a big process within the history of island societies, one that will doubtless repay sustained research with added insight.





TRANSFORMATIONS OF STATUS AND POWER


I have already observed that social power is inextricably intertwined with economic production. But the transformation of sociopolitical structures in Oceania was surely more than just a matter of economics; the topic deserves closer consideration. It was once asserted that the sociopolitical structures found in Polynesia and Melanesia were of distinct types, chiefdoms in the former and big-man systems in the latter (Sahlins 1963). This dichotomy did not hold up to closer scrutiny, however, with the realization that much of island Melanesia as well as Micronesia was also characterized by various structures of chiefship (Scaglion 1996). Although we should be wary of replacing one outmoded overgeneralization with another, we might cautiously suggest that if there is a major distinction between political “types” in Oceania, it would be between the societies of the Austronesian-speaking peoples and the Non-Austronesian speakers. The former are characterized by principles of hereditary ranking, certainly an ancient aspect of Austronesian societies in general (Bellwood 1996a; Blust 1996; Fox 1994, 1995). The social structures of the Papuan speakers are more varied, but it is among them that classic big-man structures of achieved (rather than inherited) status are typically found.

The varied sociopolitical formations found throughout Austronesian-speaking Near Oceania and Remote Oceania can be seen as transformations of an original structure, which Friedman (1981) inferred to have been hierarchical and based on asymmetric exchange. That these societies should share fundamental structural features is not surprising, since they are almost all ultimately descended from the Lapita cultural complex. The nature of Lapita society itself is still debated, although I have argued that it may have been more heterarchical than hierarchical. But with some principle of ranking inherent, the basis for “status rivalry” (as Goldman [1970] called it) was presumably already present in Lapita society, between junior and senior siblings and more widely between junior and senior branches of a lineage. This was the structural germ that gave rise to hierarchy again and again once societies increased in size from small groups—in which everyone was known to each other, face-to-face as kinsmen—to larger groups of a few thousand up to tens of thousands, in which a small self-selected elite could gain control over a vast populace.

Historical linguistics has defined some of the lexically marked social groups, and status positions, that were present in Ancestral Oceanic societies, that is, those made up of speakers of Proto Oceanic language and reflected archaeologically by the Lapita cultural complex. One important Proto Oceanic term is *kainanga, which denoted an exogamous group made up of the descendants of an eponymous ancestor, who collectively controlled an estate of land (Kirch and Green 2001). Cognates of this word are found throughout much of Remote Oceania today, indicating the persistence of this kind of social unit over thousands of years. Also present in Proto Oceanic were specific terms for the leader of such a corporate descent group and for the firstborn son of this leader (*adiki), which implies a hereditary principle for succession of leadership (Lichtenberk 1986; Pawley 1982). (The Proto Oceanic term *adiki is reflected in later Polynesian languages by the widespread term ariki or aliki, meaning “chief.”) Through careful semantic reconstruction of such terms for social groups and statuses and by comparing these with later transformations in descendant societies throughout Remote Oceania, it is possible to gain insight into the changing nature of social organization in those cultures and societies that originally derived from the first Lapita colonists in Remote Oceania, such as that of Ancestral Polynesia (Kirch and Green 2001).

As with the processes of intensification, the growth of large and dense populations was linked to the rise of increasingly hierarchical and stratified societies. It is an empirical fact that the level of stratification in Polynesian chiefdoms is significantly correlated with both population density and the size of the maximal political unit (Kirch 1984a:98–99, fig. 26). But we know that a correlation is not necessarily a cause; it is probably best to regard the growth of large populations as a necessary condition for sociopolitical transformation—in Mayr’s terms perhaps an ultimate cause—but certainly not a proximal cause or determining factor.

What then can we posit as the immediate or proximal causes or mechanisms leading to the rise of hierarchical, stratified societies, not only in Polynesia, but also on many of the Micronesian high islands (especially Pohnpei and Kosrae) and in various parts of Melanesia (e.g., Fiji, New Caledonia, and the western Solomons)? Various explanations have been advanced by comparative ethnologists, such as Sahlins’s (1958) model of “redistribution” and chiefs as economic regulators, Goldman’s (1970) model of “status rivalry,” or Friedman’s (1981) model of an economic transformation from prestige-goods exchange to agricultural intensification. Indeed, each of these helps to explain certain aspects of particular historical sequences.

In chapter 8, I referred to Timothy Earle’s contention that “chiefs shape their positions from three primary power media—economy, military, and ideology” (1997:193); it may be instructive to reconsider this paradigm. Earle contends that elites or “ruling segments” use particular “power strategies” to achieve their political goals. The three main sources of power are “intertwined and interdependent” (Earle 1997:207); particular combinations were variously used by chiefs to create an economic surplus (thus fueling the political economy), to control labor or seize territory (by armed force), and to legitimate their position in society.

Fundamentally, all transformations in Oceanic sociopolitical formations had to be based on some form of control of economic production—on the extraction of a surplus—although the specific ways in which this was achieved varied endlessly. When environmental or other conditions set limits to such control, or to the continued ability of a system to yield sufficient surplus, chiefly power was undermined. When such conditions did arise, as in most of the “Open” chiefdoms of central Polynesia, a struggle for power ensued, with overt military power strategies becoming dominant. Military power was not exercised just in situations of ecological crisis, however. Territorial conquest was a major power strategy used throughout Oceania, a means for elites to capture that which was most essential to production: land.

Most interesting archaeologically—because it is strikingly manifested by monumental architecture—is ideological power. The ranking inherent in Austronesian social structures automatically placed senior lines “closer” to the sources of supernatural power, which initially were probably deified ancestors. (The whole mana [supernatural power] and tapu [sacred] ideological complex is an extension of this basic principle.) As some societies grew larger and senior lines increasingly distanced and differentiated themselves, ancestors became gods and chiefly elites the direct descendants of those deities. Such was the ideology used by the Hawaiian kings to legitimate their rule, and by other Oceanic chieftains as well (to greater or lesser degrees). But ideology is more powerful when it can be physically manifested—materialized—through symbolically charged architecture and objects. Much of the monumental architecture of Oceanic societies was constructed precisely for this purpose. The Tongan langi tombs, the Rapa Nui statue temples, the marae of the Society Islands, the Hawaiian heiau, and the tomb islets of Nan Madol are all reminders of the powerful role of ideology in the legitimation of a sociopolitical structure (fig. 9.4).




FIGURE 9.4 A human sacrifice being offered to the god ‘Oro on a marae, or temple, in Tahiti, Society Islands. Engraving after drawing by John Webber for the atlas of Cook’s third voyage. (Collection of the author.)





ON COMPARISON: A CLOSING COMMENT


Paradoxically, I have often found the act of ending a book the most difficult part of its making. Whether this stems from an inner hesitation to let the satisfying process of book-making come to a close or whether it is inherent in the structure of a book itself (how to succinctly terminate a complexly interwoven chain of assertion and argument?) I cannot judge; perhaps it is some combination of both. For this book, I close merely with a comment. It might have been relegated to a footnote did I not feel so passionately about its significance for historical anthropology.

I have long regarded archaeology and historical anthropology as explicitly “historical sciences” in the same sense that geology and biology (at least evolutionary ecology and paleobiology) are largely historical sciences, quite distinct in their epistemologies—as well as their modes of investigation and explanation—from the “experimental” sciences (Gould 1989; Mayr 1982, 1997). More particularly, I see comparison as essential to our historical science, for through comparison we move beyond the particular, the local, and the time-bound to what is generalizing and sometimes global. Comparison reveals similarity as well as difference, exposing patterns that lurk beneath variation. Ultimately, comparison yields general principles (not “laws”), principles that allow us to make of our historical narratives not merely “just so stories,” but robust explanations of historical phenomena.

Comparison is especially productive in contexts in which history has provided sets of parallel “experiments.” We cannot rerun the real experiments of history; therefore, we must look for the closest analogues history provides. Historical sociologists do this by comparing the contexts, processes, and outcomes of various social movements (revolutions, for example), seeking to hold one or another factor “constant” and thus gain insights into underlying causes (Tilly 1984, 1997). Evolutionary biologists do the same when they seek “natural experiments,” such as the defaunation and recolonization of landscapes created by glaciation or volcanic eruptions. Mayr (1997:28–29) writes that “much progress in the observational sciences is due to the genius of those who have discovered, critically evaluated, and compared such natural experiments in fields where a laboratory experiment is highly impractical, if not impossible.”

The Pacific islands provide precisely such fertile intellectual terrain, in which comparison is facilitated and deeper understanding possible. I am certainly not the first to recognize or say this. My early mentor, Ward Goodenough, made the point succinctly decades ago when he argued that Oceania “is the logical place to work out the problems of cultural reconstruction of related cultures” (1957:154). This analogy with the experimental sciences, this particular quality of Oceania—its suitedness for controlled comparisons—sometimes led researchers to write of the Pacific as a kind of “laboratory” for historical social science (e.g., Kirch 1984a; Vayda and Rappaport 1963). But the Pacific as “laboratory” is only an analogy, and some have taken exception to other possible connotations. A more current conception is of islands as “model systems” (Vitousek 2002) for understanding both natural and cultural processes. Semantics aside, what matters is that in the Pacific history has given us an unparalleled opportunity to compare what literally hundreds of societies have wrought, at times in highly similar environments, at other times in strikingly different ones. And it is not only the range of environmental variation among Pacific islands that enhances the possibilities for controlled comparison, but also the demonstrable fact that many of these societies had common origins. To be sure, we must not delude ourselves about the complexities; these are human societies after all, replete with every kind of messy complication. Nor was every island an isolated world unto itself. People moved about, they interchanged ideas, words, genes. But as Raymond Fosberg (1963b:5) once wrote, “Isolation . . . [is] basic to insularity.” The relative isolation of islands is what renders them such marvelous microcosms—such wonderful natural and cultural experiments—of history. Among these islands of history, Clio sets her course by the road of the winds.





NOTES



INTRODUCTION


1. For samples of indigenous Pacific oral literature, including the voyaging sagas described in this paragraph, see Beckwith 1970; Grimble 1933–34; Luomala 1955; Stimson 1957.

2. The accounts of Fornander (1878) and S. Percy Smith (1921 [1910]), for example, were largely based on Polynesian oral traditions.

3. On “Tupaia’s map,” as drawn by Cook and including 74 islands, see Finney 1994:31–34, fig. 3. Cook’s own comments on Tupaia’s map are given in Beaglehole 1968:291–294. Dening (1962) discusses indigenous Polynesian geographic knowledge.

4. Polynesia derives from the Greek πολν, “many,” and νησοζ, “island”; Micronesia, from μικροζ; “small,” and νησοζ, “island”; and Melanesia, from μελαζ, “black,” and νησοζ, “island.” The term Polynesia was already in use well before Dumont d’Urville, usually attributed to de Brosses (1756). De Brosses, however, used the term in a more inclusive sense than Dumont d’Urville to encompass all the Pacific islands beyond Australia. It was thus Dumont d’Urville who gave Polynesia its modern sense.

5. The most useful overview is Oliver’s Oceania (1989). Houghton (1996) deals with human biological variation, although he emphasizes Remote Oceania; see also Howells 1973. On languages in Oceania, see Foley 1986, 2000 on Papuan and Blust 2013 and Pawley and Ross 1993, 1995 on Austronesian (including its Oceanic branch).

6. As examples, see Dixon 1929; Sullivan 1924.

7. Philosophers of science recognize that there are deep distinctions between the “experimental” and “historical” sciences (see, e.g., Chalmers 1982; Gould 1987; Mayr 1982, 1997), and many archaeologists regard our discipline as falling into the latter category.





CHAPTER ONE


1. The one exception was New Zealand, where stratigraphic evidence for cultural change had been noted as early as Von Haast 1872 and was developed in the mid-twentieth century by scholars such as Duff (1942, 1947) and Lockerbie (1940, 1959); see also Green 1993:218.

2. Rivers belonged to the British “diffusionist” school (see Harris 1968:380–81), theoretically opposed to the historical particularists in the United States, especially Boas.

3. Among those who disagreed with the Kulturkreise school were Haddon and Hornell (1936–38, 3:69), who used detailed distributional studies of canoe technology to assess historical relationships between Oceanic peoples and cultures.

4. In his magnum opus on Cook Islands material culture, Hiroa (1944) critiqued Handy’s “two-strata” model of Polynesian origins and, following Burrows (1938), argued for the importance of internal cultural processes.

5. An excellent overview of fieldwork carried out during the pre–World War II period in Polynesia is Hiroa 1945.

6. At this time the eugenics movement was at its height in the United States, and such prominent Americans as Theodore Roosevelt spoke of the “Yellow Peril” and other problems they associated with immigration and “racial impurity.” Stocking (1968:297–98) discusses the expansion of “serious modern American anthropological interest in the Pacific” in the context of the scientific interest in race prevalent in the 1920s, including the close intellectual connections between the members of the National Research Council (including the Bishop Museum’s H.E. Gregory) and the planners of the Bayard Dominick Expeditions.

7. Hiroa published under both Te Rangi Hiroa and Peter H. Buck, but he clearly preferred his Polynesian surname.

8. In 1931, Hiroa wrote to his close friend Sir Apirana Ngata, “We have entered into competition with people of western culture and must be prepared for disparaging comment based on their past superiority” (Sorrenson, ed., 1986–88, 2:233). In another letter in July 1934, Hiroa wrote sarcastically, “The Native is a fine fellow so long as he accepts an inferior position” (Sorrenson, ed., 1986–88, 3:163).

9. Eventually, in 1946, Hiroa was made a knight commander of the Order of St. Michael and St. George.

10. In 1943 a House of Representatives concurrent resolution (No. 42) was passed asking Congress to confer U.S. citizenship on Professor Buck, to no avail. A prominent member of the Bishop Museum Trustees, C. Montague Cooke Jr., wrote to Joseph R. Farrington, the delegate to Congress from the Territory of Hawaii, that Buck “feels keenly the fact that he has not been able to procure American citizenship” (Cooke to Farrington, May 21, 1943, Archives, Bishop Museum).

11. In the same letter to Ngata, Hiroa commented on a trip to Pago Pago with the American Samoan Commission: “The job was to show that the Samoan was a Polynesian of Caucasian descent and quite distinct from the negroid division of mankind” (Sorrenson, ed., 1986–88, 2:78).

12. In another passage, Hiroa (1938b:18) writes, “Sufficient for the day is the fact that a tall, athletic people without woolly hair or a Mongoloid eyefold had the ability and courage to penetrate into the hitherto untraversed seaways of the central and eastern Pacific.”

13. Hiroa’s view on archaeology was not charitable: “Archaeology . . . is a dry subject but the details must be recorded for subsequent comparative study” (Sorrenson, ed., 1986–88, 3:160). See also Hiroa 1944:500 on the limited value of Polynesian archaeology.

14. Sand and Kirch (2002), in a bilingual edition published in honor of the fiftieth anniversary of this pioneering expedition, describe the course of the 1952 fieldwork and its significance, illustrated with numerous color and black-and-white photos taken by Gifford and Shutler.

15. On Emory’s remarkable career, see Krauss 1988.

16. In his first annual report as Bishop Museum director, Spoehr (1954:24) opined, “Despite the reams that have been written on the early migrations of Pacific peoples, the one discipline from which most valid conclusions must derive has barely been utilized. This discipline is archaeology.”

17. Although a full account of them was not published until 1950, the Wairau excavations actually commenced in 1939 and a preliminary account was published in 1942; see Duff 1968 for a historical account of the development of archaeological research in New Zealand.

18. The five-year Tri-Institutional Pacific Program (TRIPP), launched in 1953 with a major grant from the Carnegie Corporation, included archaeology within its purview, providing funding for the work of Douglas Osborne in Palau and Jack Golson in Samoa (Spoehr 1955:28; 1958:8). The Bishop Museum, one of the three TRIPP institutions (along with Yale and the University of Hawai‘i), became a key center for the expanding range of U.S. science in the Pacific, housing the office of the Pacific Science Board of the National Research Council and in 1954 receiving its first major NSF grant, for an entomological survey of Micronesia (Spoehr 1956:20, 27).

19. On the legacy of Sue Bulmer’s pioneering research in New Guinea and the continued importance of her collections, see Gaffney, Ford, and Summerhayes 2016.

20. These studies were published as Egloff 1979; Irwin 1985a; Lauer 1970, 1971; White 1972.

21. Smart’s work was never completed, see Poulsen 1968, 1983, 1987; Specht 1968b.

22. The first phase of the SSICHP was summarized in Green and Cresswell, eds., 1976; Green and Yen 2009. Significant results of the second phase include Green 1978; Kirch and Yen 1982; Leach and Davidson 2008; McCoy and Cleghorn 1988.

23. Garanger (1967) also investigated marae sites in the Society Islands.





CHAPTER TWO


1. This was the “lost continent of Mu” theory—that the Pacific islands were the tips of former continental mountain ranges and that the Pacific peoples were remnants of a formerly more extensive race of people who had constructed monumental sites, such as Nan Madol on Pohnpei, and carved the Rapa Nui statues.

2. Coleman (ed., 1973) deals with the island-arc geology of the western Pacific, while Menard (1986) provides a highly readable account of island geology of all types. Nunn 1994 is a valuable summary of the physical geography of oceanic islands.

3. Flannery 1994 provides an account of the unique biota of these ancient Gondwana-derived lands.

4. Menard (1986) and Nunn (1994) discuss hot spot islands.

5. On Hawaiian geology and island evolution, see Macdonald and Abbott 1970.

6. An excellent overview of the human geography of the Melanesian island-arcs is Brookfield with Hart 1971; see also Winslow, ed., 1977.

7. Obsidian and geochemically related volcanic glasses are typical products of island-arc volcanism and occur on the Willaumez Peninsula (Talasea) of New Britain, in the Manus group, in the Banks Islands of Vanuatu, in New Zealand, and on Rapa Nui. Obsidian obtained from certain of these sources was widely traded and exchanged throughout the southwest Pacific.

8. Wiens 1962 remains the definitive treatment of atoll ecology. Davis 1928 provides useful data on coral reefs and atolls.

9. On Pacific climate, see Nunn 1994; Thomas 1963. On rainfall variability, see Taylor 1973.

10. In Hawaiian, the terms are kona and ko‘olau, which appear throughout the archipelago as various district names or other toponyms.

11. Diaz and Markgraf, eds., 1992 provides much valuable information on the historical aspects of El Niño; see also Nunn 1994:160–64.

12. Carlquist 1974 remains a classic treatment on island biota and biogeography. On island biogeography, see Fosberg, ed., 1963; Gressitt, ed., 1963; MacArthur and Wilson 1967; Radovsky, Raven, and Sohmer, eds., 1984; Wagner and Funk 1995; Williamson 1981.

13. A classic summary of Oceanic flora and vegetation is Merrill 1945; see also van Balgooy 1971. The vegetation zonation on a highly complex island, New Guinea, is treated in Paijmans, ed., 1976; that of Hawai‘i is well summarized in Wagner, Herbst, and Sohmer 1990; and Zimmerman 1948.

14. See Parkes 1997 on evidence for the coconut on Atiu Island by 7820 ± 70 B.P. Kahn et al. 2015 reports on coconuts preserved in swampy sediments around Mo‘orea Island, predating Polynesian arrival by at least 3,000 years.

15. On Pacific region mammals, see Carter, Hill, and Tate 1945; Mayr 1945 is the classic synthesis on Pacific birds, updated by numerous regional manuals.

16. On the biogeography of the tropical Pacific, see Stoddart 1992.

17. See Blong 1982; Eissen, Monzier, and Robin 1994; Machida et al. 1996; Robin, Eissen, and Monzier 1993; Robin, Monzier, and Eissen 1994.

18. Two volumes that provide overviews of this evidence are Dodson 1992; Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1997.

19. Roberts (1991) discusses the Pacific rat; and Matisoo-Smith et al. (1998) present a study of R. exulans mtDNA variation and its implications for Polynesian voyaging.

20. On Pacific agricultural systems, see Barrau 1965a, 1965b; Kirch 1991b; Yen 1971, 1973. Kirch (1994) provides a case study of Polynesian agriculture and its relation to island ecology.

21. See Sand 1995, 1996c on New Caledonia; Osborne 1966, 1979 on Palau; and Kirch 1977 on the Hawaiian systems. The significance of “landesque capital intensification” is explored in Kirch 1994.

22. See, e.g., Athens 1997; Athens and Ward 1993, 1995; Athens, Ward, and Wickler 1992; Bussell 1988; Dodson and Intoh 1999; Elliot et al. 1995; Ellison 1994; Flenley and King 1984; Flenley et al. 1991; Haberle et al. 2012; Hope and Hope 1976; Hope, O’Dea, and Southern 1999; Hope and Spriggs 1982; Hughes et al. 1979; McGlone and Basher 1995; Parkes 1997; J. Stevenson 1998, 2004; Stevenson and Dodson 1995.

23. The Rapa Nui pollen sequence is detailed by Flenley and King (1984) and Flenley et al. (1991) and is summarized more generally by Bahn and Flenley (1992); see also Fischer, ed., 1993; Van Tilburg 1994.

24. Steadman (2006) provides a synthesis of Polynesian bird extinctions (see also Steadman and Kirch 1990; Steadman and Rolett 1996; Steadman, Pahlavan, and Kirch 1990). On the evidence from Hawai‘i, see James 1995; Moniz 1997; Olson and James 1982a, 1982b, 1984. For the New Zealand avifaunal extinction record, see Cassells 1984; Worthy and Holdaway 1995. An avifaunal record for Near Oceania is just beginning to be developed, but it also suggests considerable human impacts (Steadman and Kirch 1998; Steadman, White, and Allen 1999).

25. The Tangatatau excavations and avifaunal assemblage analyses are reported in Kirch 1996b; Kirch, ed., 2017; Kirch, Steadman, et al. 1995; Steadman 1995, 2006; Steadman and Kirch 1990.

26. On moa and moa hunting, see Anderson 1989a, 1989b, 1997.

27. Regarding impacts on the New Zealand marine fauna, especially large marine mammals such as seals, see Smith 1989.

28. See Kirch 1997b on the environmental histories of Mangaia and Tikopia, and for a discussion of the possibilities and limitations of “sustainability” in island ecosystems.





CHAPTER THREE


1. The Huon finds are reported in Groube 1986; Groube et al. 1986. Groube (1989) discusses implications of the “waisted blades.” On the U/Th dating of the Huon reef series and sea levels, see Chappell 1974, 1993; Chappell et al. 1994.

2. Similar waisted axes are found in other parts of Sahul, such as North Queensland, and on Kangaroo Island (Lourandos 1997:81, 84).

3. On the biogeography of Sahul, Wallacea, and adjacent Southeast Asia, and its relevance to human history, see Bellwood 2017; Golson 1972a, 1972b.

4. Chappell (1993) summarizes the evidence for Pleistocene sea levels and changing shorelines in the Sahul region. On sea level fluctuations during the last glacial cycle, see Siddall, Rohling, and Almogi-Labin 2003.

5. Important overviews on Pleistocene Sahul include Allen 1993; Allen and O’Connell 2008, 2014; O’Connell and Allen 2012, 2015; Summerhayes 2007a; White and Allen 1980. See also Smith, Spriggs, and Fankhauser 1993.

6. The Kilu site is reported by Wickler and Spriggs 1988.

7. The Pamwak site is reported by Fredericksen, Spriggs, and Ambrose 1993. The 13,000 B.P. date from Pamwak comes from a depth of about 1.7 meters; the basal occupation levels remain undated (Ambrose 1994; Fredericksen, Spriggs, and Ambrose 1993; Spriggs 1997:49).

8. The Matenkupkum faunal remains are reported in Gosden and Robertson 1991.

9. Since this book is about Oceania, I do not deal further with the prehistory of Australia or Tasmania, although their Pleistocene sequences are related to those of New Guinea.

10. For a somewhat dated summary of Papua New Guinea prehistory, see Lilley 1992. Swadling (1981) provides excellent illustrations of New Guinea sites and artifacts. The archaeology of Irian Jaya remains little known.

11. On pollen records from the New Guinea Highlands, see Haberle 1996, 2003; Haberle, Hope, and DeFretes 1991; Haberle et al. 2012; Hope and Golson 1995; Hope and Hope 1976; Hope, Golson, and Allen 1983.

12. On the Lapita Homeland Project and its main results, see Allen 1984a; Allen and Gosden, eds., 1991; Allen and White 1989; Gosden et al. 1989.

13. Syntheses of these new data from Pleistocene sites in the Bismarcks include Allen 1996, 2003; Allen and Gosden 1996; Allen, Gosden, and White 1989; Enright and Gosden 1992; Gosden 1993; Gosden and Robertson 1991; Leavesley 2006; Pavlides 2006; Spriggs 1997; Summerhayes 2007a.

14. See Loy, Spriggs, and Wickler 1992, but note that the techniques and methods of residue analysis in archaeology remain contested and experimental.

15. There is a substantial literature on the obsidian sources of New Britain and their exploitation in Pleistocene and later (especially Lapita) contexts. See Kirch 1991c; Summerhayes and Allen 1993; Summerhayes et al. 1998; Torrence 2001, 2004; Torrence and Summerhayes 1997.

16. On the marsupial fauna of Near Oceania, see Carter, Hill, and Tate 1945; Flannery 1994. Another introduction—evidently purposeful—of the small wallaby Thylogale brownii from New Guinea to New Ireland occurred around the end of the Pleistocene. Flannery et al. (1988) discuss archaeological evidence for faunal changes in the Holocene period, and Flannery and White (1991) discuss animal translocations.

17. From a site in the Sepik-Ramu area of New Guinea, dated to 14,000 B.P., Yen (1990:262) reports the presence of Canarium nut shells, suggestive of initial efforts to domesticate this important Melanesian tree crop.

18. On New Guinea and the Near Oceanic region as a center for plant domestication, see Barrau 1965a, 1965b; Denham 2003, 2004, 2007, 2011; Denham, Fullagar, and Head 2009; Yen 1971, 1973, 1990, 1991, 1995.

19. On the indigenous development of agriculture in Near Oceania, see Fairbairn 2005; Denham 2003, 2005, 2011; Golson 1988, 1990, 1991a; Spriggs 1993b, 1993c; Yen 1990, 1995.

20. These complex drainage systems have been described many times in the anthropological literature (e.g., Feil 1987; Pospisil 1963).

21. The long-awaited monograph on the Kuk site appeared as this book was in page proof (Golson et al., eds., 2017). On the Kuk excavations see also Bayliss-Smith and Golson 1992; Denham 2004; Denham and Haberle 2008; Denham et al. 2003; Golson 1977, 1988, 1990, 1991a, 1997; Golson and Gardner 1990; Wilson 1985; see also Feil 1987.

22. Muke and Mandui (2003) report on a wetland agricultural site at Kana, near the confluence of the Wahgi and Minj Rivers, with a similar stratigraphy of superimposed ditches and other cut features, similar in many respects to Kuk. Radiocarbon dates from Kana, however, suggest that the earliest agricultural phase here dates to about 3,000 years ago.

23. Spriggs (1997:73–82) provides a more elaborate discussion of these sites.

24. Swadling et al. (1989) report key geomorphological and radiometric data, and further details are provided in Swadling, Araho, and Ivuyo 1991; Swadling 1997. Color photos of the sites and some finds are provided in Swadling et al. 1988.

25. Swadling et al. (1989) also reported the presence of betel nut (Areca catechu) at the Dongan site, although direct radiocarbon dating of the plant specimen later showed it to be a modern intrusion into the site (Fairbairn and Swadling 2005).

26. Yen (1991:84, fig. 6) notes that P. Gorecki recovered Canarium remains from a mid-Sepik site that may indicate domestication of this tree crop in the late Pleistocene.

27. One unresolved issue regarding these pre-Lapita subsistence economies in lowland Near Oceania is the presence of the domestic pig. Gorecki, Mabin, and Campbell (1991) report pig bones “throughout the deposit” of the Taora shelter on the Vanimo coast of New Guinea, dated to the mid-Holocene. In the Bismarcks, the only claim for pre–Lapita period pigs is by Allen (1996:22–23), for two pig teeth from levels dated by charcoal samples to 8000 and 6000 B.P., in Matenbek. Allen (pers. comm. 1998) believes these are in situ finds, although one cannot entirely discount the possibility that they are intrusive. An attempt to date one of the two teeth directly by the accelerator mass spectrometer 14C method yielded an age of “modern,” bolstering the argument for intrusion, although Allen (pers. comm. 1998) suggests “contamination.”

28. For Taora, Gorecki, Mabin, and Campbell (1991:120–21) report that 78 sherds were recovered but that “most are in the upper levels,” with an associated radiocarbon age of 2250 ± 70 B.P. (which postdates Lapita). Although they note the “possible vertical displacement of artefacts” in the site, they remain “confident that pottery first appears at Taora about 5400 years ago.” Judgment is best reserved until the promised additional analysis is provided. Similarly, the claims of Swadling et al. (1989) for pottery dated to 5600 B.P. in the Ramu area lack conclusive dating of their stratigraphic contexts and full ceramic analysis and description.

29. Of these, the most notable is the α-thalassemia deletion, ubiquitous in Near Oceanic populations, which must already have been present there by 3500 B.P., because it was transferred to certain Austronesian-speaking groups who subsequently migrated into Remote Oceania and Polynesia (Hill et al. 1985; Martinson 1996).





CHAPTER FOUR


1. Kirch 1997a is a book-length review of the Lapita cultural complex. Sand and Bedford, eds., 2010 is a collection of essays in conjunction with an exhibit of Lapita objects at the Musée Quai Branly in Paris. Other overviews of Lapita include Golson 1971; Gosden 1991a; Green 1978, 1979b, 1991a, 1997, 2003; Kirch and Hunt 1988; Specht 2007; Specht et al. 2014; Spriggs 1984, 1997; Summerhayes 2000a, 2001b, 2007a, 2007b. Several edited volumes also offer contributions to the Lapita literature, too numerous to cite individually: Addison and Sand 2008; Chiu and Sand 2007; Clark, Anderson, and Vunidilo 2001; Galipaud and Lilley 1999; Lilley 2006; Sand 2003; Sand, Chiu, and Hogg 2015; Sheppard, Thomas, and Summerhayes 2009; Stevenson, Lee, and Morin 2001; Summerhayes and Buckley 2013.

2. Buried midden sites dating to ca. 6000–5000 B.P. in the Sepik-Ramu River basin, such as Dongon (Swadling, Araho, and Ivuyo 1991), may be an exception, but their geographic extent has yet to be determined.

3. This diversity was doubtless even greater ca. 2000 B.C., because Non-Austronesian languages once spoken throughout the Bismarck and Solomon groups were likely replaced by Austronesian languages or went extinct.

4. On the α-thalassemia deletion and its significance, see S.J. Allen et al. 1997; Boyce, Harding, and Martinson 1995; and Hill et al. 1985.

5. Early syntheses of the Lapita radiocarbon chronology were provided by Green (1979b), followed by Kirch and Hunt, eds. (1988), Specht and Gosden (1997), Spriggs (1990b), and Specht (2007). Denham, Ramsey, and Specht (2012) applied Bayesian calibration methods to dates from Lapita sites both in the Bismarcks and in Remote Oceania; their chronology is followed here.

6. Arguments for an indigenous, island Melanesian origin of Lapita were presented by Allen (1984a), Allen and White (1989), and White, Allen, and Specht (1988).

7. Among his key writings on Lapita in relation to island Southeast Asian culture history, see Bellwood 1993, 1998, 2017.

8. For overviews of Austronesian linguistics, see Blust 1985, 1996, 1999; Pawley and Ross 1993, 1995; Ross 1989.

9. Dendritic, or “tree,” models are by no means the only kinds used by Austronesian and Oceanic linguists; they have developed sophisticated dialect chain and linkage models as well (see Pawley and Ross 1993, 1995; Ross 1995, 1997). The importance of linkage joining and breaking models for Oceanic culture history is discussed in Kirch and Green 2001.

10. An asterisk before a word indicates that it is a reconstruction rather than a cognate of the proto-lexeme in a descendant language. In the case of Proto Austronesian *tales (taro), a few of the reflexes occurring in modern Austronesian languages are Bunan (Taiwan) tai?, Tongan talo, and Hawaiian kalo.

11. This deletion was incorporated into the gene pool of Lapita populations who expanded eastward into then-unoccupied Remote Oceania, so that this genetic marker shows up even today in low frequency in Polynesian populations (Hill et al. 1985).

12. See also Gosden 1991b, 1992a; Kirch 1996a, 1997a.

13. Green (1979b) and Kirch (1997a) provided early inventories of Lapita sites. Anderson et al. (2001) greatly expanded that inventory, which was further updated by Bedford, Sand, and Connaughton, eds. (2007), for a total of 227 sites.

14. On radiocarbon dates from Lapita sites, see Denham, Ramsey, and Specht 2012; Green 1979b; Kirch 1997a:table 3.1; Nunn and Petchey 2013; Sand 1997; Specht 2007; Specht and Gosden 1997; Spriggs 1990b; Summerhayes 2001a.

15. This age range follows the Bayesian calibration of Denham, Ramsey, and Specht (2012). Recent AMS dates on Canarium nut shells from the ECA site in Mussau (Kirch, unpublished data), however, suggest to me that the onset of Lapita in the Bismarck Archipelago may not be much earlier than about 1250 B.C.

16. On the late Lapita and other ceramic assemblages of the New Georgia group, see Felgate 2001, 2003; Summerhayes and Scales 2005.

17. On Lapita sites in Vanuatu, see also Bedford 2006a, 2006b, 2007; Bedford and Spriggs 2000, 2007, 2008, 2014.

18. On the Teouma site and its chronology see Bedford, Spriggs, and Regenvanu 2006; Petchey et al. 2014, 2015. On lithic artifacts, see Reepmeyer et al. 2011. On the analysis of the Lapita skeletal population from various perspectives, see Bentley et al. 2007; Kinaston et al. 2014; and Valentin et al. 2010, 2011, 2016.

19. Key literature on Lapita sites in New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands includes Frimigacci 1974, 1975; Galipaud 1988, 1992; Gifford and Shutler 1956; Sand 1995, 1997, 2000b, 2001, 2010, 2013, 2015.

20. On Lapita voyaging capabilities, see Irwin 2008; Irwin and Flay 2015.

21. On Lapita sites in the Lau Islands, see Best 1984, 2002.

22. For linguistic evidence bearing on early Austronesian and Proto Oceanic social organization, see Bellwood (1996a; Fox 1994; Lichtenberk 1986; Pawley 1982.

23. See, e.g., Hawaiian myths cited in Beckwith 1970; Luomala 1955.

24. On Oceanic languages and their relationships, see Pawley 2007, 2009; Pawley and Green 1973, 1984; Pawley and Ross 1993, 1995; Ross 1988, 1989.

25. Two exceptions in Micronesia are the languages of Palau and the Marianas, which are Austronesian (specifically, Western Malayo-Polynesian) languages but not Oceanic (see chap. 6).

26. Donohue and Denham (2008, 2012) question the association of Lapita with Oceanic, partly due to a posited “Papuan influence” on the languages of Vanuatu. However, the presence of certain Non-Austronesian linguistic features in the Vanuatu languages can just as readily be explained by a “second wave” of Papuan-speaking migrants following the first “wave” of Oceanic speakers, who later abandoned their language(s) “in favor of the more uniform and widely dispersed speech of late Proto-Oceanic speakers, but not before leaving traces of their former presence in the form of typological divergence toward a pattern that is more typical of Papuan languages” (Blust 2008:445).

27. Malcolm Ross (1988, 1989) discusses the high-order subgrouping of Oceanic languages in Near Oceania and the breakup of the Proto Oceanic dialect chain into several first-order clusters. On the difference between linguistic divergence by dialect differentiation and by separation, see Ross 1995, 1997.

28. On the notions of foundation cultures and languages, see Pawley and Green 1973, 1984.

29. It was previously thought that another exception to exclusively Oceanic languages within Remote Oceania was the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands, where it had been posited that one or more languages were Non-Austronesian or Papuan. However, Ross and Næss (2007) show that all of the languages spoken throughout this culturally diverse group of islands are Oceanic.

30. See, for example, the essays in the volumes edited by Pawley and Ross (1994) and Ross, Pawley, and Osmond (1998). Blust (1987) outlines methodological aspects of lexical and semantic reconstruction.

31. On the 9-base-pair deletion, see Hagelberg 1997; Hertzberg et al. 1989; Merriwether et al. 1999.

32. Some key papers on the “genetic trail” include the chapters in Hill and Serjeantson 1989, as well as Friedlaender et al. 2008; Lum 1998; Lum and Cann 1998; Lum et al. 1998; Martinson 1996; Melton et al. 1998; Merriwether et al. 1999; Serjeantson and Gao 1995; Serjeantson, Ryan, and Thompson 1982.

33. On sand tempers and their significance for tracing interisland movement of pottery, see Dickinson 1998; Dickinson and Shutler 1979.

34. Key references on Lapita pottery decoration include Anson 1983, 1986; Cochrane 2013; Donovan 1973; Golson 1971; Green 1976b, 1978, 1979a, 1979b, 1990; Kirch 1988b, 1997a; Marshall 1985, 2008; Mead et al. 1975; Sharp 1988, 1991; Shaw 1975; Summerhayes 1997;

35. On Lapita anthropomorphic designs, see Kirch 1997a:132–40; Spriggs 1990a, 1993a.

36. On tattooing and Lapita, see Ambrose 2012; Kononenko 2012.

37. The distinction between pervasive and partitive art styles is from De Boer 1991.

38. On the Mulifanua site and its geological context, see Dickinson and Green 1998.

39. I base these estimates on ethnographic information for house sizes in Oceania, with roughly 50 square meters for a “typical” dwelling, surrounded by another 500 square meters of open activity space incorporating cook sheds or other ancillary structures.

40. Details of the important RF-2 site have been reported in Green 1976b, 1986, 1991c; Sheppard 1992, 1993; Sheppard and Green 1991.

41. This argument was set out by Groube (1971) and countered in articles by Green (1979b) and Kirch (1979b).

42. On linguistic evidence for Proto Oceanic crops and horticulture, see French-Wright 1983; Osmond 1998; Ross 1996b. Lichtenberk (1994) deals with food preparation methods. The linguistic evidence for horticulture and food preparation is contrasted with archaeological evidence in Kirch 1997a:192–217.

43. On plant remains from Lapita sites, see Gosden 1992b, 1995; Kirch 1989b. Microfossil plant evidence for aroids and yams in Lapita contexts is presented by Horrocks and Bedford (2005) and Horrocks and Nunn (2007).

44. Kirch (1989b) describes the plant remains from Talepakemalai, while a detailed analysis of their morphology and metrical characteristics is given by Lepofsky, Kirch, and Lertzman (1998).

45. See Gosden and Webb 1994:46; this erosional layer has an associated radiocarbon date of 2870 ± 70 B.P.

46. Diffusion of terracing and irrigation technology out of Asia was argued by Spriggs (1982) but countered on archaeological and linguistic evidence by Kirch and Lepofsky (1993).

47. For a review of DNA evidence for the origins of pigs, dogs, and chickens in the Pacific, see Matisoo-Smith 2009.

48. Marine faunal remains from Lapita sites are discussed in V.L. Butler 1988, 1994; Green 1986; Nagaoka 1988; Swadling 1986. Kirch and Dye (1979) and Walter (1989b) treat aspects of Lapita fishing.

49. Oceanic peoples widely use the grated or pounded roots or bark of such plants as Barringtonia asiatica and Derris elliptica as narcotics to stupefy fish in shallow waters. The names of these plants can be reconstructed for Proto Oceanic, and their narcotic properties were probably known to the Lapita peoples.

50. On shell fishhooks from the Arawe Islands sites, see Specht et al. 2016.

51. On the Sylviornis remains, see Balouet and Olson 1989; Sand 1995. On horned tortoises, see Hawkins et al. 2016; A.W. White et al. 2010.

52. On the extinct iguana, see Pregill and Dye 1989; Steadman (2006) discusses the extinct megapodes of Samoa.

53. On the kula, see Leach and Leach 1983; Malinowski 1922; Weiner 1992. Davenport (1962) discusses the Santa Cruz exchange network. Aspects of these networks are formally analyzed by Hage and Harary (1991, 1996).

54. The literature on sourcing and material evidence for Lapita exchange is extensive; some key articles include Ambrose and Green 1972; Bellwood and Koon 1989; Best 1987; Green 1974b, 1996a; Kirch 1990d, 1991c, 1996a; Lilley 1986, 1988; Sheppard 1993; Spriggs 1984, 1991a; Summerhayes 1997, 2000a; Wickler 1990. The argument for shell valuables was advanced by Kirch (1988c; 1997a:236–39). An excellent overview of shell working and shell artifacts is provided by Szabó (2010).

55. Evidence for the Mussau exchange system is presented in Kirch 1987, 1988d, and 1990d.

56. In keeping with the terminology proposed by Kirch and Green (1987), I would distinguish between Ancestral Oceanic culture and societies, the Proto Oceanic language they spoke, and the Parental Oceanic populations (as biological entities). In this sense, Lapita is the archaeological manifestation of Ancestral Oceanic culture.

57. See Lichtenberk 1986; Pawley 1982.

58. The concept of heterarchy has been elaborated by several archaeologists in recent years (e.g., Ehrenreich, Crumley, and Levy, eds., 1995).

59. Most likely, these basic social groups constituted some form of what Austronesian scholars now refer to as a “house,” based on the “house society” concept (sociétés à maison) of Claude Lévi-Strauss (1982) and other works; see Carsten and Hugh-Jones 1995; Fox 1995.





CHAPTER FIVE


1. Overviews of Melanesian archaeology include Spriggs 1993b, 1997; White and Allen 1980.

2. Classic ethnographic accounts of these trade and exchange networks include Malinowski 1922; Seligman 1910; Williams 1932. For an ethnographic overview of the hiri system, see also Skelly and David 2017.

3. Allen (1972) excavated at Nebira and did extensive work at Motupore Island, a major trading center (Allen 1977, 1984b; Allen, Holdaway, and Fullagar 1997). Bulmer (1971, 1975) provides settlement pattern and ceramic data on the Port Moresby area. Mailu was intensively studied by Irwin (1974, 1978a, 1978b, 1985a; Irwin and Holdaway 1996). The early site of Oposisi has been reported in summary form by Vanderwal (1978). Bickler (1997), David (2008), David et al. (2009, 2010), Frankel and Rhoads (1994), and Rhoads (1980) deal with the Gulf of Papua.

4. Reconnaissance data are reported by Egloff (1978) and Lauer (1970, 1971), while stratigraphic excavations at Collingwood Bay are reported by Egloff (1979). Irwin (1983) provides additional perspective on the prehistory of the kula region.

5. This hypothesis is supported by the occurrence of one piece of Fergusson Island obsidian in a Lapita site in the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands (Green and Bird 1989), suggesting that Lapita peoples had some connection to the Massim region.

6. Burenhult, ed., 2002 presents some archaeological reconnaissance data from the Trobriand Islands, including illustrations of potsherds with a variety of decorative techniques.

7. Some influences may have filtered into the Highlands via the Sepik-Ramu drainages. If the arrival of the pig in Near Oceania was in fact associated with the expansion of Austronesian speakers, then its presence in the Highlands—where it became the economic foundation of social exchanges—would constitute a significant impact.

8. The main sources for this period in the Highlands are the pioneering study by Bulmer and Bulmer (1964), White’s (1972; White and Thomas 1972) excavations at four rockshelters, Watson and Cole’s (1977; Cole 1996) excavations at eight open sites in Kainantu, Christensen’s (1975) work at four rockshelters in the Manim Valley, and Golson’s study of the Kuk agricultural site (Bayliss-Smith and Golson 1992; Golson 1977, 1988, 1990, 1991a, 1997; Golson and Gardner 1990). On connections between the Highlands and the northern coast, see Gorecki and Gillieson, eds., 1989; Swadling 1997.

9. For summaries of the pollen sequences and their implications for changing vegetation patterns, see Haberle 1996; Haberle, Hope, and DeFretes 1991; Walker and Hope 1982.

10. White and O’Connell (1982:table 6.5) summarize these data.

11. On Highlands trade, see the historical ethnographic synthesis by Hughes (1977).

12. Goodenough (1997) disagrees with aspects of Ross’s model for Proto Oceanic, suggesting that a Proto Kimbe language was part of an Eastern Oceanic dialect chain that was part of the Lapita trade network, and later broke up into several dialect groups after the W-K2 Witori volcanic eruption.

13. On Lossu, see White 1992; White and Downie 1980; on the Lasigi excavation and ceramics, see Golson 1991b; and on Fissoa, see White and Murray-Wallace 1996.

14. Watom was the site of Otto Meyer’s discovery of Lapita (Meyer 1909, 1910). It was reinvestigated by Specht (1968b), and by Green and Anson (1987, 1991) as part of the Lapita Homeland Project.

15. On Manus ceramics, see Ambrose 1991.

16. See Ambrose 1988, 1991; and the discussion in Spriggs 1997:162–65, pl. 24.

17. The Sabah obsidian is reported by Bellwood and Koon (1989).

18. The ethnographic system is described by Harding (1967).

19. There are additional indications of contacts between Mussau and Micronesia, such as the presence of the backstrap loom in both localities and possible Micronesian loan words into Mussau (Blust 1984; Ross 1988).

20. For a review of archaeological research in the Solomon Islands see Walter and Sheppard (2009). Sheppard and Walter (2006) present a generalized “revised model” for Solomon Islands culture history.

21. Specht (1968a) initially defined the Buka ceramic sequence, while new work has been carried out by Wickler (1990, 2001). The Nissan sequence is reported by Spriggs (1991c, 1997). Terrell (1986) incorporates data from the large island of Bougainville.

22. Chikamori (1967) reconnoitered New Georgia, followed in 1971 by work by Yen, Rosendahl, and myself on Kolombangara Island (see Yen 1976a). Miller (1979, 1980) carried out site surveys in the western Solomons in the late 1970s. The Panaivili site is reported by Reeve (1989). The most important recent work in the New Georgia group has been carried out by Sheppard and Walter (2006, 2009); Sheppard, Walter, and Nagaoka (2000); Sheppard, Walter, and Aswani (2004); T. Thomas (2009, 2014); and Walter and Sheppard (2001, 2006, 2009).

23. On the late Lapita intertidal ceramic sites in New Georgia, see Felgate 2001, 2003; Sheppard and Walter 2009; Summerhayes and Scales 2005. Carter et al. 2012 reports ceramics in a similar intertidal setting on Santa Isabel Island, although the age of these ceramics has not yet been determined.

24. Davenport (1972) reports on an excavation on Santa Ana Island. Green (1976c, 1976d), Hendren (1976), Kaschko (1976), and Ward (1976) provide archaeological and ethnoarchaeological reports from Uki and Ulawa.

25. An earlier date of A.D. 1055–1295 was also obtained from the Su‘ena site but was rejected as being inconsistent with the four other dates (Walter and Green 2011:28).

26. The first phase (1970–71) of the SSICHP was summarized in Green and Cresswell, eds., 1976. No final report of the second phase (1977–78) was produced, but key results are presented in Kirch 1983; Kirch and Yen 1982; McCoy and Cleghorn 1988.

27. On the dating of early Lapita sites in the Santa Cruz group, see Green and Jones 2008; Green, Jones, and Sheppard 2008; Sheppard, Chiu, and Walter 2015.

28. On pottery traditions of Vanuatu, see Galipaud 1996a, 1996b.

29. Congruence between oral traditions and archaeology in the late period of Tikopia is discussed by Kirch and Yen (1982). On Vanuatu oral traditions and archaeology see Rivierre 1996.

30. See Robin, Monzier, and Eissen 1994; Spriggs 1997:215–18.

31. For overviews of the Polynesian Outliers, see Bayard 1976; Feinberg and Scaglion 2012. Pawley (1967) reviews the linguistic relationships of the Polynesian Outlier languages. The Micronesian Outliers Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi are discussed in chapter 6.

32. For Tikopia, Firth (1961) documents oral traditions regarding the origins of lineages from various sources, mostly to the west. The most famous of these involves the Taumako clan, tracing its ancestry to a reputed offspring of the Tu‘i Tonga, or paramount chief, of Tonga. See Kirch and Yen 1982:362–68 for a discussion of these traditions in relation to the archaeological record.

33. This was part of the study of drift voyaging probabilities in the Pacific by Levison, Ward, and Webb (1973); see also Ward, Webb, and Levison 1973.

34. On Nukuoro, see Davidson 1967a, 1967b, 1971. The Anutan archaeological sequence presented by Kirch and Rosendahl (1973, 1976) was revised by Kirch (1982b). Poulsen (1972) excavated on Bellona, while Chikamori (1975; Chikamori and Takasugi 1985) studied Rennell. Other work on the Outliers Futuna, Fila, and Aniwa in Vanuatu is reported by Shutler and Shutler (1965, 1968) and excavations on Mele Island by Garanger (1972a).

35. Archaeological sequences from the Outliers are synthesized by Kirch (1984b).

36. Key archaeological results from Tikopia are presented in Kirch and Yen 1982; see also Kirch 1997a; Steadman, Pahlavan, and Kirch 1990.

37. Kirch and Yen (1982) put initial settlement at 900 B.C., but new AMS dates from the earliest excavation contexts indicate that 800 B.C. is more accurate (P.V. Kirch and J. Swift, unpublished data).

38. Dickinson (in Kirch and Yen 1982:372) examined these sherds petrographically; they are similar to Mangaasi-style sherds from Emo in Vanikoro. Both the Tikopia and Vanikoro pottery wares were probably imported from Vanuatu (possibly Santo).

39. The genetic evidence is provided in Blake et al. 1983, although its cultural historical significance was first pointed out by Kirch (1985b).

40. Leach and Davidson (2008) put the beginning of the Tavatava Phase at 1000 B.C., but this is clearly too early in light of their two radiocarbon dates for this phase.

41. On the extinct biota of New Caledonia, see Balouet and Olson 1989; Flannery 1994; Sand 1995.

42. Classic ethnographic summaries of New Caledonian societies include Guiart 1963; and Leenhardt 1937. On linguistic diversity in New Caledonia, see Kasarherou 1989.

43. For example, the French ethnographer Maurice Leenhardt maintained that the Kanak peoples were a “paleo-mélanésien” group, even retaining traits “plus primitifs que ceux de l’Australien . . . et que ceux de l’homme de Néanderthal” (1937:12–13)!

44. In addition to Gifford and Shutler 1956, Green and Mitchell 1983, and a reanalysis of the Gifford-Shutler collections in Kirch et al., eds., 1997, important works on New Caledonian and Loyalty Island archaeology and prehistory include the PhD dissertations of Frimigacci (1975), Galipaud (1988; see also Galipaud 1990, 1992, 1995), and Sand (1993a, 1994, 1995; see also Sand 1996a, 1996b, 1996c, 1996d, 1998c). Sand’s bibliography (1995) encompasses more specialized articles and reports. Sand (1996c) offers an English-language overview of New Caledonian archaeology. The Service Territorial des Musées et du Patrimoine of New Caledonia publishes a monograph series, Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie.

45. On the paddle-impressed Podtanean pottery, see Galipaud 1988, 1990, 1992.

46. Sand and Ouétcho (1993) define Puen Ware.

47. The tradition takes its name from Gifford and Shutler’s site 26, Oundjo village, the ceramic assemblages of which are reanalyzed in Kirch et al., eds., 1997.

48. On palynological and sedimentary evidence for human impacts to the New Caledonian landscape, see Stevenson 1998, 2004; Stevenson and Dodson 1995; Stevenson, Dodson, and Prosser 2001. Dotte-Sarout et al. (2013) discuss the use of charcoal evidence to trace vegetation changes in New Caledonia. Faunal extinctions in New Caledonia are discussed by Balouet and Olson (1989), Flannery (1995), and White et al. (2010).

49. These highly intensive agricultural systems are described in Barrau 1956.

50. The Païta work is described in Sand and Ouétcho 1993; see also Sand 1995:138–40, 171–81.

51. On the history of the Fijian languages, see Geraghty 1983.

52. In addition to Gifford (1951), see Birks (1973) on the initial Sigatoka excavations, Shaw (1967) on a reanalysis of Gifford’s collections, and Davidson and Leach (1993) and Davidson et al. (1990) on the early Lapita site at Natunuku. The early Lapita site on Naigani Island is reported by Kay (1984) and by Irwin et al. (2011), while Nunn et al. (2007) report a Lapita occupation at Naitabale, and Nunn et al. (2004) provide a brief report on the early Bourewa Lapita site. Anderson and Clark (1999; Clark and Anderson 2001) discuss radiocarbon dates for initial Fijian settlement, and the full results of the ANU “Early Prehistory of Fiji” project are presented in Clark and Anderson, eds., 2009. Sand, Valentin, and Sorovi-Vunidilo (2000) report on archaeological research on the islands of Cikobia and Naqelelevu.

53. Renewed investigations at Sigatoka are reported in Burley 2005; Burley and Edinborough 2014; Marshall et al. 2000; Anderson et al. 2006.

54. Parry (1977, 1981, 1984, 1987) used aerial photography in his study of fortifications and agricultural features. Frost (1974, 1979) reports on ceramic typology as well as fortifications. Rechtman (1992) excavated two fortified sites on Wakaya Island. Best (1984) traces the cultural sequence of Lakeba from Lapita colonization to the early contact period. Palmer (1969) reports fortified sites on Viti Levu. Parke (1998) describes rescue excavations at the Navatanitawake ceremonial mound on Bau Island, a proto-historic and early postcontact chiefly center. Field (1998, 2003, 2004) has extensively investigated fortifications and intensified agricultural landscapes in the interior of the Sigatoka Valley. Settlement patterns and fortifications of the Vatia Peninsula of Viti Levu are described by Robb and Nunn (2012).

55. Shaw (1967) modified a few aspects of Green’s sequence; see also Babcock 1977. Rossitto (1995) discusses ceramic change in the postcontact Ra Phase. For a perspective on Fijian ceramics based on a “selectionist” evolutionary approach, see Cochrane 2009. The “orthodox” four-phase model of Fijian prehistory has been critiqued by Marshall et al. (2000), but see Anderson et al. 2006.

56. Claims for a date of 1220 B.C. for the Bourewa Lapita site (Nunn et al. 2004) are not supported by the radiocarbon evidence; Clark and Anderson, eds. (2009:175) put the age of Bourewa at 2870–3080 B.P.

57. Linguistically, a dialect chain linked these early settlements in Fiji, Lau, and Tonga-Samoa (Geraghty 1983).

58. Bellwood (1979:264) relates Vunda Phase developments to the arrival of a historical figure, named Lutunasobasoba, a prominent ancestor in Fijian oral traditions.

59. For sedimentological and palynological evidence of these human-induced environmental changes, see Bayliss-Smith et al. 1988; Hughes et al. 1979.

60. Kirch (1988c) recovered Fijian sherds on Niuatoputapu, while Dye (1988) noted the same for sites in the Ha‘apai group. See also Davidson (1977) and Green (1996a) regarding prehistoric contacts between these archipelagoes.

61. The “Tongan maritime empire” has been discussed by various authors, including Guiart (1963), Kaeppler (1978), and Kirch (1984a); see further discussion in chapter 8.

62. On the Lau Islands and their relationship to Tonga, see Hocart 1929; Thompson 1940.

63. One example is the elaboration of kava ritual as an overtly political activity. In technology, another example may be the diffusion of pondfield terracing from Fiji to Futuna (see Kirch 1994).

64. The terms exchange and trade are sometimes used interchangeably by archaeologists. I use the former for systems in which economic transactions underwrite, or are accompanied by, other kinds of social relations (e.g., marriage), where the transactions are ritualized and the return “gift” need not be immediate. Trade, in contrast, I see as more overtly economic or commercial, with an immediate transaction of goods expected. Specialized trade, such as occurred in the Papuan hiri system, was often characterized by high volumes of goods passing through the networks. From the archaeological record alone, it can sometimes be difficult to discern whether one is dealing with exchange or trade.

65. On these points, see Kirch 1994.

66. Here I call attention to the facile distinction often drawn between Polynesia and Melanesia (in part, based on Sahlins 1963), that the former is characterized by chiefdoms and the latter by “big-man” political structures. In fact, many of the Austronesian-speaking societies of island Melanesia (as opposed to the New Guinea Highlands, where the big-man model is probably accurate) fit well within the chiefdom paradigm (see Scaglion 1996). Part of the confusion resulted from social collapse and “devolution” of complex political structures following initial European contact, in part due to massive depopulation.





CHAPTER SIX


1. Peterson (2009) presents an overview of Micronesian peoples and cultures.

2. Christian (1899), Hambruch (1911, 1919, 1936), and Kubary (1874) made early contributions to archaeology on Pohnpei and Kosrae. In the 1920s, Commander J.C. Thompson and H.G. Hornbostel excavated in the Marianas, sending their collections to the Bishop Museum, where they were analyzed by L.M. Thompson (1932). Chapman (1964) provides a survey of pre–World War II German and Japanese work, as well as sources up to the early 1960s. Overviews of Micronesian archaeology include Athens 2014; Cordy 1980, 1982; Craib 1983; Davidson 1988; Fitzpatrick 2014; Rainbird 1994, 2004. Intoh (1992a) summarizes Micronesian ceramic traditions; see also Takayama 1984.

3. For a geoarchaeological study of how cyclones can affect the archaeological record of atolls, see Dye, ed., 1987.

4. See the bibliographies in Rainbird 1994, 2004; as well as the symposium proceedings edited by Hunter-Anderson (1990).

5. On the subgrouping of Oceanic languages, see Pawley and Ross 1993, 1995; Ross 1988, 1996a.

6. The linguistic classification of Yapese, along with that of Nauru, has been debated, but Blust (2013) regards it as an Oceanic language. Bender and Wang (1985:54) were unable “to make a definitive statement on the relationship of either to the unquestionably nuclear Micronesian languages.” Ross (1996a) argued that Yapese is Oceanic but has been influenced by no fewer than four phases of borrowing, two from Non-Oceanic languages.

7. The one exception may be Nauruan (see Bender and Wang 1985:54).

8. For the tortured history of Spoehr’s Chalan Piao oyster shell date, see Butler 1994; Kurashina and Clayshulte 1983.

9. Carson (2014) provides an overview of the early Marianas sites; see also Carson 2010, 2011; Carson et al. 2013; Hung et al. 2011. On the Chalan Piao site, see Amesbury, Moore, and Hunter-Anderson 1996; Spoehr 1957:60–65. Investigations at Tarague Beach are reported by Athens (1986), Kurashina and Clayshulte (1983), and Kurashina et al. (1984). For the Unai Bapot site, see Carson 2008, 2014.

10. A third coring site, Lake Hagoi on Tinian Island, produced a date for human presence at about 3444 B.P. (Athens and Ward 1998).

11. The earliest radiocarbon date reported by Takayama (1982:91) for the Pemrang site is 360 ± 80 B.C., which, as in the Marianas, is associated with CST pottery quite different from the later Yapese “laminated” ware. At the Rungruw site, Intoh and Leach (1985:68) obtained a radiocarbon date of 1905 ± 65 B.P. in association with CST pottery.

12. On the ceramic finds at Nan Madol, see Athens 1990b; Bryson 1989; on the Lelu pottery, see Athens 1990a.

13. Regarding Nan Madol, Bath and Athens (1990:280) write that “radiocarbon dates of islet fill indicate an initial occupation on sand beaches, bars or possibly on stilt houses over the reef as early as A.D. 1.”

14. Athens (ed., 1995:267; see also Athens 1990a) indicates that Kosrae pottery is different from that of Pohnpei and more like ceramics from Chuuk. However, all three assemblages fall within the range of variation known for late Lapita ceramics in the southeastern Solomons.

15. See also summaries of sea level change in Athens, ed., 1995:239–51; and in Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1993.

16. For the Majuro and Arno sites, see Dye, ed., 1987; Riley 1987; the Maloelap date is from Weisler 1999. See Beardsley 1994 for an archaeological study of Kwajalein Atoll.

17. For additional information on Marianas prehistory, see Amesbury, Moore, and Hunter-Anderson 1996; Athens 2011; Bonhomme and Craib 1987; B. Butler, ed., 1988; B. Butler 1992; Carson 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2014; Carson et al. 2013; Carson and Kurashina 2012; Craib 1986; Dixon et al. 2006; Dye and Cleghorn 1990; Graves 1986a, 1986b, 1991; Hung et al. 2011; Hunter-Anderson and Butler 1995; F. Petchy et al. 2016; Reinman 1966, n.d. [1966]; Russell 1998; Russell and Fleming 1986; Takayama and Egami 1971; Takayama and Intoh 1976; Thompson 1932.

18. On Palau prehistory, see Athens and Ward 2001; G. Clark 2005; G. Clark, Anderson, and Wright 2006; Dickinson and Athens 2007; Fitzpatrick 2001, 2003, 2007; Fitzpatrick and Callaghan 2013; Gumerman, Snyder, and Masse 1981; Hazell and Fitzpatrick 2006; Masse 1989, 1990; Masse, Snyder, and Gumerman 1984; Morgan 1988; Osborne 1966, 1979; Van Tilburg 1991; and Welch 2002.

19. On Chuuk archaeology, see Brooks 1984; Clune 1974; Knudson 1990; Parker and King 1984; Takayama and Intoh 1978, 1980; Takayama and Seki 1973; Takayama and Shutler 1978.

20. On Pohnpei archaeology, see Athens 1980, 1983, 1984a, 1984b, 1990b; Ayres 1992; Ayres and Haun 1985, 1990; Ayers, Haun, and Mauricio 1983; Ayres, Haun, and Severance 1979; Ayres and Mauricio 1987; Bath 1984a, 1984b; Bath and Athens 1990; Christian 1899; Hambruch 1911, 1936; Kubary 1874; Levin and Ayres 2016; McCoy et al. 2016.

21. As noted in chapter 5, Terebra shell adzes also appear in island Melanesian sequences in the last 1,000 years.

22. Athens (2007b) suggests that the Saudeleur reign lasted from about A.D. 1200–1300 to 1500–1600.

23. Key works on Micronesian atoll archaeology include Beardsley 1994; Craib 1984; Davidson 1967a, 1967b, 1992; Davidson and Leach 1996; Dye, ed., 1987; Fujimura and Alkire 1984; Harris, Lambrides, and Weisler 2016; Harris and Weisler 2016; Intoh 1984, 1986, 1991, 1992b, 1996; Leach and Davidson 1988; Leach and Ward 1981; Moir 1989; Poteate et al. 2016; Rosendahl 1987; Weisler 1999, 2001a, 2001b; Weisler, Yamano, and Hua 2012; Yamaguchi, Kayanne, and Yamano 2009.

24. Kiribati remains a major gap in the archaeological record for Micronesia. Some excavations were conducted by Takayama, but only preliminary accounts are available (Takayama and Takasugi 1987; Takayama, Takasugi, and Kaiyama 1989, 1990).

25. On Nukuoro archaeology, see Davidson 1967a, 1967b, 1992; and on Kapingamarangi, see Leach and Ward 1981. Leach and Davidson (1988) discuss faunal evidence for prehistoric fishing on both islands.

26. An excellent overview of atoll environments, including human ecology, is Wiens 1962. The Atoll Research Bulletin, published by the Smithsonian Institution, includes many important studies of human ecology on atolls.

27. The land snail faunas of atolls reveal the extent to which these islands have been influenced by human agency and are dominated by synanthropic species transported by people (e.g., Gastrocopta pediculus, Lamellaxis gracilis, and Assiminea nitida). Harry (1966) provides an informative account of the snail fauna of Ulithi Atoll.

28. For a classic ethnographic description of traditional navigation, see Gladwin 1970; see also Goodenough and Thomas 1987.

29. In addition to Spoehr 1957 and Thompson 1932, important archaeological surveys or excavations of latte sites include Athens 2011; Bayman et al. 2012; B. Butler, ed., 1988; B. Butler 1992; Craib 1986; Dixon et al. 2006; Reinman n.d. [1966]. Graves (1986b) synthesizes data pertaining to latte, while Morgan (1988) offers an architect’s viewpoint. Cordy (1983; see also 1986) also discusses Chamorro sociopolitical organization (but see Graves 1986a).

30. Butler (1992:223) lends cautious support to Craib’s position, based on independent data from Aguiguan Island.

31. Osborne (1966, 1979) included many of these sites in his survey and excavated at Bairulchau; Van Tilburg (1991) documented 38 monoliths. Morgan (1988:13–17) provides additional information on the Melekeok and Bairulchau sites.

32. Intoh (1991) raises the possibility of cultural contacts with the Solomon Islands. Specifically, shell fishhooks from Fais are of distinctive Solomon Island forms.

33. Labby’s suggestions regarding changing patterns of agricultural production find support in the paleoenvironmental sequence of Dodson and Intoh (1999).

34. Reisenberg (1968) analyzed the traditional sociopolitical system of Pohnpei, and additional ethnographic material of relevance to the archaeological record is contained in Christian 1899 and Hambruch 1936. See also Hanlon 1988; Petersen 1990.

35. An 1849 map of Madolenihmw Harbor by M.J. de Rosamel shows Nan Madol but in a stylized manner. For an annotated bibliography of early references to Nan Madol, see Athens 1981.

36. For archaeological studies at Nan Madol, see Athens 1980, 1983, 1984a, 1990b, 2007b; Ayres 1992; Ayres, Haun, and Mauricio 1983; Bryson 1989; McCoy et al. 2016; Seikel 2011.

37. The main source for Pohnpei oral traditions is The Book of Luelen (Bernart 1977); see also the summary by Maurico in Ayres, Haun, and Mauricio 1983; and Mauricio 1987.

38. Katau has sometimes been identified as Kosrae Island, but as Goodenough (1986) argues, the term refers to a mythical “sky world.”

39. This kind of arboriculture, what Athens, Ward, and Murakami (1996) call an “agroforest,” is similar to that found in the southeast Solomon Islands (Yen 1974a), such as on Tikopia (Kirch and Yen 1982). Given that Kosrae was probably settled from the southeast Solomons, these arboricultural systems may have a common origin in Lapita subsistence practices. See also Levin and Ayres 2016 on Pohnpei agroforests.

40. These accounts have been summarized and analyzed by Cordy (1993).





CHAPTER SEVEN


1. The To‘aga site excavations are reported in Kirch et al. 1990; and Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1993. An account of our Manu‘a fieldwork is also given in Kirch 2015:214–23.

2. For a time, it was thought that Tonga had been settled as much as a millennium before Samoa, leading Les Groube (1971) to propose Tonga as the original Polynesian homeland. The accidental discovery of Lapita pottery at Mulifanua, on ‘Upolu in Western Samoa, demonstrated that the lack of Lapita sites in Samoa was a problem of archaeological “visibility” due to coastal submergence, and thus an issue of sampling error.

3. For a somewhat different view of Polynesian origins, one that has echoes of Hiroa’s (1938b) Micronesian route theory, see Addison and Matisoo-Smith (2010), and a response by Davidson (2012).

4. On interisland relationships, see Best 1984, 1987; Davidson 1979; Green 1996a; Green and Kirch 1997; Kirch 1988c.

5. Geraghty (1983) provides a network or chain model of linguistic differentiation among Fijian and Polynesian languages.

6. On the ceramic sequences of Western Polynesia, see Burley 1998; Burley and Clark 2003; Dye 1988; Green 1974a; Kirch 1988c; Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1993; Poulsen 1983, 1987; Sand 1990, 1992.

7. Green (1971, 1974a) discusses the development of the Polynesian adz kit.

8. On the Polynesian “homeland,” see Green 1981.

9. Archaeological overviews of Polynesia include Bellwood 1979, 1987a; Green 1993; Jennings, ed., 1979; Kirch 1982a, 1984a, 1989a.

10. The phrase “segment of cultural history” is from Romney (1957), one of the originators of the phylogenetic model; see also Bellwood 1996b; Bellwood, Fox, and Tryon 1995; Kirch and Green 1987, 2001; Vogt 1964, 1994.

11. On the internal subgrouping of Polynesian, see Biggs 1971; R. Clark 1979; Green 1966; Marck 2000; Pawley 1966; Wilson 1985; Walworth 2014.

12. A number of Polynesian languages are extinct, such as Moriori in the Chatham Islands, or have been replaced, such as some of the languages of the Austral chain (largely replaced by Tahitian). Other Polynesian languages, such as Mangaian and Mangarevan, remain inadequately documented.

13. Such statistical analyses have been carried out by, among others, Howells (1970) and Pietrusewsky (1970, 1990, 1994).

14. See Hill and Serjeantson, eds., 1989; Kayser et al. 2006; Merriwether et al. 1999.

15. In a controversial theory, Houghton (1991) argues that critical selection pressures on the Polynesian genotype resulted from the risks of long-distance voyaging, with its exposure of the human body, at sea level, to prolonged periods of cold.

16. Kirch (1990b) discusses differences between the temple architecture of Tonga (a Western Polynesian culture) and Hawai‘i (Eastern Polynesian).

17. On adz sourcing in Polynesia and the movement of adzes among Eastern Polynesian communities, see M. Allen 1996a; Best et al. 1992; Rolett 1996, 2002; Rolett et al. 2015; Walter 1996; Weisler 1993, 1998a, 2002; Weisler, ed., 1997; Weisler and Kirch 1996; Weisler et al. 2016.

18. On the concept of heterarchy in social organization and its significance for the evolution of complex societies, see Ehrenreich, Crumley, and Levy, eds., 1995.

19. The domestication of kava, based on botanical and ethnographic evidence, is discussed by Lebot and Levesque (1989).

20. The Samoan research was published in Green and Davidson, eds., 1969, 1974; see also Davidson 1977, 1979. On the Tongatapu excavations, see Poulsen 1968, 1983, 1987.

21. On Samoan archaeology, see Burley and Clark 2003; J.T. Clark 1996; Clark and Herdrich 1993; Clark and Michlovic 1996; Clark et al. 2016; Cochrane et al. 2015; Herdrich 1991; Jennings and Holmer, eds., 1980; Jennings et al. 1976; Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1993; Kirch et al. 1990; Morrison and Addison 2009; Pearl 2004; Quintus and Clark 2012; Quintus et al. 2015; Rieth and Hunt 2008; Rieth, Morrison, and Addison 2008; Wallin, Wallin-Martisson, and Clark 2007; Wallin-Martinsson 2007; Wallin-Martinsson, Wallin, and Clark 2007.

22. On Tongan archaeology, see Burley 1994, 1998; Burley and Connaughton 2007; Burley et al. 2001, 2010, 2012, 2015; G. Clark 2016; G. Clark, Burley, and Murray 2008; G. Clark and Reepmeyer 2014; G. Clark, Reepmeyer, and Melekiola 2016; G. Clark et al. 2014; Dickinson, Burley, and Shutler 1994; Dye 1988; Kirch 1988c; Poulsen 1968, 1983, 1987; Reepmeyer, Clark, and Sheppard 2012; Shutler et al. 1994; Spennemann 1989; Valentin and Clark 2013.

23. On Futunan archaeology, see Frimigacci 1990; Kirch 1981, 1994; Sand 1990, 1993b. Results from ‘Uvea are reported in Frimigacci 2000; Frimigacci and Hardy 1997; Sand 1998b, 2000a; Sand and Valentin 1991. Burrows (1937) discusses ‘Uvean oral traditions.

24. Trotter (Trotter, ed., 1979) conducted an initial archaeological survey of Niue, and Walter and Anderson (2002) carried out limited excavations at several sites. The cultural sequence begins around 250 B.C. and is aceramic from the beginning.

25. On Western Polynesian prehistory in general, see Davidson 1977, 1979; Green 1968. For the Tokelau Islands, see Best 1988.

26. The chronology of ceramic loss in Western Polynesia is debated. Green (1974a) suggested that pottery was abandoned in Samoa by around A.D. 300–400, while Clark and Michlovic (1996) argue—on the basis of evidence from the ‘Aoa Valley—that it persisted much later, until ca. A.D. 1500. For Niuatoputapu, I believe the evidence supports a date of ca. A.D. 800–900 for terminal pottery use (Kirch 1988c).

27. On changes in adz forms, see Green 1971, 1974a; Green and Davidson, eds., 1969.

28. On these methodological issues, see Athens 1997; Kirch 1986; Kirch and Ellison 1994; Spriggs and Anderson 1993.

29. This model was proposed by Emory and Sinoto (1965) and elaborated by Emory (1968) and Sinoto (1967, 1970, 1983). Finney (1985) proposed that a direct voyage from Western Polynesia to the Marquesas may have been facilitated by periodic wind shifts associated with El Niño weather patterns.

30. The “orthodox scenario” was critiqued by Kirch (1986); see also Irwin 1981; Rolett 1993; Sutton 1987.

31. For the flavor of these debates, see, e.g., Irwin 1992, 1998; Kirch 1986; Kirch and Ellison 1994; Spriggs and Anderson 1993.

32. See, e.g., M.S. Allen 2004; M.S. Allen and Wallace 2007; Anderson, Binney, and Harris 1994; Anderson and Sinoto 2002; Conte and Anderson 2003; Dye 2011, 2015; Green and Weisler 2002; Kirch et al. 2010; Rolett1998; Rolett and Conte 1995; Weisler 1994, 1995. Wilmshurst et al. (2011) claimed that the settlement of all but the Society Islands occurred after A.D. 1190–1290. However, their argument depends on a fairly extreme form of chronometric hygiene, and not all archaeologists accept their conclusion. For a discussion of problems with the Wilmshurst et al. (2011) analysis, see Mulrooney et al. 2011.

33. The claim of Lepofsky, Harries, and Kellum (1992) for initial settlement of Mo‘orea Island by A.D. 600, based on anaerobically preserved coconuts from sediments in the lower ‘Opunohu Valley, can now be rejected, given the discovery by Kahn et al. (2015) that coconuts were naturally present on Mo‘orea for thousands of years prior to human arrival.

34. On voyaging traditions, see Beckwith 1970; Howe, ed., 2006; Luomala 1955; Thrum, ed., 1916–20.

35. The experimental voyages of the Hokule‘a and the work of the Polynesian Voyaging Society are discussed in Babayan et al. 1987; Finney 1977, 1988, 1996a, 1996b; Finney et al. 1986, 1989. Anderson (2001) and Irwin and Flay (2015) discuss Polynesian voyaging canoe design and performance.

36. On Eastern Polynesian fishhooks, see M.S. Allen 1992, 1996b; Duff 1950; Emory, Bonk, and Sinoto 1959; Sinoto 1962; Suggs 1961; Walter 1989a. On adzes, see Duff 1956; Emory 1968; Green 1971.

37. The problems of pottery in the Marquesas and of whether the sherds found at four sites on three islands are the product of local manufacture or were exotic imports remain contentious. For various positions, see Dickinson and Shutler 1974; Green 1974b; Kirch, Dickinson, and Hunt 1988; Sinoto 1966, 1979b; Suggs 1961. Dickinson et al. (1998:119) assert that while potsherds from the Ha‘atuatua site were without doubt manufactured on the Rewa Delta of Viti Levu, Fiji, sherds from other sites on Nuku Hiva, Hiva Oa, and Ua Huka “contain contrasting quartz-free basaltic temper sands compatible with local derivation from Marquesan volcanic assemblages.”

38. On the geochemcial characterization and souring of basalt and other volcanic rocks in Polynesia, see Best et al. 1992; Collerson and Weisler 2007; Di Piazza and Pearthree 2001; McAlister, Sheppard, and Allen 2013; Mills and Lundblad 2014; Weisler 1993, 1998a; Weisler, ed., 1997; Weisler et al. 2016.

39. On Ma‘uke, see Walter 1989a, 1990; on Aitutaki, see M.S. Allen 1996a; Allen and Schubel 1990; Allen and Steadman 1990.

40. The Pacific Equatorial Islands, a dispersed group of atolls lying between central Eastern Polynesia and Hawai‘i, were presumably also settled at this time, although all were later abandoned, probably due to the high frequency of drought. On archaeological sites in the Equatorial Islands, see Di Piazza and Pearthree 2004; Emory 1934a; A. Sinoto 1973.





CHAPTER EIGHT


1. The estimate of canoes is from Ledyard (1963:103), who calculated that at least 15,000 people greeted Cook’s expedition as it entered Kealakekua Bay on Hawai‘i Island.

2. On the Makahiki and other Hawaiian rituals of kingship, see Valeri 1985.

3. On Cook as Lono, see the masterful work of Sahlins (1981, 1995).

4. For overviews of evolutionary paradigms incorporating a chiefdom stage, see Fried 1967; Renfrew 1984; Service 1967. Earle, ed. (1991), reviews archaeological perspectives on chiefdoms, and Carneiro (1981) summarizes the evolutionary significance of chiefdoms.

5. On the “domestic mode of production” and its significance for chiefdoms, see Sahlins 1972. Friedman and Rowlands (1978) present an “epigenetic model” of sociopolitical evolution in which the chiefdom stage figures prominently.

6. The exceptions are New Zealand, where resource restriction was due not to size limitation but to a temperate climate that posed great challenges to the Ancestral Polynesian production system based on a tropical horticultural complex, and Samoa, a large and fertile archipelago. I believe that Goldman (1970) was in error in placing Samoa within the Open society group. As Sahlins (1958) more correctly realized, Samoa possessed a Stratified sociopolitical system much more similar to that of Tonga, the Society Islands, and Hawai‘i.

7. The results of the Mangaia Project are reported in Kirch, ed., 2017; see also Kirch 1996b, 1997b; Kirch, Steadman, et al. 1995; Steadman 2006; Steadman and Kirch 1990. Bellwood (1978) surveyed marae sites on Mangaia. Trotter, ed. (1974), reports on similar marae sites elsewhere in the Southern Cook Islands, and Chikamori, Yoshida, and Yamaguchi (1995) report on marae in the Northern Cook Islands (Tongareva).

8. Mangaia society was described by Hiroa (1934), who relied on early missionary accounts as well as his own field research. Reilly (2003, 2009) has greatly augmented our understanding of traditional Mangaian society and history.

9. Handy 1923 remains the classic source on Marquesan ethnography, augmented by the historical work of Dening (1980) and Thomas (1990).

10. Linton (1925) pioneered surface survey throughout the Marquesas, while Suggs (1961) conducted the first stratigraphic excavations on Nuku Hiva and outlined the prehistoric sequence. Work by Sinoto (1966, 1970, 1979b, 1996b), especially at the Hane dune site, augmented our understanding of the cultural sequence. Subsequent excavations by M.S. Allen and colleagues (Allen 2004, 2009, 2010, 2014; Allen and Addison 2002; Allen and McAlister 2013), Conte and Molle (2012, 2014; Molle and Conte 2011), Molle (2011), and Rolett (1989, 1992, 1998; Rolett and Conte 1995) have amplified the archaeological record. Settlement pattern studies by Bellwood (1972), Chavaillon and Olivier (2007), Kellum-Ottino (1971), and Ottino (1985, 1990a, 1990b; Ottino-Garanger 2006) added information on architecture and land use. Millerstrom (1997, 2003) discusses Marquesan rock art in its settlement context.

11. For further details on the Marquesan pottery sherds, see Allen, Dickinson, and Huebert 2012; Dickinson and Shutler 1974; Dickinson et al. 1998; Kirch et al. 1988.

12. The Marquesan faunal sequence was first outlined by Kirch (1973), augmented by Dye (1990, 1996) and Rolett (1992). Steadman (1989, 1997, 2006) and Steadman and Rolett (1996) discuss bird extinctions and extirpations. Huebert and Allen (2016) offer insights into the development of arboriculture, while Richards et al. (2009) apply stable isotope analysis to understanding pig husbandry.

13. Ernst Mayr (1997) drew a distinction between proximate and ultimate forms of causation. Prestige rivalry in the social arena may have been a proximate cause for aspects of Classic Period Marquesan culture, such as the elaboration of material arts that were elite sumptuary items. Underlying such a proximate cause, however, one can identify other ultimate causes, including resource restriction, periodic environmental perturbations (drought), and high population density.

14. On Green’s 1959 Mangareva excavations, see Green and Weisler 2000, 2002, 2004; Weisler and Green 2013. Weisler (2003) reports on excavations on Temoe Atoll, a part of the Gambier group.

15. For discussion of the “mystery islands” and a complete listing of these, see Kirch 1984a:89–92, table 9.

16. Early and important surveys of Rapa, Ra‘ivavae, and Tubuai were carried out by Stokes (n.d. [1930], n.d.) and Aitken (1930), while the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition visited Rapa and Ra‘ivavae in 1955–56 (Heyerdahl and Ferdon, eds., 1965).

17. A great deal of ethnohistoric data on Rapa Nui culture is also synthesized in Edwards and Edwards 2013.

18. The literature on Rapa Nui archaeology is extensive, and only a few key works can be referenced here. The results of the pioneering Norwegian Archaeological Expedition were published in Heyerdahl and Ferdon, eds., 1961, 1965; see also Golson 1965. Important excavation reports include Ayres 1973; Mulloy and Figueroa 1978; Skjølsvold, ed., 1994. Van Tilburg (1994) provides a masterful synthesis and excellent bibliography; see also P.C. McCoy 1979. Lee (1992) describes the island’s notable rock art. On the statue cult, see Lipo, Hunt, and Haoa 2013; Shepardson 2005; Van Tilburg 1986, 1988; Vargas 1988. Evidence for precontact agriculture is discussed in Ladefoged, Flaws, and Stevenson 2013; C.M. Stevenson 1997; Stevenson, Wozniak, and Haoa 1999; Stevenson et al. 2006, 2015; Vitousek et al. 2014; Wozniak 2001, 2003. The volumes edited by Vargas (1998), Fischer (1993), and Stevenson and Ayres (2000) also contain much valuable information.

19. P.C. McCoy’s settlement pattern survey (1976) of the Rano Kau area was fully analyzed. Preliminary results of the more extensive University of Chile survey may be found in Cristino and Vargas 1980; Cristino, Vargas, and Izaurieta 1981; Vargas 1993, 1998; Vargas, Cristino, and Izaurieta 2006; Vargas et al. 1998. Mulrooney (2012, 2013) discusses the chronology of settlement.

20. Palynological studies and vegetation history are presented by Flenley and King (1984), Flenley et al. (1991), and Orliac (1998).

21. See also Hunt 2006, 2007; Hunt and Lipo 2006; Lipo and Hunt 2005; Lipo et al. 2016.

22. Although I have not conducted primary fieldwork on Rapa Nui, I have been fortunate to visit on two occasions, in 1984 and 1996, giving me the opportunity to visit most of the major archaeological sites.

23. Later excavations at Anakena by Hunt and Lipo (2006) yielded radiocarbon dates that are interpreted as supporting a late colonization date of A.D. 1200. In my view, both the Steadman and Hunt and Lipo date series support initial Polynesian settlement between ca. A.D 1000 and 1200.

24. Steadman (2006) and Steadman, Vargas, and Cristino (1994) present zooarchaeological evidence for former seabird populations on Rapa Nui. On Rapa Nui soils and their nutrient properties, see Ladefoged et al. 2010; Stevenson et al. 2015; Vitousek et al. 2014.

25. Important contributions to the historical ecology of Rapa Nui include Commendador et al. 2013; Horrocks and Wozniak 2007; Loret and Tanacredi, eds., 2003; Mann et al. 2008; Mieth and Bork 2005, 2010; Orliac 1998; Tromp and Dudgeon 2015.

26. Hunt and Lipo (2011; Lipo et al. 2013), using experimental archaeology, argue that the statues “walked” upright from the quarries to the temple sites, essentially rocked back and forth on specially carved convex bases while held by guide ropes. Timber rollers, sledges, and levers were almost certainly also used in various stages of quarrying, transport, and statue erection.

27. The assertions of Hunt and Lipo (Hunt 2006, 2007; Hunt and Lipo 2011) that the island’s population never exceeded 3,000 have no empirical validity, nor do they make any sense demographically.

28. Note that this labor force included not just the stone workers in Rano Raraku, Puna Pau, and other quarries but also those who kept the former supplied with food and with such materials as great lengths of sturdy rope and a continual supply of basalt picks.

29. I draw attention to this gaze deliberately, for the emphasis accorded the eye in the Rapa Nui statues give the images a visual presence that must be seen to be appreciated.

30. On Rapa Nui soils and rock mulch gardening, see Wozniak 2001, 2003; Stevenson, Wozniak, andHaoa 1999; Stevenson et al. 2006, 2015. See also Ladefoged et al. 2010; Ladefoged, Flaws, and Stevenson 2013; Louwagie, Stevenson, and Langohr 2006.

31. The term literally means “statue toppling.”

32. It has been claimed that the mata‘a were not weapons at all but agricultural implements (Lipo et al. 2016; Hunt and Lipo 2011:95–99), although considerable ethnohistoric information refutes this.

33. According to Anderson, Binney, and Harris (2014), this name may be a nineteenth-century invention.

34. An important exception to the unsystematic nature of excavations prior to Golson is Duff’s (1950) work at the Wairau Bar site. The careful excavations and analysis of the Wairau Bar assemblages established the Eastern Polynesian origins of Maori culture.

35. Davidson’s (1984) initial synthesis of New Zealand prehistory is still worth consulting, although it has been superseded by that of Anderson et al. (2014). See also Furey and Holdaway, eds., 2004; Prickett, ed., 1982; Wilson, ed., 1987. Leach (2006) offers a synthesis of archaeological data on prehistoric fishing in New Zealand.

36. For key site reports and analyses of such South Island Archaic sites, see Anderson 1982, 1989a; Anderson and Smith 1992, 1996; Anderson et al., eds., 1996; Duff 1956.

37. On the environmental transformation of South Island by fire and other human actions, see McGlone 1983, 1989.

38. Furey (2006) has synthesized the archaeological evidence for prehistoric horticulture in New Zealand; see also Barber 1989; Best 1925; Horrocks et al. 2008; Jones 1986, 1989, 1991; Leach 1984; Leach and Leach, eds., 1979; Sullivan 1985.

39. On pa variation, classification, and distribution, see Bellwood 1971; Best 1927; Davidson 1984; Fox 1976; Groube 1965. For examples of excavated pa sites, see Fox 1978; Fox and Green 1982; McFadgen and Sheppard 1984; Phillips 1986, 2000; Shawcross 1976; Sutton, Furey, and Marshall 2003. Irwin, ed. (2004), describes the Kohika site, a lake village with remarkable preservation of wooden artifacts.

40. The linkage between pa and a horticultural economy is made clear by the absence of pa sites in South Island south of the Banks Peninsula. According to Davidson (1984:193), virtually all of the approximately 100 pa recorded for South Island are concentrated in “the area in which Polynesian horticulture was marginally possible.”

41. Key studies on the temporal development of pa and pa-based settlement patterns include Groube 1970; Irwin 1985b; Schmidt 1996; Sutton 1990; Sutton, ed., 1990, 1993; Sutton, Furey, and Marshall 2003.

42. Barber (1996:877) also suggests that pa construction “is consistent with a heightened concern for territorial visibility and, as a corollary, the physical and spiritual maintenance of local production and harvest by cognate groups.”

43. On Futunan archaeology, see Frimigacci 1990; Kirch 1981, 1994; Sand 1990, 1993b.

44. On the development of Futunan agricultural systems, see Di Piazza 1990; Frimigacci 1990; Kirch 1994.

45. In addition to the references cited here, other contributions include Garanger’s (1967) study of marae in the Tautira region of Tahiti; Descantes’s (1990) analysis of Green’s ‘Opunohu Valley settlement pattern data; Eddowes (1991) on marae; Emory and Sinoto’s various studies (Emory 1979; Emory and Sinoto 1965; Sinoto 1979a, 1996a); Wallin (1993); and the paleoenvironmental analyses of Orliac (1997) and Parkes (1997).

46. Regarding Samoan settlement patterns and sites, see J.T. Clark 1996; Clark and Herdrich 1993; Clark and Michlovic 1996; Clark et al. 2016; Herdrich 1991; Jennings and Holmer, eds., 1980; Jennings et al. 1976; Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1993; Pearl 2004; Quintus 2012, 2015; Quintus and Clark 2012, 2016; Quintus et al. 2015; Wallin, Wallin-Martinsson, and Clark 2007; Wallin-Martinsson 2007.

47. The term maritime empire was first coined by Guiart (1963).

48. Kirch (1985a) provided a synthesis of Hawaiian archaeology up to the early 1980s (see also Kirch 1990a, 1990b). Other overviews include Bayman and Dye 2013; and Tuggle 1979.

49. Examples of early survey work include Bennett 1931; Emory 1924, 1928; McAllister 1933; Stokes 1991. Hawaiian rock art is surveyed by Cox and Stasack 1970; and Lee and Stasack 1999.

50. Some of the classic culture-historical works in Hawaiian archaeology include Emory, Bonk, and Sinoto 1959, 1969; Emory and Sinoto 1961; Pearson, ed., 1969.

51. The literature of Hawaiian archaeology is too vast to enumerate here. Selected examples of empirical studies are Bayman and Moniz-Nakamura 2001; Cordy 1981, 2000; Earle 1978; Field and Graves, ed., 2015; Green 1980; Hommon 1986, 2013; Kirch 1977, 1979a, 1990a, 1990b, 2004, 2014; Kirch, ed., 2011; Kirch and Kelly, eds., 1975; Kirch and Sahlins 1992; Kirch et al. 2010; Kirch and O’Day 2003; Kolb 1992, 1994, 1999; Kolb and Dixon 2002; M.D. McCoy 2006, 2007; Mills and Lundblad 2014; Pearson, ed., 1968; Tuggle and Griffin, eds., 1973; Tuggle and Tomonari-Tuggle 1980; Weisler and Kirch 1985.

52. On changes in Hawaiian archaeological practice, and some of the political problems this has engendered, see Graves and Erkelens 1991; Kawelu 2015; Kirch 1999; Spriggs 1989. For examples of archaeological research generated by CRM contracts, see J. Clark and Kirch, eds., 1983; Kirch 1979a; Schilt 1984; Weisler and Kirch 1985.

53. The contact period population of Hawai‘i has been debated (see Stannard 1989) but seems unlikely to have been less than about half a million, possibly considerably more.

54. For other culture historical periodizations of Hawai‘i, see Cordy 1974; Hommon 1986; Kirch 1985a, 1990b; Kolb 1994, 1992; Weisler 1989.

55. On the dating of initial Polynesian settlement of Hawai‘i, see Athens, Rieth, and Dye 2014; Dye and Pantaleo 2010; Kirch 2011.

56. On these voyaging traditions, see Thrum, ed., 1916–20; and the discussion in Finney 1996b.

57. See Emory et al. 1969; Kirch and Kelly, eds., 1975; and Pearson, Kirch, and Pietrusewsky 1971 for reports on these sites.

58. See Athens 1997; Athens and Ward 1993; Athens, Ward, and Wickler 1992.

59. On initial attempts at demographic modeling, see Cordy 1981; Hommon 1986; Kirch 1984a:104–16.

60. This approach was first applied by Dye and Komori (1992), and has been used as well by Carson (2005).

61. On Hawaiian irrigation systems, see Jane Allen 1991; Earle 1978; Kirch 1977, 1984a; Kirch and Kelly, eds., 1975; Kirch and Sahlins 1992; McCoy and Graves 2010; McElroy 2007; Tuggle and Tomonari-Tuggle 1980; Yen et al. 1972.

62. On the dryland field systems of Hawai‘i Island, see M.S. Allen, ed., 2001; Field et al. 2010, 2011; Kirch 1984a, 1994; Ladefoged and Graves 2000; Ladefoged, Graves, and McCoy 2003; Ladefoged, Graves, and Coil 2005; Mulrooney and Ladefoged 2005; Rosendahl 1972, 1994; Vitousek et al. 2004. On the Maui systems, see Coil and Kirch 2005; Dixon et al. 1999; Holm 2006; Kirch, Coil, et al. 2005; Kirch, Hartshorn, et al. 2004; Kirch, Holson, and Baer 2009. And on the Kalaupapa, Moloka‘i, system, see M.D. McCoy 2005, 2006.

63. The argument regarding “wet” versus “dry” modes of agricultural intensification is advanced in detail in Kirch 1994; see also Kirch, ed., 2011.

64. On the temporal development of Hawaiian heiau, see Kolb 1992, 1994, 1999; as well as the overview in Kirch 1985a) and references cited therein to specific heiau site studies. Other important heiau studies include Bennett 1931; Emory 1924, 1928; Masse, Carter, and Somers 1991; McAllister 1933; Stokes 1991; Weisler and Kirch 1985.

65. Archaeological evidence for craft specialization has focused primarily on basalt adze production, regarding which see Bayman and Moniz-Nakamura 2001; Cleghorn 1986; Kahn et al. 2009; M.D. McCoy, Asner, and Graves 2011; Mills and Lundblad 2014.





CHAPTER NINE


1. Greg Dening (e.g., 1992) brought anthropology and history closer together, but his own approach was that of a particularistic history informed by anthropology rather than a generalizing anthropology informed by the details of history. Nonetheless, I admire his work.

2. The significant exception to this generalization would be New Zealand, but only for South Island, since where intensive sweet potato cultivation was feasible in North Island relatively high population densities were also achieved, in less than 1,000 years.

3. McArthur, Saunders, and Tweedie (1976) show the striking differences in extinction probabilities that result from small increases in the size of the founding population. For example, a founding group of three couples (six people) in which the only marriage rule is a ban on incest has an extinction probability of 77 percent, whereas increasing that founding group to seven couples lowers the extinction probability to only 19 percent.

4. The speed at which even a small founding group can quickly produce a dense population on Oceanic high islands with good agricultural resources is shown by the case of Pitcairn Island, settled by the Bounty mutineers and their Tahitian accomplices in 1790. The founding population of 28 had given rise to 193 descendants by 1856, when the British government stepped in to remove them to Norfolk Island because of overcrowding and a shortage of agricultural land. The net rate of intrinsic increase during this period had been about 3.7 percent.

5. The classic ethnographic account of population control in Oceania is certainly that of Firth for Tikopia (Borrie, Firth, and Spillius 1957; Firth 1936; see also Kirch and Yen 1982; Kirch 1997b).

6. This is, presumably, what Douglas Yen had in mind when he wrote that “human population level may be regarded as the primary incentive to technological development or adoption of greater intensity in production methods” (1973:80).

7. In the case of Hawai‘i, initial European contact occurred with Cook’s 1778–79 voyage, when the population was estimated by Lieutenant King at around 400,000. The earliest missionary “census” (a rough estimate, really) was carried out 53 years later, and it suggested a total population of around 130,000 for the archipelago (Schmitt 1968). A decline from 400,000 to 130,000 in five decades is regarded by many historical demographers as too abrupt, and thus King’s estimate was reduced to 250,000 at first contact (Schmitt 1968; but see Stannard 1989). In the case of certain Western Polynesian islands such as Tongatapu, Niuatoputapu, and Futuna, “first contact” dates to the voyages of Tasman (1643) and Schouten and Le Maire (1616), with the first serious attempts at population estimate not made until some two centuries later. In these latter cases there would have been time for major population collapse but also for possible recovery.

8. Consider the case of Tahiti. In one of the earliest attempts at estimating Oceanic island populations, Johann Reinhold Forster, who had sailed with Cook in 1772–75, devoted a section of his famous Observations to a disquisition on “the numbers of inhabitants in the South-Sea-Isles” (1996 [1778]:145–52). Forster used estimates of naval forces as well as a carefully argued calculation of agricultural carrying capacity to estimate 150,000 persons for Tahiti and Emeo Islands and 200,000 for the rest of the Society Islands. Oliver (1974:35) calls Forster’s estimates “pure fantasy,” but it is not evident that Oliver’s reduced estimate of about 35,000 for Tahiti is any more accurate.

9. See Green and Davidson, eds., 1969, 1974; Jennings et al. 1976; Leach and Witter 1987, 1990; Quintus 2012, 2015.

10. The U.S. Exploring Expedition under the command of Commodore Wilkes estimated the Samoan population at 56,600 in 1839 (McArthur 1968:table 18), decades after first contact. Yet McArthur’s view was that there had been “no very great decrease in population numbers in Samoa before mid-century” because “sporadic wars, famines, and outbreaks of disease checked its growth” (1968:115).

11. Green and Davidson, eds. (1974:281–82), briefly discuss the matter of pre-European population in Samoa. Without giving their own estimate, they aver that “only a population twice the size of that in the 1840s [i.e., around 80,000] . . . would require the amount of arable land which archaeology indicates was once in use.” In a long, unpublished manuscript, Green (pers. comm. 1998) argued the case for a precontact Samoan population of about 200,000.

12. Another example of the gap between population estimates based on historical texts and those based on archaeological evidence is the Marquesas, where Suggs (1961:192) proposed a figure of 100,000 for the archipelago, but Rallu (1990) would go no higher than 43,000. For Tahiti in the Society Islands, there is tremendous disagreement, ranging from McArthur’s (1968) low estimate of 17,000 to 19,000 to Oliver’s (1974:34) cautious 35,000 up to Rallu’s (1990) estimate of 70,000.

13. The “failures” would presumably include attempts to colonize some of the minute or otherwise ecologically marginal islands, such as the Equatorial Islands, Nihoa, the Kermadecs, Pitcairn, Henderson, and others that had been abandoned by the time of European arrival in the Pacific.

14. For a review of some of the literature and ideas regarding intensification, see Morrison 1994, 1996; on specialization, see Brumfiel and Earle, eds., 1987.

15. One reason for this is that the flooded pondfield is “self-weeding” as long as the water level is maintained, whereas in dryland taro cultivation constant weeding (and usually mulching as well) is required. For Futuna Island (Kirch 1994), I estimated that the yield of irrigated pondfields was between four and eight times greater than that of shifting cultivation (per unit area).

16. For a more elaborate discussion of the theory invoked here, and the production-function model on which it builds, see Kirch 1984a:160–67; 2010:190–201.





REFERENCES


Addison, D.J. 2001. Irrigation in traditional Marquesan agriculture: Surface survey evidence from Hatihe‘u Valley, Nuku Hiva. In C.M. Stevenson, G. Lee, and F.J. Morin, eds., Pacific 2000: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Easter Island and the Pacific, pp. 267–71. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

Addison, D.J., and E. Matisoo-Smith. 2010. Rethinking Polynesian origins: A West-Polynesia Triple-I model. Archaeology in Oceania 45:1–12.

Addison, D.J., and C. Sand, eds. 2008. Recent Advances in the Archaeology of the Fiji/West-Polynesian Region. University of Otago Studies in Prehistoric Anthropology No. 21. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago.

Aitken, R.T. 1930. Ethnology of Tubuai. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 70. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Alkire, W.H. 1965. Lamotrek Atoll and Inter-Island Socioeconomic Ties. Illinois Studies in Anthropology No. 5. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

———. 1980. Technical knowledge and the evolution of political systems in the central and western Caroline Islands of Micronesia. Canadian Journal of Anthropology 1:229–37.

Allen, Jane. 1991. The role of agriculture in the evolution of the pre-contact Hawaiian state. Asian Perspectives 30:117–32.

Allen, Jim. 1972. Nebira 4: An early Austronesian site in central Papua. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 7:92–124.

———. 1977. Sea traffic, trade and expanding horizons. In J. Allen, J. Golson, and R. Jones, eds., Sunda and Sahul, pp. 387–417. London: Academic Press.

———. 1982. Pre-contact trade in Papua New Guinea. In R.J. May and H. Nelson, eds., Melanesia: Beyond Diversity, vol. 1, pp. 193–205. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1984a. In search of the Lapita homeland. Journal of Pacific History 19:186–201.

———. 1984b. Pots and poor princes: A multidimensional approach to the study of pottery trading in coastal Papua. In S.E. van der Leeuw and A. Pritchard, eds., The Many Dimensions of Pottery: Ceramics in Archaeology and Anthropology, pp. 407–63. Amsterdam: Universiteit Van Amsterdam Alb Voor Prae-En Protohistorie.

———. 1993. Notions of the Pleistocene in Greater Australia. In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 139–51. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1996. The pre-Austronesian settlement of island Melanesia: Implications for Lapita archaeology. In W.H. Goodenough, ed., Prehistoric Settlement of the Pacific, pp. 11–27. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 86(5).

———. 2003. Discovering the Pleistocene in island Melanesia. In C. Sand, ed., Pacific Archaeology: Assessments and Prospects, pp. 33–42. Le Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie 15. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

———. 2017. Excavations on Motupore Island, Central District, Papua New Guinea. University of Otago Working Papers in Anthropology No. 4. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago.

Allen, J., and C. Gosden. 1996. Spheres of interaction and integration: Modelling the culture history of the Bismarck Archipelago. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 183–97. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin North: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Allen, J., and C. Gosden, eds. 1991. Report of the Lapita Homeland Project. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Allen, J., C. Gosden, and J.P. White. 1989. Human Pleistocene adaptations in the tropical island Pacific. Antiquity 63:548–61.

Allen, J., S. Holdaway, and R. Fullagar. 1997. Identifying specialisation, production and exchange in the archaeological record: The case of shell bead manufacture on Motupore Island, Papua. Archaeology in Oceania 32:13–38.

Allen, J., and J. O’Connell. 2008. Getting from Sunda to Sahul. In G. Clark, F. Leach, and S. O’Connor, eds., Islands of Inquiry: Colonisation, Seafaring and the Archaeology of Maritime Landscapes, pp. 31–46. Terra Australis 29. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 2014. Both half right: Updating the evidence for dating first human arrivals in Sahul. Australian Archaeology 79:86–108.

Allen, J., and P. White. 1989. The Lapita homeland: Some new data and an interpretation. Journal of the Polynesian Society 98:129–46.

Allen, M.S. 1992. Temporal variation in Polynesian fishing strategies: The Southern Cook Islands in regional perspective. Asian Perspectives 31:183–204.

———. 1996a. Patterns of interaction in Southern Cook Island prehistory. In I.C. Glover and B. Bellwood, eds., Indo-Pacific Prehistory: The Chiang Mai Papers, vol. 2, pp. 13–22. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1996b. Style and function in East Polynesian fish-hooks. Antiquity 70:97–116.

———. 1998. Holocene sea-level change on Aitutaki, Cook Islands: Landscape change and human response. Journal of Coastal Research 12:10–22.

———. 2004. Revisiting and revising Marquesan culture history: New archaeological investigations at Anaho Bay, Nuku Hiva Island. Journal of the Polynesian Society 113:143–96.

———. 2009. Morphological variability and temporal patterning in Marquesan domestic architecture: Anaho Valley in regional context. Asian Perspectives 48:342–82.

———. 2010. Oscillating climate and socio-political process: The case of the Marquesan chiefdom, Polynesia. Antiquity 84:86–102.

———. 2014. Marquesan colonization chronologies and post-colonisation interaction: Implications for Hawaiian origins and the “Marquesan Homeland” hypothesis. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 5:1–17.

Allen, M.S., ed. 2001. Gardens of Lono: Archaeological Investigations at the Amy B.H. Greenwell Ethnobotanical Garden, Kealakekua, Hawai‘i. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Allen, M.S., and D. Addison. 2002. Prehistoric settlement at Anaho Bay, Nuku Hiva, Marquesas Islands: Preliminary observations. Archaeology in Oceania 37:87–91.

Allen, M.S., and J. Craig. 2009. Dynamics of Polynesian subsistence: Insights from archaeofauna and stable isotope studies, Aitutaki, Southern Cook Islands. Pacific Science 63:477–506.

Allen, M.S., W.R. Dickinson, and J.M. Huebert. 2012. The anomaly of Marquesan ceramics: A fifty-year retrospective. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 3:90–104.

Allen, M.S., and J.M. Huebert. 2014. Short-lived plant materials, long-lived trees, and Polynesian 14C dating: Considerations for 14C sample selection and documentation. Radiocarbon 56:257–76.

Allen, M.S., and A. McAlister. 2013. Early Marquesan settlement patterns of interaction: New insights from Hatiheu Valley, Nuku Hiva Island. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 4:90–109.

Allen, M.,and A.E. Morrison. 2013. Modelling site formation dynamics: Geoarchaeological, chronometric and statistical approaches to a stratified rockshelter sequence, Polynesia. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:4560–75.

Allen, M.S., and S.E. Schubel. 1990. Recent archaeological research on Aitutaki, Southern Cooks: The Moturakau shelter. Journal of the Polynesian Society 99:265–96.

Allen, M.S., and D.W. Steadman. 1990. Excavations at the Ureia site, Aitutaki, Cook Islands: Preliminary results. Archaeology in Oceania 25:24–36.

Allen, M.S., and R. Wallace. 2007. New evidence from the East Polynesian gateway: Substantive and methodological results from Aitutaki, Southern Cook Islands. Radiocarbon 49:1163–79.

Allen, M.W. 1996. Pathways to economic power in Maori chiefdoms: Ecology and warfare in prehistoric Hawke’s Bay. Research in Economic Anthropology 17:171–225.

Allen, S.J., A. O’Donnell, N.D.E. Alexander, M.P. Alpers, T.E.A. Peto, J.B. Clegg, and D.J. Weatherall. 1997. α-Thalassemia protects children against disease caused by infections as well as malaria. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 94:14736–741.

Ambrose, W.R. 1988. An early bronze artefact from Papua New Guinea. Antiquity 62:483–91.

———. 1991. Lapita or not Lapita: The case of the Manus pots. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 103–12. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1994. Obsidian hydration dating of a Pleistocene age site from the Manus Islands, Papua New Guinea. Quaternary Geochronology 13:137–42.

———. 1997. Contradictions in Lapita pottery: A composite clone. Antiquity 71:525–38.

———. 2012. Oceanic tattooing and the implied Lapita ceramic connection. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 3(1):1–21.

Ambrose, W.R., and R.C. Green. 1972. First millennium B.C. transport of obsidian from New Britain to the Solomon Islands. Nature 237:31.

Amesbury, J.R., D.R. Moore, and R.L. Hunter-Anderson. 1996. Cultural adaptations and late Holocene sea level change in the Marianas: Recent excavations at Chalan Piao, Saipan, Micronesia. In I.C. Glover and B. Bellwood, eds., Indo-Pacific Prehistory: The Chiang Mai Papers, vol. 2, pp. 53–70. Canberra: Australian National University.

Anderson, A. 1982. A review of economic patterns during the Archaic Phase in southern New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 4:45–75.

———. 1989a. Mechanics of overkill in the extinction of New Zealand moas. Journal of Archaeological Research 16:137–51.

———. 1989b. Prodigious Birds: Moas and Moa-Hunting in Prehistoric New Zealand. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1997. Prehistoric Polynesian impact on the New Zealand environment: Te whenua hou. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Historical Ecology in the Pacific Islands: Prehistoric Environmental and Landscape Change, pp. 271–83. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

———. 2001. Towards the sharp end: The form and performance of prehistoric Polynesian voyaging canoes. In C.M. Stevenson, G. Lee, and F.J. Morin, eds., Pacific 2000: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Easter Island and the Pacific, pp. 29–36. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

———. 2006. Polynesian seafaring and American horizons: A response to Jones and Klar. American Antiquity 71:759–63.

Anderson, A., B. Allingham, and I. Smith, eds. 1996. Shag River Mouth: The Archaeology of an Early Southern Maori Village. Research Papers in Archaeology and Natural History No. 27. Canberra: Australian National University.

Anderson, A., S. Bedford, G. Clark, I. Lilley, C. Sand, G. Summerhayes, and R. Torrence. 2001. An inventory of Lapita sites containing dentate-stamped pottery. In G.R. Clark, A.J. Anderson, and T. Vunidilo, eds., The Archaeology of Lapita Dispersal in Oceania, pp. 1–14. Terra Australis 17. Canberra: Australian National University.

Anderson, A., J. Binney, and A. Harris. 2014. Tangata Whenua: An Illustrated History. Wellington, New Zealand: Bridget Williams Books.

Anderson, A., and G. Clark. 1999. The age of Lapita settlement in Fiji. Archaeology in Oceania 34:31–39.

Anderson, A., and D.J. Kennett, eds. 2012. Taking the High Ground: The Archaeology of Rapa, a Fortified Island in Remote East Polynesia. Terra Australis 37. Canberra: Australian National University.

Anderson, A., H. Leach, I. Smith, and R. Walter. 1994. Reconsideration of the Marquesan sequence in East Polynesian prehistory, with particular reference to Hane (MUH1). Archaeology in Oceania 29:29–52.

Anderson, A., H. Martinsson-Wallin, and P. Wallin. 2002. The Prehistory of Kirimati (Christmas) Island, Republic of Kiribati. Kon-Tiki Museum Occasional Papers 6. Oslo: Kon-Tiki Museum.

Anderson, A., R. Roberts, W. Dickinson, G. Clark, D. Burley, A. de Biran, G. Hope, and P. Nunn. 2006. Times of sand: Sedimentary history and archaeology at the Sigatoka dunes, Fiji. Geoarchaeology 21:131–54.

Anderson, A., C. Sand, F. Petchey, and T.H. Worthy. 2010. Faunal extinction and human habitation in New Caledonia: Initial results and implications of new research at the Pindai Caves. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 1:89–109.

Anderson, A., and Y. Sinoto. 2002. New radiocarbon ages of colonization sites in East Polynesia. Asian Perspectives 41:242–57.

Anderson, A., and I. Smith. 1992. The Papatowai site: New evidence and interpretations. Journal of the Polynesian Society 101:129–58.

———. 1996. The transient village in southern New Zealand. World Archaeology 27:359–71.

Anderson, E. 1952. Plants, Man, and Life. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Anson, D. 1983. Lapita pottery of the Bismarck Archipelago and its affinities. PhD dissertation, University of Sydney.

———. 1986. Lapita pottery of the Bismarck Archipelago and its affinities. Archaeology in Oceania 21:157–65.

Arnold, J.E. 2007. Credit where credit is due: The history of the Chumash oceangoing plank canoe. American Antiquity 72:196–209.

Ash, J. 1992. Vegetation ecology of Fiji: Past, present, and future perspectives. Pacific Science 46:111–27.

Aswani, S., and M.W. Graves. 1998. The Tongan maritime expansion: A case in the evolutionary ecology of social complexity. Asian Perspectives 37:135–64.

Athens, J.S. 1980. Pottery from Nan Madol, Ponape, eastern Caroline Islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 89:95–99.

———. 1981. The Discovery and Archaeological Investigation of Nan Madol, Ponape, Eastern Caroline Islands: An Annotated Bibliography. Micronesian Archaeological Survey Report No. 3. Saipan: Micronesian Archaeological Survey.

———. 1983. The megalithic ruins of Nan Madol. Natural History 92(12):50–61.

———. 1984a. A stone adze from Ponape, eastern Caroline Islands. Asian Perspectives 24:43–46.

———. 1984b. Surface artefact distributions at the Nan Madol site: A preliminary assessment of spatial patterning. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 6:129–52.

———. 1986. Archaeological investigations at Tarague Beach, Guam. Report. J.S. Athens, Archaeological Consultant, Honolulu.

———. 1990a. Kosrae pottery, clay, and early settlement. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 171–86.

———. 1990b. Nan Madol pottery, Pohnpei. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 17–32.

———. 1997. Hawaiian native lowland vegetation in prehistory. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Historical Ecology in the Pacific Islands: Prehistoric Environmental and Landscape Change, pp. 248–70. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

———. 2007a. Prehistoric population growth on Kosrae, eastern Caroline Islands. In P.V. Kirch and J.-L. Rallu, eds., The Growth and Collapse of Pacific Island Societies: Archaeological and Demographic Perspectives, pp. 257–77. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 2007b. The rise of the Saudeleur: Dating the Nan Madol chiefdom, Pohnpei. In A. Anderson, K. Green, and F. Leach, eds., Vastly Ingenious: The Archaeology of Pacific Material Culture in Honour of Janet M. Davidson, pp. 191–208. Dunedin, New Zealand: Otago University Press.

———. 2011. Latte period occupation on Pagan and Sarigan, northern Mariana Islands. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 6:314–30.

———. 2014. Archaeology of the eastern Caroline Islands, Micronesia. In E. Cochrane and T. Hunt, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Prehistoric Oceania. Oxford Handbooks Online, DOI:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199925070.013.013.

Athens, J.S., ed. 1995. Landscape Archaeology: Prehistoric Settlement, Subsistence, and Environment of Kosrae, Eastern Caroline Islands, Micronesia. Honolulu: International Archaeological Research Institute.

Athens, J.S., T.M. Rieth, and T.S. Dye. 2014. A paleoenvironmental and archaeological model-based age estimate for the colonization of Hawai‘i. American Antiquity 79:144–55.

Athens, J.S., H.D. Tuggle, J.V. Ward, and D.J. Welch. 2002. Avifaunal extinctions, vegetation change, and Polynesian impacts in prehistoric Hawai‘i. Archaeology in Oceania 37:57–78.

Athens, J.S., and J.V. Ward. 1993. Environmental change and prehistoric Polynesian settlement in Hawai‘i. Asian Perspectives 32:205–23.

———. 1995. Paleoenvironment of the Orote Peninsula, Guam. Micronesica 28:51–76.

———. 1998. Paleoenvironment and Prehistoric Landscape Change: A Sediment Core Record from Lake Hagoi, Tinian, CNMI. Honolulu: International Archaeological Research Institute.

———. 2001. Paleoenvironmental evidence for early human settlement in Palau: The Ngerchau Core. In C.M. Stevenson, G. Lee, and F.J. Morin, eds., Pacific 2000: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Easter Island and the Pacific, pp. 165–78. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

Athens, J.S., J.V. Ward, and G.M. Murakami. 1996. Development of an agroforest on a Micronesian high island: Prehistoric Kosraean agriculture. Antiquity 70:834–46.

Athens, J.S., J. Ward, and S. Wickler. 1992. Late Holocene lowland vegetation, O‘ahu, Hawai‘i. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 14:9–34.

Attenborough, R.D., and M.P. Alpers, eds. 1992. Human Biology in Papua New Guinea: The Small Cosmos. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Ayres, W.S. 1973. The cultural context of Easter Island religious structures. PhD dissertation, Tulane University.

———. 1990. Pohnpei’s position in eastern Micronesian prehistory. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 187–212.

———. 1992. Nan Madol, Micronesia. Society for American Archaeology Bulletin 10:4–5.

Ayres, W.S., and A.E. Haun. 1985. Archaeological perspectives on food production in Eastern Micronesia. In I.S. Farrington, ed., Prehistoric Intensive Agriculture in the Tropics, pp. 455–73. BAR International Series 232. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

———. 1990. Prehistoric food production in Micronesia. In D.E. Yen and J.M.J. Mummery, eds., Pacific Production Systems: Approaches to Economic Prehistory, pp. 211–30. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 18. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Ayres, W.S., A.E. Haun, and R. Mauricio. 1983. Nan Madol archaeology: 1981 survey and excavations. Typescript report.

Ayres, W.S., A.E. Haun, and C. Severance. 1979. Settlement and subsistence on Ponape, Micronesia. Interim Report 78–2. Ponape Archaeology Survey, Department of Anthropology, University of Oregon.

Ayres, W.S., and R. Mauricio. 1987. Stone adzes from Pohnpei, Micronesia. Archaeology in Oceania 22:27–30.

Babayan, C., B. Finney, B. Kilonsky, and N. Thompson. 1987. Voyage to Aotearoa. Journal of the Polynesian Society 96:161–200.

Babcock, T. 1977. A re-analysis of pottery from fortified sites on Taveuni, Fiji. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 12:112–34.

Bahn, P., and J. Flenley. 1992. Easter Island: Earth Island. London: Thames and Hudson.

Ballard, C. 1993. Stimulating minds to fantasy? A critical etymology for Sahul. In M.A. Smith, M. Spriggs, and B. Fankhauser, eds., Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia, pp. 17–23. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Balouet, J.C., and S.L. Olson. 1989. Fossil Birds from Late Quaternary Deposits in New Caledonia. Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology 469. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.

Barber, I.G. 1989. Of boundaries, drains, and crops: A classification system for traditional Maori horticultural ditches. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 11:23–50.

———. 1996. Loss, change, and monumental landscaping: Towards a new interpretation of the “Classic” Maaori emergence. Current Anthropology 37:868–80.

Barrau, J. 1956. L’Agriculture vivrière autochtone de la Nouvelle-Calédonie. Noumea, New Caledonia: Commission du Pacifique Sud.

———. 1965a. Histoire et préhistoire horticoles de l’Océanie tropicale. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 21:55–78.

———. 1965b. L’Humide et le sec: An essay on ethnobiological adaptation to contrastive environments in the Indo-Pacific area. Journal of the Polynesian Society 74:329–46.

Barthel, T.S. 1974. Das Achte Land: Die Entdeckung und Besiedlung der Osterinsel nach Eingeborenentraditionen Übersetzt und Erläutert. Munich: Klaus Renner Verlag. [English translation, The Eighth Land (Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1978).]

Barton, C.M., J. Bernabeau, J. Aura, E.O. Garcia, S. Schmich, and L. Molina. 2004. Long-term socioecology and contingent landscapes. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 11:253–91.

Bath, J.E. 1984a. Sapwtakai: Archaeological Survey and Testing. Micronesian Archaeological Survey Report 14. Saipan: Historic Preservation Office.

———. 1984b. A tale of two cities: An evaluation of political evolution in the eastern Caroline Islands of Micronesia since A.D. 1000. PhD dissertation, University of Hawaii, Manoa.

Bath, J.E., and J.S. Athens. 1990. Prehistoric social complexity on Pohnpei: The Saudeleur to Nahnmwarki transformation. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 275–90.

Bayard, D.T. 1976. The Cultural Relationships of the Polynesian Outliers. University of Otago Studies in Prehistoric Anthropology 9. Dunedin, New Zealand: Department of Anthropology, University of Otago.

Bayliss-Smith, T., R. Bedford, H.C. Brookfield, and M. Latham. 1988. Islands, Islanders, and the World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bayliss-Smith, T., and J. Golson. 1992. A Colocasian revolution in the New Guinea Highlands? Insights from Phase 4 at Kuk. Archaeology in Oceania 27:1–21.

Bayman, J.M., and T.S. Dye. 2013. Hawaii’s Past in a World of Pacific Islands. Washington, DC: Society for American Archaeology.

Bayman, J.M., H. Kurashina, M.T. Carson, J.A. Peterson, D.J. Doig, and J.A. Drengson. 2012. Household economy and gendered labor in the 17th century A.D. on Guam. Journal of Field Archaeology 37:259–69.

Bayman, J.M., and J.J. Moniz-Nakamura. 2001. Craft specialization and adze production on Hawai‘i Island. Journal of Field Archaeology 28:239–52.

Beaglehole, J.C., ed. 1967. The Journals of Captain James Cook on His Voyages of Discovery: The Voyage of the Resolution and Discovery, 1776–1780. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press for the Hakluyt Society.

———. 1968. The Journals of Captain James Cook on His Voyages of Discovery: The Voyage of the Endeavor, 1768–1771. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press for the Hakluyt Society.

———. 1969. The Journals of Captain James Cook on His Voyages of Discovery: The Voyage of the Resolution and Adventure, 1772–1775. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press for the Hakluyt Society.

Beardsley, F.R. 1994. Archaeological Investigations on Kwajalein Atoll, Marshall Islands. Honolulu: International Archaeological Research Institute.

Beckwith, M.W. 1970. Hawaiian Mythology. Honolulu: University Press of Hawai‘i.

Bedford, S. 2006a. The Pacific’s earliest painted pottery: An added layer of intrigue to the Lapita debate and beyond. Antiquity 80:544–57.

———. 2006b. Pieces of the Vanuatu Puzzle: Archaeology of the North, South, and Centre. Terra Australis 23. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 2007. Crucial first steps into Remote Oceania: Lapita in the Vanuatu Archipelago. In S. Chiu and C. Sand, eds., From Southeast Asia to the Pacific: Archaeological Perspectives on the Austronesian Expansion and the Lapita Cultural Complex, pp. 185–213. Taipei: Academia Sinica.

Bedford, S., C. Sand, and S.P. Connaughton, eds. 2007. Oceanic Explorations: Lapita and Western Pacific Settlement. Terra Australis 26. Canberra: Australian National University.

Bedford, S., and M. Spriggs. 2000. Crossing the Pwanmwou: Preliminary report on recent excavations adjacent to and south west of Mangaasi, Efate, Vanuatu. Archaeology in Oceania 35:120–26.

———. 2007. Birds on the rim: A unique Lapita carinated vessel in its wider context. Archaeology in Oceania 42:12–21.

———. 2008. Northern Vanuatu as a Pacific crossroads: The archaeology of discovery, interaction, and the emergence of the “ethnographic present.” Asian Perspectives 47:95–120.

———. 2014. The archaeology of Vanuatu: 3,000 years of history across islands of ash and coral. The Oxford Handbook of Prehistoric Oceania. Oxford Handbooks Online. DOI:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199925070.013.015.

Bedford, S., M. Spriggs, and R. Regenvanu. 2006. The Teouma Lapita site and the early human settlement of the Pacific Islands. Antiquity 80:812–28.

Bellwood, P. 1971. Fortifications and economy in prehistoric New Zealand. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 37:56–95.

———. 1972. Settlement Pattern Survey, Hanatekua Valley, Hiva Oa, Marquesas Islands. Pacific Anthropological Records 17. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1978. Archaeological Research in the Cook Islands. Pacific Anthropological Records 27. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1979. Man’s Conquest of the Pacific: The Prehistory of Southeast Asia and Oceania. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 1987a. The Polynesians. London: Thames and Hudson.

———. 1987b. The prehistory of island Southeast Asia: A multidisciplinary review of recent research. Journal of World Prehistory 1:171–224.

———. 1993. Crossing the Wallace Line—with style. In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 152–63. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 21. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1996a. Hierarchy, founder ideology and Austronesian expansion. In J.J. Fox and C. Sather, eds., Origins, Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations in Austronesian Ethnography, pp. 18–40. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1996b. Phylogeny vs. reticulation in prehistory. Antiquity 70: 881–90.

———. 1998. The archaeology of Papuan and Austronesian prehistory in the Northern Moluccas, Eastern Indonesia. In R. Blench and M. Spriggs, eds., Archaeology and Language II: Correlating Archaeological and Linguistic Hypotheses, pp. 128–40. London: Routledge.

———. 2017. First Islanders: Prehistory and Human Migration in Island Southeast Asia. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.

Bellwood, P., J. Fox, and D. Tryon. 1995. The Austronesians in history: Common origins and diverse transformations. In P. Bellwood, J. Fox, and D. Tryon, eds., The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, pp. 1–16. Canberra: Australian National University.

Bellwood, P., and P. Koon. 1989. Lapita colonists leave boats unburned! The question of Lapita links with island Southeast Asia. Antiquity 63:613–22.

Bellwood, P., G. Nitihaminoto, G. Irwin, Gunadi, A. Waluyo, and D. Tanudirjo. 1998. 35,000 years of prehistory in the northern Moluccas. In G.-J. Bartstra, ed., Bird’s Head Approaches: Irian-Jaya Studies—a Programme for Interdisciplinary Research, pp. 233–75. Rotterdam: A.A. Balkema.

Bender, B.W., and J.W. Wang. 1985. The status of Proto-Micronesian. In A. Pawley and L. Carrington, eds., Austronesian Linguistics at the 15th Pacific Science Congress, pp. 53–92. Pacific Linguistics C-88. Canberra: Australian National University.

Bennett, W.C. 1931. Archaeology of Kauai. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 80. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Bentley, R.A., H.R. Buckley, M. Spriggs, S. Bedford, C.J. Ottley, G.M. Nowell, C.G. Macpherson, and D.G. Pearson. 2007. Lapita migrants in the Pacific’s oldest cemetery: Isotopic analysis at Teouma, Vanuatu. American Antiquity 72:645–56.

Bernart, L. 1977. The Book of Luelen. Pacific History Series No. 8. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Best, E. 1925. Maori Agriculture. Dominion Museum Bulletin 9. Wellington, New Zealand: Dominion Museum.

———. 1927. The Pa Maori. Dominion Museum Bulletin 6. Wellington, New Zealand: Dominion Museum.

Best, S. 1984. Lakeba: The prehistory of a Fijian island. PhD dissertation, University of Auckland.

———. 1987. Long-distance obsidian travel and possible implications for the settlement of Fiji. Archaeology in Oceania 22:31–32.

———. 1988. Tokelau archaeology: A preliminary report of an initial survey and excavations. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 8:104–18.

———. 2002. Lapita: A View from the East. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 24. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Best, S., P. Sheppard, R. Green, and R. Parker. 1992. Necromancing the stone: Archaeologists and adzes in Samoa. Journal of the Polynesian Society 101:45–85.

Bickler, S.H. 1997. Early pottery exchange along the south coast of Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 32:151–62.

Biggs, B. 1971. The languages of Polynesia. In T.A. Sebeok, ed., Current Trends in Linguistics, vol. 8, pt. 1, pp. 466–505. The Hague: Mouton.

Birks, L. 1973. Archaeological Excavations at Sigatoka Dune Site, Fiji. Bulletin of the Fiji Museum No. 1. Suva: Fiji Museum.

Birks, L., and H. Birks. 1967. Archaeological excavations at Site VL 16/81, Yanuca Island, Fiji. Oceanic Prehistory Records 6. Auckland, New Zealand: Department of Anthropology, University of Auckland.

Blaikie, P., and H.C. Brookfield, eds. 1987. Land Degradation and Society. London: Methuen.

Blake, N., M. Gibbs, and D. Roe. 2015. Revised radiocarbon dates for Mwanihuki, Makira: A c. 3000 BP aceramic site in the Southeast Solomon Islands. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 6(2):56–64.

Blake, N., M.B. Hawkins, R. Kirk, K. Bhatia, P. Brown, R.M. Garruto, and D.C. Gajdusek. 1983. A population genetic study of the Banks and Torres Islands (Vanuatu) and of the Santa Cruz Islands and Polynesian Outliers (Solomon Islands). American Journal of Physical Anthropology 62:343–61.

Blong, R.J. 1982. The Time of Darkness: Local Legends and Volcanic Reality in Papua New Guinea. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Blust, R. 1984. A Mussau vocabulary, with phonological notes. Pacific Linguistics A-69:159–208.

———. 1985.The Austronesian homeland: A linguistic perspective. Asian Perspectives 26:45–67.

———. 1987. Lexical reconstruction and semantic reconstruction: The case of Austronesian “house” words. Diachronica 4(1–2):79–106.

———. 1995. The prehistory of the Austronesian-speaking peoples: A view from language. Journal of World Prehistory 9:453–510.

———. 1996. Austronesian culture history: The windows of language. In W.H. Goodenough, ed., Prehistoric Settlement of the Pacific, pp. 28–35. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 86(5).

———. 1999. Subgrouping, circularity and extinction: Some issues in Austronesian comparative linguistics. In E. Zeitoun and P. Jen-kuei Li, eds., Selected Papers from the Eighth International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics, pp. 31–94. Symposium Series of the Institute of Linguitics, Academia Sinica, No. 1. Taipei: Academia Sinica.

———. 2008. Remote Melanesia: One history or two? An addendum to Donohue and Denham. Oceanic Linguistics 47:445–59.

———. 2013. The Austronesian Languages. Rev. ed. Asia-Pacific Linguistics, Open Access Monographs A-PL 008. http://hdl.handle.net/1885/10191. Canberra: Australian National University.

Bollt, R. 2008. Peva: The Archaeology of an Austral Island Settlement. Bishop Museum Bulletin in Anthropology 12. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Bonhomme, T., and J. Craib. 1987. Radiocarbon dates from Unai Bapot, Saipan—Implications for the prehistory of the Mariana Islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 96:95–106.

Borrie, W.D., R. Firth, and J. Spillius. 1957. The population of Tikopia, 1929 and 1952. Population Studies 10:229–52.

Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change under Population Pressure. Chicago: Aldine.

Boyce, A.J., R.M. Harding, and J.J. Martinson. 1995. Population genetics of the α-globin complex in Oceania. In A.J. Boyce and V. Reynolds, eds., Human Populations: Diversity and Adaptation, pp. 217–32. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Braudel, F. 1980. On History. Trans. S. Matthews. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Brewis, A., M.A. Molloy, and D.G. Sutton, 1990. Modeling the prehistoric Maori population. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 81:343–56.

Brigham, W.T. 1902. Stone Implements and Stone Work of the Ancient Hawaiians. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Memoir 1(5). Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Brookfield, H.C. 1972. Intensification and disintensification in Pacific agriculture: A theoretical approach. Pacific Viewpoint 13:30–48.

———. 1984. Intensification revisited. Pacific Viewpoint 25:15–44.

Brookfield, H.C., with D. Hart. 1971. Melanesia: A Geographical Interpretation of an Island World. London: Methuen.

Brooks, C.C. 1984. A contribution to the geoarchaeology of Truk, Micronesia. Asian Perspectives 24:27–42.

Brown, P. 1978. Highland Peoples of New Guinea. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Brumfiel, E., and T. Earle, eds. 1987. Specialization, Exchange and Complex Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bryson, R.U. 1989. Ceramic and spatial archaeology at Nan Madol, Pohnpei. PhD dissertation, University of Oregon.

Buck, P.H. See Hiroa, T.R.

Bulmer, S. 1971. Prehistoric settlement patterns and pottery in the Port Moresby area. Journal of the Papua and New Guinea Society 5:28–91.

———. 1975. Settlement and economy in prehistoric Papua New Guinea: A review of the archaeological evidence. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 31(46): 7–75.

Bulmer, S., and R. Bulmer. 1964. The prehistory of the Australian New Guinea Highlands. American Anthropologist 66:29–76.

Burenhult, G., ed. 2002. The Archaeology of the Trobriand Islands, Milne Bay Province, Papua New Guinea. BAR International Series 1080. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Burley, D.V. 1994. As a prescription to rule: The royal tomb of Mala‘e Lahi and 19th-century Tongan kingship. Antiquity 68:504–17.

———. 1998. Archaeology and the Tongan past, 2850–150 B.P. Journal of World Prehistory 12:337–92.

———. 2005. Mid-sequence archaeology at the Sigatoka sand dunes with interpretive implications for Fijian and Oceanic culture history. Asian Perspectives 44:320–48.

———. 2013. Fijian polygenesis and the Melanesian/Polynesian divide. Current Anthropology 54:436–62.

Burley, D.V., A. Barton, W.R. Dickinson, S.P. Connaughton, and K. Taché. 2010. Nukuleka as a founder colony for West Polynesian settlement: New insights from recent excavations. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 1:128–44.

Burley, D.V., and J. Clark. 2003. The archaeology of Fiji/Western Polynesia in the post-Lapita era. In C. Sand, ed., Pacific Archaeology: Assessments and Prospects, pp. 235–54. Le Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie 15. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Burley, D.V., and S.P. Connaughton. 2007. First Lapita settlement and its chronology in Vava‘u, Kingdom of Tonga. Radiocarbon 49:131–37.

Burley, D.V., and W.R. Dickinson. 2004. Late Lapita occupation and its ceramic assemblage at the Sigatoka Sand Dune site, Fiji, and their place in Oceanic prehistory. Archaeology in Oceania 39:12–25.

Burley, D.V., W.R. Dickinson, A. Barton, and R. Shutler Jr. 2001. Lapita on the periphery: New data on old problems in the Kingdom of Tonga. Archaeology in Oceania 36:89–104.

Burley, D.V., and K. Edinborough. 2014. Discontinuity in the Fijian archaeological record supported by a Bayesian radiocarbon model. Radiocarbon 56:295–303.

Burley, D., K. Edinborough, M. Weisler, and J. Zhao. 2015. Bayesian modeling and chronological precision for Polynesian settlement of Tonga. PLoS ONE 10: e0120795.

Burley, D.V., D.E. Nelson, and R. Shutler Jr. 1999. A radiocarbon chronology for the eastern Lapita frontier in Tonga. Archaeology in Oceania 34:59–70.

Burley, D.V., M.I. Weisler, and J. Zhao. 2012. High precision U/Th dating of first Polynesian settlement. PLoS ONE 7: e48769.

Burney, D.A., H.F. James, L.P. Burney, S.L. Olson, W. Kikuchi, W.L. Wagner, M. Burney, D. McCloskey, D. Kikuchi, F.V. Grady, R. Gage II, and R. Nishek. 2001. Fossil evidence for a diverse biota from Kaua‘i and its transformation since human arrival. Ecological Monographs 71:615–41.

Burney, J. 1806. A Chronological History of the Voyages and Discoveries in the South Sea or Pacific Ocean. London: Luke Hansard and Sons.

Burrows, E.G. 1937. Ethnology of Uvea. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 145. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1938. Western Polynesia: A Study in Cultural Differentiation. Ethnological Studies No. 7. Gothenburg, Sweden: n.p.

Burton, J. 1987. Exchange pathways at a stone axe factory in Papua New Guinea. In G. de G. Sieveking and M.H. Newcomer, eds., The Human Uses of Flint and Chert, pp. 183–91. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bussell, M.R. 1988. Mid and late Holocene pollen diagrams and Polynesian deforestation, Wanganui District, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Botany 26:431–51.

Butler, B.M. 1992. An Archaeological Survey of Aguiguan (Aguijan), Northern Marianas Islands. Micronesian Archaeological Survey Report No. 29. Saipan: Division of Historic Preservation.

———. 1994. Early prehistoric settlement in the Marianas Islands: New evidence from Saipan. Man and Culture in Oceania 10:15–38.

Butler, B.M., ed. 1988. Archaeological Investigations on the North Coast of Rota, Mariana Islands. Center for Archaeological Investigations, Occasional Paper No. 8. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University.

Butler, V.L. 1988. Lapita fishing strategies: The faunal evidence. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Archaeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review, pp. 99–116. Thomas Burke Memorial Washington State Museum Research Report No. 5. Seattle, WA: Burke Museum.

———. 1994. Fishing feeding behavior and fish capture: The case for variation in Lapita fishing strategies. Archaeology in Oceania 29:81–90.

Cachola-Abad, C.K. 2000. The evolution of Hawaiian socio-political complexity: An analysis of Hawaiian oral traditions. PhD dissertation, University of Hawai‘i.

Carlquist, S. 1974. Island Biology. New York: Columbia University Press.

Carneiro, R. 1981. The chiefdom as precursor to the state. In G. Jones and R. Krautz, eds., The Transition to Statehood in the New World, pp. 37–79. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1990. Chiefdom-level warfare as exemplified in Fiji and the Cauca Valley. In J. Haas, ed., The Anthropology of War, pp. 190–211. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Carson, M.T. 2005. A radiocarbon dating synthesis for Kaua‘i. In M.T. Carson and M.W. Graves, eds., Na Mea Kahiko o Kaua’i: Archaeological Studies in Kaua’i, pp. 11–32. Society for Hawaiian Archaeology Special Publication No. 2. Honolulu.

———. 2008. Refining earliest settlement in Remote Oceania: Renewed archaeological investigations at Unai Bapot, Saipan. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 3:115–39.

———. 2010. Radiocarbon chronology with marine reservoir correction for the Ritidian archaeological site, Northern Guam. Radiocarbon 52:1627–38.

———. 2011. Palaeohabitat of first settlement sites 1500–1000 B.C. in Guam, Mariana Islands, Western Pacific. Journal of Archaeological Science 38:2207–21.

———. 2012. An overview of Latte period archaeology. Micronesica 42:1–79.

———. 2014. First Settlement of Remote Oceania: Earliest Sites in the Marianas Islands. New York: Springer.

Carson, M.T., H. Hung, G. Summerhayes, and P. Bellwood. 2013. The pottery trail from Southeast Asia to Remote Oceania. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 8:17–36.

Carson, M.T., and H. Kurashina. 2012. Re-envisioning long-distance oceanic migration: Early dates in the Mariana Islands. World Archaeology 44:409–35.

Carsten, J., and S. Hugh-Jones. 1995. Introduction to J. Carsten and S. Hugh-Jones, eds., About the House: Lévi-Strauss and Beyond, pp. 1–46. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Carter, M., D. Roe, and J. Keopo. 2012. Recent recoveries of archaeological ceramics on Santa Isabel. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 3(2):62–68.

Carter, T.D., J.E. Hill, and G.H.H. Tate. 1945. Mammals of the Pacific World. New York: Macmillan.

Cassels, R. 1984. Faunal extinction and prehistoric man in New Zealand and the Pacific islands. In P. Martin and R. Klein, eds., Quaternary Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution, pp. 741–67. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.

Cattani, J.A. 1992. The epidemiology of malaria in Papua New Guinea. In R.D. Attenborough and M.P. Alpers, eds., Human Biology in Papua New Guinea: The Small Cosmos, pp. 302–12. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Chalmers, A.F. 1982. What Is This Thing Called Science? St. Lucia, Australia: University of Queensland Press.

Chapman, P.S. 1964. Micronesian archaeology: An annotated bibliography. MA thesis, Stanford University.

Chappell, J. 1974. Geology of coral terraces, Huon Peninsula, New Guinea: A study of Quaternary tectonic movements and sea-level changes. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 85:553–70.

———. 1993. Late Pleistocene coasts and human migrations in the Austral Region. In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 43–48. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 21. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Chappell, J., A. Omura, M. McCulloch, T. Esat, Y. Ota, and J. Pandolfi. 1994. Revised late Quaternary sea levels between 70 and 30 Ka from coral terraces at Huon Peninsula. In Y. Ota, ed., Study on Coral Reef Terraces of the Huon Peninsula, Papua New Guinea: Establishment of Quaternary Sea Level and Tectonic History, pp. 155–65. Yokohama: Department of Geography, Yokohama National University.

Chavaillon, C., and E. Olivier. 2007. Le patrimoine archéologique de l’île de Hiva Oa (Archipel des Marquises). Dossier d’Archéologie Polynésienne No. 5. Tahiti: Service de la Culture et du Patrimoine.

Chazine, J.-M. 1977. Prospections archéologiques à Takapoto. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 56–57:191–214.

Chevalier, L. 1963. Le problème des tumuli en Nouvelle-Calédonie. Études Mélanésiennes, n.s., 14–17:24–42.

Chikamori, M. 1967. Preliminary report on the archaeological researches in Western Solomon Islands. [In Japanese] In M. Chikamori and S. Itoh, eds., Eiryo Solomon Shoto ni Okeru Kokogaku-teki, Minzokugakuteki Choza Ryakuho. Privately published by Kaimeido, Tokyo.

———. 1975. The Early Polynesian Settlement on Rennell Island, British Solomon Islands Protectorate. Occasional Papers of the Department of Archaeology and Ethnology, Keio University, No. 1. Tokyo: Keio University.

———. 1996. Development of coral reefs and human settlement: Archaeological research in the Northern Cook Islands and Rarotonga. In I.C. Glover and B. Bellwood, eds., Indo-Pacific Prehistory: The Chiang Mai Papers, vol. 2, pp. 45–52. Canberra: Australian National University.

Chikamori, M., ed. 1998. Archaeological Studies on the Cook Islands, Series 2. Occasional Papers of the Department of Archaeology and Ethnology, Keio University, No. 12. Tokyo: Keio University.

Chikamori, M., and H. Takasugi. 1985. Archaeology on Rennell Island. Occasional Papers of the Department of Archaeology and Ethnology, Keio University, No. 5. Tokyo: Keio University.

Chikamori, M., and S. Yoshida. 1988. An Archaeological Survey of Pukapuka Atoll, 1985. Occasional Papers of the Department of Archaeology and Ethnology, Keio University, No. 6. Tokyo: Keio University.

Chikamori, M., S. Yoshida, and T. Yamaguchi. 1995. Archaeological Studies of the Cook Islands, Series 1. Occasional Papers of the Department of Archaeology and Ethnology, Keio University, No. 10. Tokyo: Keio University.

Chiu, S. 2003. The socio-economic functions of Lapita ceramic production and exchange: A case study from site WKO013A, Kone, New Caledonia. PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

———. 2005. Meanings of a Lapita face: Materialized social memory in ancient house societies. Taiwan Journal of Anthropology 3:1–47.

———. 2012. The way of doing things: What Lapita pottery can tell us about the stories of Austronesian expansion. Journal of Austronesian Studies 3:1–24.

Chiu, S., and C. Sand, eds. 2007. From Southeast Asia to the Pacific: Archaeological Perspectives on the Austronesian Expansion and the Lapita Cultural Complex. Taipei: Academic Sinica.

Christensen, C., and P.V. Kirch. 1981. Nonmarine mollusks from archaeological sites on Tikopia, southeastern Solomon Islands. Pacific Science 35:75–88.

———. 1986. Non-marine mollusks and ecological change at Barbers Point, O‘ahu, Hawai‘i. Bishop Museum Occasional Papers 26:52–80.

Christensen, O.A. 1975. Hunters and horticulturalists: A preliminary report of the 1972–4 excavations in the Manim Valley, Papua New Guinea. Mankind 10: 24–36.

Christian, F.W. 1899. The Caroline Islands: Travel in the Sea of the Little Lands. London: Methuen.

Churchill, W. 1911. The Polynesian Wanderings. Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 134. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution.

Clark, G. 2005. A 3,000-year culture sequence from Palau, Western Micronesia. Asian Perspectives 44:349–80.

———. 2016. Chiefly tombs, lineage history, and the ancient Tongan state. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 11:326–43.

Clark, G., and A. Anderson. 2001. The pattern of Lapita settlement in Fiji. Archaeology in Oceania 36:77–88.

Clark, G., and A. Anderson, eds. 2009. The Early Prehistory of Fiji. Terra Australis 31. Canberra: Australian National University.

Clark, G., A.J. Anderson, and T. Vunidilo, eds. 2001. The Archaeology of Lapita Dispersal in Oceania. Terra Australis 17. Canberra: Australian National University.

Clark, G., A. Anderson, and D. Wright. 2006. Human colonization of the Palau Islands, Western Micronesia. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 1:215–32.

Clark, G., D. Burley, and T. Murray. 2008. Monumentality and the development of the Tongan maritime chiefdom. Antiquity 82:994–1008.

Clark, G., and C. Reepmeyer. 2014. Stone architecture, monumentality, and the rise of the early Tongan chiefdom. Antiquity 88:1244–60.

Clark, G., C. Reepmeyer, and N. Melekiola. 2016. The rapid emergence of the archaic Tongan state: The royal tomb of Paepaeotelea. Antiquity 90:1038–53.

Clark, G.R., C. Reepmeyer, N. Melekiola, J. Woodhead, W.R. Dickinson, and H. Martinsson-Wallin. 2014. Stone tools from the ancient Tongan state reveal prehistoric interaction centers in the Central Pacific. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 111:10491–96.

Clark, J.T. 1996. Samoan prehistory in review. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 445–60. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Clark, J.T., and A.O. Cole. 1997. Environmental change and human prehistory in the Central Pacific: Archaeological and palynological investigations on Totoya Island, Fiji. Report submitted to the Fiji Museum, Suva.

Clark, J.T., and D.J. Herdrich. 1993. Prehistoric settlement system in eastern Tutuila, American Samoa. Journal of the Polynesian Society 102:147–86.

Clark, J.T., and K.M. Kelly. 1993. Human genetics, paleoenvironments, and malaria: Relationships and implications for the settlement of Oceania. American Anthropologist 95:612–30.

Clark, J.T., and P.V. Kirch, eds. 1983. Archaeological Investigations in the Mudlane–Waimea–Kawaihae Road Corridor, Island of Hawaii: An Interdisciplinary Study of an Environmental Transect. Department of Anthropology Report No. 83–1. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Clark, J.T., and M.G. Michlovic. 1996. An early settlement in the Polynesian homeland: Excavations at ‘Aoa Valley, Tutuila Island, American Samoa. Journal of Field Archaeology 26:151–68.

Clark, J.T., S. Quintus, M.I. Weisler, E. St Pierre, L. Nothdurft, and Y. Feng. 2016. Refining the chronology for West Polynesian colonization: New data from the Samoan archipelago. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 6:266–74.

Clark, R. 1979. Language. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 249–70. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 1991. Fingota/Fangota: Shellfish and fishing in Polynesia. In A. Pawley, ed., Man and a Half: Essays in Pacific Anthropology and Ethnobiology in Honour of Ralph Bulmer, pp. 78–83. Auckland, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

———. 1996. Linguistic consequences of the Kuwae eruption. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 275–85. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Clarke, A.C., M.K. Burtenshaw, P.A. McLenachan, D.L. Erickson, and D. Penny. 2006. Reconstructing the origins and dispersal of the Polynesian bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria). Molecular Biology and Evolution 23:893–900.

Cleghorn, P. 1986. Organizational structure at the Mauna Kea Adze Quarry Complex, Hawai‘i. Journal of Archaeological Science 13:375–87.

Clune, F.J., Jr. 1974. Archaeological survey of Truk, Micronesia. Micronesica 10:205–6.

Cochrane, E.E. 2009. The Evolutionary Archaeology of Ceramic Diversity in Ancient Fiji. Oxford: Archaeopress.

———. 2013. Quantitative phylogenetic analyses of Lapita decoration in Near and Remote Oceania. In G.R. Summerhayes and H. Buckley, eds., Pacific Archaeology: Documenting the Past 50,000 Years, pp. 17–42. University of Otago Studies in Archaeology No. 25. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago.

Cochrane, E.E., H. Kane, C. Fletcher III, M. Horrocks, J. Mills, M. Barbee, A.E. Morrison, and M.M. Tautunu, 2015. Lack of suitable coastal plains likely influenced Lapita (∼2800 cal. BP) settlement of Sāmoa: Evidence from south-eastern ‘Upolu. Holocene 26:126–35.

Coil, J., and P.V. Kirch. 2005. An Ipomoean landscape: Archaeology and the sweet potato in Kahikinui, Maui, Hawaiian Islands. In C. Ballard, P. Brown, R.M. Bourke, and T. Harwood, eds., The Sweet Potato in Oceania: A Reappraisal, pp. 71–84. Oceania Monograph No. 56. Sydney: University of Sydney.

Cole, J.D. 1996. Function and development in the East New Guinea Highlands. Archaeology in Oceania 31:12–18.

Coleman, P.J., ed. 1973. The Western Pacific: Island Arcs, Marginal Seas, Geochemistry. Nedlands: University of Western Australia Press.

Collerson, K.D., and M.I. Weisler. 2007. Stone adze compositions and the extent of ancient Polynesian voyaging and trade. Science 317:1907–11.

Commendador, A.S., J.V. Dudgeon, B.P. Finney, B.T. Fuller, and K.S. Esh. 2013. A stable isotope (δ13C and δ15N) perspective on human diet on Rapa Nui (Easter Island) ca. AD 1400–1900. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 152:173–85.

Condliffe, J.B. 1971. Te Rangi Hiroa: The Life of Sir Peter Buck. Christchurch, New Zealand: Whitcombe and Tombs.

Conte, E. 1988. L’Exploitation traditionelle des ressources marines à Napuka (Tuamotu–Polynésie française). PhD dissertation, University of Paris I (Panthéon-Sorbonne).

———. 2000. L’Archéologie en Polynésie française: Esquisse d’un bilan critique. Pape’ete, Tahiti: Au Vent des Iles.

Conte, E., and A.J. Anderson. 2003. Radiocarbon ages for two sites on Ua Huka, Marquesas. Asian Perspectives 42:155–60.

Conte, E., and J. Dennison. 1995. An anthropological study of the burials in Marae Te Tahata, Tepoto (Tuamotu Archipelago, French Polynesia). Journal of the Polynesian Society 104:397–427.

———. 2010. Te Tahata: Étude d’un Marae de Tepoto, Archipel des Tuamotu, Polynésie française. Les Cahiers du CIRAP 1. Tahiti: Universite de la Polynésie Française.

Conte, E., and P.V. Kirch, eds. 2004. Archaeological Investigations in the Mangareva Islands, French Polynesia, Contributions of the Archaeological Research Facility, No. 62. Berkeley: University of California.

Conte, E., and G. Molle. 2012. Vestiges d’une histoire marquisienne: Contribution a l’archéologie de Ua Huka. Les Cahiers du CIRAP, No. 2. Tahiti: University of French Polynesia.

———. 2014. Reinvestigating a key site for Polynesian prehistory: New results from the Hane dune site, Ua Huka (Marquesas). Archaeology in Oceania 49:121–36.

Cordy, R. 1974. Cultural adaptation and evolution in Hawaii: A suggested new sequence. Journal of the Polynesian Society 83:180–91.

———. 1980. Archaeology in Micronesia. Journal of the Polynesian Society 89:359–65.

———. 1981. A Study of Prehistoric Social Change: The Development of Complex Societies in the Hawaiian Islands. New York: Academic Press.

———. 1982. A summary of archaeological work in Micronesia since 1977. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 3:118–28.

———. 1983. Social stratification in the Mariana Islands. Oceania 53:272–76.

———. 1985. Investigations of Leluh’s stone ruins. National Geographic Research 1:255–63.

———. 1986. Relationships between the extent of social stratification and population in Micronesian polities at European contact. American Anthropologist 88:136–42.

———. 1993. The Lelu Stone Ruins (Kosrae, Micronesia): 1978–1981 Historical and Archaeological Research. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series No. 10. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawai‘i.

———. 2000. Exalted Sits the Chief: The Ancient History of Hawai‘i Island. Honolulu: Mutual Publishing.

Cox, J.H., and E. Stasack. 1970. Hawaiian Petroglyphs. Special Publication No. 60. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Craib, J.L. 1983. Micronesian prehistory: An archaeological overview. Science 219:922–27.

———. 1984. Settlement on Ulithi Atoll, Western Caroline Islands. Asian Perspectives 24:47–56.

———. 1986. Casas de los Antiguos: Social differentiation in protohistoric Chamorro society, Marianas Islands. PhD dissertation, University of Sydney.

Cristino, C., and P. Vargas. 1980. Prospección arqueológica de isla de Pascua. Anales de la Universidad de Chile 161–62:191–215.

———. 1998. Archaeological excavations and restoration of Ahu Tongariki. In P. Vargas, ed., Easter Island and East Polynesian Prehistory, pp. 153–58. Santiago: Instituto de Estudios Isla de Pascua, Universidad de Chile.

Cristino, C., P. Vargas, and S. Izaurieta. 1981. Atlas arqueólogica de isla de Pascua. Santiago: Faculty of Architecture and Urban Studies, University of Chile.

Damon, A. 1974. Human ecology in the Solomon Islands: Biomedical observations among four tribal societies. Human Ecology 2:191–215.

Darwin, C. 1842. Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs. London: Smith, Elder.

Davenport, W.H. 1962. Red feather money. Scientific American 206(3):94–103.

———. 1972. Preliminary excavations on Santa Ana Island, eastern Solomon Islands. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 7:165–83.

David, B. 2008. Rethinking cultural chronologies and past landscape engagement in the Kopi region, Gulf Province, Papua New Guinea. Holocene 18:463–79.

David, B., N. Araho, B. Barker, A. Kuaso, and I. Moffat. 2009. Keveoki 1: Exploring the Hiri ceramics trade at a short-lived village site near the Vailala River, Papua New Guinea. Australian Archaeology 68:11–27.

David, B., A. Fairbairn, K. Aplin, L. Murepe, M. Green, J. Stanisc, M. Weisler, D. Simala, T. Kokents, J. Dop, and J. Muke. 2007. OJP, a terminal Pleistocene archaeological site from the Gulf Province lowlands, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 42:31–33.

David, B., J.-M. Geneste, K. Aplin, J.-J. Delannoy, N. Araho, C. Clarkson, K. Connell, S. Haberle, B. Barker, L. Lamb, J. Stanisic, A. Fairbairn, R. Skelly, and C. Rowe. 2010. The Emo site (OAC), Gulf Province, Papua New Guinea: Resolving long-standing questions of antiquity and implications for the history of the ancestral Hiri maritime trade. Australian Archaeology 70:39–54.

David, B., I.J. McNiven, T. Richards, S.P. Connaughton, M. Leavesley, B. Barker, and C. Rowe. 2011. Lapita sites in the Central Province of mainland Papua New Guinea. World Archaeology 43:576–93.

Davidson, J.M. 1967a. An archaeological assemblage of simple fishhooks from Nukuoro Atoll. Journal of the Polynesian Society 76:177–96.

———. 1967b. Archaeology on coral atolls. In G.A. Highland, R.W. Force, A. Howard, M. Kelly, and Y.H. Sinoto, eds. Polynesian Culture History: Essays in Honor of Kenneth P. Emory, pp. 363–75. Special Publication 56. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1969. Archaeological excavations in two burials mounds at ‘Atele, Tongatapu. Records of the Auckland Institute and Museum 6:251–86.

———. 1971. Archaeology on Nukuoro Atoll: A Polynesian Outlier in the Eastern Caroline Islands. Auckland Institute and Museum Bulletin 9. Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland Institute and Museum.

———. 1977. Western Polynesia and Fiji: Prehistoric contact, diffusion and differentiation in adjacent archipelagoes. World Archaeology 9:82–94.

———. 1979. Samoa and Tonga. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 82–109. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 1984. The Prehistory of New Zealand. Auckland: Longman Paul.

———. 1988. Archaeology in Micronesia since 1965: Past achievements and future prospects. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 10:83–100.

———. 1992. New evidence about the date of colonisation of Nukuoro Atoll, a Polynesian Outlier in the eastern Caroline Islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 101:293–98.

———. 1993. Issues in New Zealand prehistory since 1954. In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 239–58. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 21. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 2012. Intrusion, integration and innovation on small and not-so-small islands with particular reference to Samoa. Archaeology in Oceania 47:1–13.

Davidson, J.M., E. Hinds, S. Holdaway, and F. Leach. 1990. The Lapita site of Natunuku, Fiji. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 12:121–55.

Davidson, J.M., and F. Leach. 1993. The chronology of the Natunuku site, Fiji. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 15:99–105.

———. 1996. Fishing on Nukuoro Atoll: Ethnographic and archaeological viewpoints. In M. Julien, M. Orliac, and C. Orliac, eds., Mémoire de pierre, mémoire d’homme: Tradition et archéologie en Océanie, pp. 183–202. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne.

Davis, W.M. 1928. The Coral Reef Problem. American Geographic Society Special Publication No. 9. New York: American Geographic Society.

DeBoer, W.R. 1991. The decorative burden: Design, medium, and change. In W.A. Longacre, ed., Ceramic Ethnoarchaeology, pp. 144–61. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.

De Brosses, C. 1756. Histoire des navigations aux Terres Australes. Paris: Durand.

DeGusta, D. 1999. Fijian cannibalism: Osteological evidence from Navatu. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 110:215–41.

———. 2000. Fijian cannibalism and mortuary ritual: Bioarchaeological evidence from Vunda. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 10:76–92.

Dempwolff, O. 1934–38. Vergleichende Lautlehre des Austronesischen Wortshatzes. 3 vols. Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für Eingeborenen-Sprachen 15, 17, 19. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer.

Denham, T. 2003. Archaeological evidence for mid-Holocene agriculture in the interior of Papua New Guinea: A critical review. Archaeology in Oceania 38:159–76.

———. 2004. Early agriculture in the highlands of New Guinea: An assessment of Phase 1 at Kuk Swamp. In V. Attenbrow and R. Fullagar, eds., A Pacific Odyssey: Archaeology and Anthropology in the Western Pacific, Papers in Honour of Jim Specht, pp. 47–57. Records of the Australian Museum, Supplement, vol. 29.

———. 2005. Envisaging early agriculture in the Highlands of New Guinea: Landscapes, plants and practices. World Archaeology 37:290–306.

———. 2006. Envisioning early agriculture in the Highlands of New Guinea. In I. Lilley, ed., Archaeology of Oceania, Australia and the Pacific Islands, pp. 160–88. London: Blackwell.

———. 2007. Exploiting diversity: Plant exploitation and occupation in the interior of New Guinea during the Pleistocene. Archaeology in Oceania 42:41–48.

———. 2011. Early agriculture and plant domestication in New Guinea and island Southeast Asia. Current Anthropology 52(S4):S3479–S3495.

Denham, T., R. Fullagar, and L. Head. 2009. Plant exploitation on Sahul: From colonisation to the emergence of regional specialisation during the Holocene. Quaternary International 202:29–40.

Denham, T.P., and S.G. Haberle. 2008. Agricultural emergence and transformation in the Upper Wahgi Valley during the Holocene: Theory, method and practice. Holocene 18:481–96.

Denham, T.P., S.G. Haberle, and C. Lentfer. 2004. New evidence and revised interpretations for early agriculture in Highland New Guinea. Antiquity 78:839–57.

Denham, T.P., S.G. Haberle, C. Lentfer, R. Fullagar, J. Field, M. Therin, N. Porch, and B. Winsborough. 2003. Origins of agriculture at Kuk Swamp in the highlands of New Guinea. Science 301:189–93.

Denham, T., C.B. Ramsey, and J. Specht. 2012. Dating the appearance of Lapita pottery in the Bismarck Archipelago and its dispersal to Remote Oceania. Archaeology in Oceania 47:39–46.

Dening, G. 1962. The geographical knowledge of the Polynesians and the nature of inter-island contact. In J. Golson, ed., Polynesian Navigation, pp. 102–32. Polynesian Society Memoir 34. Wellington, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

———. 1980. Islands and Beaches: Discourse on a Silent Land, Marquesas 1774–1880. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 1992. Mr. Bligh’s Bad Language: Passion, Power and Theatre on the Bounty. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Descantes, C. 1990. Symbolic stone structures: Protohistoric and early historic spatial patterns of the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea, French Polynesia. MA thesis, University of Auckland.

———. 1998. Integrating archaeology and ethnohistory: The development of exchange between Yap and Ulithi, western Caroline Islands. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Oregon.

———. 2005. Integrating Archaeology and Ethnohistory: The Development of Exchange between Yap and Ulithi, Western Caroline Islands. BAR International Series 1344. Oxford: Archaeopress.

Diamond, J. 1988. Express train to Polynesia. Nature 336:307–8.

———. 2005. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking.

Diaz, H.F., and V. Markgraf, eds. 1992. El Niño: Historical and Paleoclimatic Aspects of the Southern Oscillation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Dickinson, W.R. 1984. Indigenous and exotic sand tempers in prehistoric potsherds from the central Caroline Islands. In Y.H. Sinoto, ed., Caroline Islands Archaeology, pp. 131–35. Pacific Anthropological Records 35. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1998. Prehistoric temper provinces of prehistoric pottery in Oceania. Records of the Australian Museum 50:263–76.

———. 2003. Impact of mid-Holocene hydro-isostatic highstand in regional sea sevel on habitability of islands in Pacific Oceania. Journal of Coastal Research 19:489–502.

———. 2014. Beach ridges as favored locales for human settlement on Pacific islands. Geoarchaeology 29:249–67.

Dickinson, W.R., and S.J. Athens. 2007. Holocene paleoshoreline and paleoenvironmental history of Palau: Implications for human settlement. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 2:175–96.

Dickinson, W.R., D.V. Burley, P.D. Nunn, A. Anderson, G. Hope, A. de Biran, C. Burke, and S. Matararaba. 1998. Geomorphic and archaeological landscapes of the Sigatoka dunes site, Viti Levu, Fiji: Interdisciplinary investigations. Asian Perspectives 37:1–32.

Dickinson, W.R., D.V. Burley, and R. Shutler Jr. 1994. Impact of hydro-isostatic Holocene sea-level change on the geologic context of island archaeological sites, northern Ha‘apai group, Kingdom of Tonga. Geoarchaeology 9:85–111.

Dickinson, W.R., B.V. Rolett, Y.H. Sinoto, M.E. Rosenthal, and R. Shutler Jr. 1988. Temper sands in exotic Marquesan pottery and the significance of their Fijian origin. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 107:119–33.

Dickinson, W.R., and R. Shutler Jr. 1974. Probable Fijian origin of quartzose temper sands in prehistoric pottery from Tonga and the Marquesas. Science 185:454–57.

———. 1979. Petrography of sand tempers in Pacific island potsherds. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 90:993–95, 1644–1701.

Di Piazza, A. 1990. Les jardins enfouis de Futuna: Une ethno-archéologie de l’horticulture. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 91:151–62.

Di Piazza, A., and E. Pearthree. 2001. Voyaging and basalt exchange in the Phoenix and Line Archipelagoes: The viewpoint from three mystery islands. Archaeology in Oceania 36:146–52.

———. 2004. Sailing Routes of Old Polynesia: The Prehistoric Discovery, Settlement and Abandonment of the Phoenix Islands. Bishop Museum Bulletins in Anthropology 11. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Di Piazza, A., E. Pearthree, and C. Sand, eds. 2008. At the Heart of Ancient Societies: French Contributions to Pacific Archaeology. Les Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie, vol. 18. Noumea: Département Archéologie.

Dixon, B., P.J. Conte, V. Nagahara, and W.K. Hodgins. 1999. Risk minimization and the traditional ahupua‘a in Kahikinui, island of Maui, Hawai‘i. Asian Perspectives 38:229–54.

Dixon, B., T. Mangieri, E. McDowell, K. Paraso, and T. Rieth. 2006. Prehistoric Chamorro household activities and refuse disposal patterns on the Micronesian island of Tinian, Commonwealth of the northern Marianas Islands. Micronesica 39:55–71.

Dixon, R.B. 1929. The peopling of the Pacific. Philippine Magazine 26:195–97, 244–45.

Dodson, J., ed. 1992. The Naive Lands: Prehistory and Environmental Change in Australia and the Southwest Pacific. Melbourne: Longman Cheshire.

Dodson, J., and M. Intoh. 1999. Prehistory and paleoecology of Yap, Federated States of Micronesia. Quaternary International 59:17–26.

Doherty, M. 2007. Post-Lapita developments in the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands, southeast Solomon Islands. PhD dissertation, University of Auckland.

———. 2009. Post-Lapita developments in the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands, southeast Solomon Islands. In P. Sheppard, T. Thomas, and G. Summerhayes, eds., Lapita, Ancestors and Descendants, pp. 181–213. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Donohue, M., and T. Denham. 2008. The language of Lapita: Vanuatu and an early Papuan presence in the Pacific. Oceanic Linguistics 47:365–76.

———. 2012. Lapita and Proto-Oceanic: Thinking outside the pot? Journal of Pacific History 47:443–57.

Donovan, L.J. 1973. A study of the decorative system of the Lapita potters in Reefs and Santa Cruz Islands. MA research essay, University of Auckland.

Dotte-Sarout, E., J. Ouétcho, J. Bolé, D. Barret, and C. Sand. 2013. Of charcoals and forests: Results and perspectives from an archaeobotanical investigation of precolonial Kanak settlement sites in New Caledonia. In G.R. Summerhayes and H. Buckley, eds., Pacific Archaeology: Documenting the Past 50,000 Years, pp. 120–37. University of Otago Studies in Archaeology No. 25. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago.

Downie, J.E., and J.P. White. 1978. Balof Shelter, New Ireland: Report on a small excavation. Records of the Australian Museum 31:762–802.

Dudgeon, J.V., and M. Tromp. 2014. Diet, geography, and drinking water in Polynesia: Microfossil research from archaeological human dental calculus, Rapa Nui (Easter Island). International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 24:634–48.

Duff, R. 1942. Moa-hunters of the Wairau. Records of the Canterbury Museum 5:1–49.

———. 1947. The evolution of native culture in New Zealand: Moa hunters, Morioris, Maoris. Mankind 3:281–91, 313–22.

———. 1950. The Moa Hunter Period of Maori Culture. Wellington, New Zealand: Government Printer.

———. 1967. The evolution of Maori warfare. New Zealand Archaeological Association Newsletter 10:114–29.

———. 1968. A historical survey of archaeology in New Zealand. In W.G. Solheim II, ed., Anthropology at the Eighth Pacific Science Congress, pp. 167–90. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series No. 2. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawai‘i.

Dumont d’Urville, M.J. 1832. Notice sur les îles du Grand Océan et sur l’origine des peuples qui les habitent. Société de Géographie Bulletin 17:1–21.

Dye, T.S. 1988. Social and cultural change in the prehistory of the ancestral Polynesian homeland. PhD dissertation, Yale University.

———. 1989. Tales of two cultures: Traditional historical and archaeological interpretations of Hawaiian prehistory. Bishop Museum Occasional Papers 29:3–22.

———. 1990. The causes and consequences of a decline in the prehistoric Marquesan fishing industry. In D.E. Yen and J.M.J. Mummery, eds., Pacific Production Systems: Approaches to Economic Prehistory, pp. 70–94. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 18. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1996. Assemblage definition, analytic methods, and sources of variability in the interpretation of Marquesan subsistence change. Asian Perspectives 35:73–88.

———. 2010. Social transformation in old Hawai‘i: A bottom-up approach. American Antiquity 75:727–41.

———. 2011. A model-based age estimate for Polynesian colonization of Hawai‘i. Archaeology in Oceania 46:130–38.

———. 2014. Wealth in old Hawai‘i: Good-year economics and the rise of pristine states. Archaeology in Oceania 49:59–85.

———. 2015. Dating human dispersal in Remote Oceania: A Bayesian view from Hawai‘i. World Archaeology 47:661–76.

Dye, T.S., ed. 1987. Marshall Islands Archaeology. Pacific Anthropological Records 38. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Dye, T.S., and P.L. Cleghorn. 1990. Prehistoric use of the interior of southern Guam. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 261–74.

Dye, T.S., and E. Komori. 1992. A pre-censal population history of Hawaii. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 14:113–28.

Dye, T.S., and J.J. Pantaleo. 2010. Age of the O18 site, Hawai‘i. Archaeology in Oceania 45:113–19.

Dyen, I. 1965. A Lexicostatistical Classification of the Austronesian Languages. International Journal of American Linguistics Memoir 19. Baltimore, MD: Waverly Press.

Earle, T. 1978. Economic and Social Organization of a Complex Chiefdom: The Halelea District, Kaua‘i, Hawaii. Anthropological Papers No. 63. Ann Arbor: Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan.

———. 1997. How Chiefs Come to Power: The Political Economy in Prehistory. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Earle, T., ed. 1991. Chiefdoms: Power, Economy, and Ideology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Earle, T., and M. Spriggs. 2015. Political economy in prehistory: A Marxist approach to Pacific sequences. Current Anthropology 56:515–44.

Eddowes, M.D. 1991. Ethnohistorical perspectives on the marae of the Society Islands: The sociology of use. MA thesis, University of Auckland.

———. 2004. Étude archaeologique de l’île de Rimatara (Archipel des Australes). Dossier d’Archéologie Polynésienne, No. 3. Tahiti: Ministère de la Culture de Polynésie Française.

Edwards, E. 2003. Ra‘ivavae: Archaeological Survey of Ra‘ivavae, Austral Islands, French Polynesia. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

Edwards, E., and A. Edwards. 2013. When the Universe Was an Island: Exploring the Cultural and Spiritual Cosmos of Ancient Rapa Nui. Rapa Nui: Hangroa Press.

Egloff, B. 1971. Archaeological research in the Collingwood Bay area of Papua. Asian Perspectives 14:60–64.

———. 1978. The Kula before Malinowski: A changing configuration. Mankind 11:429–35.

———. 1979. Recent Prehistory in Southeast Papua. Terra Australis 4. Canberra: Australian National University.

Ehrenreich, R.M., C. Crumley, and J.E. Levy, eds. 1995. Heterarchy and the Analysis of Complex Societies. Archaeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association No. 6. Arlington, VA: American Anthropological Association.

Eissen, J.-P., M. Monzier, and C. Robin. 1994. Kuwae, l’éruption volcanique oubliée. La Recherche 270:1200–1202.

Elliot, M.B., B. Stiewski, J.R. Flenley, and D.G. Sutton. 1995. Palynological and sedimentological evidence for a radiocarbon chronology of environmental change and Polynesian deforestation from Lake Taumatawhana, Northland, New Zealand. Radiocarbon 37:899–916.

Ellis, W. 1830. Polynesian Researches. London: Fisher, Son, and Jackson.

Ellison, J. 1994. Palaeo-lake and swamp stratigraphic records of Holocene vegetation and sea-level changes, Mangaia, Cook Islands. Pacific Science 48:1–15.

Emory, K.P. 1924. The Island of Lanai: A Survey of Native Culture. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 12. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1928. Archaeology of Nihoa and Necker Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 53. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1933. Stone Remains in the Society Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 116. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1934a. Archaeology of the Pacific Equatorial Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 123. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1934b. Tuamotuan Stone Structures. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 118. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1939. Archaeology of Mangareva and Neighboring Atolls. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 163. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1947. Tuamotuan Religious Structures and Ceremonies. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 191. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1959. Origin of the Hawaiians. Journal of the Polynesian Society 68:29–35.

———. 1962. Archaeological investigation of Polynesia. Mimeographed proposal to the U.S. National Science Foundation. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu.

———. 1968. East Polynesian relationships as revealed through adzes. In I. Yawata and Y. Sinoto, eds., Prehistoric Culture in Oceania, pp. 151–69. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1979. The Society Islands. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 200–221. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Emory, K.P., W.J. Bonk, and Y.H. Sinoto. 1959. Hawaiian Archaeology: Fishhooks. Special Publication 47. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1969. Waiahukini Shelter, Site H8, Ka‘u, Hawaii. Pacific Anthropological Records 7. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Emory, K.P., and Y.H. Sinoto. 1961. Hawaiian Archaeology: Oahu Excavations. Special Publication 49. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1964. Eastern Polynesian burials at Maupiti. Journal of the Polynesian Society 75:143–60.

———. 1965. Preliminary report on the archaeological investigations in Polynesia. Mimeographed report to the National Science Foundation. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu.

Endicott, J.M. 2000. Archaeological and ethnohistoric evidence for protohistoric social relations on Mangaia Island, Cook Islands. PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

Englert, Père S. 1948. La tierra de Hotu Matu’a. Santiago, Chile: Padre las Casas.

———. 1970. Island at the Center of the World. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Enright, N.J., and C. Gosden. 1992. Unstable archipelagoes: South-west Pacific environment and prehistory since 30,000 B.P. In J. Dodson, ed., The Naive Lands: Prehistory and Environmental Change in Australia and the Southwest Pacific, pp. 160–98. Melbourne: Longman Cheshire.

Fairbairn, A. 2005. An archaeobotanical perspective on Holocene plant-use practices in lowland northern New Guinea. World Archaeology 37:487–502.

Fairbairn, A.S., G.S. Hope, and G.R. Summerhayes. 2006. Pleistocene occupation of New Guinea’s highland and subalpine environments. World Archaeology 38:371–86.

Fairbairn, A., and P. Swadling. 2005. Re-dating mid-Holocene betelnut (Areca catechu L.) and other plant use at Dongan, Papua New Guinea. Radiocarbon 47:377–82.

Feil, D.K. 1987. The Evolution of Papua New Guinea Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Feinberg, R., and R. Scaglion, eds. 2012. Polynesian Outliers: The State of the Art. Ethnology Monographs No. 21. Pittsburgh, PA: Department of Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh.

Felgate, M.W. 2001. A Roviana ceramic sequence and the prehistory of Near Oceania: Work in progress. In G.R. Clark, A.J. Anderson, and T. Vunidilo, eds., The Archaeology of Lapita Dispersal in Oceania, pp. 39–60. Terra Australis 17. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 2003. Reading Lapita in Near Oceania: Intertidal and shallow-water pottery scatters, Roviana Lagoon, New Georgia, Solomon Islands. PhD Dissertation, University of Auckland.

Field, J.S. 1998. Natural and constructed defenses in Fijian fortifications. Asian Perspectives 37:32–58.

———. 2003. The evolution of competition and cooperation in Fijian prehistory: Archaeological research in the Sigatoka Valley, Fiji. PhD dissertation, University of Hawai‘i, Manoa.

———. 2004. Environmental and climatic considerations: A hypothesis for conflict and the emergence of social complexity in Fijian prehistory. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 23:79–99.

Field, J.S., and M.W. Graves, eds. 2015. Abundance and Resilience: Farming and Foraging in Ancient Kauai. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Field, J.S., P.V. Kirch, K. Kawelu, and T.N. Ladefoged. 2010. Households and hierarchy: Domestic modes of production in leeward Kohala, Hawai‘i Island. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 5:52–85.

Field, J.S., T.N. Ladefoged, and P.V. Kirch. 2011. Household expansion linked to agricultural intensification during emergence of Hawaiian archaic states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 108:7327–32.

Field, J.S., T.N. Ladefoged, W.D. Sharp, and P.V. Kirch. 2011. Residential chronology, household subsistence, and the emergence of socioeconomic territories in leeward Kohala, Hawai‘i Island. Radiocarbon 53:605–27.

Field, J.S., and P. Lape. 2010. Paleoclimates and the emergence of fortifications in the tropical Pacific islands. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 29:113–24.

Finney, B.R. 1977. Voyaging canoes and the settlement of Polynesia. Science 196:1277–85.

———. 1985. Anomalous westerlies, El Niño, and the colonization of Polynesia. American Anthropologist 87:9–26.

———. 1988. Voyaging against the direction of the trades: A report of an experimental canoe voyage from Samoa to Tahiti. American Anthropologist 90:401–5.

———. 1994. Voyage of Rediscovery: A Cultural Odyssey through Polynesia. Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 1996a. Colonizing an island world. In W.H. Goodenough, ed., Prehistoric Settlement of the Pacific, pp. 71–116. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 86(5).

———. 1996b. Putting voyaging back into Polynesian prehistory. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 365–76. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Finney, B., P. Frost, R. Rhodes, and N. Thompson. 1989. Wait for the west wind. Journal of the Polynesian Society 98:261–302.

Finney, B., B.J. Kilonsky, S. Somsen, and E.D. Stroup. 1986. Re-learning a vanishing art. Journal of the Polynesian Society 95:41–90.

Firth, R. 1936. We, the Tikopia. London: George Allen and Unwin.

———. 1961. History and Traditions of Tikopia. Wellington, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

Fischer, S.R., ed. 1993. Easter Island Studies: Contributions to the History of Rapanui in Memory of William T. Mulloy. Oxbow Monograph 32. Oxford: Oxbow.

———. 1997. Rongorongo, the Easter Island Script: History, Traditions, Texts. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Fitzpatrick, S.M. 2001. Archaeological investigation of Omis Cave: A Yapese stone money quarry in Palau. Archaeology in Oceania 36:153–62.

———. 2003. Early human burials in the Western Pacific: Evidence for a c. 3000 year old occupation on Palau. Antiquity 77:719–31.

———. 2007. Maritime interregional interaction in Micronesia: Deciphering multi-group contacts and exchange systems through time. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 27:131–47.

———. 2014. The archaeology of Western Micronesia. In E. Cochrane and T. Hunt, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Prehistoric Oceania. Oxford Handbooks Online. DOI:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199925070.013.012.

Fitzpatrick, S.M., and R. Callaghan. 2013. Estimating trajectories of colonization to the Mariana Islands, Western Pacific. Antiquity 87:840–53.

Flannery, T.F. 1994. The Future Eaters: An Ecological History of the Australasian Lands and People. New York: George Braziller.

Flannery, T.F., P.V. Kirch, J. Specht, and M. Spriggs. 1988. Holocene mammal faunas from archaeological sites in island Melanesia. Archaeology in Oceania 23:89–94.

Flannery, T.F., and J.P. White. 1991. Animal translocations: Zoogeography of New Ireland mammals. National Geographic Research and Exploration 7:96–113.

Flenley, J., and P. Bahn. 2002. The Enigmas of Easter Island. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Flenley, J.R., and S.M. King. 1984. Late Quaternary pollen records from Easter Island. Nature 307:47–50.

Flenley, J., S. King, J. Jackson, C. Chew, J. Teller, and M. Prentice. 1991. The Late Quaternary vegetational and climatic history of Easter Island. Journal of Quaternary Science 6:85–115.

Flexner, J.L., M.A. Mulrooney, M.D. McCoy, and P.V. Kirch. 2017. Visualizing Hawaiian sacred sites: The archives and J.F.G. Stokes’s pioneering archaeological surveys, 1906–1913. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 8:63–76.

Flint, J., A.J. Boyce, J.J. Martinson, and J.B. Clegg. 1989. Population bottlenecks in Polynesia revealed by minisatellites. Human Genetics 83:257–63.

Foley, W.A. 1986. The Papuan Languages of New Guinea. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2000. The languages of New Guinea. Annual Review of Anthropology 29:357–404.

Force, R.W. 1964. Annual Report of the Director for 1962. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1965. Polynesian culture history. Mimeographed proposal to the U.S. National Science Foundation. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu.

Ford, A. 2011. Learning the lithic landscape: Using raw material sources to investigate Pleistocene colonisation in the Ivane Valley, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 46:42–53.

Fornander, A. 1878. An Account of the Polynesian Race. London: Trubner.

Forster, J.R. 1996 [1778]. Observations Made during a Voyage Round the World. Ed. N. Thomas, H. Guest, and M. Dettelbach. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Fosberg, F.R. 1963a. Disturbance in island ecosystems. In J.L. Gressitt, ed., Pacific Basin Biogeography, pp. 557–61. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1963b. The island ecosystem. In F.R. Fosberg, ed., Man’s Place in the Island Ecosystem: A Symposium, pp. 1–7. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Fosberg, F.R., ed. 1963. Man’s Place in the Island Ecosystem. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Fox, A. 1976. Prehistoric Maori Fortifications. Auckland, New Zealand: Longman Paul.

———. 1978. Tiromoana Pa, Te Awanga, Hawke’s Bay. Excavations 1974–5. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 8. Dunedin: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Fox, A., and R.C. Green. 1982. Excavations at Maioro, N51/5, South Auckland, 1965–66. Records of the Auckland Institute and Museum 19:53–80.

Fox, J.J. 1994. Who’s who in Ego’s generation: Probing the semantics of Malayo-Polynesian kinship classification. In A.K. Pawley and M.D. Ross, eds., Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change, pp. 127–40. Pacific Linguistics C-127. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1995. Austronesian societies and their transformations. In P. Bellwood, J.J. Fox, and D. Tryon, eds., The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, pp. 214–28. Canberra: Australian National University.

François, A., S. Lacrampe, M. Franjieh, and S. Schnell, eds. 2015. The Languages of Vanuatu: Unity and Diversity. Asia-Pacific Linguistics: Studies in the Languages of Island Melanesia. Canberra: Australian National University.

Frankel, D., and J.W. Rhoads. 1994. Archaeology of a Coastal Exchange System: Sites and Ceramics of the Papuan Gulf. Research Papers in Archaeology and Natural History No. 25. Canberra: Australian National University.

Fredericksen, C., M. Spriggs, and W. Ambrose. 1993. Pamwak rockshelter: A Pleistocene site on Manus Island, Papua New Guinea. In M.A. Smith, M. Spriggs, and B. Fankhauser, eds., Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia, pp. 144–54. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Freeland, T., B. Heung, D.V. Burley, G. Clark, and A. Knudby. 2016. Automated feature extraction for prospection and analysis of monumental earthworks from aerial LiDAR in the Kingdom of Tonga. Journal of Archaeological Science 69:64–74.

French-Wright, R. 1983. Proto-Oceanic horticultural practices. MA thesis, University of Auckland.

Fried, M. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society. New York: Random House.

Friedlaender, J.S. 1987. Conclusion. In J.S. Friedlaender, ed., The Solomon Islands Project: A Long-Term Study of Health, Human Biology, and Culture Change, pp. 351–64. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Friedlaender, J.S., ed. 1987. The Solomon Islands Project: A Long-Term Study of Health, Human Biology, and Culture Change. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

———. 2007. Genes, Language, and Culture History in the Southwest Pacific. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Friedlaender, J.S., F.R. Friedlaender, F.A. Reef, K.K. Kidd, J.R. Kidd, G.K. Chambers, R.A. Lea, J.-H. Loo, G. Koki, J.A. Hodgson, D.A. Merriwether, and J.L. Weber. 2008. The genetic structure of Pacific islanders. PLoS Genetics 4:1–18.

Friedlaender, J.S., and L.B. Page. 1987. Epidemiology. In J.S. Friedlaender, ed., The Solomon Islands Project: A Long-Term Study of Health, Human Biology, and Culture Change, pp. 89–121. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Friedman, J. 1981. Notes on structure and history in Oceania. Folk 23:275–95.

Friedman, J., and M. Rowlands. 1978. Notes toward an epigenetic model of the evolution of “civilisation.” In J. Friedman and M. Rowlands, eds., The Evolution of Social Systems, pp. 201–76. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.

Frimigacci, D. 1974. Les deux niveaux à poterie du site du Vatcha. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 30:25–70.

———. 1975. La préhistoire neo-calédonien. Thèse de 3e Cycle, University of Paris I.

———. 1990. Aux temps de la terre noire: Ethno-archéologie des îles Futuna et Alofi. Paris: Peeters.

———. 2000. La préhistoire d’Uvéa (Wallis). Journal de la Société des Océanistes 111:135–63.

Frimigacci, D., and M. Hardy. 1997. Des archéologues, des conquérants, et des forts: Talietumu: Résidence tongienne d’Uvea. Versailles: Art Lys.

Froehlich, J.W. 1987. Fingerprints as phylogenetic markers in the Solomon Islands. In J.S. Friedlaender, ed., The Solomon Islands Project: A Long-Term Study of Health, Human Biology, and Culture Change, pp. 175–214. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Frost, E.L. 1974. Archaeological Excavations of Fortified Sites on Taveuni, Fiji. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series No. 6. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawaii.

———. 1979. Fiji. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 61–81. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Fujimura, K., and W.H. Alkire. 1984. Archaeological test excavations of Faraulep, Woleai, and Lamotrek in the Caroline Islands of Micronesia. In Y.H. Sinoto, ed., Caroline Islands Archaeology, pp. 66–130. Pacific Anthropological Records 35. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Fullagar, R., J. Field, T.P. Denham, and C. Lentfer. 2006. Early and mid-Holocene processing of taro (Colocasia esculenta) and yam (Dioscorea sp.) at Kuk Swamp in the highlands of Papua New Guinea. Journal of Archaeological Science 33:595–614.

Furey, L. 2006. Maori Gardening: An Archaeological Perspective. Wellington, New Zealand: Department of Conservation.

Furey, L., and S. Holdaway, eds. 2004. Change through Time: 50 Years of New Zealand Archaeology. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 26. Auckland.

Gaffney, D., A. Ford, and G. Summerhayes. 2015. Crossing the Pleistocene–Holocene transition in the New Guinea Highlands: Evidence from the lithic assemblage of Kiowa rockshelter. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 39:223–46.

———. 2016. Sue Bulmer’s legacy in highland New Guinea: A re-examination of the Bulmer Collection and future directions. Archaeology in Oceania 51:23–32.

Gaffney, D., G.R. Summerhayes, A. Ford, J.M. Scott, T. Denham, J. Field, and W.R. Dickinson. 2015. Earliest pottery on New Guinea mainland reveals Austronesian influences in highland environments 3000 years ago. PLoS ONE DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0134497.

Galipaud, J.-C. 1988. La poterie préhistorique neo-calédonien et ses implications dans l’étude du processus de peuplement du Pacifique Occidental. Thèse de doctorat, University of Paris I.

———. 1992. Un ou plusieurs peuples potiers en Nouvelle-Calédonie? Analyse physico-chimique des poteries préhistoriques de Nouvelle-Calédonie. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 95:185–200.

———. 1995. A revision of the archaeological sequence of southern New Caledonia. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 17:77–109.

———. 1996a. Poteries et potiers de Vanuatu. In J. Bonnemaison, K. Huffman, and D. Tryon, eds., Vanuatu—Océanie: Arts des Iles de Cendre et de Corail, pp. 98–103. Paris: Editions de la Réunion des Musées Nationaux.

———. 1996b. Le rouge et le noir: La poterie Mangaasi et le peuplement des îles de Mélansie. In M. Julien, M. Orliac, and C. Orliac, eds., Mémoire de pierre, mémoire d’homme: Tradition et archéologie en Océanie, pp. 115–30. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne.

Galipaud, J.-C., and I. Lilley, eds. 1999. Le Pacifique de 5000 à 2000 avant le présent: Supplements a l’histoire d’une colonisation. Paris: Editions de IRD.

Garanger, J. 1967. Archaeology and the Society Islands. In G.A. Highland, R.W. Force, A. Howard, M. Kelly, and Y.H. Sinoto, eds., Polynesian Culture History: Essays in Honor of Kenneth P. Emory, pp. 377–96. Special Publication No. 56. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1972a. Archéologie des Nouvelles-Hébrides. Publication de la Société des Océanistes No. 30. Paris: Société des Océanistes.

———. 1972b. Mythes et archéologie en Océanie. La Recherche 21:233–42.

———. 1996. Tongoa, Mangaasi, et Eretoka: Histoires d’une préhistoire. In J. Bonnemaison, K. Huffman, and D. Tryon, eds., Vanuatu—Océanie: Arts des îles de Cendre et de Corail, pp. 68–75. Paris: Editions de la Réunion des Musées Nationaux.

Garling, S.J. 2003. Tanga takes the stage: Another model “transitional” site? New evidence and a contribution to the “incised and applied relief tradition” in New Ireland. In C. Sand, ed., Pacific Archaeology: Assessments and Prospects, pp. 213–33. Le Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie 15. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Geraghty, P. 1983. The History of the Fijian Languages. Oceanic Linguistics Publication No. 19. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

———. 1994. Linguistic evidence for the Tongan empire. In T. Dutton and D.T. Tryon, eds., Language Contact and Change in the Austronesian World, pp. 233–49. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.

Gifford, E.W. 1951. Archaeological Excavations in Fiji. Anthropological Records 13:189–288. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Gifford, E.W., and D.S. Gifford. 1959. Archaeological Excavations on Yap. Anthropological Records 18, part 2. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Gifford, E.W., and D. Shutler Jr. 1956. Archaeological Excavations in New Caledonia. Anthropological Records 18, part 1. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Gillieson, D.S., and J.M. Mountain. 1983. Environmental history of Nombe rockshelter, Papua New Guinea Highlands. Archaeology in Oceania 18:53–62.

Gilliland, C.L.C. 1975. The Stone Money of Yap. Smithsonian Studies in History and Technology 23. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.

Gladwin, T. 1970. East Is a Big Bird: Navigation and Logic on Puluwat Atoll. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Goldman, I. 1970. Ancient Polynesian Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Golson, J. 1959. Culture change in prehistoric New Zealand. In J.D. Freeman and W.R. Geddes, eds., Anthropology in the South Seas, pp. 29–74. New Plymouth, New Zealand: Avery.

———. 1961. Report on New Zealand, Western Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Fiji. Asian Perspectives 5:166–80.

———. 1963. Rapport sur les fouilles effectuées à l’île des Pins (Nouvelle-Calédonie) de décembre 1959 à février 1960. Études Mélanésiennes, n.s., 14–17:11–24.

———. 1965. Thor Heyerdahl and the prehistory of Easter Island. Oceania 36:38–83.

———. 1971. Lapita ware and its transformations. In R.C. Green and M. Kelly, eds., Studies in Oceanic Culture History, vol. 2, pp. 67–76. Pacific Anthropological Records 12. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1972a. Both sides of the Wallace Line: New Guinea, Australia, island Melanesia, and Asian prehistory. In N. Barnard, ed., Early Chinese Art and Its Possible Influence in the Pacific Basin, pp. 533–95. New York: Intercultural Arts Press.

———. 1972b. The Pacific islands and their prehistoric inhabitants. In R.G. Ward, ed., Man in the Pacific Islands: Essays on Geographical Change in the Pacific Islands, pp. 5–33. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———. 1977. No room at the top: Agricultural intensification in the New Guinea Highlands. In J. Allen, J. Golson, and R. Jones, eds., Sunda and Sahul: Prehistoric Studies in Southeast Asia, Melanesia and Australia, pp. 601–38. London: Academic Press.

———. 1988. The origins and development of New Guinea agriculture. In D. Harris and G. Hillman, eds., Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, pp. 678–87. London: Unwin Hyman.

———. 1990. Kuk and the development of agriculture in New Guinea: Retrospection and introspection. In D.E. Yen and J.M.J. Mummery, eds., Pacific Production Systems: Approaches to Economic Prehistory, pp. 139–47. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 18. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1991a. Bulmer Phase II: Early agriculture in the New Guinea Highlands. In A. Pawley, ed., Man and a Half: Essays in Pacific Anthropology and Ethnobiology in Honour of Ralph Bulmer, pp. 484–91. Auckland, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

———. 1991b. Two sites at Lasigi, New Ireland. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 244–59. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1996a. New Guinea: The making of a history. In M. Julien, M. Orliac, and C. Orliac, eds., Mémoire de pierre, mémoire d’homme: Tradition et archéologie en Océanie, pp. 153–82. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne.

———. 1996b. Roger Green: Early and late encounters. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 307–17. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

———. 1997. From horticulture to agriculture in the New Guinea Highlands: A case study of people and their environments. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Historical Ecology in the Pacific Islands: Prehistoric Environmental and Landscape Change, pp. 39–50. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Golson, J., T. Denham, P. Hughes, P. Swadling, and J. Muke, eds. 2017. Ten Thousand Years of Cultivation at Kuk Swamp in the Highlands of Papua New Guinea. Terra Australis 46. Canberra: Australian National University.

Golson, J., and D. Gardner. 1990. Agriculture and sociopolitical organization in New Guinea Highlands prehistory. Annual Review of Anthropology 19: 395–417.

Gongora, J., N.J. Rawlence, V.A. Mobegi, H. Jianlin, J.A. Alcade, J.T. Matus, O. Hanotte, C. Moran, J.J. Austin, S. Ulm, A.J. Anderson, G. Larson, and A. Cooper. 2008. Indo-European and Asian origins for Chilean and Pacific chickens revealed by mtDNA. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105:10308–13.

Goodenough, W.H. 1957. Oceania and the problem of controls in the study of cultural and human evolution. Journal of the Polynesian Society 66:146–55.

———. 1986. Sky world and this world: The place of Kachaw in Micronesian cosmology. American Anthropologist 88:551–68.

———. 1997. Proto-Kimbe: A new analysis. Oceanic Linguistics 36:247–311.

Goodenough, W.H., and S.D. Thomas. 1987. Traditional navigation in the Western Pacific. Expedition 29:3–14.

Goodwin, I.D., S.A. Browning, and A.J. Anderson. 2014. Climate windows for Polynesian voyaging to New Zealand and Easter Island. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 111:14716–21.

Gorecki, P.P., and D.S. Gillieson, eds. 1989. A Crack in the Spine: Prehistory and Ecology of the Jimi-Yuat Valley, Papua New Guinea. Townsville, Australia: Division of Anthropology and Archaeology, James Cook University of North Queensland.

Gorecki, P., M. Mabin, and J. Campbell. 1991. Archaeology and geomorphology of the Vanimo Coast, Papua New Guinea: Preliminary results. Archaeology in Oceania 26:119–22.

Gosden, C. 1989. Prehistoric social landscapes of the Arawe Islands, West New Britain Province, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 24:45–58.

———. 1991a. Learning about Lapita in the Bismarck Archipelago. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 260–68. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1991b. Long-term trends in the colonisation of the Pacific: Putting Lapita in its place. In P. Bellwood, ed., Indo-Pacific Prehistory 1990: Proceedings of the 14th Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association, pp. 333–38. Canberra: Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association.

———. 1991c. Towards an understanding of the regional archaeological record from the Arawe Islands, West New Britain, Papua New Guinea. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 205–16. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1992a. Dynamic traditionalism: Lapita as a long term social structure. In J.-C. Galipaud, ed., Poterie Lapita et peuplement: Actes du Colloque LAPITA, pp. 21–26. Noumea, New Caledonia: ORSTOM.

———. 1992b. Production systems and the colonization of the western Pacific. World Archaeology 24:55–69.

———. 1993. Understanding the settlement of Pacific islands in the Pleistocene. In M.A. Smith, M. Spriggs, and B. Fankhauser, eds., Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia, pp. 131–36. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1995. Arboriculture and agriculture in coastal Papua New Guinea. Antiquity 69 (special number 265):807–17.

Gosden, C., J. Allen, W. Ambrose, D. Anson, J. Golson, R. Green, P. Kirch, I. Lilley, J. Specht, and M. Spriggs. 1989. Lapita sites of the Bismarck Archipelago. Antiquity 63:561–86.

Gosden, C., and N. Robertson. 1991. Models for Matenkupkum: Interpreting a late Pleistocene site from southern New Ireland, Papua New Guinea. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 20–45. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Gosden, C., and J. Webb. 1994. The creation of a Papua New Guinean landscape: Archaeological and geomorphological evidence. Journal of Field Archaeology 21:29–51.

Gosden, C., J. Webb, B. Marshall, and G.R. Summerhayes. 1994. Lolmo Cave: A mid- to late Holocene site, the Arawe Islands, West New Britain Province, Papua New Guinea. Asian Perspectives 33:97–120.

Gould, S.J. 1987. Evolution and the triumph of homology, or why history matters. American Scientist (January–February): 60–69.

———. 1989. Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History. New York: W.W. Norton.

Gräbner, F. 1905. Kulturkriese und Kulturschichten in Ozeanien. Zeitschrift für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte 37:28–53, 84–90.

Graves, M.W. 1986a. Late prehistoric social complexity on Lelu: Alternatives to Cordy’s model. Journal of the Polynesian Society 95:479–90.

———. 1986b. Organization and differentiation within late prehistoric ranked social units, Mariana Islands, Western Pacific. Journal of Field Archaeology 13:139–54.

———. 1991. Architectural and mortuary diversity in late prehistoric settlements at Tumon Bay, Guam. Micronesica 24:169–94.

Graves, M.W., and C. Erkelens. 1991. Who’s in control? Method and theory in Hawaiian archaeology. Asian Perspectives 30:1–18.

Gray, R.D., A.J. Drummond, and J.S. Greenhill, 2009. Language phylogenies reveal expansion pulses and pauses in Pacific settlement. Science 323:479–83.

Gray, R.D., and F.M. Jordan. 2000. Language trees support the express-train sequence of Austronesian expansion. Nature 405:1052–55.

Green, R.C. 1961. Moorea archaeology: A preliminary report. Man 61:169–73.

———. 1963a. A Review of the Prehistoric Sequence of the Auckland Province. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 2. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

———. 1963b. A suggested revision of the Fijian sequence. Journal of the Polynesian Society 72:235–53.

———. 1966. Linguistic subgrouping within Polynesia: The implications for prehistoric settlement. Journal of the Polynesian Society 75:6–38.

———. 1967a. The immediate origins of the Polynesians. In G.A. Highland, R.W. Force, A. Howard, M. Kelly, and Y.H. Sinoto, eds., Polynesian Culture History, pp. 215–40. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1967b. Settlement patterns: Four case studies from Polynesia. In W.G. Solheim II, ed., Archaeology at the Eleventh Pacific Science Congress, pp. 101–32. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series No. 1. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawaii.

———. 1968. West Polynesian prehistory. In I. Yawata and Y.H. Sinoto, eds., Prehistoric Culture in Oceania, pp. 99–110. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1971. Evidence for the development of the early Polynesian adz kit. New Zealand Archaeological Association Newsletter 14:12–44.

———. 1974a. A review of portable artifacts from Western Samoa. In R.C. Green and J. Davidson, eds., Archaeology in Western Samoa, vol. 2, pp. 245–75. Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland Institute and Museum.

———. 1974b. Sites with Lapita pottery: Importing and voyaging. Mankind 9:253–59.

———. 1975. Adaptation and change in Maori culture. In G. Kuschel, ed., Biogeography and Ecology in New Zealand, pp. 591–641. The Hague: W. Junk.

———. 1976a. An introduction to the Southeast Solomons Culture History Programme. In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 9–17. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

———. 1976b. Lapita sites in the Santa Cruz group. In R.C. Green and M.M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 245–65. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

———. 1976c. A late prehistoric sequence from Su‘ena Village, Uki. In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 181–91. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

———. 1976d. A late prehistoric settlement in Star Harbour. In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 133–47. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

———. 1978. New Sites with Lapita Pottery and Their Implications for an Understanding of the Settlement of the Western Pacific. Working Papers in Anthropology No. 51. Auckland: Department of Anthropology, University of Auckland.

———. 1979a. Early Lapita art from Polynesia and island Melanesia: Continuities in ceramic, barkcloth, and tattoo decorations. In S. Mead, ed., Exploring the Visual Art of Oceania, pp. 13–31. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 1979b. Lapita. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 27–60. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 1980. Makaha before 1880 A.D. Pacific Anthropological Records 31. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1981. Location of the Polynesian homeland: A continuing problem. In J. Hollyman and A. Pawley, eds., Studies in Pacific Languages and Cultures, pp. 133–58. Auckland: Linguistic Society of New Zealand.

———. 1986. Lapita fishing: The evidence of site SE-RF-2 from the main Reef Islands, Santa Cruz group, Solomons. In A. Anderson, ed., Traditional Fishing in the Pacific, pp. 19–35. Pacific Anthropological Records 37. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1988. Those mysterious mounds are for the birds. Newsletter of the New Zealand Archaeological Association 31:153–58.

———. 1990. Lapita design analysis: The Mead System and its use, a potted history. In M. Spriggs, ed., Lapita Design, Form and Composition, pp. 33–52. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 19. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1991a. The Lapita cultural complex: Current evidence and proposed models. In P. Bellwood, ed., Indo-Pacific Prehistory 1990: Proceedings of the 14th Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association, pp. 295–305. Canberra: Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association.

———. 1991b. Near and Remote Oceania: Disestablishing “Melanesia” in culture history. In A. Pawley, ed., Man and a Half: Essays in Pacific Anthropology and Ethnobiology in Honour of Ralph Bulmer, pp. 491–502. Auckland, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

———. 1991c. A reappraisal of the dating for some Lapita sites in the Reef/Santa Cruz Group of the southeast Solomons. Journal of the Polynesian Society 100:197–208.

———. 1993. Tropical Polynesian prehistory—where are we now? In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 218–38. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 21. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1994. Archaeological problems with the use of linguistic evidence in the reconstruction of rank, status and social organization in Ancestral Polynesian society. In A.K. Pawley and M.D. Ross, eds., Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change, pp. 171–84. Pacific Linguistics C-127. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1995. Linguistic, biological, and cultural origins of the initial inhabitants of Remote Oceania. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 17:5–27.

———. 1996a. Prehistoric transfers of portable items during the Lapita horizon in Remote Oceania: A review. In I.C. Glover and B. Bellwood, eds., Indo-Pacific Prehistory: The Chiang Mai Papers, vol. 2, pp. 119–30. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1996b. Settlement patterns and complex society in the Windward Society Islands: Retrospective commentary from the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea. In M. Julien, M. Orliac, and C. Orliac, eds., Mémoire de pierre, mémoire d’homme: Tradition et archéologie en Océanie, pp. 209–28. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne.

———. 1997. Linguistic, biological, and cultural origins of the initial inhabitants of Remote Oceania. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 17:5–27.

———. 1998. Rapanui origins prior to European contact: The view from Eastern Polynesia. In P.V. Casanova, ed., Easter Island and East Polynesian Prehistory, pp. 87–110. Santiago: Instituto de Estudios Isla de Pascua, Universidad de Chile.

———. 2003. The Lapita horizon and traditions—signature for one set of Oceanic migrations. In C. Sand, ed., Pacific Archaeology: Assessments and Prospects, pp. 95–120. Le Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie 15. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

———. 2005. Sweet potato transfers in Polynesian prehistory. In C. Ballard, P. Brown, R.M. Bourke, and T. Harwood, eds., The Sweet Potato in Oceania: A Reappraisal, pp. 43–62. Oceania Monograph 56. Sydney: University of Sydney.

Green, R.C., and D. Anson. 1987. The Lapita site of Watom: New evidence from excavations in 1985. Man and Culture in Oceania 3:121–32.

———. 1991. The Reber-Rakival Lapita site on Watom: Implications of the 1985 excavations at the SAC and SDI localities. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 170–81. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Green, R.C., D. Anson, and J. Specht. 1989. The SAC burial ground, Watom Island, Papua New Guinea. Records of the Australian Museum 41:215–22.

Green, R.C., and J.R. Bird. 1989. Fergusson Island obsidian from the D’Entrecasteaux Group in a Lapita site of the Reef–Santa Cruz group. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 11:87–99.

Green, R.C., and M.M. Cresswell, eds. 1976. Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

Green, R.C., and J. Davidson, eds. 1969. Archaeology in Western Samoa. Vol. 1. Bulletin of the Auckland Institute and Museum 6. Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland Institute and Museum.

———. 1974. Archaeology in Western Samoa. Vol. 2. Bulletin of the Auckland Institute and Museum 7. Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland Institute and Museum.

Green, R.C., K. Green, R. Rappaport, A. Rappaport, and J. Davidson. 1967. Archaeology on the Island of Mo‘orea, French Polynesia. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History 51(2). New York: American Museum of Natural History.

Green, R.C. and M. Jones. 2008. The absolute age of SE-RF-6 (Ngamanie) and its relation to SE-RF-2 (Nenumbo): Two decorated Lapita sites in the Southeast Solomon Islands. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 29:5–18.

Green, R.C., M. Jones, and P.J. Sheppard. 2008. The reconstructed environment and absolute dating of SE-SZ-8 Lapita site on Nendo, Santa Cruz, Solomon Islands. Archaeology in Oceania 43:49–61.

Green, R.C., and P.V. Kirch. 1997. Lapita exchange systems and their Polynesian transformations: Seeking explanatory models. In M.I. Weisler, ed., Prehistoric Long-Distance Interaction in Oceania: An Interdisciplinary Approach, pp. 19–37. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 21. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Green, R.C., and J.S. Mitchell. 1983. New Caledonian culture history: A review of the archaeological sequence. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 5:19–68.

Green, R.C., and A. Pawley. 1998. Architectural forms and settlement patterns. In M. Ross, A. Pawley, and M. Osmond, eds., The Lexicon of Proto Oceanic: The Culture and Environment of Ancestral Oceanic Society, pp. 37–65. Pacific Linguistics C-152. Canberra: Australian National University.

Green, R.C., and M.I. Weisler. 2000. Mangarevan Archaeology: Interpretations Using New Data and 40 Year Old Excavations to Establish a Sequence from 1200 to 1900 AD. University of Otago Studies in Prehistoric Anthropology No. 19. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago.

———. 2002. The Mangarevan sequence and dating of the geographic expansion into Southeast Polynesia. Asian Perspectives 41:213–41.

———. 2004. Prehistoric introduction and extinction of animals in Mangareva, Southeast Pacific. Archaeology in Oceania 39:34–41.

Green, R.C., and D.E. Yen. 2009. The Southeast Solomon Islands Culture History Project: Principal investigators’ overview of the 1970s project including recent and current research. In P.J. Sheppard, T. Thomas, and G.R. Summerhayes, eds., Lapita: Ancestors and Descendants, pp. 147–72. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 28. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Greenhill, S.J. and R.C. Gray. 2005. Testing population dispersal hypotheses: Pacific settlement, phylogenetic trees and Austronesian languages. In R. Mace, C.J. Holden, and S. Shennan, eds., The Evolution of Cultural Diversity: A Phylogenetic Approach, pp. 31–52. London: Routledge.

Gregory, H.E. 1921. Report of the director for 1920. Occasional Papers of the Bernice P. Bishop Museum 8(1):1–28.

[Gregory, H.E., ed.] 1921. Proceedings of the First Pan-Pacific Scientific Conference. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Special Publication 7. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Gressitt, J.L., ed. 1963. Pacific Basin Biogeography. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Grimble, A. 1933–34. The Migrations of a Pandanus People. Polynesian Society Memoir 12. Wellington, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

Groube, L.M. 1964. Settlement patterns in prehistoric New Zealand. MA thesis, University of Auckland.

———. 1965. Settlement Patterns in New Zealand Prehistory. Occasional Papers in Archaeology No. 1. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago.

———. 1970. The origin and development of earthwork fortification in the Pacific. In R.C. Green and M. Kelly, eds., Studies in Oceanic Culture History, vol. 1, pp. 133–64. Pacific Anthropological Records 11. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1971. Tonga, Lapita pottery, and Polynesian origins. Journal of the Polynesian Society 80:278–316.

———. 1986. Waisted axes of Asia, Melanesia, and Australia. In G.K. Ward, ed., Archaeology at ANZAAS Canberra, pp. 168–77. Canberra: Department of Prehistory and Anthropology, Australian National University.

———. 1989. The taming of the rain forests: A model for late Pleistocene forest exploitation in New Guinea. In D.R. Harris and D.C. Hillman, eds., Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, pp. 292–304. London: Unwin Hyman.

———. 1993a. Contradictions and malaria in Melanesian and Australian prehistory. In M.A. Smith, M. Spriggs, and B. Fankhauser, eds., Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia, pp. 164–86. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1993b. “Dig up those moa bones, dig”: Golson in New Zealand, 1954–1961. In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 6–17. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 21. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Groube, L.M., J. Chappell, J. Muke, and D. Price. 1986. A 40,000-year-old human occupation site at Huon Peninsula, Papua New Guinea. Nature 324:453–55.

Guiart, J. 1963. La chefferie en Mélanésie du Sud. Paris: Institut d’Ethnologie, Musée de l’Homme.

Gumerman, G.J., D. Snyder, and W.B. Masse. 1981. An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Palau Archipelago, Western Caroline Islands, Micronesia. Research Paper 23. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Center for Archaeological Investigations.

Gunderson, L.H., and C.S. Holling. 2002. Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in Human and Natural Systems. Washington, DC: Island Press.

Haberle, S. 1993. Late Quaternary environmental history of the Tari Basin, Papua New Guinea. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

———. 1996. Paleoenvironmental change in the eastern highlands of Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 31:1–11.

———. 2003. The emergence of an agricultural landscape in the highlands of New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 38:149–58.

Haberle, S., G. Hope, and Y. DeFretes. 1991. Environmental change in the Bliem Valley, montane Irian Jaya, Republic of Indonesia. Journal of Biogeography 18:25–40.

Haberle, S., C. Lentfer, S. O’Donnell, and T. Denham. 2012. The paleoenvironments of Kuk swamp from the beginnings of agriculture in the highlands of Papua New Guinea. Quaternary International 249:129–39.

Haddon, A.C., and J. Hornell. 1936–38. Canoes of Oceania. 3 vols. Special Publications 27–29. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Hage, P. 1999. Reconstructing Proto-Oceanic society. Asian Perspectives 38:200–228.

Hage, P., and F. Harary. 1991. Exchange in Oceania: A Graph Theoretic Analysis. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

———. 1996. Island Networks: Communication, Kinship, and Classification Structures in Oceania. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hage, P., and J. Marck. 2003. Matrilineality and the Melanesian origin of Polynesian Y chromosomes. Current Anthropology 44:121–27.

Hagelberg, E. 1997. Ancient and modern mitochondrial DNA sequences and the colonization of the Pacific. Electrophoresis 18:1529–33.

Hale, H. 1846. Ethnography and Philology. United States Exploring Expedition, vol. 6. Philadelphia: Sherman.

Hambruch, P. 1911. Die “sogenannten Ruinen” von Matolenim auf Ponape. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte 42:128–31.

———. 1919. Die Ruinen von Lolo. In E.G. Sarfert, Kusae, vol. 1: Allgemeiner Teil und Materielle Kultur, pp. 261–96. In G. Thilenius, ed., Ergebnisse der Südsee-Expedition, 1908–1910, II, Ethnographie: B, Mikronesien, vol. 4. Hamburg: L. Friederichsen, de Gruyter.

———. 1936. Ponape. In G. Thilenius, ed., Ergebnisse der Südsee-Expedition, 1908–1910, II, Ethnographie: B, Mikronesien, vol. 7. Hamburg: L. Friederichsen, de Gruyter.

Hamilton, B.K., and J.G. Kahn. 2007. Pre-contact population in the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea: An integrated archaeological and ethnohistorical approach. In P.V. Kirch and J.-L. Rallu, eds., The Growth and Collapse of Pacific Island Societies, pp. 129–59. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Handy, E.S.C. 1923. The Native Culture in the Marquesas. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 9. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1930a. History and Culture in the Society Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 79. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1930b. The problem of Polynesian origins. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Occasional Papers 9:1–27.

Hanlon, D. 1988. Upon a Stone Altar: A History of the Island of Pohnpei to 1890. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Harding, T.G. 1967. Voyagers of the Vitiaz Straits. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Harris, E.F., and H.L. Bailil. 1987. Odontometric comparisons among Solomon Islanders and other Oceanic peoples. In J.S. Friedlaender, ed., The Solomon Islands Project: A Long-Term Study of Health, Human Biology, and Culture Change, pp. 215–64. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Harris, M. 1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory: A History of Theories of Culture. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.

Harris, M., and M. Weisler. 2016. Intertidal foraging on atolls: Prehistoric forager decision-making at Ebon Atoll, Marshall Islands. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 12:200–223.

Harris, M., A.B.J. Lambrides, and M.I. Weisler. 2016. Windward vs. leeward: Inter-site variation in marine resource exploitation on Ebon Island, Republic of the Marshall Islands. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 6:221–29.

Harry, H.W. 1966. Land snails of Ulithi Atoll, Caroline Islands: A study of snails accidentally distributed by man. Pacific Science 20:212–23.

Hassan, F.A. 1981. Demographic Archaeology. London: Academic Press.

Hather, J., and P.V. Kirch. 1991. Prehistoric sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) from Mangaia Island, central Polynesia. Antiquity 65:887–93.

Hawkins, S., T.H. Worthy, S. Bedford, M. Spriggs, G. Clark, G. Irwin, S. Best, and P. Kirch. 2016. Ancient tortoise hunting in the southwest Pacific. Nature, Scientific Reports 6:38317. DOI:10.1038/srep38317.

Hazell, L., and S.M. Fitzpatrick. 2006. The maritime transport of megaliths in Micronesia. Archaeology in Oceania 41:12–24.

Hendren, G.H. 1976. Recent settlement pattern changes on Ulawa, southeast Solomon Islands. In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 149–59. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

Herdrich, D. 1991. Towards an understanding of Samoan star mounds. Journal of the Polynesian Society 100:381–436.

Herle, A., and S. Rouse, eds. 1998. Cambridge and the Torres Strait: Centenary Essays on the 1898 Anthropological Expedition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hermann, A. 2013. Les industries lithiques pré-européenes de Polynésie centrale: Savoir-faire et dynamiques techno-economiques. PhD dissertation, Université de la Polynésie Française, Tahiti.

Hermann, A., R. Bollt, and E. Conte. 2015. The Atiahara site revisited: An early coastal settlement in Tubuai (Austral Islands, French Polynesia). Archaeology in Oceania 51:31–44.

Hertzberg, M., K.P.N. Mickleson, S.W. Serjeantson, J.F. Prior, and R.J. Trent. 1989. An Asian-specific 9-bp deletion of mitochondrial DNA is frequently found in Polynesians. American Journal of Human Genetics 44:504–10.

Heyerdahl, T. 1952. American Indians in the Pacific: The Theory behind the Kon-Tiki Expedition. London: Allen and Unwin.

Heyerdahl, T., and E.N. Ferdon Jr., eds. 1961. Reports of the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition to Easter Island and the East Pacific, vol. 1: Archaeology of Easter Island. Monographs of the School of American Research 24(1). Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research.

———. 1965. Reports of the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition to Easter Island and the East Pacific, vol. 2: Miscellaneous Papers. Monographs of the School of American Research 24(2). Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research.

Hill, A.V.S., D.K. Bowden, R.J. Trent, D.R. Higgs, S.J. Oppenheimer, S.L. Thein, K.N.P. Mickleson, D.J. Weatherall, and J.B. Clegg. 1985. Melanesians and Polynesians share a unique α-thalassemia mutation. American Journal of Human Genetics 37:571–80.

Hill, A.V.S., and S.W. Serjeantson, eds. 1989. The Colonization of the Pacific: A Genetic Trail. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Hiroa, T.R. [P.H. Buck]. 1934. Mangaian Society. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 122. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1938a. Ethnology of Mangareva. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 157. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1938b. Vikings of the Sunrise. New York: Frederick Stokes.

———. 1944. Arts and Crafts of the Cook Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 179. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1945. An Introduction to Polynesian Anthropology. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 187. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Hocart, A.M. 1922. The cult of the dead in Eddystone of the Solomons. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 52:71–112, 259–305.

———. 1929. Lau Islands, Fiji. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 62. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Hoeningswald, H. 1960. Language Change and Linguistic Reconstruction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1973. The comparative method. In T.A. Sebeok, ed., Current Trends in Linguistics III, pp. 51–62. The Hague: Mouton.

Holdaway, R.N. 1999. A spatio-temporal model for the invasion of the New Zealand archipelago by the Pacific rat Rattus exulans. Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand 29:91–105.

Holm, L.A. 2006. The archaeology and the ‘Aina of Mahamenui and Manawainui, Kahikinui, Maui Island. PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

Hommon, R.J. 1986. Social evolution in ancient Hawai‘i. In P.V. Kirch, ed., Island Societies: Archaeological Approaches to Evolution and Transformation, pp. 55–68. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2013. The Ancient Hawaiian State: Origins of a Political Society. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hooper, R. 1994. Reconstructing Proto-Polynesian fish names. In A.K. Pawley and M.D. Ross, eds., Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change, pp. 185–230. Pacific Linguistics C-127. Canberra: Australian National University.

Hope, G.S., and J. Golson. 1995. Late Quaternary change in the mountains of New Guinea. Antiquity 69 (special number 265):818–30.

Hope, G., J. Golson, and J. Allen. 1983. Palaeoecology and prehistory in New Guinea. Journal of Human Evolution 12:37–60.

Hope, G., D. O’Dea, and W. Southern. 1999. Holocene vegetation histories in the western Pacific: Alternative records of human impact. In J.-C. Galipaud and I. Lilley, eds., The Pacific from 5000 to 2000 bp: Colonisation and Transformations, pp. 387–404. Paris: Éditions de IRD.

Hope, J., and G. Hope. 1976. Palaeoenvironments for man in New Guinea. In R. Kirk and A. Thorne, eds., The Origin of the Australians, pp. 28–54. Human Biology Series 6. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.

Hope, J., and M. Spriggs. 1982. A preliminary pollen sequence from Aneityum Island, southern Vanuatu. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 3:88–94.

Horridge, A. 1987. Outrigger Canoes of Bali and Madura, Indonesia. Special Publication 77. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Horrocks, M., and S. Bedford. 2005. Microfossil analysis of Lapita deposits in Vanuatu reveals introduced Araceae (aroids). Archaeology in Oceania 40:67–74.

Horrocks, M., G. Irwin, M. Jones, and D. Sutton. 2003. Starch grains and xylem cells of sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) and bracken (Pteridium esculentum) in archaeological deposits from northern New Zealand. Journal of Archaeological Science 31:251–58.

Horrocks, M., and P.D. Nunn. 2007. Evidence for introduced taro (Colocasia esculenta) and lesser yam (Dioscorea esculenta) in Lapita-era (c. 3050–2500 cal. yr BP) deposits from Bourewa, southwest Viti Levu Island, Fiji. Journal of Archaeological Science 34:739–48.

Horrocks, M., I.W.G. Smith, S.L. Nichol, and R. Wallace. 2008. Sediment, soil and plant microfossil analysis of Maori gardens at Anarua Bay, eastern North Island, New Zealand: Comparison with descriptions made in 1769 by Captain Cook’s expedition. Journal of Archaeological Science 35:2446–64.

Horrocks, M., and J.A. Wozniak. 2007. Plant microfossil analysis reveals disturbed forest and a mixed-crop, dryland production system at Te Niu, Easter Island. Journal of Archaeological Science 35:126–42.

Houghton, P. 1991. The early human biology of the Pacific. Journal of the Polynesian Society 100:167–96.

———. 1996. People of the Great Ocean: Aspects of Human Biology of the Early Pacific. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Howard, A. 1967. Polynesian origins and migrations. In G.A. Highland, R.W. Force, A. Howard, M. Kelly, and Y.H. Sinoto, eds., Polynesian Culture History, pp. 45–101. Special Publication 56. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Howe, K.R. 1984. Where the Waves Fall: A New South Seas History from First Settlement to Colonial Rule. Sydney: George Allen and Unwin.

Howe, K.R., ed. 2006. Vaka Moana: Voyages of the Ancestors. Auckland, New Zealand: David Bateman.

Howells, W.W. 1970. Anthropometric grouping analysis of Pacific peoples. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 5:192–217.

———. 1973. The Pacific Islanders. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Huebert, J.M., and M.S. Allen. 2016. Six centuries of anthropogenic forest change on a Polynesian high island: Archaeological charcoal records from the Marquesas Islands. Quaternary Science Reviews 137:79–96.

Hughes, I. 1977. New Guinea Stone Age Trade: The Geography and Ecology of Traffic in the Interior. Terra Australis 3. Canberra: Australian National University.

Hughes, P., G. Hope, M. Latham, and M. Brookfield. 1979. Prehistoric man-induced degradation of the Lakeba landscape: Evidence from two inland swamps. In H. Brookfield, ed., Lakeba: Environmental Change, Population Dynamics, and Resource Use, pp. 93–110. Paris: UNESCO.

Hung, H.-C., and M.T. Carson. 2014. Foragers, fishers and farmers: Origins of the Taiwanese Neolithic. Antiquity 88:1115–31.

Hung, H.-C., M.T. Carson, P. Bellwood, F. Campos, P.J. Piper, E. Dizon, M.J.L.A. Bolunia, M. Oxenham, and C. Zhang. 2011. The first settlement of Remote Oceania: The Philippines to the Marianas. Antiquity 85:909–26.

Hunt, T.L. 2006. Rethinking the fall of Easter Island. American Scientist 91:412–19.

———. 2007. Rethinking Easter Island’s ecological catastrophe. Journal of Archaeological Science 34:485–502.

Hunt, T.L., and C.P. Lipo. 2006. Late colonization of Easter Island. Science 311:1603–6.

———. 2011. The Statues That Walked: Unraveling the Mystery of Easter Island. New York: Free Press.

Hunter-Anderson, R.L. 1983. Yapese Settlement Patterns: An Ethnoarchaeological Approach. Agana, Guam: Micronesian Area Research Center.

———. 1984. Recent observations on traditional Yapese settlement patterns. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 6:95–106.

———. 1991. A review of traditional Micronesian high island horticulture in Belau, Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae. Micronesica 24:1–56.

Hunter-Anderson, R.L., ed. 1990. Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2. Mangilao: University of Guam Press.

Hunter-Anderson, R.L., and B.M. Butler. 1995. An Overview of Northern Marianas Prehistory. Micronesian Archaeological Survey Report No. 31. Saipan: Division of Historic Preservation.

Hunter-Anderson, R.L., and Y. Zan. 1996. Demystifying the sawei, a traditional interisland exchange system. Isla: A Journal of Micronesian Studies 4:1–45.

Hurles, M.E., E. Matisoo-Smith, R.D. Gray, and D. Penny. 2003. Untangling Oceanic settlement: The edge of the knowable. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 18:531–40.

Hurles, M.E., J. Nicholson, E. Bosch, C. Renfrew, B.C. Sykes, and M.A. Jobling. 2002. Y chromosomal evidence for the origins of Oceanic-speaking peoples. Genetics 160:289–303.

Intoh, M. 1984. Reconnaissance archaeological research on Ngulu Atoll in the western Caroline Islands. Asian Perspectives 24:69–80.

———. 1986. Pigs in Micronesia: Introduction or reintroduction by the Europeans. Man in Oceania 2:1–26.

———. 1988. Changing prehistoric Yapese pottery technology: A case study of adaptive transformation. PhD dissertation, University of Otago.

———. 1990. Ceramic environment and technology: A case study in the Yap Islands in Micronesia. Man in Oceania 6:35–52.

———. 1991. Archaeological Research on Fais Island: Preliminary Report. Prepared for Historic Preservation Office, Yap State. Hokkaido, Japan: Tokai University.

———. 1992a. Pottery traditions in Micronesia. In J.-C. Galipaud, ed., Poterie Lapita et peuplement, pp. 67–82. Noumea, New Caledonia: ORSTOM.

———. 1992b. Why were pots imported to Ngulu Atoll? A consideration of subsistence strategies. Journal of the Polynesian Society 101:159–68.

———. 1996. Multi-regional contacts of prehistoric Fais islanders of Micronesia. In I.C. Glover and B. Bellwood, eds., Indo-Pacific Prehistory: The Chiang Mai Papers, vol. 2, pp. 111–18. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1997. Human dispersals into Micronesia. Anthropological Science 105:15–28.

Intoh, M., and F. Leach. 1985. Archaeological Investigations in the Yap Islands, Micronesia: First Millennium b.c. to the Present Day. BAR International Series 277. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Irwin, G. 1972. An archaeological survey in the Shortland Islands, B.S.I.P. MA thesis, University of Auckland.

———. 1974. The emergence of a central place in coastal Papuan prehistory: A theoretical approach. Mankind 9:268–72.

———. 1978a. The development of Mailu as a specialized trading and manufacturing centre in Papuan prehistory: The causes and the implications. Mankind 11:406–15.

———. 1978b. Pots and entrepots: A study of settlement, trade and the development of economic specialization in Papuan prehistory. World Archaeology 9:299–319.

———. 1981. How Lapita lost its pots: The question of continuity in the colonisation of Oceania. Journal of the Polynesian Society 90:481–94.

———. 1983. Chieftainship, kula, and trade in Massim prehistory. In J.W. Leach and E. Leach, eds., The Kula: New Perspectives on Massim Exchange, pp. 29–72. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1985a. The Emergence of Mailu. Terra Australis 10. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1985b. Land, Pa and Polity. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 15. n.p.: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

———. 1989. Against, across and down the wind: The first exploration of the Pacific islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 98:167–206.

———. 1990. Human colonisation and change in the Remote Pacific. Current Anthropology 31:90–94.

———. 1991. Pleistocene voyaging and the settlement of Greater Australia and its Near Oceanic neighbors. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 9–19. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1992. The Prehistoric Exploration and Colonisation of the Pacific. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1993. Voyaging. In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 73–87. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 21. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1998. The colonisation of the Pacific: Chronological, navigational and social issues. Journal of the Polynesian Society 107:111–44.

———. 2008. Pacific seascapes, canoe performance, and a review of Lapita voyaging with regard to theories of migration. Asian Perspectives 47:12–27.

Irwin, G., ed. 2004. Kohika: The Archaeology of a Late Maori Lake Village in the Ngati Awa Rohe, Bay of Plenty, New Zealand. Auckland: Auckland University Press.

Irwin, G., and R.G.J. Flay. 2015. Pacific colonisation and canoe performance: Experiments in the science of sailing. Journal of the Polynesian Society 124:419–43.

Irwin, G., and S. Holdaway. 1996. Colonisation, trade and exchange: From Papua to Lapita. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 225–35. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Irwin, G., T.H. Worthy, S. Best, S. Hawkins, J. Carpenter, and S. Matararaba. 2011. Further investigations at the Naigani Lapita site (VL 21/5), Fiji: Excavation, radiocarbon dating and paleofaunal extinction. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 2:66–78.

Jackson, F.H. 1986. On determining the external relationships of the Micronesian languages. In P. Geraghty, L. Carrington, and S.A. Wurm, eds., FOCAL II: Papers from the Fourth International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics, pp. 201–38. Pacific Linguistics C-94. Canberra: Australian National University.

James, H.F. 1995. Prehistoric extinctions and ecological changes on oceanic islands. Ecological Studies 115:87–102.

Jennings, J., ed. 1979. The Prehistory of Polynesia. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Jennings, J., and R. Holmer, eds. 1980. Archaeological Excavations in Western Samoa. Pacific Anthropological Records 32. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Jennings, J., R. Holmer, J. Janetski, and H. Smith. 1976. Excavations on ‘Upolu, Western Samoa. Pacific Anthropological Records 25. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Johns, D.A., G.J. Irwin, and Y.K. Sung, 2014. An early sophisticated East Polynesian voyaging canoe discovered on New Zealand’s coast. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 111:14728–33.

Jones, K.L. 1986. Polynesian gardening and settlement in two river catchments of the eastern North Island. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 8:5–32.

———. 1989. Settlement chronology, pa and environment of Tolaga Bay, East Coast, North Island, New Zealand. In D.G. Sutton, ed., Saying So Doesn’t Make It So: Papers in Honour of B. Foss Leach, pp. 233–57. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 17. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

———. 1991. Maori settlement and horticulture on the Rangitaiki Plains, Bay of Plenty, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 13:143–75.

Jones, K.L., and R.G. Law. 1987. Prehistoric population estimates for the Tolaga Bay vicinity, East Coast, North Island, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 9:81–114.

Jones, S. 2009. Food and Gender and Fiji: Ethnoarchaeological Explorations. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books/Rowman & Littlefield.

Jones, S., and R.L. Quinn. 2009. Prehistoric Fijian diet and subsistence: Integration of faunal, ethnographic, and stable isotopic evidence from the Lau Island Group. Journal of Archaeological Science 36:2742–54.

Jones, S., D.W. Steadman, and P.M. O’Day. 2007. Archaeological investigations on the small islands of Aiwa Levu and Aiwa Lailai, Lau Group, Fiji. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 2:72–98.

Jones, T.L., and K.A. Klar. 2005. Diffusionism reconsidered: Linguistic and archaeological evidence for prehistoric Polynesian contact with Southern California. American Antiquity 70:457–84.

Jones, T.L., A.A. Storey, E.A. Matisoo-Smith, and J.M. Ramírez-Aliaga, eds. 2011. Polynesians in America: Pre-Columbian Contacts with the New World. New York: AltaMira Press.

Jordan, F.M., R.D. Gray, S.J. Greenhill, and R. Mace. 2009. Matrilocal residence is ancestral in Austronesian societies. Proceedings of the Royal Society, Series B 276:1957–64.

Kaeppler, A. 1978. Exchange patterns in goods and spouses: Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa. Mankind 11:246–52.

Kahn, J.G. 2005. Household and community organization in the late prehistoric Society Islands (French Polynesia). PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

———. 2007. Power and precedence in ancient house societies: A case study from the Society Island chiefdoms (French Polynesia). In R.A. Beck Jr., ed., The Durable House: House Society Models in Archaeology, pp. 198–223. Occasional Paper No. 35, Center for Archaeological Investigations. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University.

———. 2009. Adze production in the Papeno‘o Valley, Tahiti, Society Islands: Technological analysis of the Putoura (TPP-035) workshop assemblage. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 30:55–87.

———. 2010. A spatio-temporal analysis of ‘Oro Cult marae in the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea, Society Islands. Archaeology in Oceania 45:103–10.

———. 2011. Multi-phase construction sequences and aggregate site complexes of the prehistoric windward Society Islands (French Polynesia). Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 6:24–50.

———. 2012. Coastal occupation at the GS-1 site, Cook’s Bay, Mo‘orea Island, Society Islands. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 3:52–61.

Kahn, J.G., E. Dotte-Sarout, G. Molle, and E. Conte. 2015. Mid- to late prehistoric landscape change, settlement histories, and agricultural practices on Maupiti, Society Islands (Central Eastern Polynesia). Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 10:363–91.

Kahn, J.G., and P.V. Kirch. 2004. Ethnographie préhistorique d’une « société a maisons » dans la vallée de ‘Opunohu (Mo‘orea, îles de la Société). Journal de la Société des Océanistes 119:229–56.

———. 2011. Monumentality and the materialization of ideology in central Eastern Polynesia. Archaeology in Oceania 46:93–104.

———. 2013. Residential landscapes and house societies of the late prehistoric Society Islands. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 4:50–72.

———. 2014. Monumentality and Ritual Materialization in the Society Islands: The Archaeology of a Major Ceremonial Complex in the ‘Opunohu Valley, Mo‘orea. Bishop Museum Bulletin in Anthropology 13. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Kahn, J.G., P.R. Mills, S.P. Lundblad, J. Holson, and P.V. Kirch, 2009. Tool production at the Nuu quarry, Maui, Hawaiian Islands: Manufacturing sequences and energy dispersive x-ray analyses. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 30:135–65.

Kahn, J.G., C. Nickelsen, J. Stevenson, N. Porch, E. Dotte-Sarout, C.C. Christensen, L. May, J.S. Athens, and P.V., Kirch. 2015. Mid- to late Holocene landscape change and anthropogenic transformations on Mo‘orea, Society Islands: A multi-proxy approach. The Holocene 25:333–47.

Kahn, J.G., T.M. Rieth, P.V. Kirch, J.S. Athens, and G.M. Murakami. 2014. Re-dating of the Kuli‘ou‘ou Rockshelter, Oahu, Hawaii: Location of the first radiocarbon date from the Pacific islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 123:67–90.

Kahn, J., and Y.H. Sinoto. 2017. Refining the Society Island cultural sequence: Colonization Period and Developmental Period coastal occupation on Mo‘orea Island. Journal of the Polynesian Society 126:33–60.

Kamakau, S. 1961. Ruling Chiefs of Hawaii. Honolulu: Kamehameha Schools Press.

Kasarherou, E. 1989. La Calédonie pré-coloniale: Populations et aires linguistiques. In Atlas de la Nouvelle-Calédonie, chap. 14. Noumea, New Caledonia: Editions du Cagou.

Kaschko, M.W. 1976. An archaeological consideration of the ethnographic fishhook set on Uki Island, southeast Solomon Islands. In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 193–201. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

Katayama, K., and N. Shibata, eds. 1999. Prehistoric Cook Islands: People, Life and Language. Part 1, Anthropology and Archaeology. Rarotonga: Cook Islands Library and Museum Society.

Kawelu, K. 2015. Kuleana and Commitment: Working toward a Collaborative Hawaiian Archaeology. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Kawelu, K., and D. Pakele. 2014. Community-based research: The next step in Hawaiian archaeology. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 5:62–71.

Kay, R.M.A. 1984. Analysis of archaeological material from Naigani. MA thesis, University of Auckland.

Kayser, M., S. Brauer, R. Cordaux, A. Casto, O. Lao, L.A. Zhivotovsky, C. Moyse-Faurie, R.B. Rutledge, W. Schiefenhoevel, D. Gil, A.A. Lin, P.A. Underhill, P.J. Oefner, R.J. Trent, and M. Stoneking. 2006. Melanesian and Asian origins of Polynesians: mtDNA and Y chromosome gradients across the Pacific. Molecular Biological Evolution 23:2234–44.

Kayser, M., S. Brauer, G. Weiss, P.A. Underhill, L. Roewer, W. Schiefenhovel, and M. Stoneking. 2000. Melanesian origin of Polynesian Y chromosome. Current Biolology 10:1237–46.

Kayser, M., Y. Choi, M. van Oven, S. Mona, S. Brauer, R.J. Trent, D. Suarkia, W. Schiefenhovel, and M. Stoneking. 2008. The impact of the Austroniesan expansion: Evidence from mtDNA and Y chromosome diversity in the Admiralty Islands of Melanesia. Molecular Biological Evolution 25:1362–74.

Kellum-Ottino, M. 1971. Archéologie d’une vallée des Îles Marquises. Publications de la Société des Océanistes 26. Paris: Société des Océanistes.

Kelly, K.M. 1996. The end of the trail: The genetic basis for deriving the Polynesian peoples from Austronesian speaking paleopopulations of Melanesian Near Oceania. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 355–64. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Kelly, R.C. 1988. Etoro suidology: A reassessment of the pig’s role in the prehistory and comparative ethnology of New Guinea. In J.G. Weiner, ed., Mountain Papuans: Historical and Comparative Perspectives from New Guinea Fringe Highlands Societies, pp. 116–86. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Kennedy, J. 1983. On the prehistory of western Melanesia: The significance of new data from the Admiralty Islands. Australian Archaeology 16:115–22.

Kikuchi, W.K. 1976. Prehistoric Hawaiian fishponds. Science 193:295–99.

Kinaston, R., H. Buckley, F. Valentin, S. Bedford, M. Spriggs, S. Hawkins, and E. Herrscher. 2014. Lapita diet in Remote Oceania: New stable isotope evidence from the 3000-year-old Teouma site, Efate Island, Vanuatu. PLoS ONE 9(3):e90376. DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0090376.

Kinaston, R.L., R.K. Walter, C. Jacomb, E. Brooks, N. Tables, S.E. Halcrow, C. Stirling, M. Reid, A.R. Gray, J. Spinks, B. Shaw, and H.R. Buckley. 2013. The first New Zealanders: Patterns of diet and mobility revealed through isotope analysis. PLoS ONE 8:e64580.

King, T.F., and P. Parker. 1984. Pisekin Noomw Noon Tonaachaw: Archaeology in the Tonaachaw Historic District, Moen Island. Occasional Paper 3. Carbondale: Southern Illinois Center for Archaeological Investigations.

Kirch, P.V. 1973. Prehistoric subsistence patterns in the northern Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia. Archaeological and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 8:24–40.

———. 1977. Valley agricultural systems in prehistoric Hawai‘i: An archaeological consideration. Asian Perspectives 20:246–80.

———. 1979a. Marine Exploitation in Prehistoric Hawai‘i: Archaeological Excavations at Kalahuipua‘a, Hawai‘i Island. Pacific Anthropological Records 29. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1979b. Subsistence and ecology. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 286–307. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 1980. Polynesian prehistory: Cultural adaptation in island ecosystems. American Scientist 68:39–48.

———. 1981. Lapitoid settlements of Futuna and Alofi, Western Polynesia. Archaeology in Oceania 16:127–43.

———. 1982a. Advances in Polynesian prehistory: Three decades in review. Advances in World Archaeology 1:51–87.

———. 1982b. A revision of the Anuta sequence. Journal of the Polynesian Society 91:245–54.

———. 1983. An archaeological exploration of Vanikoro, Santa Cruz Islands, eastern Melanesia. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 5:69–113.

———. 1984a. The Evolution of the Polynesian Chiefdoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1984b. The Polynesian outliers: Continuity, change, and replacement. Journal of Pacific History 19:224–38.

———. 1985a. Feathered Gods and Fishhooks: An Introduction to Hawaiian Archaeology and Prehistory. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

———. 1985b. On the genetic and cultural relationships of certain Polynesian outlier populations. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 66:381–82.

———. 1986. Rethinking East Polynesian prehistory. Journal of the Polynesian Society 95:9–40.

———. 1987. Lapita and Oceanic cultural origins: Excavations in the Mussau Islands, Bismarck Archipelago, 1985. Journal of Field Archaeology 14:163–80.

———. 1988a. Circumscription and sociopolitical evolution in Polynesia. American Behavioral Scientist 31: 416–27.

———. 1988b. Long-distance exchange and island colonisation: The Lapita case. Norwegian Archaeological Review 21:103–17.

———. 1988c. Niuatoputapu: The Prehistory of a Polynesian Chiefdom. Thomas Burke Memorial Washington State Museum Monograph No. 5. Seattle: Burke Museum.

———. 1988d. The Talepakemalai site and Oceanic prehistory. National Geographic Research 4:328–42.

———. 1989a. Prehistory. In A. Howard and R. Borofsky, eds., Developments in Polynesian Ethnology, pp.13–46. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

———. 1989b. Second millennium B.C. arboriculture in Melanesia: Archaeological evidence from the Mussau Islands. Economic Botany 43:225–40.

———. 1990a. The evolution of socio-political complexity in prehistoric Hawaii: An assessment of the archaeological evidence. Journal of World Prehistory 4: 311–45.

———. 1990b. Monumental architecture and power in Polynesian chiefdoms: A comparison of Tonga and Hawaii. World Archaeology 22:206–22.

———. 1990c. Regional variation and local style: A neglected dimension in Hawaiian prehistory. Pacific Studies 13:41–54.

———. 1990d. Specialization and exchange in the Lapita complex of Oceania (1600–500 B.C.). Asian Perspectives 29:117–33.

———. 1991a. Chiefship and competitive involution: The Marquesas Islands of eastern Polynesia. In T. Earle, ed., Chiefdoms: Power, Economy and Ideology, pp. 119–45. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1991b. Polynesian agricultural systems. In P.A. Cox and S.A. Banack, eds., Islands, Plants, and Polynesians: An Introduction to Polynesian Ethnobotany, pp. 113–34. Portland, OR: Dioscorides Press.

———. 1991c. Prehistoric exchange in western Melanesia. Annual Review of Anthropology 20:141–65.

———. 1994. The Wet and the Dry: Irrigation and Agricultural Intensification in Polynesia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1995. The Lapita culture of western Melanesia in the context of Austronesian origins and dispersals. In P. Li, C. Tsang, Y. Huang, D. Ho, and C. Tseng, eds., Austronesian Studies Relating to Taiwan, pp. 255–94. Taipei: Academia Sinica.

———. 1996a. Lapita and its aftermath: Austronesian settlement of Oceania. In W.H. Goodenough, ed., Prehistoric Settlement of the Pacific, pp. 57–70. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 86(5).

———. 1996b. Late Holocene human-induced modifications to a central Polynesian island ecosystem. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 93: 5296–5300.

———. 1997a. The Lapita Peoples: Ancestors of the Oceanic World. Oxford: Blackwell.

———. 1997b. Microcosmic histories: Island perspectives on “global” change. American Anthropologist 99:30–42.

———. 1999. Hawaiian archaeology: Past, present, and future. Hawaiian Archaeology 7:60–73.

———. 2004. Solstice observation in Mangareva, French Polynesia: New perspectives from archaeology. Archaeoastronomy 18:1–19.

———. 2006. Agricultural intensification: A Polynesian perspective. In J. Marcus and C. Stanish, eds., Agricultural Strategies, pp. 191–220. Los Angeles: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, UCLA.

———. 2007a. Hawaii as a model system for human ecodynamics. American Anthropologist 109:8–26.

———. 2007b. “Like shoals of fish”: Archaeology and population in pre-contact Hawai‘i. In P.V. Kirch and J.-L. Rallu, eds., The Growth and Collapse of Pacific Island Societies: Archaeological and Demographic Perspectives, pp. 52–69. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 2007c. Three islands and an archipelago: Reciprocal interactions between humans and island ecosystems in Polynesia. Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 98:1–15.

———. 2010. How Chiefs Became Kings: Divine Kingship and the Rise of Archaic States in Ancient Hawai‘i. Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 2011. When did the Polynesians settle Hawaii? A review of 150 years of scholarly inquiry and a tentative answer. Hawaiian Archaeology 12:3–26.

———. 2012. A Shark Going Inland Is My Chief: The Island Civilization of Ancient Hawai‘i. Berkeley: University of California Press.

———. 2014. Kua’āina Kahiko: Life and Land in Ancient Kahikinui, Maui. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 2015. Unearthing the Polynesian Past: Adventures and Explorations of an Island Archaeologist. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Kirch, P.V., ed. 1986. Island Societies: Archaeological Approaches to Evolution and Transformation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2001. Lapita and Its Transformations in Near Oceania: Archaeological Investigations in the Mussau Islands, Papua New Guinea, 1985–88. Vol. 1, Introduction, Stratigraphy, Chronology. Archaeological Research Facility Contribution No. 59. Berkeley: University of California.

———. 2011. Roots of Conflict: Soils, Agriculture, and Sociopolitical Complexity in Ancient Hawai‘i. Santa Fe, NM: School for Advanced Research.

———. 2017. The Tangatatau Rockshelter (Mangaia, Cook Islands): The Evolution of an Eastern Polynesian Socio-Ecosystem. Monumenta Archaeologica 40. Los Angeles: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press.

Kirch, P.V., G. Asner, O.A. Chadwick, J. Field, T. Ladefoged, C. Lee, C. Puleston, S. Tuljapurkar, and P.M. Vitousek. 2012. Building and testing models of long-term agricultural intensification and population dynamics: A case study from the Leeward Kohala Field System, Hawai‘i. Ecological Modeling 227:18–28.

Kirch, P.V., J.H. Coil, A.S. Hartshorn, M. Jeraj, P.M. Vitousek, and O.A. Chadwick. 2005. Intensive dryland farming on the leeward slopes of Haleakala, Maui, Hawaiian Islands: Archaeological, archaeobotanical, and geochemical perspectives. World Archaeology 37:240–58.

Kirch, P.V., E. Conte, W. Sharp, and C. Nickelsen. 2010. The Onemea Site (Taravai Island, Mangareva) and the human colonization of southeastern Polynesia. Archaeology in Oceania 45:66–79.

Kirch, P.V., W.R. Dickinson, and T.L. Hunt. 1988. Polynesian plainware sherds from Hivaoa and their implications for early Marquesan prehistory. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 10:101–8.

Kirch, P.V., and T.S. Dye. 1979. Ethnoarchaeology and the development of Polynesian fishing strategies. Journal of the Polynesian Society 88:53–76.

Kirch, P.V., and J. Ellison. 1994. Palaeoenvironmental evidence for human colonization of remote Oceanic islands. Antiquity 68:310–21.

Kirch, P.V., and R.C. Green. 1987. History, phylogeny, and evolution in Polynesia. Current Anthropology 28:431–56.

———. 2001. Hawaiki: Ancestral Polynesia. An Essay in Historical Anthropology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kirch, P.V., A. Hartshorn, O.A. Chadwick, P.M. Vitousek, D. Sherrod, J. Coil, L. Holm, and W. Sharp. 2004. Environment, agriculture, and settlement patterns in a marginal Polynesian landscape. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 101:9936–41.

Kirch, P.V., J. Holson, and A. Baer. 2009. Intensive dryland agriculture in Kaupō, Maui, Hawaiian Islands. Asian Perspectives 48:265–90.

Kirch, P.V., and T.L. Hunt, eds. 1988. Archaeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review. Thomas Burke Memorial Washington State Museum Research Report No. 5. Seattle: Burke Museum.

———. 1993. The To’aga Site: Three Millennia of Polynesian Occupation in the Manu‘a Islands, American Samoa. Archaeological Research Facility Contribution No. 51. Berkeley: University of California.

———. 1997. Historical Ecology in the Pacific Islands. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Kirch, P.V., T.L. Hunt, L. Nagaoka, and J. Tyler. 1990. An Ancestral Polynesian occupation site at To‘aga, Ofu Island, American Samoa. Archaeology in Oceania 25:1–15.

Kirch, P.V., and M. Kelly, eds. 1975. Prehistory and Ecology in a Windward Hawaiian Valley: Halawa Valley, Molokai. Pacific Anthropological Records 24. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Kirch, P.V., and D. Lepofsky. 1993. Polynesian irrigation: Archaeological and linguistic evidence for origins and development. Asian Perspectives 32:183–204.

Kirch, P.V., and M. McCoy. 2007. Reconfiguring the Hawaiian cultural sequence: Results of re-dating the Halawa dune site (MO-A1–3), Moloka’i Island. Journal of the Polynesian Society 116:385–406.

Kirch, P.V., R. Mertz-Kraus, and W.D. Sharp. 2015. Precise chronology of Polynesian temple construction and use for southeastern Maui, Hawaiian Islands determined by 230Th dating of corals. Journal of Archaeological Science 53:166–77.

Kirch, P.V., S. Millerstrom, S. Jones, and M.D. McCoy, 2010. Dwelling among the gods: A late pre-contact priest’s house in Kahikinui, Maui, Hawaiian Islands. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 1:145–60.

Kirch, P.V., G. Molle, C. Nickelsen, P. Mills, E. Dotte-Sarout, J. Swift, A. Wolfe, and M. Horrocks. 2015. Human ecodynamics in the Mangareva Islands: A stratified sequence from Nenega-Iti rock shelter (site AGA-3, Agakauitai Island). Archaeology in Oceania 50:23–42.

Kirch, P.V., and S. O’Day. 2003. New archaeological insights into food and status: A case study from pre-contact Hawaii. World Archaeology 34:484–97.

Kirch, P.V., and J.-L. Rallu, eds., 2007. The Growth and Collapse of Pacific Island Societies: Archaeological and Demographic Perspectives. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Kirch, P.V., and P.H. Rosendahl. 1973. Archaeological investigations of Anuta. In D.E. Yen and J. Gordon, eds., Anuta: A Polynesian Outlier in the Solomon Islands, pp. 25–108. Pacific Anthropological Records 21. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1976. Early Anutan settlement and the position of Anuta in the prehistory of the southwest Pacific. In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 225–44. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

Kirch, P.V., and M. Sahlins. 1992. Anahulu: The Anthropology of History in the Kingdom of Hawaii. 2 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kirch, P.V., and W.D. Sharp. 2005. Coral 230Th dating of the imposition of a ritual control hierarchy in precontact Hawaii. Science 307:102–4.

Kirch, P.V., D.W. Steadman, V.L. Butler, J. Hather, and M.I. Weisler. 1995. Prehistory and human ecology in Eastern Polynesia: Excavations at Tangatatau rockshelter, Mangaia, Cook Islands. Archaeology in Oceania 30:47–65.

Kirch, P.V., M.I. Weisler, and E. Casella, eds. 1997. Towards a Prehistory of the Koné Region, New Caledonia: A Reanalysis of the Pioneering Archaeological Excavations of E.W. Gifford. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers 82. Berkeley: Kroeber Anthropological Society, University of California.

Kirch, P.V., and D.E. Yen. 1982. Tikopia: The Prehistory and Ecology of a Polynesian Outlier. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 238. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Knudson, K.E. 1990. Social complexity on Truk and in the Marianas: Lack of correspondence between anthropological models and historical evidence. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 117–24.

Kolb, M.J. 1992. Diachronic design changes in heiau temple architecture on the island of Maui, Hawai‘i. Asian Perspectives 31:9–38.

———. 1994. Monumentality and the rise of religious authority in precontact Hawai‘i. Current Anthropology 35:521–48.

———. 1999. Monumental grandeur and political efflorescence in pre-contact Hawai‘i: Excavations at Pi‘ilanihale Heiau, Maui. Archaeology in Oceania 34:71–82.

Kolb, M.J., and B. Dixon, 2002. Landscapes of war: Rules and conventions of conflict in ancient Hawai‘i (and elsewhere). American Antiquity 67:514–34.

Kononenko, N. 2012. Middle and late Holocene skin-working tools in Melanesia: Tattooing and scarification? Archaeology in Oceania 47:14–28.

Krauss, B. 1988. Keneti: South Seas Adventures of Kenneth Emory. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Kubary, J.S. 1874. Die Ruinen von Nanmatal auf der Insel Ponope (Ascension), nach J. Kubary’s brieflichen Mittheilungen. Journal des Museums Godeffroy 3:123–31.

Kurashina, H., and R.N. Clayshulte. 1983. Site formation processes and cultural sequence at Tarague, Guam. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 4:114–22.

Kurashina, H., D. Moore, O. Kataoka, R. Clayshulte, and E. Ray. 1984. Prehistoric and protohistoric cultural occurrences at Tarague, Guam. Asian Perspectives 24:57–68.

Labby, D. 1976. The Demystification of Yap: Dialectics of Culture on a Micronesian Island. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ladefoged, T.N. 1998. Spatial similarities and change in Hawaiian architecture: The expression of ritual offering and kapu in luakini heiau, residential complexes, and houses. Asian Perspectives 37:59–73.

Ladefoged, T.N., A. Flaws, and C.M. Stevenson. 2013. The distribution of rock gardens on Rapa Nui (Easter Island) as determined from satellite imagery. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:1203–12.

Ladefoged, T.N., and M.W. Graves. 2000. Evolutionary theory and the historical development of dry-land agriculture in North Kohala, Hawai‘i. American Antiquity 65:423–48.

———. 2008. Variable development of dryland agriculture in Hawai‘i: A fine-grained chronology from the Kohala field system, Hawai‘i Island. Current Anthropology 49:771–802.

Ladefoged, T.N., M.W. Graves, and J.H. Coil. 2005. The introduction of sweet potato in Polynesia: Early remains in Hawai‘i. Journal of the Polynesian Society 114:359–74.

Ladefoged, T.N., M.W. Graves, and M.D. McCoy. 2003. Archaeological evidence for agricultural development in Kohala, island of Hawai‘i. Journal of Archaeological Science 30:923–40.

Ladefoged, T.N., P.V. Kirch, S.M. Gon III, O.A. Chadwick, A.S. Hartshorn, and P.M. Vitousek. 2009. Opportunities and constraints for intensive agriculture in the Hawaiian archipelago prior to European contact. Journal of Archaeological Science 36:2374–83.

Ladefoged, T.N., M.D. McCoy, G. Asner, P.V. Kirch, C.O. Puleston, O.A. Chadwick, and P.M. Vitousek. 2011. Agricultural potential and actualized development in Hawai‘i: An airborne LiDAR survey of the leeward Kohala field system (Hawai‘i Island). Journal of Archaeological Science 38:3605–19.

Ladefoged, T.N., C.M. Steveson, S. Haoa, M. Mulrooney, C. Puleston, P.M. Vitousek, and O.A. Chadwick. 2010. Soil nutrient analysis of Rapa Nui gardening. Archaeology in Oceania 45:80–85.

Lauer, P. 1970. Amphlett Islands’ pottery trade and the kula. Mankind 7:165–76.

———. 1971. Changing patterns of pottery trade to the Trobriand Islands. World Archaeology 3:197–209.

Leach, B.F. 1981. The prehistory of the southern Wairarapa. Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand 11:11–33.

———. 2006. Fishing in Pre-European New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Wellington: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Leach, B.F., and J.M. Davidson. 1988. The quest for the rainbow runner: Prehistoric fishing on Kapingamarangi and Nukuoro Atolls, Micronesia. Micronesica 21:1–22.

———. 2008. Archaeology on Taumako: A Polynesian Outlier in the Eastern Solomon Islands. Dunedin: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Leach, B.F., and H. Leach, eds. 1979. Prehistoric Man in Palliser Bay. National Museum of New Zealand Bulletin 21. Wellington: National Museum of New Zealand.

Leach, B.F., and G.K. Ward. 1981. Archaeology on Kapingamarangi Atoll, a Polynesian Outlier in the Eastern Caroline Islands. n.p.: Privately published.

Leach, H. 1982. Cooking without pots: Aspects of prehistoric and traditional Polynesian cooking. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 4:149–56.

———. 1984. 1,000 Years of Gardening in New Zealand. Wellington, New Zealand: Reed.

Leach, H., and R.C. Green. 1989. New information for the Ferry Berth site, Mulifanua, western Samoa. Journal of the Polynesian Society 98:319–30.

Leach, H.M., and D.C. Witter. 1987. Tataga-Matau “rediscovered.” New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 9:33–54.

———. 1990. Further investigations at the Tatagamatau site, American Samoa. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 12:51–83.

Leach, J.W., and E. Leach. 1983. The Kula: New Perspectives on Massim Exchange. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Leavesley, M. 2005. Prehistoric hunting strategies in New Ireland, Papua New Guinea: The evidence of the cuscus (Phalanger orientalis) remains from Buang Merabak Cave. Asian Perspectives 44:207–18.

———. 2006. Late Pleistocene complexities in the Bismarck Archipelago. In I. Lilley, ed., Archaeology of Oceania, Australia and the Pacific Islands, pp. 189–204. London: Blackwell.

Leavesley, M., and J. Allen. 1998. Dates, disturbance and artefact distributions: Another analysis of Buang Merabak, a Pleistocene site on New Ireland, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 33:63–82.

Leavesley, M.G., M.I. Bird, L.K. Fifield, P.A. Hausladen, G.M. Santos, and M.L. di Tada. 2002. Buang Merabak: Early evidence for human occupation in the Bismarck Archipelago, Papua New Guinea. Australian Archaeology 54:55–57.

Leavesley, M.G., and J. Chappell. 2004. Buang Merabak: Additional early radiocarbon evidence of the colonisation of the Bismarck Archipelago, Papua New Guinea. Antiquity 78.

Lebot, V., and J. Levesque. 1989. The Origin and Distribution of Kava (Piper methysticum Forst. f., Piperaceae): A Phytochemical Approach. Allertonia 5(2). Lawai, Hawai‘i: National Tropical Botanical Garden.

Ledyard, J. 1963. John Ledyard’s Journal of Captain Cook’s Last Voyage. Corvallis: Oregon State University Press.

Lee, G. 1992. The Rock Art of Easter Island: Symbols of Power, Prayers to the Gods. Monumenta Archaeologica 17. Los Angeles: Institute of Archaeology, University of California.

Lee, G., and E. Stasack. 1999. Spirit of Place: Petroglyphs of Hawai‘i. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

Leenhardt, M. 1937. Gens de la Grande Terre. 9th ed. Paris: Gallimard.

Lepofsky, D. 1988. The environmental context of Lapita settlement locations. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Archeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review, pp. 33–48. Thomas Burke Memorial Washington State Museum Research Report No. 5. Seattle: Burke Museum.

———. 1994. Prehistoric agricultural intensification in the Society Islands, French Polynesia. PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

———. 1995. A radiocarbon chronology for prehistoric agriculture in the Society Islands, French Polynesia. Radiocarbon 37:917–30.

Lepofsky, D., H.C. Harries, and M. Kellum. 1992. Early coconuts on Mo‘orea Island, French Polynesia. Journal of the Polynesian Society 101:299–308.

Lepofsky, D., and J.G. Kahn. 2011. Cultivating an ecological and social balance: Elite demands and commoner knowledge in ancient Ma‘ohi agriculture, Society Islands. American Anthropologist 113:319–35.

Lepofsky, D., P.V. Kirch, and K. Lertzman. 1996. Stratigraphic and paleobotanical evidence for prehistoric human-induced environmental disturbance on Mo‘orea, French Polynesia. Pacific Science 50:253–73.

———. 1998. Metric analyses of prehistoric morphological change in cultivated fruits and nuts: An example from island Melanesia. Journal of Archaeologial Science 25:1001–14.

Levin, M.J., and W.S. Ayres. 2016. Managed agroforests, swiddening, and the introduction of pigs in Pohnpei, Micronesia: Phytolith evidence from an anthropogenic landscape. Quaternary International 434:70–77.

Levison, M., R. Ward, and J. Webb. 1973. The Settlement of Polynesia: A Computer Simulation. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Lévi-Strauss, C. 1982. The Way of the Masks. Trans. Sylvia Modelski. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Lewis, D. 1972. We, the Navigators. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Lewthwaite, G.R. 1950. The population of Aotearoa: Its number and distribution. New Zealand Geographer 6:35–52.

Li, K.C. 1983. Report of Archaeological Investigations in the O-Luan-Pi Park at the Southern Tip of Taiwan. Taipei: Department of Anthropology, National Taiwan University.

Lichtenberk, F. 1986. Leadership in Proto-Oceanic society: Linguistic evidence. Journal of the Polynesian Society 95:341–56.

———. 1994. The raw and the cooked: Proto Oceanic terms for food preparation. In A.K. Pawley and M.D. Ross, eds., Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change, pp. 267–88. Pacific Linguistics C-127. Canberra: Australian National University.

Lilley, I. 1986. Prehistoric exchange across the Vitiaz Strait, Papua New Guinea. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

———. 1988. Prehistoric exchange across the Vitiaz Strait, Papua New Guinea. Current Anthropology 20:513–16.

———. 1991. Lapita sites in the Duke of York Islands. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 164–69. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1992. Papua New Guinea’s human past: The evidence of archaeology. In R.D. Attenborough and M.P. Alpers, eds., Human Biology in Papua New Guinea: The Small Cosmos, pp. 150–71. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Lilley, I., ed. 2006. Archaeology of Oceania: Australia and the Pacific Islands. Oxford: Blackwell.

Lingenfelter, S.G. 1975. Yap: Political Leadership and Culture Change in an Island Society. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Linton, R. 1925. Archaeology of the Marquesas Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 23. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Lipo, C.P. and T.L. Hunt. 2005. Mapping prehistoric statue roads on Easter Island. Antiquity 79:158–68.

Lipo, C.P., T.L. Hunt, and S.R. Haoa. 2013. The “walking” megalithic statues (moai) of Easter Island. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:2859–66.

Lipo, C.P., T.L. Hunt, R. Horneman, and V. Bonhomme. 2016. Weapons of war? Rapa Nui mata‘a morphometric analyses. Antiquity 90:172–87.

Liston, J. 2009. Cultural chronology of earthworks in Palau, western Micronesia. Archaeology in Oceania 44:56–73.

———. 2013. Sociopolitical development and a monumental earthwork landscape on Babeldaob Island, Palau. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

Liston, J., M.W. Kaschko, and D.J. Welch. 1998. Archaeological Inventory Survey for the Capitol Relocation Project, Melekeok, Republic of Palau. Honolulu: International Archaeological Research Institute.

Livingstone, F.B. 1984. The Duffy blood groups, vivax malaria, and malaria selection in human populations: A review. Human Biology 56:413–25.

Lockerbie, L. 1940. Excavations at King’s Rock, Otago, with a discussion of the fish-hook barb as an ancient feature of Polynesian culture. Journal of the Polynesian Society 49:393–446.

———. 1959. From moa-hunter to classic Maori in southern New Zealand. In J.D. Freeman and W.R. Geddes, eds., Anthropology in the South Seas, pp. 75–110. New Plymouth, New Zealand: Avery.

Loret, J., and J.T. Tanacredi, eds. 2003. Easter Island: Scientific Exploration into the World’s Environmental Problems in Microcosm. New York: Kluwer Academic.

Lourandos, H. 1997. Continent of Hunter-Gatherers: New Perspectives in Australian Prehistory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Louwagie, G., C.M. Stevenson, and R. Langohr. 2006. The impact of moderate to marginal land suitability on prehistoric agricultural production and models of adaptive strategies for Easter Island (Rapa Nui, Chile). Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 25:290–317.

Loy, T.H., M. Spriggs, and S. Wickler. 1992. Direct evidence for human use of plants 28,000 years ago: Starch residues on stone artifacts from the northern Solomon Islands. Antiquity 66:898–912.

Lum, J.K. 1998. Central and eastern Micronesia: Genetics, the overnight voyage, and linguistic divergence. Man and Culture in Oceania 14:69–80.

Lum, J.K., and R.L. Cann. 1998. mtDNA and language support a common origin of Micronesians and Polynesians in island Southeast Asia. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 105:109–19.

Lum, J.K., R.L. Cann, J.J. Martinson, and L.B. Jorde. 1998. Mitochondrial and nuclear genetic relationships among Pacific island and Asian populations. American Journal of Human Genetics 63:613–24.

Luomala, K. 1955. Voices on the Wind: Polynesian Myths and Chants. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Lütke, F. 1835. Voyage autour du monde. Paris: Didot.

MacArthur, R.H., and E.O. Wilson. 1967. The Theory of Island Biogeography. Monographs in Population Biology No. 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Macdonald, G.A., and A.T. Abbott. 1970. Volcanoes in the Sea: The Geology of Hawai‘i. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Machida, H., R.J. Blong, J. Specht, H. Moriwaki, R. Torrence, Y. Hayakawa, B. Talai, D. Lolok, and C.F. Pain. 1996. Holocene explosive eruptions of Witori and Dakataua Caldera volcanoes in West New Britain, Papua New Guinea. Quaternary International 34–36:65–78.

MacLachlan, R.R.C. 1940. The native pottery of the Fiji Islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 49:243–71.

Malinowski, B. 1922. Argonauts of the Western Pacific. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Malo, D. 1951. Hawaiian Antiquities. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Special Publication 2. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Mann, D., J. Edwards, J. Chase, W. Beck, R. Reanier, M. Mass, B. Finney, and J. Loret. 2008. Drought, vegetation change, and human history on Rapa Nui (Isla de Pascua, Easter Island). Quaternary Research 69:16–28.

Marck, J. 2000. Topics in Polynesian Language and Culture History. Pacific Linguistics No. 504. Canberra: Australian National University.

Marcus, J., and G.M. Feinman. 1998. Introduction. In G.M. Feinman and J. Marcus, eds., Archaic States, pp. 3–13. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press.

Maric, T. 2012. Dynamiques de peuplement et transformations sociopolitiques à Tahiti (Îles de la Société). PhD dissertation, Université de Paris I, Panthéon-Sorbonne.

Marshall, B., and J. Allen. 1991. Excavations at Panakiwuk Cave, New Ireland. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 59–91. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Marshall, Y. 1985. Who made the Lapita pots? A case study in gender archaeology. Journal of the Polynesian Society 94:205–34.

———. 2008. The social lives of lived and inscribed objects: A Lapita perspective. Journal of the Polynesian Society 117:59–101.

Marshall, Y., A. Crosby, S. Matararaba, and S. Wood. 2000. Sigatoka: The Shifting Sands of Fijian Prehistory. Oxford: Oxbow Books.

Martinson, J.J. 1996. Molecular perspectives on the colonisation of the Pacific. In A.J. Boyce and C.G.N. Mascie-Taylor, eds., Molecular Biology and Human Diversity, pp. 171–95. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Martinson, J.J., R.M. Harding, G. Philippon, F. Flye Sainte-Marie, J. Roux, A.J. Boyce, and J.B. Clegg. 1993. Demographic reductions and genetic bottlenecks in humans: Minisatellite allele distributions in Oceania. Human Genetics 91:445–50.

Martinsson-Wallin, H. 1994. Ahu—the Ceremonial Stone Structures of Easter Island: Analyses of Variation and Interpretation of Meanings. Aun 18. Uppsala, Sweden: Societas Archaeologica Upsaliensis.

———. 2016. Samoan Archaeology and Cultural Heritage: Monuments and People, Memory and History. Oxford: Archaeopress.

Martinsson-Wallin, H., ed. 2007. Archaeology in Samoa: The Pulemelei investigations. Archaeology in Oceania, Supplement 42:1–89.

Masse, W.B. 1989. The archaeology and ecology of fishing in the Belau Islands, Micronesia. PhD dissertation, Southern Illinois University.

———. 1990. Radiocarbon dating, sea-level change and the peopling of Belau. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 213–30.

Masse, W.B., L.A. Carter, and G.F. Somers. 1991. Waha’ula heiau: The regional and symbolic context of Hawai‘i Island’s “red mouth” temple. Asian Perspectives 30:19–56.

Masse, W.B., D. Snyder, and G.J. Gumerman. 1984. Prehistoric and historic settlement in the Palau Islands, Micronesia. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 6:107–28.

Matisoo-Smith, E. 2009. The commensal model for human settlement of the Pacific 10 years on—what can we say now and where to now? Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 4:151–63.

Matisoo-Smith, E., J.S. Allen, T.N. Ladefoged, R.M. Roberts, and D.M. Lambert. 1997. Ancient DNA from Polynesian rats: Extraction, amplification and sequence from single small bones. Electrophoresis 18:1534–37.

Matisoo-Smith, E., M. Hingston, G. Summerhayes, J. Robins, H.A. Ross, and M. Hendy. 2009. On the rat trail in Near Oceania: Applying the commensal model to the question of the Lapita colonization. Pacific Science 63:465–75.

Matisoo-Smith, E., R.M. Roberts, G.J. Irwin, J.S. Allen, D. Penny, and D.M. Lambert. 1998. Patterns of prehistoric human mobility revealed by mitochondrial DNA from the Pacific rat. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 95:15145–50.

Matisoo-Smith, E., and J.H. Robins. 2004. Origins and dispersals of Pacific peoples: Evidence from mtDNA phylogenies of the Pacific rat. Proceedings of the National Academy, U.S.A. 101:9167–72.

Mauricio, R. 1987. Peopling of Pohnpei Island: Migration, dispersal and settlement themes in clan narratives. Man in Oceania 3:47–72.

Mayr, E. 1945. Birds of the Southwest Pacific. New York: Macmillan.

———. 1982. The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 1997. This Is Biology: The Science of the Living World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

McAlister, A., P.J. Sheppard, and M.S. Allen. 2013. The identification of a Marquesan adze in the Cook Islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 122:273–57.

McAllister, J.G. 1933. Archaeology of Oahu. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 104. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

McArthur, N. 1968. Island Populations of the Pacific. Canberra: Australian National University Press.

McArthur, N., I. Saunders, and R. Tweedie. 1976. Small population isolates: A micro-simulation study. Journal of the Polynesian Society 85:307–26.

McCall, G. 1980. Rapanui: Tradition and Survival on Easter Island. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

McCoy, M.D. 2005. The development of the Kalaupapa field system, Moloka‘i Island, Hawai‘i. Journal of the Polynesian Society 114:339–58.

———. 2006. Landscape, social memory, and society: An ethnohistoric-archaeological study of three Hawaiian communities. PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

———. 2007. A revised late Holocene culture history for Moloka‘i Island, Hawai‘i. Radiocarbon 49:1273–1322.

———. 2014. The significance of religious ritual in ancient Hawai‘i. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 5:72–80.

McCoy, M.D., H.A. Alderson, R. Hemi, H. Cheng, and R.L. Edwards. 2016. Earliest direct evidence of monument building at the archaeological site of Nan Madol (Pohnpei, Micronesia) identified using 230Th/U coral dating and geochemical sourcing of megalithic architectural stone. Quaternary Research 86:295–303.

McCoy, M.D., G.P. Asner, and M.W. Graves. 2011. Airborne LiDAR survey of irrigated agricultural landscapes: An application of the slope contrast method. Journal of Archaeological Science 38:2141–54.

McCoy, M.D., and M.W. Graves. 2010. The role of agricultural innovation on Pacific islands: A case study from Hawai‘i Island. World Archaeology 42:90–107.

McCoy, M.D. and T.N. Ladefoged. 2009. New developments in the use of spatial technology in archaeology. Journal of Archaeological Research 17:263–95.

McCoy, M.D., P.R. Mills, S. Lundblad, T. Rieth, J.G. Kahn, and R. Gard. 2011. A cost surface model of volcanic glass quarrying and exchange in Hawai‘i. Journal of Archaeological Science 38:2547–60.

McCoy, P.C. 1976. Easter Island Settlement Patterns in the Late Prehistoric and Proto-Historic Periods. International Fund for Monuments, Easter Island Committee, Bulletin 5. New York: International Fund for Monuments.

———. 1979. Easter Island. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 135–66. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

McCoy, P.C., and P.C. Cleghorn. 1988. Archaeological excavations on Santa Cruz (Nendö), southeast Solomon Islands: Summary report. Archaeology in Oceania 23:104–15.

McCoy, P.C., M.I. Weisler, J. Zhou, and X. Feng. 2009. 230Th dates for dedicatory corals from a remote alpine desert adze quarry on Mauna Kea, Hawai‘i. Antiquity 83:445–57.

McEldowney, P.H. 1995. Subsistence intensification in the late prehistory of Manus. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

McElroy, W.K. 2007. The development of irrigated agriculture in Wailau Valley, Moloka‘i Island, Hawai‘i. PhD dissertation, University of Hawai‘i.

McFadgen, B.G., and R.A. Sheppard. 1984. Ruahihi Pa: A Prehistoric Defended Settlement in the South-Western Bay of Plenty. National Museum of New Zealand Bulletin 22. Wellington: National Museum of New Zealand.

McGlone, M.S. 1983. Polynesian deforestation of New Zealand: A preliminary synthesis. Archaeology in Oceania 18:11–25.

———. 1989. The Polynesian settlement of New Zealand in relation to environmental and biotic changes. New Zealand Journal of Ecology 12(suppl.):115–30.

McGlone, M.S., and L.R. Basher. 1995. The deforestation of the upper Awatere catchment, inland Kaikoura Range, Malborough, South Island, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Ecology 19:53–66.

McGlone, M.S., and J.M. Wilmshurst. 1999. Dating initial Maori environmental impact in New Zealand. Quaternary International 59:5–16.

McKern, W.C. 1929. Archaeology of Tonga. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 60. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

McNiven, I.J., B. David, T. Richards, K. Aplin, B. Asmussen, J. Mialanes, M. Leavesley, P. Faulkner, and S. Ulm. 2011. New direction in human colonisation of the Pacific: Lapita settlement of south coast New Guinea. Australian Archaeology 72:1–6.

Mead, M. 1930. Social Organization of Manua. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 76. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Mead, S.M., L. Birks, H. Birks, and E. Shaw. 1975. The Lapita Pottery Style of Fiji and Its Associations. Polynesian Society Memoir No. 38. Wellington, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

Melton, T., S. Clifford, J. Martinson, M. Batzer, and M. Stoneking. 1998. Genetic evidence for the Proto-Austronesian homeland in Asia: mtDNA and nuclear DNA variation in Taiwanese Aboriginal tribes. American Journal of Human Genetics 63:1807–23.

Menard, H.W. 1986. Islands. New York: Scientific American Library.

Merrill, E.D. 1945. Plant Life of the Pacific World. New York: Macmillan.

———. 1954. The Botany of Cook’s Voyages and Its Unsuspected Significance in Relation to Anthropology, Biogeography and History. Chronica Botanica, vol. 14. Waltham, MA: Chronica Botanica.

Merriwether, D.A., J.S. Friedlaender, J. Mediavilla, C. Mgone, F. Gentz, and R.E. Ferrell. 1999. Mitochondrial DNA variation is an indicator of Austronesian influence in island Melanesia. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 110:243–70.

Métraux, A. 1940. Ethnology of Easter Island. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 160. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1957. Easter Island: A Stone-Age Civilization of the Pacific. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Meyer, O. 1909. Funde prähistorischer Töpferei und Steinmesser auf Vuatom, Bismarck-Archipel. Anthropos 4:1093–95.

———. 1910. Funde von Menschen- und Tierknochen, von prähistorischer Töpferei und Steinwerkzeugen auf Vuatom, Bismarck-Archipel. Anthropos 5:1160–61.

Mieth, A., and H.R. Bork, 2005. History, origin and extent of soil erosion on Easter Island (Rapa Nui). Catena 63:244–60.

———. 2010. Humans, climate or introduced rats—which is to blame for the woodland destruction on prehistoric Rapa Nui (Easter Island)? Journal of Archaeological Science 37:417–26.

Miller, D. 1979. Report of the National Sites Survey: 1976–1978. Honiara: Solomon Islands Museum.

———. 1980. Settlement and diversity in the Solomon Islands. Man 15:451–66.

Miller, L.J. 1997. Mollusk exploitation and paleoenvironmental change in the Kone Region: A reanalysis of the site 13 mollusk assemblages. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers 82:25–37.

Millerstrom, S.N. 1997. Carved and painted rock images in the Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia. Archaeology in Oceania 32:181–96.

———. 2003. Gravures rupestres et archéologie de l’habitat de Hatiheu a Nuku Hiva. Cahiers du Patrimoine 6. Pape‘ete, Tahiti: Service de la Culture de Polynésie Française.

Mills, P.R., and S.P. Lundblad. 2014. Current perspectives on Hawai‘i’s stone tool economies. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 5:30–39.

Moir, B.G. 1989. A review of Tridacnid ecology and some possible implications for archaeological research. Asian Perspectives 31:95–122.

Molle, G. 2011. Ua Huka, une île dans l’histoire: Histoire pré- et post-européenne d’une société marquisienne. PhD dissertation, University of French Polynesia.

———. 2014. Ancêtres-dieux et temples de Corail: Approche ethnoarchéologique du complexe marae dans l’Archipel des Tuamotu, Polynésie Française. Les Cahiers du CIRAP No. 3. Tahiti: Université de la Polynesie Française.

Molle, G., and E. Conte. 2011. New perspectives on the occupation of Hatuana dune site, Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 2:103–8.

Mona, S., M. Tommaseo-Ponzetta, S. Brauer, H. Sudoyo, S. Marzuki, and M. Kayser. 2007. Patterns of Y-chromosome diversity intersect with the Trans-New-Guinea Hypothesis. Molecular Biology and Evolution 24:2546–55.

Moniz, J.J. 1997. The role of seabirds in Hawaiian subsistence: Implications for interpreting avian extinction and extirpation in Polynesia. Asian Perspectives 36:27–50.

Monnin, J., and C. Sand. 2004. Kibo: Le serment gravé. Essai de synthèse sur les pétroglyphes calédoniens. Les Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie, vol. 16. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Montenegro, A., R.T. Callaghan, and S.M. Fitzpatrick. 2016. Using seafaring simulations and shortest-hop trajectories to model the prehistoric colonization of Remote Oceania. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 113:12685–90.

Moodley, Y.B. Linz, Y. Yamaoka, H.M. Windsor, S. Breurec, J.-Y. Wu, A. Maady, S. Bernhoft, J.-M. Thiberge, S. Phuanukoonnon, G. Jobb, P. Siba, D.Y. Graham, B.J. Marshall, and M. Achtman. 2009. The peopling of the Pacific from a bacterial perspective. Science 323:527–30.

Morgan, W.N. 1988. Prehistoric Architecture in Micronesia. Austin: University of Texas Press.

Morrison, A.E., and D.J. Addison. 2009. Examining causes and trends in marine trophic level change: 1500 years of fish exploitation at Fatu-ma-Futi, Tutuila Island, American Sāmoa. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 4:177–94.

Morrison, K. 1994. Intensification of production: Archaeological approaches. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 1:111–59.

———. 1996. Typological schemes and agricultural change: Beyond Boserup in precolonial South India. Current Anthropology 37:583–608.

Mountain, M.-J. 1983. Preliminary report on excavations at Nombe rockshelter, Simbu Province, Papua New Guinea. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 4:84–89.

———. 1991a. Bulmer Phase 1: Environmental change and human activity through the late Pleistocene into the Holocene in the highlands of New Guinea: A scenario. In A. Pawley, ed., Man and a Half: Essays in Pacific Anthropology and Ethnobiology in Honour of Ralph Bulmer, pp. 510–20. Auckland, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

———. 1991b. Landscape use and environmental management of tropical rainforest by pre-agricultural hunter-gatherers in northern Sahulland. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 11:54–68.

Muke, J., and H. Mandui. 2003. In the shadows of Kuk: Evidence for prehistoric agriculture at Kana, Wahgi Valley, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 38:177–85.

Mulloy, W., and G. Figueroa. 1978. The A Kivi-Vai Teka Complex and Its Relationship to Easter Island Architectural Prehistory. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series No. 8. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawaii.

Mulrooney, M.A. 2012. Continuity or collapse? Diachronic settlement and land use in Hanga Ho‘onu, Rapa Nui (Easter Island). PhD dissertation, University of Auckland.

———. 2013. An island-wide assessment of the chronology of settlement and land use on Rapa Nui (Easter Island) based on radiocarbon data. Journal of Archaeological Science 40:4377–99.

Mulrooney, M.A., S.H. Bickler, M.S. Allen, and T.N. Ladefoged. 2011. High-precision dating of colonization and settlement in East Polynesia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 108: E192–E194.

Mulrooney, M.A., and T.N. Ladefoged. 2005. Hawaiian heiau and agricultural production in the Kohala dryland field system. Journal of the Polynesian Society 114:45–68.

Murdock, G.P. 1963. Human influences on the ecosystem of high islands of the tropical Pacific. In F.R. Fosberg, ed., Man’s Place in the Island Ecosystem: A Symposium, pp. 145–52. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Nāleimaile, S.P., and L. Brandt. 2013. Is Hawaiian archipelago really Hawaiian? A Native Hawaiian perspective. SAA Archaeological Record 13:31–32.

Nagaoka, L. 1988. Lapita subsistence: The evidence of non-fish archaeofaunal remains. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Archaeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review, pp. 117–34. Thomas Burke Memorial Washington State Museum Research Report No. 5. Seattle: Burke Museum.

Negishi, Y., and R. Ono. 2009. Kasasinabwana shell midden: The prehistoric ceramic sequence of Wari Island in the Massim, eastern Papua New Guinea. People and Culture in Oceania 25:23–52.

Nunn, P.D. 1994. Oceanic Islands. Oxford: Blackwell.

Nunn, P.D., T. Ishimura, W.R. Dickinson, K. Katayama, F. Thomas, R. Kumar, S. Matararaba, J. Davidson, and T. Worthy. 2007. The Lapita occupation at Naitabale, Moturiki Island, central Fiji. Asian Perspectives 46:96–132.

Nunn, P.D., R. Kumar, S. Matararaba, T. Ishimura, J. Seeto, S. Rayawa, S. Kuruyawa, A. Nasila, A. Nasila, B. Oloni, A.R. Ram, P. Saunivalu, P. Singh, and E. Tegu. 2004. Early Lapita settlement site at Bourewa, southwest Viti Levu Island, Fiji. Archaeology in Oceania 39:139–43.

Nunn, P.D., and F. Petchey. 2013. Bayesian re-evaluation of Lapita settlement in Fiji: Radiocarbon analysis of the Lapita occupation at Bourewa and nearby sites on the Rove Peninsula, Viti Levu Island. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 4(2):21–34.

O’Connell, J.F., and J. Allen. 2012. The restaurant at the end of the universe: Modelling the colonisation of Sahul. Australian Archaeology 74:5–17.

———. 2015. The process, biotic impact, and global implications of the human colonization of Sahul about 47,000 years ago. Journal of Archaeological Science 56:73–84.

Ó Foighil, D., T. Lee, and J. Slapcinsky. 2011. Prehistoric anthropogenic introduction of partulid tree snails in Papua New Guinean archipelagos. Journal of Biogeography 38:1625–32.

Oliver, D.L. 1974. Ancient Tahitian Society. 3 vols. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 1989. Oceania: The Native Cultures of Australia and the Pacific Islands. 2 vols. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Olson, S.L., and H.F. James. 1982a. Fossil birds from the Hawaiian Islands: Evidence for wholesale extinction by man before Western contact. Science 217:633–35.

———. 1982b. Prodromus of the fossil avifauna of the Hawaiian Islands. Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology 365:1–59.

———. 1984. The role of Polynesians in the extinction of the avifauna of the Hawaiian Islands. In P.S. Martin and R.L. Klein, eds., Quaternary Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution, pp. 768–80. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.

Orliac, C. 1998. Donnes nouvelles sur la composition de la flore de l’île de Pâques. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 107:135–43.

Orliac, M. 1997. Human occupation and environmental modifications in the Papeno‘o Valley, Tahiti. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Historical Ecology in the Pacific Islands: Prehistoric Environmental and Landscape Change, pp. 200–29. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Osborne, D. 1966. The Archaeology of the Palau Islands: An Intensive Survey. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 230. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1979. Archaeological Test Excavations, Palau Islands: 1968–1969. Micronesica, Supplement 1.

Osmond, M. 1996. Proto Oceanic terms for fishing and hunting implements. In J. Lynch and F. Pat, eds., Oceanic Studies: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Oceanic Linguistics, pp. 111–32. Pacific Linguistics C-133. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1998. Horticultural practices. In M. Ross, A. Pawley, and M. Osmond, eds., The Lexicon of Proto Oceanic: The Culture and Environment of Ancestral Oceanic Society, vol. 1: Material Culture, pp. 115–42. Pacific Linguistics C-152. Canberra: Australian National University.

Ottino, P. 1985. Archéologie des îles Marquises: Contribution à la connaissance de l’île de Ua Pou. 2 vols. PhD dissertation, University of Paris I, Panthéon-Sorbonne.

———. 1990a. L’Habitat des anciens Marquisiens: Architecture des maisons, évolution et symbolisme des formes. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 90:3–15.

———. 1990b. Hakao’hoka: Étude d’une vallée marquisienne. Travaux et Documents Microédités 66. Paris: ORSTOM.

———. 1992. Anapua: Abri-sous-roche de pêcheurs. Étude des hameçons. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 94:57–79, 95:201–26.

Ottino-Garanger, P. 2006. Archéologie chez les Taïpi: Hatiheu, un projet partage aux îles Marquises. Tahiti: Au Vent des îles, IRD Editions.

Paijmans, K., ed. 1976. New Guinea Vegetation. Canberra: Australian National University Press.

Palmer, B. 1969. Ring-ditch fortifications on windward Viti Levu, Fiji. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 4:181–97.

Parke, A. 1998. Navatanitawake ceremonial mound, Bau, Fiji: Some results of 1970 investigations. Archaeology in Oceania 33:20–27.

Parker, P.L., and T.F. King. 1984. Recent and current archaeological research on Moen Island, Truk. Asian Perspectives 24:11–26.

Parkes, A. 1997. Environmental change and the impact of Polynesian colonization: Sedimentary records from central Polynesia. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Historical Ecology in the Pacific Islands: Prehistoric Environmental and Landscape Change, pp. 166–99. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Parry, J.T. 1977. Ring-Ditch Fortifications in the Rewa Delta, Fiji: Air Photo Interpretation and Analysis. Fiji Museum Bulletin No. 3. Suva: Fiji Museum.

———. 1981. Ring-Ditch Fortifications in the Navua Delta, Fiji: Air Photo Interpretation and Analysis. Fiji Museum Bulletin No. 7. Suva: Fiji Museum.

———. 1984. Air photo interpretation of fortified sites: Ring-ditch fortifications in southern Viti Levu, Fiji. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 6:71–94.

———. 1987. The Sigatoka Valley: Pathway into Prehistory. Fiji Museum Bulletin No. 9. Suva: Fiji Museum.

Pavlides, C. 1993. New archaeological research at Yombon, West New Britain, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 28:55–59.

———. 2004. From Misisil Cave to Eliva Hamlet: Rediscovering the Pleistocene in interior West New Britain. In V. Attenbrow and R. Fullagar, eds., A Pacific Odyssey: Archaeology and Anthropology in the Western Pacific, Papers in Honour of Jim Specht, pp. 97–108. Records of the Australian Museum, Supplement, vol. 29.

———. 2006. Life before Lapita: New developments in Melanesia’s long-term history. In I. Lilley, ed., Archaeology of Oceania: Australia and the Pacific Islands, pp. 205–27. Oxford: Blackwell.

Pavlides, C., and C. Gosden. 1994. 35,000-year-old sites in the rainforests of West New Britain, Papua New Guinea. Antiquity 68:604–10.

Pawley, A. 1966. Polynesian languages: A subgrouping based on shared innovations in morphology. Journal of the Polynesian Society 75:39–64.

———. 1967. The relationships of Polynesian outlier languages. Journal of the Polynesian Society 76:259–96.

———. 1982. Rubbish-man, commoner, big-man, chief? Linguistic evidence for hereditary chieftainship in Proto-Oceanic society. In J. Siikala, ed., Oceanic Studies: Essays in Honor of Aarne A. Koskinen, pp. 33–52. Transactions of the Finnish Anthropological Society No. 11. Helsinki: Finnish Anthropological Society.

———. 1996. On the Polynesian subgroup as a problem for Irwin’s continuous settlement hypothesis. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 387–410. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

———. 2007. The origins of early Lapita culture: The testimony of historical linguistics. In S. Bedford, C. Sand, and S.P. Connaughton, eds., Oceanic Explorations: Lapita and Western Pacific Settlement, pp. 17–50. Terra Australis 26. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 2009. The role of the Solomon Islands in the first settlement of Remote Oceania: Bringing linguistic evidence to an archaeological debate. In A. Adelaar and A. Pawley, eds., Austronesian Historical Linguistics and Culture History: A Festschrift for Robert Blust, pp. 515–40. Pacific Linguistics 601. Canberra: Australian National University.

Pawley, A., and R.C. Green. 1973. Dating the dispersal of the Oceanic languages. Oceanic Linguistics 12:1–67.

———. 1984. The Proto-Oceanic language community. Journal of Pacific History 19:123–46.

Pawley, A., and M. Pawley. 1994. Early Austronesian terms for canoe parts and seafaring. In A.K. Pawley and M.D. Ross, eds., Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change, pp. 329–61. Pacific Linguistics C-127. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1998. Canoes and seafaring. In M. Ross, A. Pawley, and M. Osmond, eds., The Lexicon of Proto Oceanic: The Culture and Environment of Ancestral Oceanic Society, vol. 1: Material Culture, pp. 173–210. Pacific Linguistics C-152. Canberra: Australian National University.

Pawley, A.K., and M. Ross. 1993. Austronesian historical linguistics and culture history. Annual Review of Anthropology 22:425–59.

———. 1995. The prehistory of Oceanic languages: A current view. In P. Bellwood, J.J. Fox, and D. Tryon, eds., The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, pp. 39–74. Canberra: Australian National University.

Pawley, A.K., and M. Ross, eds. 1994. Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change. Pacific Linguistics C-127. Canberra: Australian National University.

Pearl, F. 2004. The chronology of mountain settlements in Tutuila, American Samoa. Journal of the Polynesian Society 113:331–48.

Pearson, R.J., ed. 1968. Excavations at Lapakahi: Selected Papers. Hawaii State Archaeological Journal 69(2).

———. 1969. Archaeology on the Island of Hawaii. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series No. 3. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawaii.

Pearson, R.J., P.V. Kirch, and M. Pietrusewsky. 1971. An early prehistoric site at Bellows Beach, Waimanalo, Oahu, Hawaiian Islands. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 6:204–34.

Peoples, J.G. 1990. The evolution of complex stratification in Eastern Micronesia. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 291–302.

Petchey, F.J. 2001. Radiocarbon determinations from the Mulifanua Lapita site, Upolu, Western Samoa. Radiocarbon 43:63–68.

Petchey, F., G. Clark, O. Winter, P. O’Day, and M. Litster. 2016. Colonisation of Remote Oceania: New date for the Bapot-1 site in the Marianas Islands. Archaeology in Oceania DOI: 10.1002/arco.5108.

Petchey, F., M. Spriggs, S. Bedford, and F. Valentin. 2015. The chronology of occupation at Teouma, Vanuatu: Use of a modified chronometric hygiene protocol and Bayesian modeling to evaluate midden remains. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 4:95–105.

Petchey, F., M. Spriggs, S. Bedford, F. Valentin, and H. Buckley. 2014. Radiocarbon dating of burials from the Teouma Lapita cemetery, Efate, Vanuatu. Journal of Archaeological Science 50:227–42.

Petchey, P., H. Buckley, R.Walter, D. Anson, and R. Kinaston. 2016. The 2008–2009 excavations at the SAC locality, Reber-Rakival Lapita site, Watom Island, Papua New Guinea. Journal of Indo-Pacific Archaeology 40:12–31.

Petersen, G. 1990. Some overlooked complexities in the study of Pohnpei social complexity. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 137–52.

———. 2009. Traditional Micronesian Societies: Adaptation, Integration, and Political Organization. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Petrie, C.A., and R. Torrence. 2008. Assessing the effects of volcanic disasters on human settlement in the Willaumez Peninsula, Papua New Guinea: A Bayesian approach to radiocarbon calibration. The Holocene 18:729–44.

Phillips, C. 1986. Excavations at Raupa Pa (N53/37) and Waiwhau Village (N53/198), Paeroa, New Zealand, in 1984. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 8:89–114.

———. 2000. Waihou Journeys: The Archaeology of 400 Years of Maori Settlement. Auckland: University of Auckland Press.

Pickering, R.B. 1990. An ethno-archaeological investigation of Yapese mortuary behavior. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 153–70.

Piddington, R., ed. 1939. Essays in Polynesian Ethnology, by Robert W. Williamson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pietrusewsky, M. 1970. An osteological view of indigenous populations in Oceania. In R.C. Green and M. Kelly, eds., Studies in Oceanic Culture History, vol. 1, pp. 1–12. Pacific Anthropological Records 11. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1990. Craniometric variation in Micronesia and the Pacific: A multivariate study. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 373–402.

———. 1994. Lapita origins: An osteological perspective. In P.J.C. Dark and R.G. Rose, eds., Artistic Heritage in a Changing Pacific, pp. 15–19. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 1996. The physical anthropology of Polynesia: A review of some cranial and skeletal studies. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 343–53. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

Pospisil, L. 1963. Kapauku Papuan Economy. Yale University Publications in Anthropology No. 67. New Haven, CT: Department of Anthropology, Yale University.

Poteate, A.S., S.M. Fitzpatrick, W.S. Ayres, and A. Thompson. 2016. First radiocarbon chronology for Mwoakilloa (Mokil) Atoll, eastern Caroline Islands, Micronesia. Radiocarbon 58:169–78.

Poulsen, J. 1968. Archaeological excavations on Tongatapu. In I. Yawata and Y.H. Sinoto, eds., Prehistoric Culture in Oceania, pp. 85–92. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1972. Outlier archaeology: Bellona. A preliminary report on field work and radiocarbon dates. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 7:184–205.

———. 1983. The chronology of early Tongan prehistory and the Lapita ware. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 76:46–56.

———. 1987. Early Tongan Prehistory. 2 vols. Terra Australis 12. Canberra: Australian National University.

Pregill, G., and T. Dye. 1989. Prehistoric extinction of giant iguanas in Tonga. Copeia 1989:505–8.

Prickett, N., ed. 1982. The First Thousand Years: Regional Perspectives in New Zealand Archaeology. Palmerston North, New Zealand: Dunmore Press.

Puleston, C.O., and S. Tuljapurkar. 2008. Population and prehistory II: Space-limited human populations in constant environments. Theoretical Population Biology 74:147–60.

Quintus, S.J. 2012. Terrestrial production and land use in prehistoric Samoa: An example from Olosega Island, Manu‘a, American Samoa. Archaeology in Oceania 47:133–40.

———. 2015. Dynamics of agricultural development in prehistoric Samoa: The case of Ofu Island. PhD dissertation, University of Auckland.

Quintus, S.J., and J.T. Clark. 2012. Between chaos and control: Spatial perception of domestic, political, and ritual organization in prehistoric Samoa. Journal of the Polynesian Society 121:275–302.

———. 2016. Space and structure in Polynesia: Instantiated spatial logic in American Samoa. World Archaeology 48:395–410.

Quintus, S., J.T. Clark, S.S. Day, and D.P. Schwert. 2015. Investigating regional patterning in archaeological remains by pairing extensive survey with a lidar dataset: The case of the Manu‘a Group, American Samoa. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 2:677–87.

Radovsky, F.J., P.H. Raven, and S.H. Sohmer, eds. 1984. Biogeography of the Tropical Pacific. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Special Publication 72. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Rainbird, P. 1994. Prehistory in the northwest tropical Pacific: The Caroline, Mariana, and Marshall Islands. Journal of World Prehistory 8:293–349.

———. 1996. A place to look up to: A review of Chuukese hilltop enclosures. Journal of the Polynesian Society 105:461–78.

———. 2004. The Archaeology of Micronesia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2006. The archaeology of the Conical Clan in Micronesia. In I. Lilley, ed., Archaeology of Oceania: Australia and the Pacific Islands, pp. 302–17. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Rallu, J.-L. 1990. Les populations océaniennes aux XIXe et XXe siècles.Travaux et Documents Cahier No. 128. Paris: Institut National d’Études Démographiques.

Rath, P., and R. Torrence. 2003. Producing value: Stemmed tools from Garua Island, Papua New Guinea. Australian Archaeology 57:119–27.

Rechtman, R.B. 1992. The evolution of sociopolitical complexity in the Fiji Islands. PhD dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.

Reepmeyer, C., G. Clark, and P. Sheppard. 2012. Obsidian source use in Tongan prehistory: New results and implications. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 7:255–71.

Reepmeyer, C., M. Spriggs, S. Bedford, and W. Ambrose. 2011. Provenance and technology of lithic artifacts from the Teouma Lapita site, Vanuatu. Asian Perspectives 49:205–25.

Reeve, R. 1989. Recent work on the prehistory of the western Solomons, Melanesia. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 9:46–67.

Rehbock, P.F. 1988. Organizing Pacific science: Local and international origins of the Pacific Science Association. In R. MacLoed and P.F. Rehbock, eds., Nature in Its Greatest Extent: Western Science in the Pacific, pp. 195–222. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Rehg, K.L. 1995. The significance of linguistic interaction spheres in reconstructing Micronesian prehistory. Oceanic Linguistics 34:305–26.

Reid, L.A. 1999. Morphosyntactic evidence for the position of Chamorro in the Austronesian language family. Paper presented at the 16th Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association, Melaka, Malaysia, July 1–7, 1998.

Reilly, M.P.J. 2003. War and Succession in Mangaia from Mamae’s Texts. Polynesian Society Memoir No. 52. Auckland: Polynesian Society.

———. 2009. Ancestral Voices from Mangaia: A History of the Ancient Gods and Chiefs. Polynesian Society Memoir No. 54. Auckland: The Polynesian Society.

Reinman, F.R. 1966. Notes on an archaeological survey of Guam, Marianas Islands, 1965–66. Mimeographed preliminary report to the National Science Foundation. Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago.

———. n.d. [1966]. An archaeological survey and preliminary test excavations on the island of Guam, Marianas Islands, 1965–66. Mimeographed report. California State University, Los Angeles.

Reisenberg, S.H. 1968. The Native Polity of Ponape. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 10. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.

Renfrew, C. 1982. Polity and power: Interaction, intensification and exploitation. In C. Renfrew and M. Wagstaff, eds., An Island Polity: The Archaeology of Exploitation in Melos, pp. 264–90. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1984. Approaches to Social Archaeology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Rhoads, J.W. 1980. Through a glass darkly: Present and past land use systems among Papuan sagopalm users. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

Richards, M.P., E. West, B.V. Rolett, and K. Dobney. 2009. Isotope analysis of human and animal diets from the Hanamiai archaeological site (French Polynesia). Archaeology in Oceania 44:29–37.

Richards, Z.T., C.-C. Shen, J.-P.A. Hobbs, C.-C. Wu, X. Jiang, and F. Beardsley. 2015. New precise dates for the ancient and sacred coral pyramidal tombs of Leluh (Kosrae, Micronesia). Science Advances 1:e1400060.

Rick, T.C., P.V. Kirch, J.M. Erlandson, and S.M. Fitzpatrick. 2013. Archeology, deep history, and the human transformation of island ecosystems. Anthropocene 4:33–45.

Rieth, T.M., and T.L. Hunt. 2008. A radiocarbon chronology for Sāmoan prehistory. Journal of Archaeological Science 35:1901–27.

Rieth, T.M., A.E. Morrison, and D.J. Addison. 2008. The temporal and spatial patterning of the initial settlement of Sāmoa. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 3:214–39.

Riley, T. 1987. Archaeological survey and testing, Majuro Atoll, Marshall Islands. In T.S. Dye, ed., Marshall Islands Archaeology, pp. 169–270. Pacific Anthropological Records 38. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Ritter, P.L. 1981. The population of Kosrae at contact. Micronesica 17:11–28.

Rivers, W.H.R. 1914. The History of Melanesian Society. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Rivierre, J.-C. 1996. Myth, histoire et archéologie dans le Centre-Vanuatu. In M. Julien, M. Orliac, and C. Orliac, eds., Mémoire de pierre, mémoire d’homme: Tradition et archéologie en Océanie, pp. 431–64. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne.

Robb, K.F., and P.D. Nunn. 2012. Nature and chronology of prehistoric settlement on the Vatia Peninsula, northern Viti Levu Island, Fiji. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 7:272–81.

Roberts, M. 1991. Origin, dispersal routes, and geographic distribution of Rattus exulans, with specific reference to New Zealand. Pacific Science 45:123–30.

Robin, C., J.-P. Eissen, and M. Monzier. 1993. Giant tuff cone and 12-km-wide associated caldera at Ambrym Volcano (Vanuatu, New Hebrides Arc). Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 55:225–38.

Robin, C., M. Monzier, and J.-P. Eissen. 1994. Formation of the mid-fifteenth century Kuwae Caldera (Vanuatu) by an initial hydroclastic and subsequent ignimbritic eruption. Bulletin of Volcanology 56:170–83.

Roe, D. 1992. Investigations into the prehistory of the central Solomons: Some old and some new data from northwest Guadalcanal. In J.-C. Galipaud, ed., Poterie Lapita et peuplement: Actes du Colloque LAPITA, pp. 91–102. Noumea, New Caledonia: ORSTOM.

———. 1993. Prehistory without pots: Prehistoric settlement and economy of north-west Guadalcanal, Solomon Islands. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

Rogers, G. 1974. Archaeological discoveries on Niuatoputapu Island, Tonga. Journal of the Polynesian Society 83:308–48.

Rolett, B.V. 1989. Hanamiai: Changing subsistence and ecology in the prehistory of Tahuata (Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia). PhD dissertation, Yale University.

———. 1992. Faunal extinctions and depletions linked with prehistory and environmental change in the Marquesas Islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 101:86–94.

———. 1993. Marquesan prehistory and the origins of East Polynesian culture. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 96:29–47.

———. 1996. Colonisation and cultural change in the Marquesas. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 531–40. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

———. 1998. Hanamiai: Prehistoric Colonization and Cultural Change in the Marquesas Islands (East Polynesia). Yale University Publications in Anthropology No. 84. New Haven, CT: Department of Anthropology, Yale University.

———. 2002. Voyaging and interaction in ancient East Polynesia. Asian Perspectives 41:182–94.

Rolett, B.V., and E. Conte. 1995. Renewed investigation of the Ha‘atuatua dune (Nukuhiva, Marquesas Islands): A key site in Polynesian prehistory. Journal of the Polynesian Society 104:195–228.

Rolett, B.V., and J. Diamond, 2004. Environmental predictors of pre-European deforestation on Pacific islands. Nature 431:443–46.

Rolett, B.V., E. West, J.M. Sinton, and R. Iovita. 2015. Ancient East Polynesian voyaging spheres: New evidence from the Vitaria adze quarry (Rurutu, Austral Islands). Journal of Archaeological Science 53:459–71.

Romney, K. 1957. The genetic model and Uto-Aztecan time perspective. Davidson Journal of Anthropology 3:35–41.

Roos, C.I., J.S. Field, and J.V. Dudgeon. 2016. Anthropogenic burning, agricultural intensification, and landscape transformation in post-Lapita Fiji. Journal of Ethnobiology 36:535–53.

Rose, R. 1980. A Museum to Instruct and Delight: William T. Brigham and the Founding of the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Special Publication 68. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Rosendahl, P.H. 1972. Aboriginal agriculture and residence patterns in upland Lapakahi, island of Hawaii. PhD dissertation, University of Hawaii.

———. 1987. Archaeology in eastern Micronesia: A reconnaissance survey in the Marshall Islands. In T.S. Dye, ed., Marshall Islands Archaeology, pp. 17–168. Pacific Anthropological Records 38. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1994. Aboriginal Hawaiian structural remains and settlement patterns in the upland agricultural zone at Lapakahi, island of Hawai’i. Hawaiian Archaeology 3:14–70.

Rosenfeld, A. 1997. Excavation at Buang Merabak, central New Ireland. In P. Bellwood, ed., Indo-Pacific Prehistory: The Chiang Mai Papers, vol. 3, pp. 213–24. Canberra: Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association.

Ross, M.D. 1988. Proto Oceanic and the Austronesian Languages of Western Melanesia. Pacific Linguistics C-98. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1989. Early Oceanic linguistic prehistory. Journal of Pacific History 24:135–49.

———. 1995. Some current issues in Austronesian linguistics. In D.T. Tryon, ed., Comparative Austronesian Dictionary, pt. 1, pp. 45–120. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

———. 1996a. Is Yapese Oceanic? In B. Nothofer, ed., Reconstruction, Classification, Description: Festschrift in Honor of Isidore Dyen, pp. 121–66. Hamburg: Abera Verlag Meyer.

———. 1996b. Reconstructing food plant terms and associated terminologies in Proto Oceanic. In J. Lynch and F. Pat, eds., Oceanic Studies: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Oceanic Linguistics, pp. 163–221. Pacific Linguistics C-133. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1997. Social networks and kinds of speech community event. In R. Blench and M. Spriggs, eds., Archaeology and Language I: Theoretical and Methodological Orientations, pp. 209–61. London: Routledge.

Ross, M., and A. Næss. 2007. An Oceanic origin for Äiwoo, the language of the Reef Islands. Oceanic Linguistics 46:456–98.

Ross, M., A. Pawley, and M. Osmond, eds. 1998. The Lexicon of Proto Oceanic: The Culture and Environment of Ancestral Oceanic Society, vol. 1: Material Culture. Pacific Linguistics C-152. Canberra: Australian National University.

Rossitto, R. 1995. Stylistic change in Fijian pottery. Pacific Studies 18:1–46.

Routledge, K.S. 1919. The Mystery of Easter Island. London: Sifton, Praed.

Roullier, C., L. Benoit, B.D. McKey, and V. Lebot. 2013. Historical collections reveal patterns of diffusion of sweet potato in Oceania obscured by modern plant movements and recombination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 110:2205–10.

Roux, J.-C. 1990. Traditional Melanesian agriculture in New Caledonia and pre-contact population distribution. In D.E. Yen and J.M.J. Mummery, eds., Pacific Production Systems: Approaches to Economic Prehistory, pp. 161–73. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 18. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Russell, S. 1998. Tiempon I Manmofo‘na: Ancient Chamorro Culture and History of the Northern Mariana Islands. Micronesian Archaeological Survey Report No. 32. Saipan: Divsion of Historic Preservation.

Russell, S., and M. Fleming. 1986. Archaeology in the northern Mariana Islands: An overview. Journal of the Polynesian Society 95:115–26.

Sahlins, M. 1958. Social Stratification in Polynesia. Seattle, WA: American Ethnological Society.

———. 1963. Poor man, rich man, big-man, chief: Political types in Melanesia and Polynesia. Comparative Studies in Society and History 5:285–303.

———. 1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.

———. 1981. Historical Metaphors and Mythical Realities: Structure in the Early History of the Sandwich Islands Kingdom. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

———. 1982. Femmes crues, hommes cuits et autres “grandes choses” des îles Fidji. Le Débat 19:121–45.

———. 1985. Islands of History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1995. How “Natives” Think: About Captain Cook, for Example. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sand, C. 1990. The ceramic chronology of Futuna and Alofi: An overview. In M. Spriggs, ed., Lapita Design, Form and Composition, pp. 123–33. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 19. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1992. La différenciation des chronologies céramiques de Polynésie occidentale à partir d’une tradition culturelle commune issue du complexe culturel Lapita. In J.-C. Galipaud, ed., Poterie Lapita et peuplement: Actes du Colloque LAPITA, pp. 207–18. Noumea, New Caledonia: ORSTOM.

———. 1993a. Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie. Noumea: Agence de Développement de la Culture Kanak.

———. 1993b. Données archéologiques et géomorphologiques du site ancien d’Asipani (Futuna–Polynésie occidentale). Journal de la Société des Océanistes 97:117–44.

———. 1993c. A preliminary study of the impact of the Tongan maritime chiefdom on the late prehistoric society of ‘Uvea, Western Polynesia. In M.W. Graves and R.C. Green, eds., The Evolution and Organisation of Prehistoric Society in Polynesia, pp. 43–51. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 19. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

———. 1994. La préhistoire de la Nouvelle-Calédonie. Thèse de Préhistoire, Ethnologie, Anthropologie, Université Paris I, Panthéon-Sorbonne.

———. 1995. “Le temps d’avant”: La préhistoire de la Nouvelle-Calédonie. Paris: l’Harmattan.

———. 1996a. Archaeological structures, sociopolitical complexity and population density: New insight into the prehistory of the New Caledonian archipelago. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 287–95. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

———. 1996b. Le début du peuplement austronésien de la Nouvelle-Calédonie: Données archéologiques récentes. Les Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie, vol. 6. Noumea, New Caledonia: Service Territorial des Musées et du Patrimoine.

———. 1996c. Recent developments in the study of New Caledonia’s prehistory. Archaeology in Oceania 31:45–70.

———. 1996d. Structural remains as markers of complex societies in southern Melanesia during prehistory: The case of the monumental forts of Mare Island (New Caledonia). Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 15(2):37–44.

———. 1997. The chronology of Lapita ware in New Caledonia. Antiquity 71:539–47.

———. 1998a. Archaeological report on localities WKO013A and WKO013B at the site of Lapita (Koné, New Caledonia). Journal of the Polynesian Society 107:7–33.

———. 1998b. Archaeological research on ‘Uvea Island, Western Polynesia. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 18(1996):91–123.

———. 1998c. Recent archaeological research in the Loyalty Islands of New Caledonia. Asian Perspectives 37:194–223.

———. 2000a. La datation du premier peuplement de Wallis et Futuna: Contribution à la définition de la chronologie Lapita en Polynésie occidentale. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 111:165–172.

———. 2000b. The specificities of the “Southern Lapita Province”: The New Caledonian case. Archaeology in Oceania 35:20–33.

———. 2001. Evolutions in the Lapita cultural complex: A view from the Southern Lapita Province. Archaeology in Oceania 36:65–76.

———. 2004. The input of francophone archaeological research in the Pacific: A short summary. Journal of Pacific Studies 27:1–12.

———. 2010. Lapita calédonien: Archéologie d’un premier peuplement insulaire océanien. Paris: Société des Océanistes.

———. 2013. Ritually breaking Lapita pots: Or, can we get into the minds of Oceanic first settlers? A discussion. Archaeology in Oceania 48:2–12.

———. 2015. Comparing Lapita pottery forms in the southwestern Pacific: A case-study. In C. Sand, S. Chiu, and N. Hogg, eds., The Lapita Cultural Complex in Time and Space: Expansion Routes, Chronologies, and Typologies, pp. 125–72. Archeologia Pasifika 4. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Sand, C., ed. 2003. Pacific Archaeology: Assessments and Prospects. Proceedings of the International Conference for the 50th Anniversary of the First Lapita Excavation, Koné-Nouméa 2002. Le Cahiers d’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie 15. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Sand, C., and S. Bedford, eds. 2010. Lapita: Ancêtres océaniens, Oceanic Ancestors. Paris: Musée de Quai Branly.

Sand, C., J. Bolé, and A. Ouétcho. 2002. Site LPO023 of Kurin: Characteristics of a Lapita settlement in the Loyalty Islands (New Caledonia). Asian Perspectives 41:129–47.

———. 2003. Prehistory and its perception in a Melanesian archipelago: The New Caledonia example. Antiquity 77:505–19.

———. 2007. What were the real numbers? The question of pre-contact population densities in New Caledonia. In P.V. Kirch and J.-L. Rallu, eds., The Growth and Collapse of Pacific Island Societies, pp. 306–25. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 2011. A revision of New Caledonia’s ceramic sequence. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 2:56–68.

Sand, C., J. Bolé, A. Ouétcho, and D. Baret. 2008. Parcours archéologique: Deux décennies de recherches du Département Archéologie de Nouvelle-Calédonie (1991–2007). Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Sand, C., S. Chiu, and N. Hogg, eds. 2015. The Lapita Cultural Complex in Time and Space: Expansion Routes, Chronologies, and Typologies. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Sand, C., K. Coote, J. Bolé, and A. Ouétcho. 1998. A pottery pit at locality WKO013A, Lapita (New Caledonia). Archaeology in Oceania 33:37–43.

Sand, C., and P.V. Kirch. 2002. L’Expedition archéologique d’Edward W. Gifford et Richard Shutler Jr. en Nouvelle-Calédonie au cours de l’année 1952. Noumea, New Caledonia: Department of Archaeology.

Sand, C., P.V. Kirch, and J. Coil. 2002. Old sites, new insights: A reanalysis of the 1952 Gifford and Shutler New Caledonia Collections. In S. Bedford, C. Sand, and D. Burley, eds., Fifty Years in the Field: Essays in Honour and Celebration of Richard Shutler Jr.’s Archaeological Career, pp. 173–88. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 25. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Sand, C., and A. Ouétcho. 1993. Three thousand years of settlement in the south of New Caledonia: Some recent results from the region of Païta. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 15:107–30.

Sand, C., and P.J. Sheppard. 2000. Long distance prehistoric obsidian imports in New Caledonia: Characteristics and meaning. Earth and Planetary Sciences 331:235–43.

Sand, C., and F. Valentin. 1991. First results of the excavation of the burial mound of Petania, ‘Uvea, Western Polynesia. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 11:236–46.

Sand, C., F. Valentin, and T. Sorovi-Vunidilo. 2000. At the border of Polynesia: Archaeological research in the East-Fijian islands of Cikobia and Naqelelevu. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 20:107–16.

Sarfert, E.G. 1919–20. Kusae. 2 vols. In G. Thilenius, ed., Ergebnisse der Südsee-Expedition, 1908–1910, Part II(B):4. Hamburg: L. Friederichsen, de Gruyter.

Scaglion, R. 1996. Chiefly models in Papua New Guinea. Contemporary Pacific 8:1–31.

Schilt, R. 1984. Subsistence and Conflict in Kona, Hawai‘i. Department of Anthropology Report 84–1. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Schmidt, M. 1996. The commencement of pa construction in New Zealand prehistory. Journal of the Polynesian Society 105:441–51.

Schmitt, R.C. 1968. Demographic Statistics of Hawaii: 1778–1965. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Seikel, K. 2011. Mortuary contexts and social structure at Nan Madol, Pohnpei. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 6:442–60.

Seligman, C.G. 1910. The Melanesians of British New Guinea. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Serjeantson, S.W., and X. Gao. 1995. Homo sapiens is an evolving species: Origins of the Austronesians. In P. Bellwood, J.J. Fox, and D. Tryon, eds., The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, pp. 165–80. Canberra: Australian National University.

Serjeantson, S.W., D.P. Ryan, and A.R. Thompson. 1982. The colonization of the Pacific: The story according to human leukocyte antigens. American Journal of Human Genetics 34:904–18.

Service, E. 1967. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary Perspective. New York: Random House.

Sharp, A. 1956. Ancient Voyagers in the Pacific. Wellington, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

Sharp, N. 1988. Style and substance: A reconsideration of the Lapita decorative system. In P.V. Kirch and T.L. Hunt, eds., Archaeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review, pp. 61–82. Thomas Burke Memorial Washington State Museum Research Report No. 5. Seattle: Burke Museum.

———. 1991. Lapita as text: The meaning of pottery in Melanesian prehistory. In P. Bellwood, ed., Indo-Pacific Prehistory 1990: Proceedings of the 14th Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association, pp. 323–32. Canberra: Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association.

Sharp, W.D., J.G. Kahn, C.M. Polito, and P.V. Kirch. 2010. Rapid evolution of ritual architectural in central Polynesia indicated by precise 230Th/U coral dating. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. 107:13234–39.

Shaw, B. 2016. The Massim region of Papua New Guinea: A review and proposed chronology. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 7(1):106–25.

Shaw, B., M. Leclerc, W. Dickinson, M. Spriggs, and G.R. Summerhayes., 2016. Identifying prehistoric trade networks in the Massim region, Papua New Guinea: Evidence from petrographic and chemical compositional pottery analyses from Rossel and Nimowa Islands in the Louisiade Archipelago. Journal of Archaeology Science: Reports 6:518–35.

Shaw, E. 1967. A reanalysis of pottery from Navatu and Vuda, Fiji. MA thesis, University of Auckland.

———. 1975. The decorative system of Natunuku, Fiji. In S. Mead, L. Birks, H. Birks, and E. Shaw, The Lapita Style of Fiji and Its Associations, pp. 44–55. Polynesian Society Memoir 38. Wellington, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

Shawcross, W. 1967. An investigation of prehistoric diet and economy at a coastal site at Galatea Bay, New Zealand. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 33:107–31.

———. 1972. Energy and ecology: Thermodynamic models in archaeology. In D.L. Clarke, ed., Models in Archaeology, pp. 577–622. London: Methuen.

———. 1976. Kauri Point Swamp: The ethnographic interpretation of a prehistoric site. In G. de G. Sieveking, I.H. Longworth, and K.E. Wilson, eds., Problems in Economic and Social Archaeology, pp. 277–305. London: Duckworth.

Shepardson, B.L. 2005. The role of Rapa Nui (Easter Island) statuary as territorial boundary markers. Antiquity 79:169–78.

Sheppard, P.J. 1992. A report on the flaked lithic assemblage from three Southeast Solomons Lapita sites. In J.-C. Galipaud, ed., Poterie Lapita et peuplement: Actes du Colloque LAPITA, pp. 145–54. Noumea, New Caledonia: ORSTOM.

———. 1993. Lapita lithics: Trade/exchange and technology. A view from the Reefs/Santa Cruz. Archaeology in Oceania 28:121–37.

———. 2011. Lapita colonization across the Near/Remote Oceania boundary. Current Anthropology 52:799–840.

Sheppard, P.J., S. Chiu, and R. Walter. 2015. Re-dating Lapita movement in Remote Oceania. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 6(1):26–36.

Sheppard, P.J., and R.C. Green. 1991. Spatial analysis of the Nenumbo (SE-RF-2) Lapita site, Solomon Islands. Archaeology in Oceania 26:89–101.

Sheppard, P.J., T. Thomas, and G.R. Summerhayes, eds., 2009. Lapita: Ancestors and Descendants. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 28. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Sheppard, P.J., and R. Walter. 2006. A revised model of Solomon Islands culture history. Journal of the Polynesian Society 115:47–76.

———. 2009. Inter-tidal late Lapita sites and geotectonics in the western Solomon Islands. In P.J. Sheppard, T. Thomas, and G.R. Summerhayes, eds., Lapita, Ancestors and Descendants, pp. 73–100. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 28. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Sheppard, P.J., R. Walter, and S. Aswani. 2004. Oral tradition and the creation of late prehistory in Roviana Lagoon, Solomon Islands. In A.J. Anderson and T. Murray, eds., Australian Archaeologist: Collected Papers in Honour of Jim Allen, pp. 123–32. Canberra: Australian National University.

Sheppard, P.J., R. Walter, and T. Nagaoka. 2000. The archaeology of head-hunting in Roviana Lagoon. Journal of the Polynesian Society 109:9–37.

Shineberg, D. 1983. Un nouveau regard sur la démographie historique de la Nouvelle-Calédonie. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 39(76):33–43.

Shore, B. 1989. Mana and tapu. In A. Howard and R. Borofsky, eds., Developments in Polynesian Ethnology, pp. 137–73. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Shutler, M.E., and R. Shutler Jr. 1965. A preliminary report of archaeological explorations in the southern New Hebrides. Mimeographed report. Department of Anthropology, Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu.

Shutler, R., Jr., D.V. Burley, W.R. Dickinson, E. Nelson, and A.K. Carlson. 1994. Early Lapita sites, the colonisation of Tonga and recent data from northern Ha‘apai. Archaeology in Oceania 29:53–68.

Shutler, R., Jr., and J.C. Marck. 1975. On the dispersal of the Austronesian horticulturalists. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 10:81–113.

Shutler, R., Jr., and M.E. Shutler. 1968. Archaeological excavations in southern Melanesia. In I. Yawata and Y.H. Sinoto, eds., Prehistoric Culture in Oceania, pp. 15–17. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Siddall, M., E.J. Rohling, and A. Almogi-Labin. 2003. Sea level fluctuations during the last glacial cycle. Nature 423:853–58.

Sinoto, A. 1973. Fanning Island: Preliminary archaeological investigations of sites near the Cable Station. In K. Chave and E. Kay, eds., Fanning Island Expedition. Honolulu: Hawaii Institute of Geophysics.

Sinoto, Y.H. 1962. Chronology of Hawaiian fishhooks. Journal of the Polynesian Society 71:162–66.

———. 1966. A tentative prehistoric cultural sequence in the northern Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia. Journal of the Polynesian Society 75:287–303.

———. 1967. Artifacts from excavated sites in the Hawaiian, Marquesas, and Society Islands. In G.A. Highland, R.W. Force, A. Howard, M. Kelly, and Y.H. Sinoto, eds., Polynesian Culture History, pp. 341–61. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Special Publication 56. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1970. An archaeologically based assessment of the Marquesas Islands as a dispersal center in East Polynesia. In R.C. Green and M. Kelly, eds., Studies in Oceanic Culture History, pp. 105–32. Pacific Anthropological Records 11. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1979a. Excavations on Huahine, French Polynesia. Pacific Studies 3:1–40.

———. 1979b. The Marquesas. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 110–34. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

———. 1983. An analysis of Polynesian migrations based on the archaeological assessments. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 76:57–67.

———. 1996a. Mata‘ire‘a Hill, Huahine: A unique prehistoric settlement, and a hypothetical sequence of marae development in the Society Islands. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 541–53. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

———. 1996b. Tracing human movement in East Polynesia: A discussion of selected artifact types. In M. Julien, M. Orliac, and C. Orliac, eds., Mémoire de pierre, mémoire d’homme: Tradition et archéologie en Océanie, pp. 131–52. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne.

Sinoto, Y.H., ed. 1984. Caroline Islands Archaeology: Investigations on Fefan, Faraulep, Woleai, and Lamotrek. Pacific Anthropological Records 35. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Sinoto, Y.H., with H. Aramata. 2016. Curve of the Hook: An Archaeologist in Polynesia. Mānoa, Special Edition. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Sinoto, Y.H., and T.L. Han. 1981. Report on the Fa’ahia site excavations, zone “A”–section 5; Fare, Huahine, Society Islands, French Polynesia. Unpublished report on file. Department of Anthropology, Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Sinoto, Y.H., and P.C. McCoy. 1975. Report on the preliminary excavation of an early habitation site on Huahine, Society Islands. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 47:143–86.

Skelly, R., and B. David. 2017. Hiri: Archaeology of Long-Distance Maritime Trade along the South Coast of Papua New Guinea. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

Skelly, R., B. David, F. Petchey, and M. Leavesley. 2014. Tracking ancient beach-lines inland: 2600-year-old dentate-stamped ceramics at Hopo, Vailala River region, Papua New Guinea. Antiquity 88:470–87.

Skinner, H.D. 1923–24. Archaeology of Canterbury. Records of the Canterbury Museum 2:93–104, 151–62.

Skjølsvold, A. 1972. Excavations of a Habitation Cave, Hanapete’o, Hiva Oa, Marquesas Islands. Pacific Anthropological Records 16. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Skjølsvold, A., ed. 1994. Archaeological Investigations at Anakena, Easter Island. Kon-Tiki Museum, Occasional Papers, vol. 3. Oslo: Kon-Tiki Museum.

Skoglund, P., et al. 2016. Genomic insights into the peopling of the southwest Pacific. Nature 538:510–13.

Smith, B. 1985. European Vision and the South Pacific. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Smith, I.W.G. 1989. Maori impact on the marine megafauna: Pre-European distributions of New Zealand sea mammals. In D.G. Sutton, ed., Saying So Doesn’t Make It So: Papers in Honour of B. Foss Leach, pp. 76–108. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 17. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Smith, M.A., and N.D. Sharp. 1993. Pleistocene sites in Australia, New Guinea and island Melanesia: Geographic and temporal structure of the archaeological record. In M.A. Smith, M. Spriggs, and B. Fankhauser, eds., Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia, pp. 37–59. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Smith, M.A., M. Spriggs, and B. Fankhauser, eds. 1993. Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

Smith, S.P. 1921 [1910]. Hawaiki: The Original Home of the Maori, with a Sketch of Polynesian History. 4th ed. Auckland, New Zealand: Whitcombe and Tombs.

Somers, G.F. 1991. The effects of rapid geological change on archaeology in Hawai‘i. Asian Perspectives 30:133–47.

Sorovi-Vundilo, T. 2003. Developing better relationships between researchers and local Pacific communities: The way forward. In C. Sand, ed., Pacific Archaeology: Assessments and Prospects, pp. 371–74. Le Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Caledonie, No. 15. Noumea, New Caledonia: Service des Musées de du Patrimoine.

Sorrenson, M.P.K., ed. 1986–88. Na To Hoa Aroha, from Your Dear Friend: The Correspondence between Sir Apirana Ngata and Sir Peter Buck, 1925–50. 3 vols. Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland University Press.

Specht, J. 1968a. Prehistoric and modern pottery industries of Buka Island, T.P.N.G. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

———. 1968b. Preliminary report on excavations on Watom Island. Journal of the Polynesian Society 77:117–34.

———. 1972. The pottery industry of Buka Island, T.P.N.G. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 7:125–44.

———. 1974. Lapita pottery at Talasea, West New Britain, Papua New Guinea. Antiquity 48:302–6.

———. 1991. Kreslo: A Lapita pottery site in southwest New Britain, Papua New Guinea. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 189–204. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 2007. Small islands in the big picture: The formative period of Lapita in the Bismarck Archipelago. In S. Bedford, C. Sand, and S.P. Connaughton, eds., Oceanic Explorations: Lapita and Western Pacific Settlement, pp. 51–70. Terra Australis 26. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 2009. The aceramic to ceramic boundary in the Bismarck Archipelago. In P.J. Sheppard, T. Thomas, and G.R. Summerhayes, eds., Lapita: Ancestors and Descendants, pp. 11–34. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 28. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Specht, J., T. Denham, J. Goff, and J.E. Terrell. 2014. Deconstructing the Lapita cultural complex in the Bismarck Archipelago. Journal of Archaeological Research 22:89–140.

Specht, J., and C. Gosden. 1997. Dating Lapita pottery in the Bismarck Archipelago, Papua New Guinea. Asian Perspectives 36:175–99.

Specht, J., C. Gosden, C. Pavlides, Z. Richards, and G.R. Summerhayes. 2016. Exploring Lapita diversity on New Britain’s south coast, Papua New Guinea. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 7(1):20–29.

Specht, J., I. Lilley, and J. Normu. 1981. Radiocarbon dates from west New Britain, Papua New Guinea. Australian Archaeology 12:13–15.

Spennemann, D.H.R. 1989. ‘Ata‘a Tonga mo ‘Ata‘o Tonga: Early and later prehistory of the Tongan Islands. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

Spoehr, A. 1952. Time perspective in Micronesia and Polynesia. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 8:457–65.

———. 1954. Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Annual Report 1953. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1955. Museum at Work: Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Annual Report for 1954. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1956. A Museum Is a Point of View: Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Annual Report for 1955. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1957. Marianas Prehistory: Archaeological Survey and Excavations on Saipan, Tinian, and Rota. Fieldiana: Anthropology 48. Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History.

———. 1958. Concept of the Pacific: Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Annual Report for 1957. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1962. Science and Education: Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Annual Report for 1961. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1973. Zamboanga and Sulu: An Archaeological Approach to Ethnic Diversity. Ethnology Monographs No. 1. Pittsburgh, PA: Department of Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh.

Spriggs, M. 1981. Vegetable kingdoms: Taro irrigation and Pacific prehistory. PhD dissertation, Australian National University.

———. 1982. Taro cropping systems in the southeast Asian-Pacific region. Archaeology in Oceania 17:7–15.

———. 1984. The Lapita cultural complex: Origins, distribution, contemporaries and successors. Journal of Pacific History 19:202–23.

———. 1986. Landscape, land use and political transformation in southern Melanesia. In P.V. Kirch, ed., Island Societies: Archaeological Approaches to Evolution and Transformation, pp. 6–19. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———. 1989. God’s police and damned whores: Images of archaeology in Hawaii. In P. Gathercole and D. Lowenthal, eds., Politics of the Past, pp. 118–29. London: Unwin Hyman.

———. 1990a. The changing face of Lapita: Transformation of a design. In M. Spriggs, ed., Lapita Design, Form and Composition, pp. 83–122. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 19. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———.1990b. Dating Lapita: Another view. In M. Spriggs, ed., Lapita Design, Form and Composition, pp. 6–27. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 19. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1991a. Facing the nation: Archaeologists and Hawaiians in the era of sovereignty. Contemporary Pacific 3:380–92.

———. 1991b. Lapita origins, distribution, contemporaries and successors revisited. In P. Bellwood, ed., Indo-Pacific Prehistory 1990: Proceedings of the 14th Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association, pp. 306–12. Canberra: Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association.

———. 1991c. Nissan: The island in the middle. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 222–43. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1992a. Alternative prehistories for Bougainville: Regional, national, or micronational. Contemporary Pacific 4:269–98.

———. 1992b. What happens to Lapita in Melanesia? In J.-C. Galipaud, ed., Poterie Lapita et peuplement: Actes du Colloque LAPITA, pp. 219–30. Noumea, New Caledonia: ORSTOM.

———. 1993a. How much of the Lapita design system represents the human face? In P.J.C. Dark and R.G. Rose, eds., Artistic Heritage in a Changing Pacific, pp. 7–14. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

———. 1993b. Island Melanesia: The last 10,000 years. In M. Spriggs, D.E. Yen, W. Ambrose, R. Jones, A. Thorne, and A. Andrews, eds., A Community of Culture: The People and Prehistory of the Pacific, pp. 187–205. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 21. Canberra, Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1993c. Pleistocene agriculture in the Pacific: Why not? In M.A. Smith, M. Spriggs, and B. Fankhauser, eds., Sahul in Review: Pleistocene Archaeology in Australia, New Guinea and Island Melanesia, pp. 137–43. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 24. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1995. The Lapita culture and Austronesian prehistory in Oceania. In P. Bellwood, J.J. Fox, and D. Tryon, eds., The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, pp. 112–33. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1997. The Island Melanesians. Oxford: Blackwell.

———. 2007a. The Neolithic and Austronesian expansion: Within island Southeast Asia and into the Pacific. In S. Chiu and C. Sand, eds., From Southeast Asia to the Pacific: Archaeological Perspectives on the Austronesian Expansion and the Lapita Cultural Complex, pp. 104–40. Taipei: Academia Sinica.

———. 2007b. Population in a vegetable kingdom: Aneityum Island (Vanuatu) at European contact in 1830. In P.V. Kirch and J.-L. Rallu, eds., The Growth and Collapse of Island Societies, pp. 278–305. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

———. 2011. Archaeology and the Austronesian expansion: Where are we now? Antiquity 85:510–28.

———. 2017. Thomas G. Thrum and John F.G. Stokes: Australian archaeologists in paradise in the early twentieth century. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 8:47–62.

Spriggs, M.J.T., and A. Anderson. 1993. Late colonization of east Polynesia. Antiquity 67:200–217.

Spriggs, M., R. Bird, and W. Ambrose. 2010. A reanalysis of the Tikopia obsidians. Archaeology in Oceania 45:31–38.

Spriggs, M.J.T., and S. Wickler. 1989. Archaeological research on Erromango: Recent data on southern Melanesian prehistory. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 9:68–91.

Stannard, D. 1989. Before the Horror: The Population of Hawai‘i on the Eve of Western Contact. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawai‘i.

Stantis, C., R.L. Kinaston, M.P. Richards, J.M. Davidson, and H.R. Buckley. 2015. Assessing human diet and movement in the Tongan maritime chiefdom using isotopic analyses. PLoS ONE 10: e0123156.

Stantis, C., N. Tayles, R.L. Kinaston, C. Cameron, P.D. Nunn, M.P. Richards, and H.R. Buckley. 2016. Diet and subsistence in Remote Oceania In M. Oxenham and H.R. Buckley, eds., The Routledge Handbook of Bioarchaeology in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands, pp. 569–98. London: Routledge.

Steadman, D.W. 1993. Biogeography of Tongan birds before and after human impact. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 90(3):818–22.

———. 1995. Prehistoric extinctions of Pacific island birds: Biodiversity meets zooarchaeology. Science 267:1123–30.

———. 2006. Extinction and Biogeography of Tropical Pacific Birds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Steadman, D.W., S. Antón, and P.V. Kirch. 2000. Ana Manuka: A prehistoric ritualistic site on Mangaia, Cook Islands. Antiquity 74:873–83.

Steadman, D.W., and P.V. Kirch. 1990. Prehistoric extinction of birds on Mangaia, Cook Islands, Polynesia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 87:9605–9.

———. 1998. Biogeography and prehistoric exploitation of birds in the Mussau Islands, Bismarck Archipelago, Papua New Guinea. Emu 98:13–22.

Steadman, D.W., D. Pahlavan, and P.V. Kirch. 1990. Extinction, biogeography, and human exploitation of birds on Tikopia and Anuta, Polynesian Outliers in the Solomon Islands. Bishop Museum Occasional Papers 30:118–53.

Steadman, D.W., and B. Rolett. 1996. A chronostratigraphic analysis of land bird extinction on Tahuata, Marquesas Islands. Journal of Archaeological Science 23:81–94.

Steadman, D.W., C. Vargas, and F. Cristino. 1994. Stratigraphy, chronology, and cultural context of an early faunal assemblage from Easter Island. Asian Perspectives 33:79–96.

Steadman, D.W., J.P. White, and J. Allen. 1999. Prehistoric birds from New Ireland, Papua New Guinea: Extinctions on a large Melanesian island. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 96:2563–68.

Stevenson, C.M. 1997. Archaeological Investigations on Easter Island. Maunga Tari: An Upland Agricultural Complex. Los Osos, CA: Bearsville Press.

———. 2002. Territorial divisions on Easter Island in the 16th century: Evidence from the distribution of ceremonial architecture. In T.N. Ladefoged and M.W. Graves, eds., Pacific Landscapes: Archaeological Approaches, pp. 211–30. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

Stevenson, C.M., and W.W. Ayres, eds. 2000. Easter Island Archaeology: Research on Early Rapanui Culture. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

Stevenson, C.M., T.L. Jackson, A. Mieth, H.-R. Bork, and T.N. Ladefoged. 2006. Prehistoric and early historic agriculture at Maunga Orito, Easter Island (Rapa Nui), Chile. Antiquity 80:919–36.

Stevenson, C.M., G. Lee, and F.J. Morin, eds. 1998. Easter Island in Pacific Context: South Seas Symposium. Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Easter Island and East Polynesia. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

———. 2001. Pacific 2000: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Easter Island and the Pacific. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

Stevenson, C.M., C.O. Puleston, P.M. Vitousek, O.A. Chadwick, S. Haoa, and T.N. Ladefoged. 2015. Variation in Rapa Nui (Easter Island) land use indicates production and population peaks prior to European contact. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 112:1025–30.

Stevenson, C.M., J. Wozniak, and S. Haoa. 1999. Prehistoric agricultural production on Easter Island (Rapa Nui), Chile. Antiquity 73:801–12.

Stevenson, J. 1998. Late Quaternary environmental change and the impact of Melanesian colonisation in New Caledonia. PhD dissertation, University of New South Wales.

———. 2004. A late-Holocene record of human impact from the southwest coast of New Caledonia. The Holocene 14:888–98.

Stevenson, J., A. Benson, J. S. Athens, J. Kahn, and P. V. Kirch. 2017. Polynesian colonization and landscape changes on Mo’orea, French Polynesia: The Lake Temae pollen record. The Holocene. DOI: 10.1177/085968317715690

Stevenson, J., and J.R. Dodson. 1995. Palaeoenvironmental evidence for human settlement of New Caledonia. Archaeology in Oceania 30:36–41.

Stevenson, J., J.R. Dodson, and I.P. Prosser. 2001. A late Quaternary record of environmental change and human impact from New Caledonia. Paleogeography, Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology 168:97–123.

Stimson, J.F. 1957. Songs and Tales of the Sea Kings: Interpretations of the Oral Literature of Polynesia. Salem, MA: Peabody Museum.

Stocking, G.W., Jr. 1968. Race, Culture, and Evolution: Essays in the History of Anthropology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1982. Race, Culture, and Evolution: Essays in the History of Anthropology. With a New Preface. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Stoddart, D.R. 1992. Biogeography of the tropical Pacific. Pacific Science 46:276–93.

Stokes, J.F.G. 1991. Heiau of the Island of Hawai‘i: A Historic Survey of Native Hawaiian Temple Sites. Ed. T. Dye. Bishop Museum Bulletins in Anthropology 2. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. n.d. [1930]. Ethnology of Rapa. 5 vols. Library, Bernice P. Bishop Museum. Manuscript.

———. n.d. Archaeology of Raivavae. Library, Bernice P. Bishop Museum. Manuscript.

Storey, A.A., D. Quiroz, J.M. Ramírez, N. Beavan-Athfield, D.J. Addison, R. Walter, T. Hunt, J.S. Athens, L. Huynen, and E.A. Matisoo-Smith. 2008. Pre-Columbian chickens, dates, isotopes, and mtDNA. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 105:E99.

Storey, A.A., J.M. Ramírez, D. Quiroz, D.V. Burley, D.J. Addison, R. Walter, A.J. Anderson, T.L. Hunt, J.S. Athens, L. Huynen, and E.A. Matisoo-Smith. 2007. Radiocarbon and DNA evidence for a pre-Columbian introduction of Polynesian chickens to Chile. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 104:10335–39.

Su, B., L. Jin, P. Underhill, J.J. Martinson, N. Saha, S.T. McGarvey, M.D. Shriver, J. Chu, P. Oefner, R. Chakraborty, and R. Deka. 2000. Polynesian origins: Insights from the Y chromosome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 97:8225–28.

Suggs, R.C. 1960. The Island Civilizations of Polynesia. New York: Mentor.

———. 1961. Archaeology of Nuku Hiva, Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History 49, pt. 1. New York: American Museum of Natural History.

———. 1962. The Hidden Worlds of Polynesia. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World.

Sullivan, A. 1985. Intensification in volcanic zone gardening in northern New Zealand. In I.S. Farrington, ed., Prehistoric Intensive Agriculture in the Tropics, pp. 475–89. BAR International Series 232. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Sullivan, L.R. 1924. Race types in Polynesia. American Anthropologist 26:22–26.

Summerhayes, G.R. 1997. Interaction in Pacific prehistory: An approach based on the production, distribution and use of pottery. 2 vols. PhD dissertation, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Australia.

———. 2000a. Far Western, Western, and Eastern Lapita: A Re-evaluation. Asian Perspectives 39:109–38.

———. 2000b. Lapita Interaction. Terra Australis 15. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 2000c. Recent archaeological investigations in the Bismarck Archipelago, Anir—New Ireland Province. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 19:167–74.

———. 2001a. Defining the chronology of Lapita in the Bismarck Archipelago. In G.R. Clark, A.J. Anderson, and T. Vunidilo, eds., The Archaeology of Lapita Dispersal in Oceania, pp. 25–38. Terra Australis 17. Canberra: Australian National University

———. 2001b. Lapita in the Far West: Recent developments. Archaeology in Oceania 36:53–64.

———. 2007a. Island Melanesian pasts: A view from archaeology. In J.S. Friedlaender, ed., Genes, Language, and Culture History in the Southwest Pacific, pp. 10–35. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———. 2007b. The rise and transformations of Lapita in the Bismarck Archipelago. In S. Chiu and C. Sand, eds. From Southeast Asia to the Pacific: Archaeological Perspectives on the Austronesian Expansion and the Lapita Cultural Complex, pp. 141–69. Taipei: Academia Sinica.

Summerhayes, G.R., and J. Allen. 1993. The transport of Mopir obsidian to late Pleistocene New Ireland. Archaeology in Oceania 28:144–48.

Summerhayes, G.R., J.R. Bird, R. Fullagar, C. Gosden, J. Specht, and R. Torrence. 1998. Application of PIXE-PIGME to archaeological analysis of changing patterns of obsidian use in West New Britain, Papua New Guinea. In S. Shackley, ed., Archaeological Obsidian Studies: Method and Theory, pp. 129–58. New York: Plenum Press.

Summerhayes, G.R., and H. Buckley, eds. 2013. Pacific Archaeology: Documenting the Past 50,000 Years. Papers from the 2011 Lapita Pacific Archaeology Conference. University of Otago Studies in Archaeology 25. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago.

Summerhayes, G.R., M. Leavesley, A. Fairbain, H. Mandui, J. Field, A. Ford, and R. Fullagar. 2010. Human adaptation and plant use in highland New Guinea 49,000 to 44,000 years ago. Science 330:78–81.

Summerhayes, G.R., E. Matisoo-Smith, H. Mandui, J. Allen, J. Specht, N. Hogg, and S. McPherson. 2010. Tamuarawai (EQS): An early Lapita site on Emirau, New Ireland, PNG. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 1(1):62–75.

Summerhayes, G.R., and I. Scales. 2005. New Lapita pottery finds from Kolombangara, western Solomon Islands. Archaeology in Oceania 40:14–20.

Summers, C. 1964. Hawaiian Archaeology: Fishponds. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Special Publication 52. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Sutton, A., M.-J. Mountain, K. Aplin, S. Bulmer, and T. Denham. 2009. Archaeozoological records for the highlands of New Guinea: A review of current evidence. Australian Archaeology 69:41–58.

Sutton, D.G. 1980. A culture history of the Chatham Islands. Journal of the Polynesian Society 89:67–93.

———. 1987. A paradigmatic shift in Polynesian prehistory: Implications for New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 9:135–56.

———. 1990. Organization and ontology: The origins of the northern Maori chiefdom, New Zealand. Man, n.s., 25:667–92.

Sutton, D.G., ed. 1990. The Archaeology of the Kainga: A Study of Precontact Maori Undefended Settlements at Pouerua, Northland, New Zealand. Auckland: Auckland University Press.

———. 1993. The Archaeology of Peripheral Pa at Pouerua, Northland, New Zealand. Auckland: Auckland University Press.

———. 1994. The Origins of the First New Zealanders. Auckland: Auckland University Press.

Sutton, D.G., L. Furey, and Y. Marshall. 2003. The Archaeology of Puerua. Auckland: Auckland University Press.

Swadling, P. 1981. Papua New Guinea’s Prehistory: An Introduction. Boroko, Papua New Guinea: National Museum and Art Gallery.

———. 1986. Lapita shellfishing: Evidence from sites in the Reef Santa Cruz Group, southeast Solomon Islands. In A. Anderson, ed., Traditional Fishing in the Pacific, pp. 137–48. Pacific Anthropological Records 37. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1997. Changing shorelines and cultural orientations in the Sepik-Ramu, Papua New Guinea: Implications for Pacific prehistory. World Archaeology 29:1–14.

Swadling, P., N. Araho, and B. Ivuyo. 1991. Settlements associated with the Sepik-Ramu Sea. In P. Bellwood, ed., Indo-Pacific Prehistory 1990: Proceedings of the 14th Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association, pp. 92–112. Canberra: Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association.

Swadling, P., J. Chappell, G. Francis, N. Araho, and B. Ivuyo. 1989. A late Quaternary inland sea and early pottery in Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 24:106–9.

Swadling, P., and R. Hide. 2005. Changing landscape and social interaction: Looking at agricultural history from a Sepik-Ramu perspective. In A. Pawley, R. Attenborough, J. Golson, and R. Hide, eds., Papuan Pasts: Cultural, Linguistic and Biological Histories of Papuan-Speaking Peoples, pp. 289–28. Pacific Linguistics. Canberra: Australian National University.

Swadling, P., B.H. Schaublin, P. Gorecki, and F. Tiesler. 1988. The Sepik-Ramu: An Introduction. Boroko: National Museum of Papua New Guinea.

Swadling, P., P. Wiessner, and A. Tumu. 2008. Prehistoric stone artefacts from Enga and the implication of links between the highlands, lowlands and islands for early agriculture in Papua New Guinea. Journal de la Société des Océanistes 126–27:271–92.

Swift, J., M.J. Miller, and P.V. Kirch. 2016. Stable isotope analysis of Pacific rat (Rattus exulans) from archaeological sites in Mangareva (French Polynesia): Implications for nutrient flows in island socio-ecosystems. Environmental Archaeology 22:283–97.

Szabó, K. 2010. Shell artefacts and shell-working within the Lapita cultural complex. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 1(2):1–13.

Takayama, J. 1982. A brief report on archaeological investigations of the southern part of Yap Island and nearby Ngulu Atoll. In M. Aoyagi, ed., Islanders and Their Outside World, pp. 77–104. Tokyo: Committee for Micronesian Research, Rikkyo University.

———. 1984. Early pottery and population movements in Micronesian prehistory. Asian Perspectives 24:1–10.

Takayama, J., and J.T. Egami. 1971. Archaeology on Rota in the Mariana Islands. Reports of Pacific Archaeological Survey No. 1. Hiratsuka, Japan: Tokai University.

Takayama, J., B. Eritaia, and A. Saito. 1987. Preliminary observation of the origins of the Vaitupuans in view of pottery. Reprinted from Cultural Adaptation to Atolls in Micronesia and West Polynesia.

Takayama, J., and M. Intoh. 1976. Archaeological Excavation of Latte Site (M-13), Rota, in the Marianas. Reports of Pacific Archaeological Survey No. 4. Hiratsuka, Japan: Tokai University.

———. 1978. Archaeological Excavation at Chukienu Shell Midden on Tol, Truk. Reports of Pacific Archaeological Survey No. 5. Nara City, Japan: Tezukayama University.

———. 1980. Reconnaissance Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mortlocks, Truk State. Reports of Pacific Archaeological Survey No. 6. Nara City, Japan: Tezukayama University.

Takayama, J., and A. Saito. 1987. The discovery of the Davidson Type Ia hooks on Vaitupu Island, Tuvalu. Tezukayama University Review 55:29–49.

Takayama, J., and T. Seki. 1973. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations on the Island of Tol in Truk. Reports of Pacific Archaeological Survey No. 2. Tokyo: Azuma Shuppan.

Takayama, J., and R. Shutler Jr. 1978. Preliminary report of a pottery site on Fefan Island, Truk, central Caroline Islands. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 13:1–9.

Takayama, J., and H. Takasugi. 1987. The significance of lure shanks excavated in the Utiroa site of Makin Island in the Gilberts. Senri Ethnological Studies 21: 29–41.

Takayama, J., H. Takasugi, and K. Kaiyama. 1989. The 1988 archaeological expedition to Kiribati: A preliminary report. Tezukayama University Review 63:1–14.

———. 1990. Test excavation at the Nukantekaing site on Tarawa, Kiribati, Central Pacific. In I. Ushijima, ed., Anthropological Research on the Atoll Cultures of Micronesia, 1988, pp. 1–20. Tsukuba-shi, Japan: University of Tsukuba.

Taylor, R.C. 1973. An Atlas of Pacific Islands Rainfall. Hawaiian Institute of Geophysics Data Report No. 25 (HIG-73–9). Honolulu: Hawaii Institute of Geophysics.

Tcherkézoff, S. 2008. Polynésie/Mélanesie: L’Invention française des “races” et des régions de l’Océanie. Pape‘ete, Tahiti: Au Vent des Iles.

Terrell, J. 1986. Prehistory in the Pacific Islands. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Terrell, J.E., T.L. Hunt, and C. Gosden. 1997. The dimensions of social life in the Pacific: Human diversity and the myth of the primitive isolate. Current Anthropology 38:155–96.

Thilenius, G. 1902. Ethnographische Ergebnisse aus Melanesien, vol. 1: Die Polynesischen Inseln an der Ostgrenze Melanesiens. Halle, Germany: Erhardt Karras.

———. 1913–36. Ergebnisse der Südsee-Expedition 1908–1910. Pt. 1, Allgemeines. Pt. 2, Ethnographie; A: Melanesien; B: Micronesien. 15 vols. Hamburgische Wissenschaftliche Stiftung. Hamburg: L. Friederichsen.

Thomas, N. 1989. The force of ethnology: Origins and significance of the Melanesia/Polynesia division. Current Anthropology 30:27–41.

———. 1990. Marquesan Societies: Inequality and Political Transformation in Eastern Polynesia. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Thomas, T. 2009. Communities of practice in the archaeological record of New Georgia, Rendova and Tetepare. In P.J. Sheppard, T. Thomas, and G.R. Summerhayes, eds., Lapita, Ancestors and Descendants pp. 119–45. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 28. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association

———. 2014. Shrines in the landscape of New Georgia. In H. Martinsson-Wallin and T. Thomas, eds., Monuments and People in the Pacific, pp. 47–76. Studies in Global Archaeology 20. Uppsala: Uppsala Universitet.

Thomas, W.L., Jr. 1963. The variety of physical environments among Pacific islands. In F.R. Fosberg, ed., Man’s Place in the Island Ecosystem, pp. 7–38. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Thompson, L.M. 1932. Archaeology of the Mariana Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 100. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1938. The pottery of the Lau Islands, Fiji. Journal of the Polynesian Society 47:109–13.

———. 1940. Southern Lau, Fiji: An Ethnography. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 162. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1945. The Native Culture of the Marianas Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 185. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Thrum, T., ed. 1916–20. Fornander’s Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. 3 vols. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Memoirs 4, 5, and 6. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Tilly, C. 1984. Big Structures, Large Processes, Huge Comparisons. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

———. 1997. Durable Inequality. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Torrence, R. 2001. Cultural landscapes on Garua Island, Papua New Guinea. Antiquity 76:766–76.

———. 2004. Pre-Lapita valuables in island Melanesia. Records of the Australian Museum, Supplement 9:163–72.

———. 2012. Volcanic disasters and agricultural intensification: A case study from the Willaumez Peninsula, Papua New Guinea. Quaternary International 249:151–61.

———. 2016. Social resilience and long-term adaptation to volcanic disasters: The archaeology of continuity and innovation in the Willaumez Peninsula, Papua New Guinea. Quaternary International 394:6–16.

Torrence, R., and B. Boyd. 1997. Archaeological fieldwork in West New Britain, PNG. June–August 1997. Report on file, Australian Museum, Sydney.

Torrence, R., V. Neale, T. Doelman, E. Rhodes, C. McKee, H. Davies, R. Bonetti, A. Guglielmetti, A. Manzoni, M. Oddone, J. Parr, and C. Wallace. 2004. Pleistocene colonisation of the Bismarck Archipelago: New evidence from New Britain. Archaeology in Oceania 39:101–30.

Torrence, R., C. Pavlides, P. Jackson, and J. Webb. 2000. Volcanic disasters and cultural discontinuities in the Holocene of west New Britain, Papua New Guinea. In W.G. McGuire, D.R. Griffiths, P.L. Hancock, and I.S. Stewart, eds., The Archaeology of Geological Catastrophes, pp. 225–44. Geological Society of London, Special Publication 171. London.

Torrence, R., J. Specht, and R. Fullagar. 1990. Pompeiis in the Pacific. Australian Natural History 23:3–16.

Torrence, R., and G.R. Summerhayes. 1997. Sociality and the short distance trader: Intra-regional obsidian exchange in the Willaumez region, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 32:74–84.

Trask, H.-K. 1993. From a Native Daughter: Colonialism and Sovereignty in Hawai‘i. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.

Trask, R.L. 1996. Historical Linguistics. London: Arnold.

Trigger, B. 1989. A History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Tromp, M. 2016. Lapita plants, people and pigs. PhD dissertation, University of Otago.

Tromp, M., and J.V. Dudgeon. 2015. Differentiating dietary and non-dietary microfossils extracted from human dental calculus: The importance of sweet potato to ancient diet on Rapa Nui. Journal of Archaeological Science 54:54–63.

Tromp, M., J.V. Dudgeon, H. Buckley, and E.A. Matisoo-Smith. 2016. Dental calculus and plant diet in Oceania In M. Oxenham and H.R. Buckley, eds., The Routledge Handbook of Bioarchaeology in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands, pp. 599–622. London: Routledge.

Trotter, M.M., ed. 1974. Prehistory of the Southern Cook Islands. Canterbury Museum Bulletin No. 6. Christchurch, New Zealand: Canterbury Museum.

———. 1979. Niue Island Archaeological Survey. Canterbury Museum Bulletin No. 9. Christchurch, New Zealand: Canterbury Museum.

Tsang, C.-H. 1992. Archaeology of the P’eng-Hu Islands. Institute of History and Philology Special Publication No. 95. Taipei: Academia Sinica.

Tuggle, H.D. 1979. Hawaii. In J. Jennings, ed., The Prehistory of Polynesia, pp. 167–99. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Tuggle, H.D., and P.B. Griffin, eds. 1973. Lapakahi, Hawaii: Archaeological Studies. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series No. 5. Honolulu: Social Science Research Institute, University of Hawaii.

Tuggle, H.D., and M.J. Tomonari-Tuggle. 1980. Prehistoric agriculture in Kohala, Hawaii. Journal of Field Archaeology 7:297–312.

Ueki, T. 1990. Formation of a complex society in an island situation. In R.L. Hunter-Anderson, ed., Recent Advances in Micronesian Archaeology: Selected Papers from the Micronesian Archaeology Conference, September 9–12, 1987. Micronesica, Supplement 2, pp. 303–16.

Valentin, F., H.R. Buckley, E. Herrscher, R. Kinaston, S. Bedford, M. Spriggs, S. Hawkins, and K. Neal. 2010. Lapita subsistence strategies and food consumption patterns in the community of Teouma (Efate, Vanuatu). Journal of Archaeological Science 37:1820–29.

Valentin, F., and G. Clark. 2013. Early Polynesian mortuary behaviour at the Talasiu site, Kingdom of Tonga. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 4:1–14.

Valentin, F., F. Detroit, M.J.T. Spriggs, and S. Bedford. 2016. Early Lapita skeletons from Vanuatu show Polynesian craniofacial shape: Implications for Remote Oceanic settlement and Lapita origins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 113:292–97.

Valentin, F., E. Herrscher, S. Bedford, M. Spriggs, and H. Buckley, 2014. Evidence for social and cultural change in central Vanuatu between 3000 and 2000 BP: Comparing funerary and dietary patterns of the first and later generations at Teouma, Efate. Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 9:381–99.

Valentin, F., M. Spriggs, S. Bedford, and H. Buckley. 2011. Vanuatu mortuary practices over three millennia: Lapita to the early European contact period. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 2(2):49–65.

Valeri, V. 1985. Kingship and Sacrifice: Ritual and Society in Ancient Hawaii. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Van Balgooy, M.M.J. 1971. Plant geography of the Pacific. Blumea 6:1–222.

Vanderwal, R.L. 1978. Exchange in prehistoric coastal Papua. Mankind 11:416–26.

Van Heerkeren, H.R. 1972. The Stone Age of Indonesia. Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 61. The Hague: Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde.

Van Tilburg, J.A. 1986. Power and symbol: The stylistic analysis of Easter Island monolithic sculpture. Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.

———. 1987. Symbolic archaeology on Easter Island. Archaeology 40:26–33.

———. 1988. Easter Island statue type, part three: The moai as ideological symbol. In C. Cristino, P. Vargas, R. Izaurieta, and R. Budd, eds., First International Congress, Easter Island & East Polynesia, vol. 1: Archaeology, pp. 164–73. Santiago: University of Chile.

———. 1991. Anthropomorphic stone monoliths on the islands of Oreor and Babeldaob, Republic of Belau (Palau), Micronesia. Bishop Museum Occasional Papers 31:3–62.

———. 1994. Easter Island: Archaeology, Ecology and Culture: London: British Museum Press.

———. 2003. Among Stone Giants: The Life of Katherine Routledge and Her Remarkable Expedition to Easter Island. New York: Scribner.

Vargas, P. 1988. Easter Island statue type, part one: The moai as archaeological artefact. In C. Cristino, P. Vargas, R. Izaurieta, and R. Budd, eds., First International Congress, Easter Island & East Polynesia, vol. 1: Archaeology, pp. 133–49. Santiago: University of Chile.

———. 1993. The Easter Island prehistoric sequence and developments in its settlement patterns. In M.W. Graves and R. Green, eds., The Evolution and Organization of Prehistoric Society in Polynesia, pp. 103–5. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph No. 5. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

———. 1998. Rapa Nui settlement patterns: Types, function and spatial distribution of household structural components. In P.V. Casanova, ed., Easter Island and East Polynesian Prehistory, pp. 110–30. Santiago: Instituto de Estudios Isla de Pascua, Universidad de Chile.

Vargas, P., ed. 1998. Easter Island and East Polynesian Prehistory. Santiago: Instituto de Estudios Isla de Pascua, Universidad de Chile.

Vargas, P., C. Cristino, and R. Izaurieta. 2006. 1000 años en Rapa Nui: Arqueología del asentamiento. Santiago: Universidad de Chile.

Vargas, P., R. Izaurieta, C. Cristino, and C. Arias. 1998. New approaches to settlement pattern studies: A GIS based analysis of the Easter Island archaeological survey data. In P.V. Casanova, ed., Easter Island and East Polynesian Prehistory, pp. 147–52. Santiago: Instituto de Estudios Isla de Pascua, Universidad de Chile.

Vayda, A. 1960. Maori Warfare. Polynesian Society Maori Monograph 2. Wellington, New Zealand: Polynesian Society.

———. 1961. Expansion and warfare among swidden agriculturalists. American Anthropologist 63:346–58.

Vayda, A., and R. Rappaport. 1963. Island cultures. In F.R. Fosberg, ed., Man’s Place in the Island Ecosystem, pp. 133–42. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Vérin, P. 1969. L’Ancienne civilisation de Rurutu: La periode classique. Mémoires ORSTOM 33. Paris: ORSTOM.

Veyne, P. 1984. Writing History: Essay on Epistemology. Trans. M. Moore-Rinvolucre. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.

Vilar, M.G., A. Kaneko, F.W. Hombhanje, T. Tsukahara, I. Hwaihwanje, and J.K. Lum. 2008. Reconstructing the origin of the Lapita Cultural Complex: mtDNA analyses of East Sepik Province, PNG. Journal of Human Genetics 53:698–708.

Vitousek, P.M. 2002. Oceanic islands as model systems for ecological studies. Journal of Biogeography 29:573–82.

Vitousek, P.M., O.A. Chadwick, S.C. Hotchkiss, T.N. Ladefoged, and C.M. Stevenson. 2014. Farming the rock: A biogeochemical perspective on intensive agriculture in Polynesia. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 5:51–61.

Vitousek, P.M., T.N. Ladefoged, A. Hartshorn, P.V. Kirch, M. Graves, S. Hotchkiss, S. Tuljapurkar, and O.A. Chadwick. 2004. Soils, agriculture, and society in precontact Hawai‘i. Science 304:1665–69.

Vogt, E.Z. 1964. The genetic model and Maya cultural development. In E.Z. Vogt and A. Ruz L., eds. Desarrollo cultural de los Mayas, pp. 9–48. Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.

———. 1994. On the application of the phylogenetic model to the Maya. In R.J. DeMallie and A. Ortiz, eds., North American Indian Anthropology: Essays on Society and Culture, pp. 377–414. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Von Haast, J. 1872. Moas and moa hunters. Transactions of the New Zealand Institute 4:66–107.

Wagner, W.C., D.R. Herbst, and S.H. Sohmer. 1990. Manual of the Flowering Plants of Hawai‘i. 2 vols. Bishop Museum Special Publication 83. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press and Bishop Museum Press.

Wagner, W.L., and V.A. Funk, eds. 1995. Hawaiian Biogeography: Evolution on a Hot Spot Archipelago.Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Wahome, E.W. 1997. Continuity and change in Lapita and post-Lapita ceramics: A review of evidence from the Admiralty Islands and New Ireland, Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 32:118–23.

Walker, D., and G. Hope. 1982. Late Quaternary vegetation history. In J.L. Gressitt, ed., Biogeography and Ecology of New Guinea, vol. 1, pp. 263–85. The Hague: W. Junk.

Wallace, A.R. 1895. Island Life, or the Phenomena and Causes of Insular Faunas and Floras, Including a Revision and Attempted Solution of the Problem of Geological Climates. 3rd ed. London: Macmillan.

Wallin, P. 1993. Ceremonial Stone Structures: The Archaeology and Ethnohistory of the Marae Complex in the Society Islands, French Polynesia. Aun 18. Uppsala, Sweden: Societas Archaeologica Upsaliensis.

Wallin, P., and R. Solsvik. 2010. Archaeological Investigations of Marae Structures in Huahine, Society Islands, French Polynesia. BAR International Series 2091. Oxford: Archaeopress.

Wallin, P., H. Wallin-Martinsson, and G. Clark. 2007. A radiocarbon sequence for Samoan prehistory and the Pulemelei Mound. Archaeology in Oceania 42:71–82.

Wallin-Martinsson, H. 2007. Samoan archaeology: A review of research history. Archaeology in Oceania 42:11–27.

Wallin-Martinsson, H., P. Wallin, and G. Clark. 2007. Excavation of Pulemelei site 2002–2004. Archaeology in Oceania 42:41–59.

Walter, R. 1989a. An archaeological fishhook assemblage from the Southern Cook Islands. Man in Oceania 5:67–78.

———. 1989b. Lapita fishing strategies: A review of the archaeological and linguistic evidence. Pacific Studies 31:127–49.

———. 1990. The Southern Cook Islands in Eastern Polynesian prehistory. PhD dissertation, University of Auckland.

———. 1996. What is the East Polynesian “Archaic”? A view from the Cook Islands. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 513–29. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

———. 1998. Anai‘o: The Archaeology of a Fourteenth Century Polynesian Community in the Cook Islands. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 22. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Walter, R., and A. Anderson. 2002. The Archaeology of Niue Island, West Polynesia. Bishop Museum Bulletin in Anthropology 10. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

Walter, R., and R.C. Green. 2011. Su‘ena: Five Hundred Years of Interaction in the Eastern Triangle, Solomon Islands. University of Otago Studies in Prehistoric Anthropology 23. Dunedin: Anthropology Department, University of Otago.

Walter, R., and P.J. Sheppard. 2001. Nusa Roviana: The archaeology of a Melanesian chiefdom. Journal of Field Archaeology 27:295–318.

———. 2006. Archaeology in Melanesia: A case study from the Western Province of the Solomon Islands. In I. Lilley, ed., Archaeology of Oceania, Austalia and the Pacific Islands, pp. 137–59. London: Blackwell.

———. 2009. A review of Solomon Island archaeology. In P.J. Sheppard, T. Thomas, and G.R. Summerhayes, eds., Lapita, Ancestors and Descendants, pp. 35–72. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 28. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Walter, R., T. Thomas, and P.J. Sheppard. 2004. Cult assemblages and ritual practice in Roviana Lagoon, Solomon Islands. World Archaeology 36:142–57.

Walworth, M. 2014. Eastern Polynesian: The linguistic evidence revisited. Oceanic Linguistics 53:256–72.

Ward, G.K. 1976. The archaeology of settlements associated with the chert industry of Ulawa. In R.C. Green and M.M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomons Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 161–80. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

Ward, J.V. n.d. A Holocene pollen record from the Pago River valley, Guam. Report on file, Micronesian Archaeological Research Services, Guam.

Ward, J.V., J.S. Athens, and C. Hotton. 1998. Holocene pollen records from Babeldaob Island, Palau, western Caroline Islands. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Seattle, WA, March 29.

Ward, R.G., J.W. Webb, and M. Levison. 1973. The settlement of the Polynesian outliers: A computer simulation. Journal of the Polynesian Society 82:330–42.

Watson, J.B. 1965. From hunting to horticulture in the New Guinea Highlands. Ethnology 4:295–309.

Watson, V. 1986. Obsidian as Tool and Trade: A Papua New Guinea Case. Burke Museum Contributions to Anthropology and Natural History No. 4. Seattle, WA: Burke Museum.

Watson, V., and J.D. Cole. 1977. Prehistory of the Eastern Highlands of New Guinea. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Weiner, A.B. 1992. Inalienable Possessions: The Paradox of Keeping-While-Giving. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Weisler, M.I. 1989. Chronometric dating and late Holocene prehistory in the Hawaiian Islands: A critical review of radiocarbon dates from Moloka‘i island. Radiocarbon 31:121–45.

———. 1993. Long-distance inter-island communication in prehistoric Polynesia: Three case studies. PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

———. 1994. The settlement of marginal Polynesia: New evidence from Henderson Island. Journal of Field Archaeology 21:83–102.

———. 1995. Henderson Island prehistory: Colonization and extinction on a remote Polynesian island. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 56:377–404.

———. 1996a. An archaeological survey of Mangareva: Implications for regional settlement models and interaction studies. Man and Culture in Oceania 12:61–85.

———. 1996b. Taking the mystery out of the Polynesian “mystery” islands: A case study from Mangareva and the Pitcairn group. In J. Davidson, G. Irwin, F. Leach, A. Pawley, and D. Brown, eds., Oceanic Culture History: Essays in Honour of Roger Green, pp. 615–29. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology Special Publication. Dunedin: New Zealand Journal of Archaeology.

———. 1998a. Hard evidence for prehistoric interaction in Polynesia. Current Anthropology 39:521–32.

———. 1998b. Issues in the colonization and settlement of Polynesian islands. In P.V. Casanova, ed., Easter Island and East Polynesian Prehistory, pp. 73–86. Santiago: Instituto de Estudios Isla de Pascua, Universidad de Chile.

———. 1999. The antiquity of aroid pit agriculture and significance of buried A horizons on Pacific atolls. Geoarchaeology 14:621–54.

———. 2001a. Life on the edge: Prehistoric settlement and economy on Utrōk Atoll, northern Marshall Islands. Archaeology in Oceania 36:109–33.

———. 2001b. On the Margins of Sustainability: Prehistoric Settlement of Utrōk Atoll, Northern Marshall Islands. BAR International Series 967. Oxford: Archaeopress.

———. 2002. Centrality and the collapse of long-distance voyaging in East Polynesia. In M.D. Glascock, ed., Geochemical Evidence for Long-Distance Exchange, pp. 257–73. London: Bergin and Garvey.

———. 2003. Contraction of the Southeast Polynesian interaction sphere and resource depression on Temoe Atoll. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 25:57–88.

Weisler, M., ed. 1997. Prehistoric Long-Distance Interaction in Oceania: An Interdisciplinary Approach. New Zealand Archaeological Association Monograph 21. Auckland: New Zealand Archaeological Association.

Weisler, M.I., R. Bolhar, J. Ma, E. St Pierre, P. Sheppard, R.K. Walter, Y. Feng, J. Zhao, and P.V. Kirch. 2016. Cook Island artifact geochemistry demonstrates spatial and temporal extent of pre-European interarchipelago voyaging in East Polynesia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 113:8150–55.

Weisler, M.I., and R.C. Green. 2013. Mangareva fishing strategies in regional context: An analysis of fish bones from five sites. Journal of Pacific Archaeology 4:73–89.

Weisler, M., and P.V. Kirch. 1985. The structure of settlement space in a Polynesian chiefdom: Kawela, Moloka‘i, Hawaiian Islands. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 7:129–58.

———. 1996. Interisland and interarchipelago transport of stone tools in prehistoric Polynesia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 93:1381–85.

Weisler, M.I., H. Yamano, and Q. Hua. 2012. A multidisciplinary approach for dating human colonization of Pacific atolls. Journal of Island & Coastal Archaeology 7:102–25.

Welch, D.J. 2002. Archaeological and paleoenvironmental evidence of early settlement in Palau. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 22:161–73.

Welsch, R., ed. 1998. An American Anthropologist in Melanesia: A.B. Lewis and the Joseph N. Field South Pacific Expedition, 1909–1913. 2 vols. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

West, E.W. 2007. An archaeological investigation of pig husbandry on Tahuata Island, Marquesas, French Polynesia. PhD dissertation. University of Hawai‘i, Manoa.

White, A.W., T.H. Worthy, S. Hawkins, S. Bedford, and M. Spriggs. 2010. Megafaunal meiolaniid horned turtles survived until early human settlement in Vanuatu, southwest Pacific. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 107:15512–16.

White, J.P. 1972. Ol Tumbuna: Archaeological Excavations in the Eastern Central Highlands, Papua New Guinea. Terra Australis 2. Canberra: Australian National University.

———. 1992. New Ireland and Lapita. In J.-C. Galipaud, ed., Poterie Lapita et peuplement: Actes du Colloque LAPITA, pp. 83–90. Noumea, New Caledonia: ORSTOM.

White, J.P., and J. Allen. 1980. Melanesian prehistory: Some recent advances. Science 207:728–34.

White, J.P., J. Allen, and J. Specht. 1988. Peopling the Pacific: The Lapita Homeland Project. Australian Natural History 22:410–16.

White, J.P., K.A.W. Crook, and B.P. Ruxton. 1970. Kosipe: A late Pleistocene site in the Papuan Highlands. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 36:152–70.

White, J.P., and J. Downie. 1980. Excavations at Lesu, New Ireland. Asian Perspectives 23:193–220.

White, J.P., T.F. Flannery, R. O’Brien, R.V. Hancock, and L. Pavlish. 1991. The Balof Shelters, New Ireland. In J. Allen and C. Gosden, eds., Report of the Lapita Homeland Project, pp. 46–58. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 20. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

White, J.P., and C.V. Murray-Wallace. 1996. Site ENX (Fissoa) and the incised and applied pottery tradition in New Ireland, Papua New Guinea. Man and Culture in Oceania 12:31–46.

White, J.P., and J.F. O’Connell. 1982. A Prehistory of Australia, New Guinea and Sahul. Sydney: Academic Press.

White, J.P., and J. Specht. 1971. Prehistoric pottery from Ambitle Island, Bismarck Archipelago. Asian Perspectives 14:88–94.

White, J.P., and D.H. Thomas. 1972. What mean these stones? Ethnotaxonomic models and archaeological interpretations in the New Guinea Highlands. In D.L. Clarke, ed., Models in Archaeology, pp. 275–308. London: Methuen.

Wickler, S. 1990. Prehistoric Melanesian exchange and interaction: Recent evidence from the northern Solomon Islands. Asian Perspectives 29:135–54.

———. 2001. The Prehistory of Buka: A Stepping Stone Island in the Northern Solomons. Terra Australis 16. Canberra: Australian National University.

Wickler, S., and M. Spriggs. 1988. Pleistocene human occupation of the Solomon Islands, Melanesia. Antiquity 62:703–6.

Wiens, H. 1962. Atoll Environment and Ecology. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Williams, F.E. 1932. Trading voyages from the Gulf of Papua. Oceania 3:139–66.

Williamson, M. 1981. Island Populations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Williamson, R.W. 1924. The Social and Political Systems of Central Polynesia. 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wilmshurst, J.M., A.J. Anderson, T.F.G. Higham, and T.H. Worthy. 2008. Dating the late prehistoric dispersal of Polynesians to New Zealand using the commensal Pacific rat. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 105:7676–80.

Wilmshurst, J.M., and T.F.G. Higham. 2004. Using rat-gnawed seeds to independently date the arrival of Pacific rats and humans in New Zealand. The Holocene 14:801–6.

Wilmshurst, J.M., T.L. Hunt, C.P. Lipo, and A.J. Anderson. 2011. High-precision radiocarbon dating shows recent and rapid initial human colonization of East Polynesia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 108:1815–20.

Wilson, J., ed. 1987. From the Beginning: The Archaeology of the Maori. Auckland: Penguin.

Wilson, S. 1985. Phytolith analysis at Kuk, an early agricultural site in Papua New Guinea. Archaeology in Oceania 20:90–97.

Wilson, W. 1985. Evidence for an Outlier source for the Proto Eastern Polynesian pronomial system. Oceanic Linguistics 24:85–133.

Winslow, J.H., ed. 1977. The Melanesian Environment. Canberra: Australian National University Press.

Worthy, T.H., and R.N. Holdaway. 1995. Quaternary fossil faunas from caves on Mt. Cookson, North Canterbury, South Island, New Zealand. Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand 25:333–70.

Wozniak, J.A. 2001. Landscapes of food production on Easter Island: Successful subsistence strategies. In C.M. Stevenson, G. Lee, and F.J. Morin, eds., Pacific 2000: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Easter Island and the Pacific, pp. 91–102. Los Osos, CA: Easter Island Foundation.

———. 2003. Exploring landscapes on Easter Island (Rapanui) with geoarchaeological studies: Settlement, subsistence, and environmental changes. PhD dissertation, University of Oregon.

Yamaguchi, T., H. Kayanne, and H. Yamano. 2009. Archaeological investigation of the landscape history of an Oceanic atoll: Majuro, Marshall Islands. Pacific Science 63:537–65.

Yen, D.E. 1971. The development of agriculture in Oceania. In R.C. Green and M. Kelly, eds., Studies in Oceanic Culture History, vol. 2, pp. 1–12. Pacific Anthropological Records 12. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

———. 1973. The origins of Oceanic agriculture. Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Oceania 8:68–85.

———. 1974a. Arboriculture in the subsistence of Santa Cruz, Solomon Islands. Economic Botany 28:247–84.

———. 1974b. The Sweet Potato and Oceania: An Essay in Ethnobotany. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 236. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.

———. 1976a. Agricultural systems and prehistory in the Solomon Islands. In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 61–74. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

———. 1976b. Inland settlement on Santa Cruz Island (Nendö). In R.C. Green and M. Cresswell, eds., Southeast Solomon Islands Cultural History: A Preliminary Survey, pp. 203–24. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 11. Wellington: Royal Society of New Zealand.

———. 1988. Easter Island agriculture in prehistory: The possibilities of reconstruction. In C. Cristino, P. Vargas, R. Izaurieta, and R. Budd, eds., First International Congress, Easter Island & East Polynesia, vol. 1: Archaeology, pp. 59–82. Santiago: University of Chile.

———. 1990. Environment, agriculture and the colonisation of the Pacific. In D.E. Yen and J.M.J. Mummery, eds., Pacific Production Systems: Approaches to Economic Prehistory, pp. 258–77. Occasional Papers in Prehistory No. 18. Canberra: Department of Prehistory, Australian National University.

———. 1991. Polynesian cultigens and cultivars: The questions of origin. In P.A. Cox and S.A. Banack, eds., Islands, Plants, and Polynesians, pp. 67–98. Portland, OR: Dioscorides Press.

———. 1995. The development of Sahul agriculture with Australia as a bystander. Antiquity 69(special no. 265):831–47.

Yen, D.E., P.V. Kirch, P. Rosendahl, and T. Riley. 1972. Prehistoric agriculture in the upper Makaha Valley, Oahu. In D.E. Yen and E. Ladd, eds., Makaha Valley Historical Project: Interim Report No. 3, pp. 59–94. Pacific Anthropological Records 18. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum.

Zimmerman, E.C. 1948. Insects of Hawaii, vol. 1: Introduction. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.





INDEX


Figures are indicated by an -f suffixed after the page number, maps by a suffixed -m, and tables by a suffixed -t. Notes (suffixed -n) are referred to by number.

Achugao Point site, 154–155

adaptive radiation, 46

Admiralty Islands. See Manus

adzes: basalt, 42, 132, 187, 190, 192f, 203, 205f, 211, 221, 224, 226, 231, 260, 261f; Cassis-shell, 159; chert, 122; Polynesian, 132, 203, 240; metavolcanic, 103–104, 131; Mitre-shell, 160; quarries, 115, 232, 251; shell, 43, 71, 75, 89f, 159, 163, 185; sourcing of, 35, 190, 211; stone, 78–79, 117, 122, 134, 146, 235, 241; Terebra-shell, 117, 118f, 124, 159, 161, 300n21. See also axes; Tridacna-shell adzes

agriculture: on atolls, 43; dryland, 219; in Fiji, 144; indigenous development of, 68–69; intensification of, 8, 122, 129, 178, 182, 232, 263, 285, 305n63; irrigated pondfield, 259; landesque capital–intensive, 52; Lapita, 100–101; linguistic evidence for, 100; New Guinea Highlands, 68–69, 114; Polynesian, 277; sustainable, 279; swidden, 129. See also arboriculture; crops; domestication of plants; gardening; intensification; irrigation systems; Kuk site; shifting cultivation

agroforest, 160, 179, 279, 300n39. See also arboriculture

ahu, 190, 216, 235, 236–237, 236f, 247–249. See also marae

ahupua’a system, 265–266

Ahu Tongariki site, 236, 236f

Ahu Vinapu site, 26, 236

Aitutaki Island, 42, 200, 211

Aleurites moluccana. See candlenut

Allen, J., 31–32, 58, 60, 65–66, 68–69, 112, 148, 293n27, 296n3

Allen, M.S., 35, 52, 200, 224, 225f, 325n12

Alocasia macrorrhiza, 66, 75, 76f. See also taro

Alofi Island, 244, 245f. See also Futuna Island

α-thalassemia, 8, 76, 80, 93, 293n4, 293n29. See also malaria

Ambitle Island, 77, 104

Ambrose, W., 97

Amphlett Islands, 113

Anahulu Valley, 263f

Anakena site, 200, 234–235, 304n23

Ana Manuku site, 221

ancestor worship, 86, 96. See also social organization

Ancestral Polynesian culture, 185, 190–194, 197, 202–203, 212, 215, 238, 244, 268

Anderson, A., 199, 205, 217, 233, 238, 240–242

Aneityum Island, 52, 129, 129f, 148–149, 281

Angkitkita site, 116

Anopheles mosquitoes, 48–49, 72. See also malaria

Anthropocene Epoch, 278

anthropology: biological, 3, 189, 190–191; historical, 9, 34, 188, 286, 306n1; role of archaeology in, 23, 33

anthropophagy, 146. See also cannibalism, warfare

Anuta Island, 31, 37, 42f, 123, 130, 133–134, 157–158, 297n34

Aotearoa. See New Zealand

Apalo site, 71

aquaculture, 259. See also fishponds, fishtraps

Araho, N., 70–71

Arapus site, 124

Arawe Islands, 83

arboriculture, 71, 149, 161, 300n39, 303n12. See also agroforest; breadfruit; Canarium almond; coconut; Tahitian Chestnut; tree crops

archaeology: cultural resource management (CRM), 33–34; experimental, 208, 304n26; Francophone, 32–33; history in the Pacific, 15–36, 290n18; indigenous peoples and, 34; linguistics and, 90–91; “New Archaeology,” xvii; settlement pattern, 28–29. See also radiocarbon dating

archaic states: 214, 245; defined, 251–252; Hawaiian, 258–268; Tongan, 195, 197, 252–258. See also chiefdoms

architecture: early Austronesian, 80; Lapita, 98–99, 100–101; latte, 150, 159, 165–167, 165, 166f; monumental, 17, 166, 168–169, 197, 244, 252, 260t, 286; ritual, 193, 262; star mounds, 184, 250, 250f; stilt houses, 74, 77, 83f, 98f, 101, 177, 299n13. See also fortifications; heiau; marae

armbands, 71. See also ornaments

Arno Island, 160, 162

aroids. See Alocasia macrorrhiza; Cyrtosperma chamissonis; taro

Artocarpus altilis. See breadfruit

‘Atele site, 252

Athens, J.S., 156–158, 160, 165, 177, 179, 180, 182, 299n14, 300n22, 300n39

Atiahara site, 232

Atituiti site, 230f, 231

atolls: adaptation to, 162–164; cultivation on, 43; formation, 40, 42–43, 44f; Ghyben-Herzberg aquifer, 43; settlement of, 158, 160–161; societies, 173, 215–217; vegetation, 158.

Australimusa bananas. See bananas

Austral Islands, 19, 26, 205, 211, 231–232

Austronesian languages: biological variation and, 7, 76, 80, 92, 272–273; canoe terms, 80; distribution, 4, 6m, 79; family, 5, 79–80; Lapita and, 90; lexical reconstruction of, 80, 105; in Micronesia, 150, 153; in Solomon Islands, 118; subgrouping, 79–80, 79f. See also Non-Austronesian languages; Oceanic; Papuan languages; Proto Oceanic; Proto Polynesian

axes, 55, 65. See also adzes; waisted blades

Ayres, W., 159, 173, 177–178

Babeldaob Island, 156–157, 159, 167–169, 167f, 169f, 170f

Bairulchau site, 169, 170, 170f, 300n31

Balof site, 65

Baluan Island, 117

bananas, 69, 75, 80, 100; Australimusa section of, 67–69, 75, 100

Banks Islands, 84

Barrau, J., 280

Bayard Dominick Expeditions, 18–20, 20f, 23, 290n6

Bayliss-Smith, T., 113

Bayman, J., 166

Bedford, S., 84, 86, 124, 126, 143

Belau Islands. See Palau Islands

Bellows Dune site, 200, 260, 261f

Bellwood, P., xviii, 79, 90, 143

Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum. See Bishop Museum

Best, E., 15

Best, S., 145–146, 148, 298n54

betel nut (Areca catechu), 157, 293n25

Biggs, B., 188

“big man” societies, 8–9, 284, 298–299n66. See also social organization

Birgus latro, 48, 102

biogeography, 46–48

biological anthropology, 7–8, 20. See also DNA; genetics

biota, island, 46–48

birds: diversity of, 48; extinction, 53, 102–103, 278, 279; extirpation, 230, 279; flightlessness, 48; hunting, 75, 100, 192, 278; land birds, 48, 221; Mangaia, 221–222; Mangareva, 230; moa, 15, 53, 238, 240–241, 241f; New Guinea Highlands, 65; rails, 48; Rapa Nui, 15, 235; seabirds, 48; Sylviornis neocaledoniae, 53, 53f, 102–103, 135; in Tonga, 103. See also megapodes

Bishop Museum, 15, 20–21, 184, 290n18; archaeology and, 24, 29, 259, 299n2; Bayard Dominick Expeditions, 18–19; founding of, 15

Bismarck Archipelago, 4, 32, 42, 48, 58, 61, 65–67, 76–78, 90, 95, 97, 104, 115–118, 206, 270

Blust, R., 79–80

Bobongara site, 55–56, 60

Bolé, J., 33

Bollt, R., 232

Bonk, W.J., 25

Bootless Bay, 112

Boserup, E., 281–282

Bougainville, L. de, 12, 51

Bougainville Island, 5, 115, 118–119, 273

Bourewa site, 88

Braudel, F., 3

breadfruit, 43, 80, 103; “breadfruit revolution”, 173; pit fermentation and storage, 224, 226, 228

Brigham, W.T., 15. See also Bishop Museum

Brookfield, H., 139, 148–149, 281–283

Bryson, R.U., 178

Buang Merabak site, 60, 67

Buck, P.H. See Hiroa, T.R.

Buka Island, 61–62, 65, 77, 119, 147, 296n21. See also Kilu site

Bulmer, R. and S., 31, 71, 290n19

burials, 24, 34, 86, 96, 102–103, 120, 121f, 126–128, 127f, 128f, 134, 156, 166, 168, 173, 175, 177, 216, 241, 252–253, 255, 255f, 257–258, 257f

Burley, D., 88, 143, 148, 186, 195

Burrows, E.G., 19, 190, 289n4

Butler, B., 154–155, 165, 167

calendar: Ancestral Polynesian, 193, 194, 194f; Mangarevan, 231

Canarium almond, 68, 71, 80, 100–101, 103, 122, 292n17. See also arboriculture; tree crops

candlenut, 71, 200, 233

Cann, R., 7–8, 92

cannibalism, 145–146, 221, 229, 275. See also human sacrifice, warfare

canoes: archaeological remains, 202, 208, 209f; Austronesian terms for, 80; Caroline Islands, 164, 164f; double-hulled, 2, 203, 206f, 207, 255; Hokule’a, 207–208, 208f; lagatoi, 108; Lapita, 83, 134; outrigger, 2, 80, 134, 203, 270; plank, 210; Polynesian, 204, 208; sail types, 8; te puke, 134; Tongan, 2, 147, 255; war, 120. See also navigation; voyaging; watercraft

Carneiro, R., 242

Caroline Islands, 13, 154, 157, 157–158, 164f. See also Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei

Carson, M., 154–155

Caution Bay, 81, 89, 111

Chalan Piao site, 24, 154

Chamorro: language, 5, 91, 151, 153, 155, 165; society, 164, 166–167

Chappell, J., 70

charcoal, analysis of, 52

Chatham Islands, 238, 301n12

Chelechol ra Orrak site, 156

Chelonia mydas, 48, 102. See also turtles

chert, 38, 42, 66, 77–78, 99, 103–106, 117, 122, 131, 146, 156f, 187

chickens, 77, 80, 101, 192, 202, 210, 221, 261, 295n47

chiefdoms: anthropological significance, 214–215; Chuuk, 183; defined, 214; Futunan, 244; Kosrae, 180; Mangarevan, 229; New Caledonian, 140; Open, 215, 244, 285; Pohnpeian, 174, 178; Polynesian, 173, 195, 197, 214–215, 268, 284; Roviana, 120; Samoan, 249–250; simple, 244; social circumscription and, 242; Society Islands, 248–249; stratified, 183, 215, 245–251; Tongan, 252, 256; transformation to archaic states, 252, 267; “weak”, 140. See also chiefship; hierarchy; social organization

chiefship, 8, 105, 193, 214, 253, 258, 284. See also chiefdoms; social organization

Chiu, S., 96–97

Choiseul Island, 118–120

Christian, F.W., 1, 150, 180

Chuuk Islands, 42, 150, 157–158, 173, 183

Chuukic language, 153–154

circumscription, social, 242

Clark, G., 159, 254–255

Clark, J., 88, 146, 250

Cleghorn, P., 84

climate, 43–46, 63–64. See also cyclones, drought, rainfall

Cochrane, E., 88

coconut: 47, 52, 71, 80, 93, 100–101, 103, 156–158, 163, 171, 192, 197, 203, 219, 221, 232, 278f, 291n14. 302n33; crab, 48, 102

Col de la Pirogue site, 139

Collingwood Bay, 31

Colocasia esculenta. See taro

comparison, 27

competitive involution, 228

conservation, 53

Conte, E., 33, 200, 202, 216, 224, 229

Cook, Capt. J., 3, 12f, 12–13,

Cook Islands, 15, 43, 47, 52, 174, 200, 202, 205, 210–212, 215, 217, 232, 240. See also Aitutaki Island, Atiu Island, Mangaia Island

coral reefs, 42–43

Cordy, R., 166, 180–182

crabs, 48, 102

Craib, J.L., 167

Cristino, C., 53, 200, 234

CRM. See cultural resource management

crocodiles, 53, 53f, 70, 100, 102–103, 135, 139

cultural resource management (CRM), 33–34, 151, 159, 168, 240, 259. See also archaeology

culture change, 23–25, 27, 186. See also sociopolitical transformation

cyclones, 43, 46, 50, 61, 124, 134, 151, 164, 275

Cyrtosperma chamissonis, 43, 66, 75. See also taro

Dai village site, 123, 123f

Darwin, C., 42, 46

David, B., 81, 89

Davidson, J., 134, 151, 161, 162f, 197, 241, 244, 252

deforestation, 52, 69. See also fernlands, grasslands

demography, 27, 60, 149; Lapita, 89–90; paleodemography, 276; r/K transition, 275–276. See also population

Dempwolff, O., 272

Denham, T., 64, 68

Dening, G., 269, 306n1

D’Entrecasteaux Islands, 31

Descantes, C., 172

descent groups, 96, 105, 193, 215, 236, 244, 265, 285. See also social organization

Diamond, J., 234

Dickinson, W., 97, 145, 156, 158, 161, 172, 224

Dicranopteris, 47f, 156. See also fernlands

Dioscorea alata, 100–101, 174. See also yams

Di Piazza, A., 217

disease, 48–49; effect on population, 72, 141, 179, 234, 245, 276–277; infectious, 72–73; microorganisms and, 274; parasitic, 49, 274. See also malaria

Dixon, B., 166

Dixon, R.B., 17, 20

DNA: ancient DNA, 35–36, 93; mtDNA, 7–8, 92; 9-base-pair deletion, 7–8; Polynesian, 189; rat mtDNA, 93, 211, 240, 291n19; Y-chromosome, 7–8, 92. See also biological anthropology; genetics

dogs, 35, 77, 80, 101, 192, 202, 213, 221–222, 238, 262, 270

domestication, plant, 67–68. See also agriculture; crops

domestic mode of production, 214, 303n5

Dongan site, 70–71

drift voyages, 130, 204. See also voyaging

drought, 45–46, 50, 145, 164, 217, 224, 226, 228, 229, 245, 275, 302n40

Duff, R., 24–25, 241, 243

Dumont d’Urville, 3–4, 13, 23, 107, 150, 179, 188, 289n4

Dye, T., 162, 200

Earle, T., 215, 256, 284, 285

earth ovens, 80, 98, 104, 197, 199, 217, 221, 266

Easter Island. See Rapa Nui

Eastern Lapita, 81, 87–88, 143, 186–188, 195, 197

Eastern Polynesia, 5m, 8, 19, 24, 28, 29f, 35, 93, 114, 189, 190, 193, 198–203, 205–208, 210–212, 216m, 220, 221, 229, 231, 236, 238, 240, 260, 265. See also Polynesia, Western Polynesia

economies: staple versus wealth, 256, 284

ecosystems: human impacts on, 50–54, 100, 198, 234, 278–279; island, 49–50. See also islands

Eddowes, M., 232

Edwards, E., 232

Efate Island, 84, 87f, 90, 124, 125f, 126

Egloff, B., 31, 112–113

Ellis, W., 13

El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 45–46, 50

Emirau Island, 83

Emory, K.P., 11, 19, 20f, 21f, 24, 25f, 25, 27–28, 29f, 186, 198–199, 216–217, 229, 246, 248–249, 290n15

Emo site, Vanikoro, 124, 297n38

Englert, Père S., 233

ENSO. See El Niño–Southern Oscillation

Epakapaka site (EKQ), 116, 116f

Equatorial Islands, 215, 217, 302n40

erosion, 52, 68, 122, 129, 145, 169, 185, 235, 244, 246, 278

Erromango Island, 124, 126

ethnogenesis, 135–141

exchange: archaeological evidence for, 103, 148; asymmetric, 284; ceramic, 147; Bismarck Archipelago, 66–67; Caroline Islands, 170–171, 173; Fiji, 142, 147; kula, 148; Lapita, 95–96, 103–105, 284; long-distance, 104, 131, 191; Mangaian, 211; Massim region, 148; Melanesian, 148; New Britain, 77; New Georgia, 120; New Guinea Highlands, 114–115; obsidian, 67, 77; Papua, 108, 112–113; pigs and, 115; prestige-good, 115, 117, 120, 171, 191, 285; Santa Cruz Islands, 31, 134; Tikopia, 131; Tongan, 191, 197, 256; Trobriand Islands, 113; valuables, 103, 104f, 121f, 283; Yap, 170–172. See also hiri, interaction; trade; voyaging

extinction: bird, 53, 225, 278; igauna, 103; megafauna, 64

Fais Island, 172

Fanning Island, 215, 217

Faraulep Island, 172

Far Western Lapita, 83–84, 84f, 93–94

faunal remains, 67, 83, 161, 166, 185, 192. See also birds; chickens; dogs; fish; megafauna; mollusks; pigs; rats

feasting, feasts, 114, 117, 129, 149, 174, 224, 226, 282

featherwork, 283–284

Fefan site, 157, 159

Fergusson Island, 112, 115, 296n5

fernlands, 47, 47f, 198, 221, 279. See also grasslands

Field, J., 144–145, 263

Fiji Archipelago, 4, 11, 13, 141m; archaeology, 11, 23, 141–147; cannibalism, 145–146; ceramic sequence, 143–144, 148, 197; languages, 142, 188; Lapita sites, 81, 88, 95, 143, 186–187; settlement of, 13, 15, 87–88; vegetation, 47. See also Viti Levu, Lau Islands, Sigatoka Valley

Finney, B., 206–208

fire, 47, 52–53, 64, 157, 221, 235, 241, 278f. See also fernlands; grasslands; shifting cultivation

first fruits, 194, 214. See also tribute

Firth, R., 131–132, 297n32, 306n5

fish, 41, 46, 48, 61, 67, 77, 102, 192, 219, 221, 223, 230, 266, 279. See also fishhooks; fishing

fishhooks, 15, 25, 67, 71–72, 75, 77–78, 89f, 102f, 122, 131, 132f, 155, 156f, 161–163, 185, 192, 192f, 203f, 204f, 211, 221, 224, 229f, 230–231, 233, 240, 260, 261f

fishing: poisoning, 295n49; techniques, 8, 48, 66, 77, 102, 192, 202; trolling, 48, 77, 102, 132, 134, 160–162, 164, 203

fishponds, 259, 263, 264f

fishtraps, 117

Fissoa site, 116

Fitzpatrick, S., 154, 157, 159, 170

Flannery, T., 64

flying fox. See fruit bat

Folasa-a-Lalo site, 250

Foley, W., 76

forest clearance, 47, 52–53, 64–65, 69, 72, 103, 146, 156, 160t, 198, 221, 244, 262. See also erosion; fernlands; fire; grasslands; shifting cultivation

Fornander, A., 15, 19

Forster, J.R., 3, 188, 208, 306n8

fortifications: Chuuk, 159, 183; Fijian, 142–146, 298n54; Futunan, 244; Loyalty Islands, 138, 139f, 149; Marquesan, 226; Samoan, 251, 251f; Rapan, 232–233, 233f; Tahitian, 249; Tongan, 253, 258; ‘Uvean, 258. See also warfare

Fosberg, F.R., 50–51, 287

founder effect, 190

Fox, J., 96, 284

Francophone archaeology, 32–33

Freeland, T., 252

Friedlaender, J., 7, 76, 272–273

Friedman, J., 284

Frimigacci, D., 33, 135, 195, 244, 258

Frost, E., 143, 145, 148, 298n54

fruit bats, 47–48, 64–65, 102, 221–222

Fullagar, R., 69

Futuna Island, 32–33, 47f, 52, 88, 130, 134, 142, 161, 185, 187, 190, 194–195, 197 211, 215, 244, 245f, 281, 283f, 307n15

Galipaud, J.-C., 33, 135

Gambier Islands. See Mangareva Islands

Garanger, J., 32–33, 124, 126–128, 134, 147, 290n23

gardening, 53, 56, 97, 101, 235, 241. See also agriculture; horticulture; shifting cultivation

Garling, S.J., 116

geckos, 40, 47, 51, 163

genetics, human: bottlenecks, 89–90; gene flow, 8, 76, 92, 171; “genetic trail,” 92; variation in, 76; Y-chromosome variation, 92. See also biological anthropology; DNA

Geographical Information Systems (GIS), 36, 144

Ghyben-Herzberg aquifer, 43, 163

Gifford, E.W., 11, 23, 24f, 30, 32, 78, 93, 135, 142, 145, 151, 157, 159, 290n14

gods, 214, 267, 286; Hawaiian, 213, 252; Polynesian, 190, 193

Goldman, I., 27, 35, 184, 215, 244, 249, 258, 284, 303n6

Golson, J., 25–26, 30–31, 62, 68–69, 74–75, 93, 113–114, 135, 186, 194, 240, 290n18

Gondwanaland, 40, 56

Goodenough Island, 113

Goodenough, W., 27, 35, 183, 287, 296n12, 300n38

Gorecki, P., 71, 293n26

Gosden, C., 55, 65–67, 101, 270, 272

gourd, bottle, 208–210

grasslands, 47, 63–64, 69, 114, 122, 139f, 146, 156–157, 278, 280. See also fernlands

Graves, M., 165–167, 256, 263

Green, R.C., 4, 28, 30f, 31, 35, 80–81, 84, 98–99, 99f, 122, 135, 142–143, 148, 186, 188, 190–191, 193, 195, 202, 208, 210, 229, 240, 246–247, 260, 285

Gregory, H.E., 17–18, 21, 290n6

Groube, L., 55–56, 64, 72–73

Guadalcanal Island, 23, 71, 92, 118, 121–122

Guam Island, 12, 34, 150, 154, 155f, 156, 164, 165–166, 165f

Ha’amonga-a-Maui site, 255, 256f

Ha’apai Islands, 88, 102, 186, 194–195, 253

Ha’atuatua dune site, 27f, 199, 202, 224, 302n37

Haberle, S., 64, 68–69

Hage, P., 92, 103, 105, 170–171

Hālawa Dune site, 200, 260, 262, 262f

Hale, H., 13

Halmahera Islands, 79

Hambruch, P., 175, 176f, 180

Hanamiai site, 200, 225, 226f

Handy, E.S.C., 19, 27, 286, 224, 289n4

Hane site, 27, 28f, 200, 202, 202f, 224

Hane Valley, Marquesas, 228f

Hather, J., 210

Hawaiian Islands, 25, 40, 46, 50, 200, 205, 212, 258–268, 277, 280

Hawai’i Biocomplexity Project, 30, 35, 265, 275

Hawai’i Island, 16, 25f, 40, 42, 44, 50, 214f, 259, 260, 263, 264f, 265, 266f, 267, 277, 282

head-hunting, 120

heiau, 258, 265, 266f, 286. See also architecture; marae

Heketa site, 255

Henderson Island, 43, 200, 211, 231, 307n13

Hermann, A., 33, 232

heterarchy, 105, 167, 295n58. See also social organization

Heyerdahl, T., 26, 185, 204

hierarchy, 105, 128, 136, 166–167, 178, 183, 193, 198, 216–217, 223, 244–245, 284. See also heterarchy, social organization, social stratification

Highlands, New Guinea, 1, 31, 49, 52, 60, 62–65, 68–69, 71–73, 113–115, 140, 148–149, 274, 278, 292n11, 296n7, 296n11, 299n66

hiri, 108, 112

Hiroa, T.R., 18, 20–23, 21f, 23, 27, 185, 229, 280, 289n4, 290n7, 280nn8–13

historical linguistics. See linguistics, historical

history: anthropological, 9; indigenous forms of, 11; narrative, 9. See also oral traditions

Hiva Oa Island, 26, 226, 227f, 228f

Hnakudotit site, 138, 139f

Hokule’a, 207–208, 208f

Hommon, R., 258, 262, 266–267

horticulture, 8, 45, 56, 68–69, 100, 100–102, 119, 140, 202, 234, 238, 243–244. See also agriculture; arboriculture; crops; gardening; domestication, plant; tree crops

hot spot islands, 40–41

Houmafakalele site, 257, 257f

House of Taga site, 165–167, 166f

houses. See architecture, domestic

house societies, 96–97, 149, 295n59. See also social organization

Huahine Island, 202, 208, 245–246, 248

human sacrifice, 217, 223f, 224, 286f. See also cannibalism

Hunt, T., 234

Hunter-Anderson, R., 155, 167, 172

Huon Peninsula, 55, 56f, 58, 58f, 60, 62, 292n1

Ifo site, 126

iguana, 103

île des Pins, 87, 135

Inocarpus fagiferus. See Tahitian Chestnut

intensification: of agricultural systems, 8, 52, 113, 122, 129, 138, 140, 145, 178, 182, 198, 229, 232, 248, 263, 267, 285; causes of, 267, 282–283; cropping-cycle, 282–283; demography and, 267, 283; in island economies, 280–283; innovation and, 281; landesque capital, 52, 120, 139, 148–149, 249, 264, 264f, 282; limits to, 264, 283; of production, 263; of trade, 112. See also irrigation

interaction. See exchange, trade, voyaging

Intoh, M., 157, 159, 171–172

irrigation, 29, 52, 101, 120, 122, 129, 129f, 139–140, 139f, 149, 192, 214, 232–233, 244, 263–265, 263f, 267, 280, 232, 295n46. See also agriculture; intensification; taro; terracing

Irwin, G., 31, 61, 90, 113, 119, 206, 206f, 208, 242

island arcs, 39, 41–42

islands: biogeography, 46–48; climatic factors, 43–46, 45f; deforestation, 52; disturbance, 49–50, 52; drought, 45; economies, 317–21; ecosystems, 49–50; fauna, 47–48; geology, 38–41, 39f; high, 42; hot spot, 40–41; island-arc, 41–42; isolation and, 50; midplate, 40–41; nutrients on, 52; origins of, 38–41; socioecosystems, 50–54; types, 41f, 41–43; vegetation, 47, 51–52; vulnerability, 50–51

isolation, 50, 76, 187, 190, 211, 231, 287

Ivane Valley, 60, 63–64

Kafiavana Rockshelter site, 63, 63f

Kahekili, 213, 267

Kahikinui, 262–263, 265, 266, 266f, 277

Kahn, J., 199–200, 245–247

Kaho’olawe Island, 15

Kalani’ōpu’u, 213, 214f, 267

Kamaka Island, 230

Kamakau, Samuel, 13

Kamehameha, 15, 266f, 267

Kapingamarangi Island, 161–162

Kaua’i Island, 40–41, 259, 260t, 267, 280

kava, 126, 178, 183, 193, 245f, 272, 283f, 298n63

Kawelu, K., 34

Kayser, M., 8, 76, 92

Kealakekua Bay, 213, 214f

Kennett, D., 233

Kilu site, 61, 65–66, 119

Kinaston, R., 102, 241

King, Lt., 188, 213, 277

kingship, 213, 253, 258. See also archaic states, chiefship

kinship: Hawaiian, 258; Oceanic, 8; Proto Polynesian, 193; Proto Oceanic, 90, 105. See also descent groups, social organization

Kirch, P.V., 35, 53, 78, 81, 83, 97, 100, 104, 120–121, 124, 131, 134, 184–185, 186f, 191, 200, 211, 217, 220, 229, 244, 246, 249, 253, 256, 258, 260, 262, 265–266, 274, 280–281, 284

Kiribati archipelago, 2, 21, 45, 150, 153, 158, 300n24

Kirimati (Christmas) Island, 217

Kitchen Cave site, 230

Kohala Field System, 263, 263f

Kolombangara Island, 31, 119. 120, 121f, 281

Kolonui site, 258

Komgot site, 83, 93

Kon-Tiki, 26, 204. See also Heyerdahl, T.

Kosipe site, 63–64, 63f

Kosrae Island, 150, 153, 157–158, 160, 173, 178–183, 179f, 181f, 182f, 279, 285. See also Lelu site

Kreslo site, 97

Kroeber, A., 17

Kū, cult of, 265

Kuk site, 1–2, 68–69, 69f

kula, 103, 108, 113, 148, 295n53. See also exchange

Kuli’ou’ou Rockshelter site, 11, 24, 200

Kulturkreise, 19, 289n3

Kupona na Dari site, 60, 65

Kusaie Island. See Kosrae Island

Kwajalein Island, 158, 160

Ladefoged, T., 36, 263, 267, 280

Lagenaria gourd, 208

La Grande Terre. See New Caledonia

Lakeba Island, 142–143, 145–146

Lal-lo site, 79

Lamotrek Island, 160, 172

land management, 54, 182

landscape: archaeological, 28, 36, 68, 72, 165, 173, 182, 197, 217, 276; culturally altered, 2, 78, 144; degraded, 52, 145, 149; dynamic, 185, 277–280; habitation, 250; impact of agriculture on, 54, 69, 139, 263 281f, 282; linguistic, 91; managed, 100, 139, 144, 230, 281; Near Oceania, 75–77, 80; terraced, 167, 167f, 168f; transformation, 51, 63, 136, 139, 142, 145, 148, 217, 241, 278–279; transported, 100–101, 103, 225. See also ecosystems, intensification, socioecosystems

land snails, 46, 48, 51, 225, 229, 278–279, 300n27. See also mollusks

Lanutavake site, 258

Lapita: advent of, 78; ceramic series, 93–97; demography, 89–90; diet, 102–103; discovery of, 19, 78; exchange, 103–105; expansion, 89; geographic distribution, 81m; Homeland Project, 32, 32f, 61, 65, 74; horticulture, 100–101; houses, 98–100, 99f; “leapfrog” hypothesis, 83, 92, 119; mortuary practices, 86, 87f; origins, 78–81; plant remains, 101; Polynesian origins and, 186; pottery, 23, 78, 93–97; provinces, 81–90; radiocarbon dates for, 78, 81, 84, 86, 88; settlements, 97–100; site of, 23, 78, 86, 97; skeletal remains, 93; South Papuan, 89; subsistence economy, 100–103; tattooing, 97; Triple-I Model of, 80–81; U/Th dating of, 88; voyaging, 90

Lasigi site, 116–117

latte sites, 150, 159, 165–167, 165f, 166f

Lau Islands, 15, 88, 142, 146–148, 186, 294n21

Leach, F., 134, 162

Leach, H., 197

Leavesley, M., 67

Lebang Halika site, 71

Leenhardt, M., 297n43

Lelu site, 157, 160, 178–180, 181f

Le Maire, J., 12, 206f, 306n7

Lepofsky, D., 247–248, 281

Lesu site, 116

LiDAR, 36, 252, 253f, 264f

Lifou Island, 134–135

Lingenfelter, S.G., 172

linguistics, historical: 6–7; archaeology and, 6, 30, 90–91; dialect chains, 90–91; lexical reconstruction, 92; subgrouping models, 6–7. See also Austronesian languages; Non-Austronesian languages; Nuclear Micronesian; Oceanic languages; Papuan languages; Polynesians; Proto Oceanic; Proto Polynesian

Linton, R., 18–19

Lipo, C., 234

Liston, J., 159, 168

lithic technology, 54, 66, 77, 270, 280. See also adzes; axes; obsidian; stone tools

Lo’alo’a site, 265

Loka site, 244, 245f

Lolokoka site, 88, 89f

Lolmo site, 71, 77

Lomolomo site, 144, 144f

Long Island, 50

longue durée, 3

Lou Island, 117–118

Loyalty Islands, 32, 81, 86, 90, 130, 134–136, 139f. See also Maré Island

Luatuanu’u site, 197

Lum, K., 7–8, 92, 171

Lütke, F., 179f, 180

McArthur, N., 141, 276–277, 306n10

McCall, G., 237

McCoy, M.D., 175, 177

McCoy, P., 28, 84, 123, 234

McEldowney, H., 117

McKern, W.C., 19, 23, 254

Magapit site, 79

Mailu site, 108, 111–113, 148

Majuro Island, 158, 160, 163

Makaha Valley, O’ahu, 29

makatea islands, 41, 43, 50, 86, 135, 138, 150, 158, 195, 211, 217, 219, 220, 222–223, 231, 252, 258

Makira, 83, 92

Makué site, 84

Malaita Island, 84, 118–119, 122

Malden Island, 217

Malekula Island, 84, 124, 126

malaria, 8, 48–49, 72–73, 80, 98, 272, 274

Malinowski, B., 107–108, 113

Malo, D., 13, 213, 258

Maloelap Island, 158, 163, 163f

Malthus, T., 72

mana, 190, 193, 215, 286

Mangaasi: pottery, 33, 124, 125f, 143, 147, 297n38; site, 124

Mangaia Island, 13, 37, 47, 52–53, 200, 210, 211, 215, 217–224, 220f, 229, 231, 278f, 279, 281f. See also Tangatatau site

Mangareva Islands, 42, 47, 52, 190, 198, 200, 203, 205, 211–212, 215, 229–231, 230f, 234–235, 238, 278

mangroves, 47, 62, 70, 156

Manra Island, 217

Manu’a Islands, 88, 103, 184, 185f, 195, 250. See also To’aga site

Manus Islands, 32, 50, 61–62, 61f, 65, 67, 104, 116–117, 147

Maori, 15, 20, 34, 53, 188, 238, 240–244, 280. See also New Zealand

marae (malaqe), 21f, 30f, 190, 202, 216–217, 222, 229, 231–232, 246–249, 246f, 247f, 248f, 286, 286f. See also architecture, monumental

Marae Mahiatea site, 248, 248f

Marck, J., 92, 153, 161, 190, 193, 199, 260

Maré Island, 135, 138, 139f, 149

Marianas Islands, 13, 19, 23–24, 34, 150–151, 153–156, 159, 164–167, 171

Maric, T., 248–249

marine resources, 2, 43, 66, 98, 100, 236. See also fish; fishing

Marquesas Islands, 18, 26–28, 27f, 28f, 29f, 33, 146, 190, 198–199, 202, 202f, 203f, 205, 211–212, 221, 224–229, 234, 238, 249, 260. See also Hiva Oa Island; Nuku Hiva Island; Ua Huka Island

Marshall Islands, 34, 45, 158, 160, 163f

marsupials, 47, 64, 67, 292n16

Martinson, J.J., 7–8, 90, 92–93, 190

Martinsson-Wallin, H., 217, 250–251

Masse, B., 156, 159

Massim region, 89, 103, 107–108, 111–113, 115, 148, 284, 296n5

Matemkupkum site, 2, 60, 65, 66f

Matenbek site, 32, 67

Mateone site, 123

Matisoo-Smith, L., 93, 211, 240

Maui Island, 20f, 34, 44, 50, 213, 259, 262–263, 265–267, 266f, 277, 280

Maupiti Island, 245–246

Mayr, E., xvii, 9, 36, 276, 282, 286–287

megafauna, 64–65

megapodes, 53, 53f, 102–103, 135, 139

Melanesia: archaeology in, 30–32; defined, 4, 6m. See also Bismarck Archipelago; Fiji; Near Oceania; New Britain; New Caledonia; New Guinea; Solomon Islands; Vanuatu

Melekeok site, 159, 169

Métraux, A., 233, 236

Metroxylon. See sago

Meyer, O., 19

Micronesia: archaeology in, 19, 34, 130; atolls, 158, 162–164; biological variation, 7, 93; breadfruit, 43, 173; chiefship, 284; cultural sequences, 159–161; defined, 4, 5m, 6m, 289n4; drought, 45; kava, 178; languages, 90–92, 150–154; later prehistory, 164–173; matrilineal descent, 8; Polynesian Outliers in, 130, 161–162; pottery, 157–158; settlement of, 151–158. See also Caroline Islands; Chuuk Islands; Marianas Islands; Marshall Islands; Nuclear Micronesian; Palau Islands; Yap Islands

Micronesian route to Polynesia, 20–23, 22f

microorganisms, 48–49. See also disease; malaria

migration, 15, 26, 60, 130, 134, 143, 145, 186, 190, 212, 240, 273, 279. See also voyaging

Miscanthus, 47, 280. See also grasslands

Misisil site, 65

moa birds, 15, 16f, 53, 238, 240, 241, 241f

Mochong site, 165

model systems, islands as, xxii, 35, 287

Molle, G., 33, 200, 216, 224

mollusks, 48, 52, 101–102, 104, 122, 270. See also land snails

Moloka’i Island, 16, 38f, 200, 259, 260, 262f, 263, 264f, 280

Mo’orea Island, 28, 30f, 52, 199, 211, 245, 246–249, 247f, 291n14

Morgan, W., 165–166, 169, 174–175, 180

Moriori, 240, 301n12

Morongo Uta site, 232, 233f

motu, 43, 158, 161

Motu, 108

Motupore site, 31, 112, 148

Mountain, M.-J., 62, 64

Mu’a site, 254–256, 254f, 255f

Mulifanua site, 88, 97

Mulrooney, M., 237

Mussau Islands, 32, 49, 55, 61, 74–75, 77, 80, 83, 93, 96f, 98f, 101, 104, 115–117, 118f, 123, 147, 294n15, 295n55, 296n19. See also Talepakemalai site

Mwanihuki site, 122

mythology. See oral traditions

Naigani Island, 142–143, 298n52

Namu site, 134

Nandauwas site, 174–175, 174f, 175f, 177, 177f. See also Nan Madol site

Nanggu site (SZ-8), 84

Nan Madol site, 1–2, 157–158, 160t, 173–178, 174f, 176f, 182–183, 286. See also Pohnpei Island

National Science Foundation (NSF), 29–31, 34

Natunuku site, 142, 298n52

Navatu site, 23, 142–143, 145

navigation, 164, 171, 204, 208, 300n28. See also canoes; exchange; voyaging; watercraft

Near Oceania: arboriculture in, 71, 75; arrival of Austronesian-speakers in, 80; biogeography, 57–58; biological diversity, 76, 92; colonization of, 58–60; defined, 4, 62m; disease in, 48–49, 274; human landscape of, 75–77, 278; Lapita sites, 98–99, 157; linguistic diversity, 76, 90; malaria, 274; marsupial fauna, 65t; plant domestication in, 68, 71, 100; Pleistocene and, 50; population, 273–274; subsistence strategies, 75. See also Bismarck Archipelago, New Guinea, Sahul, Solomon Islands

Nebira site, 31, 111–112

Nendö Island, 31–32, 83–84, 122–123, 123f, 134, 157, 271

Nenega-Iti site, 230

Nenumbo site (RF-2), 84, 98–99, 99f

New Britain, 5, 8, 32, 42, 50, 58, 60–62, 65–67, 65t, 71, 75–77, 80, 83, 97, 104, 115–118, 291n7

New Caledonia, 4, 8, 23, 24f, 31, 33, 37, 40, 42, 47, 52–53, 53f, 78, 81, 86–87, 89, 91, 93, 93f, 97, 102–103, 135–141, 144, 147, 149, 161, 274, 276, 281–282, 285

New Georgia Islands, 83, 118–120, 120f, 129, 148–149, 294n16

New Guinea: archaeology in, 31–32; cultivation systems, 68, 278; environment, 63–64; fauna, 65, 65t, 112; geology, 40; Highlands, 62–65, 68–69, 73, 113–115; languages, 5, 9, 76, 90; Lapita in, 89; lowlands, 69–72; malaria in, 73, 274; Pleistocene sites, 62–65; settlement of, 60; sweet potato in, 114. See also Kuk site

New Hebrides. See Vanuatu Archipelago

New Ireland, 2, 8, 32, 42, 58, 60–62, 65–66, 66f, 77, 80, 104, 115–116, 119, 147, 292n16

New Zealand, 4, 12–13, 15, 16f, 19, 24–26, 34, 40, 52–53, 188, 190, 198, 199–200, 207–212, 209f, 238–244, 239m, 259, 282, 289n1, 291n27, 303n6

Ngerulmud Hill site, 159

Ngulu Island, 158, 171

Nissan Island, 32, 71, 77, 119, 147

Niuatoputapu Island, 43f, 88, 89f, 187, 194–195, 197–198, 253, 256–257, 257f, 302n26

Niutoua site, 197

Nombe site, 63–64

Non-Austronesian languages, 5–6, 76, 80, 92, 107, 118, 272–273, 293n3; geographic distribution, 6m; Trans–New Guinea Phylum, 6. See also Austronesian languages, Papuan languages

Norwegian Archaeological Expedition, 26, 26f, 232, 233, 233f, 303n16

Nuclear Micronesian languages, 153–154, 161

Nuku Hiva Island, 27, 202, 224, 226, 302n37. See also Ha’atuatua site; Vahangeku’a site

Nukuleka site, 88, 88f, 186, 212

Nukuoro Island, 130, 151, 158, 161–162, 162f, 297n31

O’ahu Island, 24, 29, 34, 40, 52, 200, 260, 261f, 262–263, 263f, 267, 280. See also Anahulu Valley, Bellows Dune site

obsidian: exchange, 67, 75, 83, 103–104, 112, 115, 117, 131, 146, 187, 270; sources, 76, 83, 104, 131, 291n7, 292n15; spear heads, 237, 237f, 280; tools, 77–78, 89f, 192, 237

Oceania: cultural variation in, 8–9; defined, 4; human biological variation in, 7–8; linguistic variation in, 6–7. See also Near Oceania; Remote Oceania

Oceanic languages: defined, 5; distribution, 6m, 90; Lapita and, 90–91; subgrouping, 90–91, 91f. See also Proto Oceanic

O’Connell, J., 58, 60

Oliver, D., 4, 101, 245, 249, 276, 306n8

Onemea site, 229

Open societies, 215, 217, 226, 229, 244–245, 249, 268, 285, 303n6

Oposisi site, 111–112

‘Opunohu Valley, Mo’orea, 28, 30f, 246–248, 247f, 302n33, 305n45

oral traditions: archaeology and, 33, 190; Hawaiian, 41, 258, 260, 265, 267; as “insider” history, 11; New Georgia, 120; Palauan, 170; Pohnpeian, 174, 177–178; Polynesian, 13, 15, 90, 205, 289n2; Polynesian Outlier, 130; Rapa Nui, 234; Society Island, 247, 249; Tikopian, 132–133; Tongan, 147, 197, 252–253, 255; ‘Uvean, 258; Vanuatu, 50, 126, 128; of volcanic eruptions, 50, 118, 129; of voyaging, 2. See also history

Orliac, C. and M., 33, 245

ornaments, 79, 128f, 134, 157, 159, 187, 203, 241, 260, 261f

‘Oro cult, 245–246, 246f 249, 286f

Orongo site, 237

Orrak Island, 156

Osborne, D., 151, 159, 167, 169–170

Ottino, P., 33

Ouétcho, A., 33

Outliers. See Polynesian Outliers

Ouvea Island, 130, 134–135

pa, 15, 242–243, 242f, 243f, 304n39. See also fortifications

Pā’ao, 205, 260

Pacific Plate, 39, 39f

Pacific rat (Rattus exulans), 51–52, 93, 198, 200, 211, 222, 235, 278, 280, 291n19

Paepaeotelea site, 255

Pago River Valley, 156

Palauan language, 5, 91, 153

Palau Islands, 34, 52, 150, 151, 153, 156–157, 159, 167–170, 167f, 168f, 170f, 171–172, 271, 280, 282

paleodemography, 276. See also demography; population

Pamwak Rockshelter site, 61, 61f, 65, 67, 69, 71

Panakiwuk site, 65, 69

Pandanus, 47, 56, 64–65, 71, 98, 101, 163–164, 167f, 192–193, 221

Papeno’o Valley, Tahiti, 249

Papua, 17, 89, 107, 111–112, 111f, 115, 148

Papuan languages, 4–6, 6m, 8–9, 76, 80, 90, 92–93, 100, 106, 188, 273, 284, 294n26. See also Non-Austronesian languages

Parry, J., 144–145, 298n54

Partula snails, 51

Pavlides, C., 60, 66

Pawley, A., 6, 80, 92, 99, 105, 153, 161, 188, 199, 285

pearl shell, 102, 160–161, 203, 204f, 211, 221, 224, 226, 229–231, 233, 261f. See also fishhooks; ornaments

Peoples, J.G., 178, 182–183

Petchy, F., 154, 186

Petersen, G., 173

petroglyphs, 136, 235f

Peva site, 232

Phalanger sp., 67

Philippine Islands, 79

Phoenix Islands, 217

phylogenetic model, 35, 188, 191, 271–272, 301n10. See also phyletic unit

pigeon-snaring mounds, 250, 253, 256

pigs, 35, 67, 77, 80, 101, 113–115, 128, 192, 202, 221–222, 262, 270, 282, 293n27

Pi’ilanihale site, 265

Pitcairn Island, 29, 211, 231, 306n4, 307n13

Plasmodium spp., 48–49, 72, 274. See also malaria

Pleistocene: in Near Oceania, 4, 8–9, 58, 62–67, 75; sea levels, 50, 57, 58f, 119, 158; voyaging, 60–62; watercraft, 60, 270

Poha Cave, 121

Pohnpei Island, 1, 42, 150, 153, 157–160, 160t, 173–178, 183, 279, 285. See also Nan Madol site

political economy, 214, 268, 280, 284–285, 277–280. See also chiefdoms; social organization; surplus; tribute

pollen: analysis in Pacific, 52; cores, 52; as evidence for human settlement, 176–77, 230; vegetation change and, 60, 72, 125, 172–73, 271, 338n9, 349n24

polygenesis, 91, 130, 136, 143. See also ethnogenesis

Polynesia: Ancestral, 191–194; biological variation in, 20, 92, 189–190; contact with Americas, 26, 208–210; archaeology in, 19–20, 24–28; cultural sequences, 25–28, 194–198; defined, 4; French, 32–33, 215; interaction spheres in, 210–211; languages, 188–189, 189f; origins, 18, 21–22, 22f, 185–188; as phyletic unit, 188–191; settlement of, 28, 29f, 198–200; voyaging in, 203–208. See also Eastern Polynesia; Polynesian Outliers; Western Polynesia

Polynesian Outliers, 130–134, 161–162, 205, 297n31. See also Anuta Island; Kapingamarangi Island; Nukuoro Island; Ouvea Island; Rennell Island; Tikopia Island

Polynesian Society, 15

Ponamla site, 126

Ponape. See Pohnpei Island

pondfields. See irrigation

population: agricultural intensification and, 182, 226, 263, 282–283; effect of disease on, 72–73; Fijian, 145; growth rates, 89, 274–275, 306n4; Hawaiian, 259, 260t, 262–263, 267, 277, 305n53, 306n7; high-density, 114, 217, 228–229, 244, 275; intrusion, 143, 148; Kosrae, 179–180, 182f; Lapita, 81, 89, 102, 130; malaria and, 72–73, 274; Mangaian, 217, 221, 223; Marquesan, 226, 306n12; Melanesian, 277; Near Oceania, 66, 72–73; New Caledonia, 136, 139–141, 276–277; New Guinea Highlands, 73, 114; New Zealand, 240–242, 306n2; Paluan, 169; Pohnpei, 173; “pressure,” 90, 275; Rapa Nui, 235, 279, 304n27; Tahiti, 245, 306n8; Tikopia, 133, 306n5; Samoan, 277, 306n10, 306n11; Tongan, 252; warfare and, 145–146, 228–229, 242–243. See also demography

pottery: anthropomorphic faces on, 83, 96, 96f; Balabio style, 136; Bismarck Archipelago, 77; dentate-stamped, 77–78, 78f, 81, 83–84, 87, 89, 94–95, 105, 115–116, 134, 136, 143, 147–148, 187; exchange of, 95; fingernail-impressed, 116; firing of, 93, 94f; impressed, 89, 117, 154–155; incised, 83, 87, 94, 113, 116–117, 116f, 124, 126, 131, 134, 136, 142–143, 135, 147, 155, 157; lack of in Pacific, 17; Marianas Plain Ware, 159; Marianas Red Ware, 154–155; Oundjo style, 136, 137f, 298n47; paddle-impressed, 87, 143f, 148, 297n45; plain ware, 77, 79, 94, 97–98, 113, 116, 122–123, 126, 143, 157–158, 192, 224; Plum style, 136, 137f; Polynesian Plain Ware, 184–185, 187f, 197; Potanéan ware, 136, 137f; Puen ware, 136, 137f; shell-impressed, 136; tempers in, 93, 95, 103, 155, 197, 302n37. See also Lapita; Mangaasi

Poulsen, J., 31, 186

power: chiefly, 129, 178, 214, 226, 256; economic, 237, 248–249, 267–268; ideological, 245, 249, 268; military, 223, 229, 245, 267–268; political, 172, 177–178, 215, 246, 252; sources of, 215; spiritual, 190, 215. See also social organization

Proto Central-Pacific language, 188

Proto Oceanic, 80: ancestor terms, 96, 105; dialect chain, 91, 153, 294n27; horticultural terms, 101; houses, 99–100; kinship terms, 90, 105, 285; social status terms, 90, 105, 285; subgrouping, 91f, 294n27. See also Oceanic languages

Proto Polynesian, 188, 189f, 193–194, 199, 212

Pueraria lobata, 68–69, 71, 113

Pukapuka Island, 215

Pulemelei site, 250–251, 251f

Puluwat Island, 170

Pu’u Ali’i dune site, 25f

Pu’ukoholā site, 266f

Quintus, S., 250

radiocarbon dating: advances in, 198–199, 224; AMS, 35, 78, 199–200, 294n15; archaeology and, 23–25, 30; Bayesian calibration, 35, 77, 81, 84, 143, 293n5; “chronometric hygiene”, 199, 302n32; development of, 23; Lapita, 81, 84; See also Uranium/Thorium dating

Ra’iatea Island, 21f, 245–246, 246f, 249. See also Taputapuātea site

Rainbird, P., 35, 154, 157, 159, 183

rainfall, 38, 45–46, 173, 217, 263, 265. See also drought

Ra’ivavae Island, 26, 231–232

Rallu, J.-C., 276

ranked societies, 105, 214, 267. See also chiefdoms; social organization

Rano Raraku quarry site, 26, 26f, 235–237, 235f, 304n28

Rapa Island (Rapa Iti), 19, 26, 232–233, 233f

Rapa Nui (Easter Island), 1, 14f, 16–17, 17f, 26, 26f, 48, 52–53, 188, 190, 200, 205, 207–208, 212, 215, 233–238, 278–280, 282–283, 286

rats, 35, 47, 51–52, 66, 67, 163, 221–222, 240. See also Pacific rat

Rattus exulans. See Pacific Rat

Rechtman, R., 145, 148

redistribution, 285. See also social organization

Reid, L., 153

religion, 16, 120, 190, 193, 237, 248, 252. See also gods, marae

Remote Oceania: colonization of, 19, 46, 75, 89, 100, 143, 205–206, 270; defined, 4–5, 5m; demographic history, 274–275; disease in, 48–49; ecosystems, 278; languages, 90–91; natural resources, 47, 100; rats in, 93. See also Lapita

Rennell Island, 130

reptiles, 47. See also geckos; iguana

Retoka burial site, 126–128, 127f

Rimatara Island, 231–232

Ritidian site, 154–155, 155f

Rivers, W.H.R., 17, 21, 107, 272, 289n2

Roe, D., 71, 121–122

Rolett, B., 52, 200, 202, 225–226

rongorongo, 237–238

Rosendahl, P.H., 120

Ross, M., 6, 92, 115, 153–154, 170

Rossel Island, 113

Rotuma Island, 130, 142

Routledge, K.S., 16–17, 17f

Roviana Lagoon, 97, 119–120

Roy Mata, 33, 126–128, 134, 149

Rurutu Island, 231–232, 232f

sacrifice. See human sacrifice.

sago palm, 47, 56, 66, 70, 98, 108, 193; flour of, 97, 108, 112

Sahlins, M., 8, 27, 35, 190, 214–215, 249, 258, 266–267, 282, 284, 399n66, 303n6

Sahul, 57–59, 57m, 60–61, 64–65, 72, 75–76, 270. See also Near Oceania

Samoa Islands, 15, 22, 28–28, 40, 88–89, 97, 103, 132, 143, 147, 178, 184–188, 185f, 191f, 192f, 195, 205, 211–212, 221, 249–251, 256, 277. See also Manu’a Islands; Mulifanua site; Savai’i Island; ‘Upolu Island

Sand, C., 33, 97, 134–138, 140–141, 276

Santa Ana Island, 4, 31, 122, 148, 157

Santa Cruz Islands, 31, 49, 72, 83, 87–88, 103, 119, 122–124, 123f, 134, 148, 158, 186, 274, 294n29. See also Nendö Island, Reef Islands

Sapir, E., 19

Sapwtakai site, 178, 178f

Sasi site, 117–118

Saudeleur dynasty, 174–175, 177–178, 183, 300n22

Savai’i Island, 184, 195, 250, 250f, 251f, 277

sawei, 170–173

Scaglion, R., 284

seabirds, 47–48, 52–53, 221, 223, 230, 235

seafaring. See canoes; voyaging

sea levels, 50, 58f; atolls and, 158; mid-Holocene high stand, 50, 158; Pleistocene, 50, 58, 58f, 119, 292n4

Seligman, C.G., 17, 107, 113

Sepik-Ramu Region (New Guinea), 70–71, 115, 292n17

Serjeantson, S., 7

settlement pattern archaeology, 28–29, 30f

sharks, 101–102, 132; teeth of, 185

Sharp, A., 204

Sharp, W., 248, 265

shell tools, 71–72. See also adzes, fishhooks

Sheppard, P., 83–84, 92, 119–120

shifting cultivation, 47f, 51–52, 101, 114, 129, 139, 145, 149, 168, 172, 192, 220, 246, 248, 278, 307n15. See also agriculture; horticulture

Shortland Islands, 119

Shutler, R., Jr., 23, 24f, 78, 124, 135, 290n14

Siassi Islands, 117, 148, 284

Sigatoka River Valley, Fiji, 52, 94f, 142, 144–145

Sigatoka dune site, 142–143, 143f

Sinapupu site, 31f

Sinoto, Y.H., 25, 25f, 27–28, 28f, 29f, 157, 184, 198–199, 202–203, 208, 211

Skjølsvold, A., 26

Smart, C., 31

Smith, S.P., 15, 19

social organization: Ancestral Oceanic, 105–106; Ancestral Polynesian, 193; on atolls, 164; Austronesian, 96; competitive involution, 146, 228; “founder ideology”, 96, 105; “house societies,” 96–97; Lapita, 90, 96–97, 105–106; Polynesian, 21; Proto Oceanic, 294n22; ranking, 90, 105. See also ancestor worship; “big man” societies; chiefdoms; chiefship; descent groups; heterarchy; hierarchy; power; ranked societies; sociopolitical transformation

social production, 149, 282. See also intensification

social stratification, 140, 182, 193, 215–216, 250, 267. See also chiefship, hierarchy

Society Islands, 19, 27–28, 33, 35, 52, 185, 198–199, 202, 205, 208, 211–212, 215, 240, 245–249, 286, 286f. See also Mo’orea Island; Ra’iatea Island; Tahiti Island

socioecosystems, 50–54

sociopolitical transformation, 148–149, 183, 244, 268. See also social organization

Solomon Islands, 31, 39, 47, 157; archaeology, 81, 83, 117, 118–124; biological diversity, 272; disease, 49; linguistic diversity, 91–92

solstice observation, 231

South America, 26, 45, 204, 208–210, 212, 236. See also sweet potato

Southeast Asia, island, 67, 78–79, 91

Southeast Solomon Islands Culture History Program (SSICHP), 30–31, 31f, 84, 122–123, 130, 134, 290n22

Southern Lapita, 86–87

Southern Oscillation. See El Niño–Southern Oscillation

South Papuan Lapita, 89

Spanish exploration of the Pacific, 3, 12, 114, 164, 208

Specht, J., 31, 60, 77, 83

specialization: craft, 228–229, 283, 306n65; economic, 173, 281, 283; trade, 112, 115, 117. See also intensification

Spoehr, A., 23–24, 29, 30, 151, 154–155, 159, 165, 290n16

Spondylus shell, 104, 128, 160

Spriggs, M., 52, 61, 66, 71–72, 76, 118–119, 124, 126, 128–129, 134, 199, 277, 284

SSICHP. See Southeast Solomon Islands Culture History Program

stable isotopes, 35, 52, 102, 145–146, 241

Stannard, D., 277

statues: Easter Island, 26, 26f, 234, 235–237, 235f, 236f; Marquesan, 226, 228f; Palauan, 169, 169f; Ra’ivavae, 232. See also architecture; Rapa Nui

status rivalry, 215, 268, 284–285. See also social organization

Steadman, D., 53, 217, 234

Stevenson, C., 236

stilt-houses, 98, 98f

Stokes, J.F.G., 15–16, 18f, 19, 303n16

stone tools, 56f, 63f, 66f, 75, 211, 256. See also adzes; axes; lithic technology; obsidian

Storey, A., 210

Su’ena site, 122

sugarcane, 68, 75, 103, 221, 265

Suggs, R.C., 26–27, 27f, 199, 224, 226, 228

Sulawesi, 79

Summerhayes, G., 64, 71, 81

Sunda, 57f

surplus, 129, 140, 214, 264, 267, 282–282, 285. See also feasts; first fruits; intensification; tribute

Swadling, P., 70–71, 115

swamp taro. See taro.

sweet potato: archaeological evidence for, 208–210; in Hawai’i, 208, 265; in New Guinea Highlands, 114; in New Zealand, 208, 212, 238, 241, 243, 306; in Rapa Nui, 208, 236, 283; South American origin, 208; “tripartite hypothesis”, 208

swidden gardening. See shifting cultivation

Sylviornis neocaledoniae, 53, 53f, 102–103, 135

Ta’a’oa site, 226, 227f

Taga, House of, 165–167, 166f

Taha’a Island, 245

Tahitian Chestnut, 68, 100, 192, 219, 221, 247–248

Tahiti Island, 2, 12, 12f, 15, 27, 33, 42, 51, 205, 207, 215, 224, 245–249, 249f, 260, 286f. See also Society Islands

Tahuata Island, 200, 225, 226f. See also Hanamiai site

Taipivai Valley, Marquesas, 226, 227f. See also Vahangeku’a site

Taiwan Island, 79, 93

Takayama, J., 157, 161

Talepakemalai site (ECA), 74, 75f, 83, 83f, 84f, 93, 98, 98f, 101–102, 104, 104f, 295n44

Tamuararai site, 83

Tanga Islands, 116

Tangarutu Cave site, 233

Tangatatau Rockshelter site (MAN-44), 53, 200, 204f, 205f, 208, 211, 220–222, 221f, 222f, 291n25

Tapony site, 165f

Taputapuātea site, 246, 246f, 249

Tarague Beach site, 154

taro: cultivation, 22, 68–69, 71, 75, 80, 100, 113, 144, 172–173, 192, 217, 219, 220–222, 229, 250, 265; domestication, 66, 68; giant swamp taro, 43, 56, 144, 163, 179; ideology and, 223, 223f; irrigation, 52, 129, 139, 139f, 232–233, 244, 249, 260t, 279, 281f, 282; microfossil evidence for, 103; Proto Oceanic word for, 80, 294n10; wild, 66. See also agriculture; Alocasia macrorrhiza; Cyrtosperma chamissonis; irrigation

Tasman, A., 12, 238, 306n7

Tasmania, 58

Tatangamatau site, 251

tattooing, 78, 97, 203, 228–229, 240, 283, 295n36

Ta’u Island, 184

Taumako Island, 32, 123, 130, 134, 148

Tautua site, 222, 223f

Tavai site (FU-11), 244

Taveuni Island, 142, 144

Te Ana Tavatava site, 134

Temei site, 161

Temotu Province. See Nendö, Santa Cruz Islands, Reef Islands, Taumako, Tikopia

temples, 16–17, 26–27, 30f, 35, 190–191, 213–214, 217, 222–223, 226, 232, 235–237, 236f, 246, 246f, 248, 249, 252, 258, 265, 266f, 286, 286f, 301n16, 304n26. See also ahu, heiau, marae

Teouma site, 33, 84–86, 87f, 93, 96, 102–103, 124, 294n18

Terebra-shell adzes, 117, 118f, 123–124, 133f, 159–161, 163, 300n21. See also adzes, shell

terracing, 138, 140–141, 149, 167, 219, 220, 247–248, 250, 295n46. See also irrigation

Terrell, J., 272

Tetepare Island, 121

Thilenius, G., 17, 130, 164

Thompson, L.M., 19, 150, 165–166

Tikopia Island, 31f, 42, 122–124, 130–134, 147–148, 157, 214–215, 275, 277, 279, 297n32

Tinian Island, 154, 165, 167, 299n10

Tiwaka site, 140

To’aga site, 88

Tokelau Islands, 190, 215

Tol Island, 159

Tonga Islands, 18, 22, 39, 88, 130, 142, 146–147; archaic state in, 197, 214 245, 251–258; archaeology, 19, 186, 194; Lapita, 81, 88–89, 95, 102, 188, 211–212, 252–258; maritime empire, 252–258; settlement of, 186. See also Ha’apai Islands; Niuatoputapu Island; Tongatapu Island

Tongariki site, 236, 236f

Tongatapu Island, 2, 31, 35, 88, 93, 186, 194–195, 197, 252–256, 253f, 254f, 255f

Torrence, R., 77

tortoises, terrestrial, 102–103

Totoya Island, 146

trade, 107–113, 115, 120–121, 148, 161, 271, 296n11, 298n64. See also exchange; interaction; voyaging

transported landscapes, 100–101, 103, 225

Trask, H.-K., 34

tree crops. See arboriculture; breadfruit; Canarium almond; coconut; Tahitian Chestnut

tribute, 171–172, 174, 177, 180, 214–215, 245, 252–253, 255, 255f, 265–266, 282. See also first fruits

Tridacna-shell adzes, 43, 71, 75, 89f, 117, 124, 126, 133f, 134, 155, 156f, 157, 159–162, 192, 231, See also adzes, shell

Triple-I model, 80–81, 93

Trochus shell, fishhooks of, 71, 75, 79, 102, 102f, 104, 122, 134

Tromp, M., 103

Truk. See Chuuk Islands

Tuamotu Archipelago, 43, 215–217

Tubuai Island, 231–232, 303n16

Tu’i Tonga, 252–256, 255f, 297n32

tuna, 48, 77

Tupaia, 3, 271

Turbo shell fishhooks, 66, 89f, 132f, 161, 185, 192f, 233

turtles, 48, 94, 101–102, 177, 208, 209f, 225, 249

Tutuila Island, 42, 195, 251

Tuvalu Archipelago, 45, 150, 161–162

Ua Huka Island, 27, 28f, 199–200, 202f, 228f, 302n37

Ua Pou Island, 224f

Uattamdi Rockshelter site, 79

Uchularois site, 156

Ueki, T., 182

Uki Island, 122

Ulawa Island, 31, 122

Uliamoa site, 251f

Ulithi Island, 172

Ulong site, 156

Unai Bapot site, 154–155, 155f

United States Exploring Expedition, 13

‘Upolu Island, 97, 184, 191f, 192, 195, 197, 250, 277, 301n2. See also Mulifanua site; Samoa Islands

Uranium/Thorium (U/Th) dating, 35, 177, 180, 248, 265

Ureia site, 200

Utrōk Island, 158, 160–161

Utupua Island, 122, 124, 134, 271

‘Uvea Island, 2, 33, 88, 128, 130, 132, 134, 185, 187–188, 190, 194–195, 198, 211, 215, 253, 256–258

Vahangeku’a site, 226, 227f

Vaito’otia-Fa’ahia site, 202, 208

Vaitupu Island, 161

Valentin, F., 33, 93, 102, 253, 258

Vanderwal, R., 112

Vanikoro Island, 122, 124

Vanimo coast (New Guinea), 71

Van Tilburg, J., 16, 170, 234, 235f

Vanuatu Archipelago, 33, 39, 84, 91, 124–134, 143–144, 147–148, 153–154, 158, 161, 186, 193, 274

Vao site, 84

Vargas, P., 53, 200, 234

Vatuluma Posovi site, 121–122

Vatuluma Tavuro site, 121

Vava’u Islands, 88, 186, 195, 253

Vayda, A. 242, 287

vegetation: atoll, 158, 163; change, 52, 69, 129, 146, 157, 160, 219, 230, 234, 246, 274, 278–279; Pacific island, 47. See also fernlands; grasslands; islands; pollen

Vérin, P. 32, 231

Vitaria site, 231–232, 232f

Viti Levu Island, 23, 47, 52, 90, 142, 144f, 146, 279–280

volcanic eruptions: in Hawai’i, 50; Kuwae eruption, 50; Witori eruption, 76–77, 296n12

Von Haast, J., 15, 16f, 240, 289n1

voyaging, 269–271; Caroline Islands, 164, 172; Eastern Polynesian, 190, 210; experimental, 302n35; interisland, 190–191, 221; long-distance, 231, 256, 260, 301n15; oral traditions of, 260; Pleistocene, 60–62; Polynesian, 203–208; suicide, 275; survival sailing strategy, 206, 206f; “voyaging nursery,” 61–62, 206. See also canoes; exchange; migration; navigation; watercraft

Vunda site, 23, 142, 145

Wadra, F., 33

Wahgi Valley, 68–69. See also Kuk site

Wahome, E.W., 117

Waiahukini site, 260

Wairarapa, 240

Wairau Bar site, 24, 240–241

waisted blades, 55–56, 56f

Wakaya Island, 142, 144–145

wallaby. See marsupials

Wallace, A.R., 56

Wallacea, 56, 57m, 58, 75

Wallin, P., 217, 246, 248

Wallis Islands. See Alofi Island; Futuna Island; ‘Uvea Island

Wanelek site, 71

warfare, 112, 136, 138, 145–146, 159, 172, 183, 198, 221–222, 229, 236–237, 242–244, 249, 251, 268, 283. See also fortifications

Wari Island, 113

watercraft, 8, 60–61, 67, 90, 208, 270. See also canoes; navigation; voyaging

Watom Island, 19, 31–32, 116–118, 147, 296n14

Watson, J., 114

Weisler, M., 35, 88, 158, 160, 163, 186, 190, 200, 211, 221, 231

Western Lapita, 81, 84–86, 88

Western Micronesia, 5, 91, 93, 151, 154, 157, 161, 164–173

Western Polynesia, 19, 74, 88, 99, 130, 132–134, 142, 161, 178, 185, 187, 189–191, 194–198, 207, 211–212

White, J.P., 31, 62, 63f, 66

Wickler, S., 119

Wilkes, C., 13

Williams, F.E., 107

Williamson, R.W., 268

Willaumez Peninsula, 60, 77, 83, 104, 291n7

W-K2 eruption, 76–77, 296n12

Woleai Island, 160, 172

Wozniak, J., 236

X-ray fluorescence, 35, 211

Yams (Dioscorea spp.), 56, 64, 69, 100, 103, 113, 140, 171, 173–174, 192, 210, 219, 249, 283f

Yanuca site, 142–143

Yapese Empire, 170–172

Yapese language, 153–154, 170, 299n6

Yap Islands, 52, 150–151, 154, 157, 159, 170–173, 171f

Yen, D.E., 29, 31, 69, 120, 122–123, 131, 197, 208, 210, 236, 277, 281

Yombon site, 60, 65–66, 77





