Anthropology as
Cultural Critique
AN EXPERIMENTAL MOMENT
IN THE HUMAN SCIENCES
George E. Marcus and Michael M. J. Fischer




IGOROT MAN: Brought from the Philippines for
exhibition at the 1904 Saint Louis World's Fair.
  Marcus, G. E. & M. M. J. Fischer.
  Anthropology as cultural critique. Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press, 1986.

   GN345       .M37                    1986




     _                  hMMMMI   .   Ml . ».*....__



Marcus, G. E. & M. M. J. Fischer.
Anthropology as cultural critique. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986.

 GN345       .M37                    1986
Anthropology as
Cultural Critique
Anthropology as
Cultural Critique
AN EXPERIMENTAL MOMENT
IN THE HUMAN SCIENCES


George E. Marcus and Michael M. ). Fischer




             Humanities Library
         New CoJIeoa of California


I   UK UNIVERSITY 01    <   Hit   AGO PR1 SS
(UI(,A(.() AND OMiON
                  I
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 1986 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Published         1986
Printed in the United States of America

99 98 97 96 95 94                                 10 9 8 7


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Marcus, George E.
  Anthropology as cultural critique.

      Bibliography: p.                                    lil
      Includes index.
      1.   Ethnology.    I.   Fischer, Michael M. J.,   1946-
II.    Title.
GN345.M37           1986            306        85-20686

ISBN 0-226-50449-2 (pbk.)
    Contents




    Preface                                                     vii


    Introduction                                                    i



i   A Crisis of Representation in the Human Sciences                7

2   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology                   17

3   Conveying Other Cultural Experience: The Person,
        and Emotions
    Self,                                                       4 s

4   Taking Account of World Historical Political Economy:
    Knowable Communities in Larger Systems                      77

5   The Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique   1   1   1




6   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique
    in   Anthropology                                       1
                                                                \7

    A Concluding Note                                       165

    Appendix                                                " ,l        '




                                                                ~v
    Notes                                                   I
                                                                        '




    References

    Index                                                   *oi
        Preface




In the United States and elsewhere, recent decades have witnessed a
profound challenge to the purpose and styles of theory that have
guided the social sciences since their late nineteenth-centurv origins as
professional academic disciplines. Widespread perceptions of a radi-
cally changing world order have fueled this challenge and undermined
confidence in the adequacy of our means to describe social reality, 00
which any generalizing social science must be based. Thus, in every
contemporary field whose subject is society, there are either attempts
at reorienting the field in distinctly  new directions or efforts at s\n-
thesizing       new challenges to theory with established programs tor
research.
   These debates are not new to the Western intellectual tradition                —
they are, in effect, a replaying of the hopes for a natural science ol
society, challenged by theories of interpretation that sav people must
be treated differently from nature. But their historical expression at
the    moment is both fresh and revealing of the current conditions ol
knowledge, shaped by particular              political,    technological, and eco
nomic events. At the broadest level, the contemporary debate is about
how an emergent postmodern world is to be represented .is .111 objeel
for social      thought in its various contemporary disciplinary matures
tations.
      Discussions of current intellectual trends can DC weightless and 1111
convincing if they do not concern themselves with the situations ol
particular disciplines. For us, developments in Lontempor.it \ an
thropology reflect the central problem ol representing social tealitv in
a rapidlychanging world. Within anthropology, ethnographic field
work and writing have become the most lively CUITeni atena of the
oretical       discussion and innovation.      Ethnography's concern        is   with
description,      and present   efforts to   make ethnogt aplm        writing    mOR
sensitive to its broader political, historical, and philosophical implies
tions place anthropology at        tin-   vortex   «>t   the debate iboui tin prob

lem of representing souetv in <.onletnpoi.it \ disguises We luluw
that our examination of lotial and cultural Mthropology'l 'Vspeti
mental moment/' as v%e call it, reveals mud) about tins general mtel
lectual trend as well.


         VII
     viii   •    Preface


  This essay, then, in substance is an effort at clarifying the present
situation of cultural and social anthropology. Although including his-
torical reviews of past work,   it is   not intended to be a history of an-
thropology. Although referring to many of our colleagues, it is not
intended to be a complete bibliographic survey. We apologize to those
we have not cited and ask the indulgence of those we have.
  We will focus on developments in American anthropology, but
much of what we have to say applies as well to British anthropology
and perhaps more widely. During the 1950s and 1960s, British an-
thropology was more disciplined by a research paradigm than was
American anthropology, and it had what appeared to be a more
rigorous notion of what an ethnographic description and analysis of
another culture should be.     It had great prestige and influence on

American anthropology, and in most major graduate schools, there
was a merging of the two traditions. The vitality of the British tradi-
tion expended itself in the 1960s, just as the current experimental peri-
od was emerging. The direction of influence today has reversed: the
output of American cultural anthropology significantly guides British
efforts. The ascendant American tradition, meanwhile, is being strong-
ly influenced by the third major tradition of modern anthropology, the

French. In this regard, some of the experimental moves in contempo-
rary American anthropological writing would appear familiar to
French anthropologists, as reminiscent of an exciting period of inno-
vation there during the interwar years (see Clifford 1981). Our focus
on the American situation, thus, reflects a historical development in
which anthropology in the United States seems to be synthesizing the
three national traditions.
  This is, moreover, a time when heightened awareness of global in-
terdependence challenges the idea of distinct national traditions          in

scholarship         Such traditions remain subtly important, but in-
                itself.

creasingly, they are operating less as barriers to communication and
interaction. New anthropologies in Brazil, India, Israel, Japan, and
Mexico, among other countries, are developing by a mix of locally
informed issues of concern and of classic issues of Western social theo-
ry (Gerholm and Hannerz 1982). The fact of multiple distinct an-
thropologies opens up for the      first   time the   realistic possibility of
multiple cross-cultural readerships for anthropological works, which
should eventually have a profound effect on the way that they are
conceived and written in the United States and Europe.
   In discussing this essay with various colleagues, we have noticed a
persistent tendency to drag all discussions back to the classic works of
       ix     •   Preface


the first generations of modern fieldworkers. In contrast, our purpose
in this essay is to
                  help forge a useful discourse about contemporary
and future work. Quibbles that authors of pioneering descriptive ac-
counts of other cultures such as E. E. Evans-Pntchard, Bronislaw Mal-
inowski, Franz Boas, or Gregory Bateson already "said something like
that," or that experimentation in ethnographic writing              is   as old as
anthropology are not helpful if they do not focus on bow we can do
better.   A fortiori, the fad of excoriating the sins of our ancestors          is

wearisome and impotent, if it does not lead to better contemporary
works.
     Rereading and reanalyzing the classics are indeed a venerable an-
thropological exercise that hones analytic skills and often leads to new
insights. And yet, we argue, it is not only our ancestors who wrote
well. Indeed,  many of our contemporary colleagues with a keen crit-
ical sense of their discipline's past have done even better. Manv more

have written extremely interesting, if often flawed, accounts <>t their
subjects.     It is   for their engaging provocation that   we term them "ex-
periments," and for drawing attention to their flaws that we ask indul-
gence: the flaws are often signs of mtellectualb interesting problems,
which represent a struggle to reformulate old questions and raise new
issues.
   For our students and the public, we hope this essa) will mak<
temporary anthropological writing seem less exotic and will suggest
new contexts of relevance for it. For our colleagues, we hope to ampli-
fy a discourse that we feel is very much m the air. We do not set
ourselves as proclaiming a manifesto or as envisioning I new dire*
tion; we certainly advocate no particular "ism" or "k." Rather, our
only brief is to take a "reading" of what is alre.ub happening, distill
ing the corridor discussions that inform the reception and production
of ethnographies today into a series of articulate issues.
     "What is happening" seems to us to be a pregnant moment in
which every individual pro|ect of ethnographic reseat Ji and writing is
potentially an experiment. ( ollectively, these are m the prOOSSI o( o
constructing the edifices of aulhropologual theors Itom the bottom
up, by exploringnew ways to fulfill the promises on which modem
anthropology was bunded: to otter worthwhile and interesting cri
tiqUCS Of our         own Society; tO enlighten us about othei human DOS
nihilities,   engendering an awareness we ait nuteb one pattern
                                                 that

among m.iin; to make                normalK unexamined assiunp
                                accessible the
oons by which we operate and through which we encounta members
ot   other cultures. AnthrODOlog)        is   not the mindless collection ol the
       x    •   Preface


exotic, but the use of cultural richness for self-reflection    and self-
growth. To accomplish this in the modern world of increased interde-
pendence among societies and mutual awareness among cultures re-
quires     new styles of sensibility and of writing. Such exploration in
anthropology lies in the move from a simple interest in the description
of cultural others to a more balanced purpose of cultural critique
which plays off other cultural realities against our own in order to gain
a more adequate knowledge of them all.
     A period of experimentation is characterized by eclecticism, the
play of ideas free of authoritative paradigms, 1 critical and reflexive
views of subject matter, openness to diverse influences embracing
whatever seems to work in practice, and tolerance of uncertainty
about a field's direction and of incompleteness in some of its projects.
Such periods entail risks of possible blind alleys as well as great poten-
tials, and they are by nature relatively ephemeral and transitional be-

tween periods of more settled, paradigm-dominated styles of research.
Taking a reading of such a current trend in anthropology is precisely
the one job that experimental projects do not do for themselves    — it is

almost antithetical to them    —
                               and it is in initiating some discussion
about what is going on in a period that celebrates its lack of definition
that we hope to make a contribution.
   Many discussions are appearing which intend to take the pulse of
anthropology or to analyze a perceived malaise (see, for example,
Ortner 1984; Shankman, 1984; Sperber, 198Z; and MacCannell and
MacCannell, 1982), and these are indeed a register that some sort of
transition is occurring. We differ from most such discussions in the
following way. They tend to be framed thoroughly within a paradig-
matic style of thinking about knowledge, in which research is, or
should be, conducted under a unifying theoretical system. That is, they
seek to defend an old paradigm or assert a new one, or else, more
noncommittally, they view the current situation as a clash of alter-
native paradigms. For instance, in anthropology, the situation is often
pictured as the challenge of newer, interpretive 2 programs of research
to reigning positivist 3 ones. Our perspective is that at the current mo-
ment, interpretive perspectives, although still "anti-establishment" in
ethos, are as much an accepted and understood part of the contempo-
rary discourse as are positivist perspectives. To still pose one paradigm
against the other is to miss the essential characteristic of the moment
as   an exhaustion with a paradigmatic style of discourse altogether.
Indeed, it was precisely the challenge of interpretive perspectives, now
thoroughly conventionalized in disciplinary debates, that in part led to
          xi    •   Preface


a suspicion of all totalizing styles of knowledge, including interpretive
ones themselves. Thus, while contemporary discussions of the state of
anthropology are certainly addressing cogent issues, they usuallv
speak as advocates from within one established tradition or another,
and consequently lack a more detached perspective on the character of
current anthropological discourse itself. We have tried to position our-
selves differently, to avoid a rhetoric of a clash of paradigms in order
to confront more directly the extreme fragmentation of research in-
terests and the theoretical eclecticism of the best work, which seem to
us to be the most compelling traits of anthropology today.
     We fully recognize also that much of the uncertainty in contempo-
rary anthropology and other related disciplines could be significantly
attributed to an institutional or professional crisis which parallels the
intellectual crisis that we perceive. There is a marked decline of gov-
ernment interest in, and support for, research in a number of fields,
including anthropology. Enrollments have been declining nationally in
undergraduate programs of anthropology, among other disciplines of
the social sciences           and humanities; the number of teaching-research
positions in universities has radically decreased; graduate program*
have declined in number, as potential scholars seek more secure pro
fessions in law, business, and medicine.
   There has indeed already been the painful loss of a generation of
highly trained anthropology PhDs to other occupations. Those luck)
enough to hold tenured appointments do not escape demoralization
and vulnerability to cynicism. For them, the professional rules of the
game that applied to immediately preceding generations ha\ e ch a nged
markedly. For one thing, they are lonelier: their work addresses less                     .1



new generation of graduate students than each other, who are sur-
vivors of a period of cutbacks. Also, they are well aware, more than
ever, of the marginality of their discipline purely in terms of DOW                 little

it   is   valued or how suspiciously         it   is   held bv those in powet at   home
(who  are ultimately responsible for providing funding or b) tin
powerful abroad (who are exercising tar more cart and discrimination
in   the granting of research permits). One result               is   the prevalence oi    1




strategy of doing whatever            is                     KM exam
                                           necessary to ensure solvent
pie, the creation of applied programs and the tailoring "t courses and
research proposals largely to meet the demands of certain COOStitUen
eies or possible        patrons   .




      Yet,     however   valid, this pictUIC of         demoralization .unl onuism is
perhaps too dire. Demographic trends and fashions m graduate eduCS
tion have been cyclical in the past and are likd) to he in the future. It
                                                                          is
        xii   •   Preface


perhaps a healthy development that in this period of fragmentation
and disunity, younger anthropologists in secure positions are not con-
cerned with superficial piety toward their mentors, and not burdened
with preserving an authoritative pose for large bodies of eager gradu-
ate students. Many were professionally schooled during the politically
self-conscious atmosphere of the 1960s, and in these quieter, but more
desperate times in academia, they are free to play and experiment with
ideas in their discipline to an unprecedented degree.       We believe that   it


is   just   such positive institutional effects of an   otherwise dire period
that sociologically explains the experimental moment.
   While they deserve full separate treatment, we give the above kinds
of institutional factors that shape contemporary trends little further
attention in this essay.    We reject the notion that the intellectual crisis,
on which we do focus, might be merely a reflection of the underlying
play of interests involved in the institutional crisis we have outlined.
There are indeed connections, but we have chosen to emphasize the
intellectual response in anthropology to the confluence of certain de-
velopments in the history of the discipline and certain political, eco-
nomic, and social changes in the world which are most directly
challenging its practice. We believe these to be of more specific impor-
tance in understanding the current salience of problems in eth-
nographic description and writing than is the institutional situation of
anthropology.
   The idea for this essay was developed by Marcus during a year at
the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in 1982-83, and he
sketched a first version of the argument while there. The Institute is
indeed an ideal setting for taking stock of broad intellectual trends,
but the deeper impetus for the essay originated in the collective think-
ing and discussions among members of the Rice anthropology depart-
ment, who share an interest in pushing contemporary interpretive
anthropology toward a more politically and historically sensitive crit-
ical anthropology. Consequently, Marcus invited his colleague
Michael Fischer to be a coauthor and to continue their ongoing di-
alogue with the aim of a written product in mind.
   During the fall of 1983 at Rice, Marcus refined the organizing argu-
ment for the essay and produced a rough, complete draft of the present
work. In the spring of 1984, Fischer recast the argument, substantially
reworked the first draft, and added most of the commentaries that
constitute the examples and close analyses of texts in the final version.
Through the summer of 1984, we worked jointly on this version, and
it was collaboration in the most satisfying sense.
     xiii   •   Preface


  Many colleagues have contributed to this project directly or indi-
rectly beyond their writings. For Marcus, the year at the Institute was
a special time and place for initiating the essay; Fischer would like to
acknowledge the stimulation of the Department of Anthropology of
the University of Brasilia in the spring-summer of 1982, where he dis-
cussed his ideas about the function of critique for anthropology and
drafted an essay (1982a) on changes in the current interpretive trend
of anthropological theory. Portions of the present essay were present-
ed to the Rice Circle for Anthropology, and to the Rice Humanities
Seminar on the Culture of Capitalism, during 1983-84. Arguments
were also tried out at a seminar, organized by Marcus and Janus
Clifford, at the School of American Research, Santa Fe, on "The Mak-
ing of Ethnographic Texts," in April, 1984. We are grateful to the
participants in all these events for the criticisms and encouragements
that we received.
  The authors owe a special debt of gratitude to the historian Patricia
Seed who carefully read and edited the manuscript at a critical point o(
revisionwhen they lacked the needed perspective on their work to
make certain important improvements m Style, organization, and logic
of argument. We also wish to thank the several referees for presses.
whose astute readings of the manuscript aided us in our final revisions
and editing. In particular, we are grateful to the following readers who
made themselves known to us: Ivan Karp, Michael Meeker, Kenan
Rosaldo, and David M. Schneider.
         Introduction




Twentieth-century social and cultural anthropology has promised its
still   largely Western readership enlightenment on two fronts. The one
has been the salvaging of distinct cultural forms of life from a process
of apparent global Westernization. With both its romantic appeal and
its   scientific intentions,   anthropology has stood for the refusal to ac-
cept this conventional perception of homogenization toward a domi-
nant Western model. The other promise of anthropology, one                 less

fully distinguished and attended to than the first, has been to serve as a

form of cultural critique for ourselves. In using portraits of other cul-
tural patterns to reflect self-critically on our own ways, anthropolog)
disrupts     common     sense and        makes   us   reexamine our taken-fbr*
granted assumptions.
   The current predicaments in sustaining these purposes of modern
anthropology are well illustrated by a pair of recent controversies,
each sparked by the appearance of an avowedl) polemkal work. Both
make their strongest points about distortions in the w a) s non-Western
peoples have been portrayed in scholarship, which has depended on
descriptive, semiliterary forms for its expression.
      Edward Said's Orientalism (1979) is an attack on the genres of
writing developed in the West to represent non-Western societies.          1   lis

brush is broad and indiscriminate. At one point, he seems to exempt
contemporary cultural anthropology by brief favorable mention of
one of its masters, Clifford Geertz, bul this is ambiguous, and it is
clear that he intends his condemnations to appl) to all Westerners
writing about others, including anthropologists. He attacks partial
larly the rhetorical devices which make Western authors active, while

leaving their subjects passive.  heSC Subjects, who must he spoken for,
                                     I




are generally located in the world dominated b) Western colonialism
or neocolonialism; thus, the rhetoric both exemplifies and remtor.es
Western domination. Moreover, the rhetOfK is itselt an excrusc in
power, m effect denying subjects the right to express contrary views,
by Obscuring from the reader recognition thai the) might view things
with equal validity, quite different!) from the writer, tmong these
                                                       Arabs. Greeks,
rhetorical devices are devaluations of contemporar)
       2    •   Introduction


Egyptians, or Mayans relative to their ancient forebears. In the heyday
of open imperialism, the history of the Orient was declared to be one
of decay from the glories of classical Greece, pharaonic Egypt, or
"classical" Islam.     Still   today, the search is too often for survivals of
this glorious heritage indecayed and corrupt form among descen-
dants,     while denying anyintrinsic value to their contemporary
cultures. In the language of nineteenth-century English and French
parliamentarians, "the white man's burden" was to rescue these lat-
ter-day people from centuries of decay, disease, ignorance, and politi-
cal corruption. Their     own views were of interest only in the same way
as was a child's     whom one wished to educate: as a means of teaching
them the truth. Said detects the legacy of this imperialist attitude in
contemporary ideologies of modernization, espoused equally by West-
ern policymakers and elites in the third world.
   Yet, Said poses in his book no alternative form for the adequate
representation of other voices or points of view across cultural bound-
aries, nor does he instill any hope that this might be possible. He in
fact practices the same sort of rhetorical totalitarianism against his
chosen enemies as he condemns. He acknowledges no motives of the
West other than domination, no internal debates among Westerners
about alternative modes of representation, no historical change from
the days of open imperialism (from where he exclusively draws his
close analyses of rhetoric) to the present. Most tellingly he acknowl-
edges no political or cultural divisions among the subject peoples he is
allegedly defending. These last have no more independent voice in his
text than in that of any other Western writer. However, the very du-
ality in Said's    own personal position serves to express eloquently the
political   context in which writing and scholarship on other cultures
occur. As a Palestinian and as a prominent literary scholar in an Amer-
ican university, he      is    both a   member of an uprooted, dominated
culture and a privileged intellectual of the dominating one.
   Said, finally has chosen to fight fire with fire, and his work is effec-
tive   only as polemic. Without sufficient demonstration, he suggests
that the world written about is often quite different from that im-
agained in the writings of disciplines like anthropology, which take it
upon themselves to represent authoritatively alternative social and cul-
tural forms of life contrasting with those of the West. For those in such
disciplines, the urgent task        remains to rethink and experiment with
their conventional forms of writing in response to what is, after all, a
trenchant critique in Said's polemic.
   While Orientalism had an impact mainly among scholars, Margaret
         3   •         Introduction


Mead and Samoa (1983) stirred up an even broader controversy that
was front-page news before the book's publication. It is an attack by
the Australian anthropologist Derek Freeman on the most public of
American anthropologists. Samoa was the site of Mead's early re-
search and the subject of a book that launched her career as a promi-
nent cultural critic of American society, founded on the authority of
her professional expertise about other cultures.
   The considerable debate about Freeman's book has had multiple
formulations focusing on such issues as the viscerally personal nature
of his attack, the plea he makes for biological, rather than cultural,
explanations of social behavior, and the enduring anthropological
problem of what constitutes an adequate account of another culture in
the face of contrasting interpretations.         We will deal directly in a later
chapter with Mead's characterization of Samoan culture as part of her
effort to deliver a           message about American culture. What most im-
presses us here is the salience that this attack on Mead has had for a
mass reading public. It was this public, after all, to whom Mead's
cultural criticism had been directed. The impact of Freeman's book as
a scientific scandal, in which the reading public might             teel    duped b)
the revelation of inaccurate or fraudulent claims to knowledge, thus
illustrates the          predicament of anthropology's other long-established
promise:         its    capacity on the basis of reliable knowledge of cultural
alternatives to critique and suggest reform in the u.iv we live. That this
capacity was the focus of the public controversy         ,   instead of the profes-
sional issues concerning how accurately either            Mead or     1   reeman de-
scribed Samoa, registers just how unfulfilled within the profession the
promise of anthropology as cultural critique has been, vet how great
the popular appetite is for it when ottered In as skilled and articulate I
communicator as Mead. It one prominent lesson of this controvert) tl
that the knowledge which anthropology otters ol cultural alternatives
cannot be conceived according to conventional notions of scientific
precision and certainty, then on what authority can it otter itself .is 1
critic of its      own society        ?


   The task of this essay is to characterize ongoing and potential re
sponses to the predicaments of cultural anthropolog) On these tWO
fronts. In their predominant concern with the description and analysis
«.t non-Western cultures, anthropobgisa have
                                                been developing then
own Saidian self-critiques, most itrongl) lince the 196 •.                 rhe results
.ire   now beginning to be incorporated effectivel) into the research pro
eess,   and espeu.ilK into the w.i\s other cultures .ue written tbotlt
                                                                  anthiopologu.il
Experimental strategies tO alter the si.uul.ml tonus <»t
         4     •   Introduction


accounts are expressing, on one hand, a new sensitivity to the diffi-
culty of representing cultural differences, given current, almost over-
riding, perceptions of the global          homogenization of cultures, and on
the other, a sophisticated recognition of the historical and political-
economic           realities   which, while not denied, have been elided or
finessed in much past writing.           One part of our task, then, will be to
draw out themes of theoretical importance from styles of experimenta-
tion in representative contemporary works on other cultures.
                                                 —
   Responses to the second predicament the status of anthropology
as a                                   —
     form of cultural critique have not as yet generated as rich an
experimental literature. Thus, our task will be to discuss this sub-
merged side of anthropology as a potential or opportunity, just when
the acceptability and frequency of research in their own societies are in
fact   growing among anthropologists. We argue, moreover, that the
potential for developing a distinctive anthropological cultural critique
of American society is inherently linked to the vitality of experimenta-
tion on the other front, the traditional arena of research abroad. One
distinguishing feature of this experimentation is the sophisticated re-
flection by the anthropologist about herself and her own society that
describing an alien culture engenders. This reflection can be harnessed
from the field of experimental writing and redirected for full-scale pro-
jects of cultural critique at home.        Indeed, we believe that the modern
formulation of cultural anthropology depends for its full realization
on just such a catching up of its lightly attended to critical function at
home with the present lively transformation of its traditionally empha-
sized descriptive function abroad. The result should be an integration
of the discipline's purpose and practice which would meet equally well
the challenges of the new and distinctive sort of intellectual milieu in
which it must operate, as exemplified in the Said and Mead-Freeman
controversies.
   The organization of this essay is dictated by the above division of
tasks.One set of chapters, concerned with recent works mostly from
research in foreign cultures, will be cast as a reading of the trend of
ongoing innovations in writing through commentaries on distinctive
texts.       The other set of chapters on anthropological cultural critique
will   be cast as an exploration of possibilities for a body of work that
does not fully exist yet in anthropology. Our concern will be to define
a distinctive function for anthropology within the contemporary fash-
ions     and broader intellectual traditions of cultural critique that do
                those that originated in the 1920s and 1930s. Our
exist, especially

extended discussions of examples, unlike our treatment of experimen-
         5   •   Introduction


tal works, will emphasize the weaknesses of past anthropological writ-

ing, as to its critical dimensions, for the purpose of speculating about a
more sophisticated fulfillment of this other long-standing promise of
modern anthropology.
  The key observation about the current state of cultural an-
thropology which led us to the argument we are making was our rec-
ognition of a preoccupation among our colleagues with the form and
rhetoric of anthropological writing. This has been the medium for ex-
pressing an unprecedentedly frank self-critique of the discipline's theo-
ry    and methods. Furthermore, we soon                realized that this critical
interest in writing characterizes not only anthropology, but a number
of other related fields as well.
     The present is a period of no riveting theoretical debates or fashions
that unify the interests of social and cultural anthropologists. Rather
there is a fragmented diversity of research programs, some new, some
remnants of past fashions. What seems to define the center m                        this
eclectic time is the ongoing experimentation with the semiliterarv gen-
re of    anthropological discourse     — the ethnography — which         is   where
the locus of intellectual energy in the discipline now seems to be.                 It   is

symptomatic that during the 1950s and 1960s, attempts to define gen-
eral theories in anthropology borrowed from the model of linguistics,
which seemed to offer an attractive formal and rigorous framework
for pursuing a generalizing descriptive science. However, by the yos           1




and 1980s, theoretical developments in the field of literary criticism
and interpretation had replaced linguistics as an influential BOUTCC ol
new ideas about theory and method in anthropology. It is no COUKJ
dence that the message of a prominent liter.irv scholar sikIi as Said,
whose target is precisely the rhetoric and strategies of writing about
other cultural subjects in fields such as anthropology, h.is had strong
resonance for practitioners in these fields at this moment. While we do
not presume to do the work of literary scholars in our treatment <>t
recent texts (this task has already been initiated; in anthropology, tee
for    example, Clifford     ,\m\   Marcus, [986   ,    an understanding of the
controversial importance of the literary awareness ol anthropological
rhetoric has dearly       informed out characterization ol present trends.
      Why should a preoccupation with genres of description, rathei than
with usually more prestigious and totalizing theoretical discourses, be
a current vital concern thai extendi well beyond tnthropolog)             -   I
                                                                                   his is

a question th.it     we imisi address before undertaking the main         t.isks
                                                                         «.t


this css.iv.     in do so, we must tell two background stories, one outside
and one inside anthropology, fhe outside su.is sketches the broadei
      6   •   Introduction


intellectual trend, of which  anthropology is a part, that accounts for
this shiftfrom attempts at generalizing theories of society to discus-
sions about the problems of interpreting and describing social reality
inspired by literary criticism. The internal story discusses the central
place that the ethnographic monograph     — anthropology's semiliterary
product of research   — has occupied   as a professional practice and the
changes it is undergoing. We begin with the outside story.
i        A Crisis of Representation in the
         Human Sciences


The present is a time of reassessment of dominant ideas across the
human sciences (a designation broader than and inclusive of the con-
ventional social sciences), extending to law, art, architecture, philoso-
phy, literature, and even the natural sciences. This reassessment                           is

more salient in some disciplines than in others, but its presence is per-
vasive. It is not just the ideas themselves that are coming under attack
but the paradigmatic style in which they have been presented. Particu-
larly in the social sciences, the          goal of organizing disciplines by ab-
stract, generalizing frameworks that encompass and guide all efforts at
empirical research is being fundamentally challenged.
      Clifford Geertz's paper, "Blurred Genres" (1980b), attempted to
characterize the current trend by noting the fluid borrowing of ideas
and methods from one discipline to another. Geert/ did not, however,
attempt to analyze the dilemmas of the various disciplines. While the
problem of the loss of encompassing theories remains the same from
discipline to discipline, the formulation of and responses to this predi
cament are varied. For example, in literary criticism, there has been
the waning of the "new criticism," a paradigm which asserted that the
meaning of texts was fully explorable ill terms ot their internal OOO*
struction.     Now,    literary      critics   have    incorporated,         among       other
moves,      social   theories   of    literary   production            and   reception     sec

Lentricchia 1980 and the excellent discussion                      in   the late Elizabeth

Bruss's Beautiful Theories, [98a). In law, there have arisen demvstit\
mg critiques by the Critical Legal Studies movement ot the long tU
thontative model ot legal reasoning                   see.   tor   example, LivingStOfl
1982).     In art, architecture, as well as literature,            techniques that once
had shock value or reoriented perception, such as surrealism, toda\
have lost their original force, thus stimulating a debate about the
11.   nine of postmodernist aesthetics see fameSOn                 1
                                                                       984   In social   theo

ry, the trend is reflected in challenges to establishment posimism

Guldens [976, [979). I" neoclassical economics, 11 is expressed in a
crisis of forecasting and economic poliq seeThurow [983 is well ai
in a critique of the ideal of          growth    m ccoiiomu theor)              ICC   HnsJi
197^, and     1'iore and s.ibel      1^*4). in philosophy, it i»kes the form "t I
        8   •   Chapter One


recognition of the devastating implications of issues of contextuality
and indeterminancies in human life for the construction of abstract
systems, based on clearly derived and universal principles of justice,
morality, and discourse (see Ungar 1976, 1984; Rorty 1979)- In trie
current lively debate about the possibility of artificial intelligence, a
key issue is precisely that of an adequate language of description (see
Dennett 1984: 1454). Finally, in the natural sciences (physics, es-
pecially) and mathematics, the trend is indicated by a preference
among some theorists for concentrating less on elegant theoretical vi-
sions of order, and more on the micropatterns of disorder         —
                                                               for exam-
ple, the attention that "chaos"   theory  has recently gotten in physics,
chemistry, biology,   and  mathematics   (for a popular  account  of this
development, see Gleick 1984).
   Present conditions of knowledge are defined not so much by what
they are as by what they come after. In general discussion within the
humanities and social sciences, the present indeed          is   often charac-
terized as "postparadigm"     — postmodernism, poststructuralism, post-
Marxism, for example. It is striking that in Jean-Francois Lyotard's
acute exploration of The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowl-
edge (1984 [1979]), he too should cite the contemporary "incredulity
towards metanarratives" which previously legitimated the rules of sci-
ence.   He speaks of a "crisis of narratives" with a turn to multiple
"language games" that give rise to "institutions in patches." "Post-
modern knowledge," he says, "is not simply a tool of the authorities;
it refines our sensitivity to differences and reinforces our ability to

tolerate the incommensurable" (p. xxv). The key feature of this mo-
ment, then, is the loosening of the hold over fragmented scholarly
communities of either specific totalizing visions or a general paradig-
matic style of organizing research. The authority of "grand theory"
styles seems suspended for the moment in favor of a close considera-
tion of such issues as contextuality, the meaning of social life to those
who enact it, and the explanation of exceptions and indeterminants
rather than regularities in phenomena observed    —   all   issues that make
problematic what were taken for granted as facts or certainties on
which the validity of paradigms had rested.
  The part of these conditions in which we are most interested is what
we call a crisis of representation. This is the intellectual stimulus for
the   contemporary vitality of experimental writing in anthropology.
The crisis arises from uncertainity about adequate means of describing
social reality. In the United States, it is an expression of the failure of
post- World War II paradigms, or the unifying ideas of a remarkable
          9   •   A Crists of Representation in the Human Sciences

number of fields, to account for conditions within American society, if
not within Western societies globally, which seem to be in a state of
profound transition.
   This trend may have much to do with the unfavorable shift in the
relative position of American power and influence in the world, and
with the widespread perception of the dissolution of the ruling post-
war model of the liberal welfare state at home. Both the taste for total-
izing frameworks and the predominance in many academic disciplines
of general models of stability in the social and natural order seemed to
have coincided with the previously more confident and secure national
mood. The current exhaustion of this style of theorizing merely points
up the politicized context in which post-World War II intellectual
trends have been shaped all along.
   The questioning of specific postwar paradigms, such as the social
theory of Talcott Parsons, gained  its force during the 1960s when

there was a widespread politicization of academic thought in the
United States. Yet, those times were sufficiently dominated hv hopes
for (or reactions to) images of massive, revolutionary transformations
of society that grand, abstract theoretical visions themselves remained
in   vogue. While retaining its politicized dimension as a legac] oi the
1960s, social thought in the years since has grown more suspicious ol
the ability of encompassing paradigms to ask the right questions, let
alone provide answers, about the variety of local responses to the op-
eration of global systems, which are not understood as certain!) as
they were once thought to be under the regime of                'grand theory"
      Consequently, the most interesting theoretical debates in a
styles.

number of fields have shitted to the level of method, to problems ot
epistemology, interpretation, and discursive forms ot representation
themselves, employed by social thinkers. -le\ ated to a central concern
                                                 I




of theoretical reflection, problems ot description become problems ot
representation. These are issues that have been most treiuhantb e\
plored by philosophical and literary theories ot interpretation                  thus

their   prominence now        as a source ol inspiration tor theoretical         and
self-crmcal reflection in so main disciplines.
     The intellectual      historian must have a     lenK ol   dc|.i   \u   in   con
templatmg these recent developments, tor the) recapitulate issues de
bated in other periods, most proximately during the [92 sand [9301
There is often a circular motion to intellectual histofy, i return with
fresh perspectives to questions explored earlier. forgOttefl     tern       M
porarily resolved, and then reposed in attempt! tO manage  mti.uiable

contemporary dilemmas. Yet, this bittDf) is Utter Conceived     spiral      M
      io     •     Chapter One


rather than circular. Rather than mere repetition, there is cumulative
growth in knowledge, through the creative rediscovery of older and
persistent questions in response to keenly experienced moments of dis-
satisfaction with the state of a discipline's practice tied to perceptions
of unprecedented changes in the world.
   Ours is once again a period rich in experimentation and conceptual
risk-taking. Older dominant frameworks are not so much denied
there being nothing so grand to replace them        —
                                                   as suspended. The
ideas they embody remain intellectual resources to be used in novel
and eclectic ways. The closest such previous period was the 1920s and
1930s when evolutionary paradigms, laissez-faire liberalism, and rev-
olutionary socialism and marxism all came under energetic critiques.
Instead of grand theories and encyclopedic works, writers devoted
themselves to the essay, to documenting diverse social experiences at
close quarters, and to fragmentary illuminations. The atmosphere was
one of uncertainty about the nature of major trends of change and the
ability of existing social theories to    grasp it holistically. The essay,
experience, documentation, intensive focus on fragments and detail
these were the terms and vocabulary of the generation of Walter Ben-
jamin, Robert Musil,        Ludwig Wittgenstein, the surrealists, and the
American documentary realists of the 1920s and 1930s.
   Fascism and World War II brought to fruition the worst fears of the
prewar speculations about the effects of the social transformations in
industrial capitalism, communications/propaganda, and commodity
production. In the aftermath, America emerged as the dominant eco-
nomic force, and it created a new creed of can-do modernization. In
the social sciences, Parsonian sociology became a hegemonic frame-
work, not merely for sociology, but for anthropology, psychology,
political science, and models of economic development as well. Based
on his synthesis of the major systems of nineteenth-century social the-
ory (including Weber and Durkheim, but excluding Marx), Parsons
provided a comprehensive, abstract vision of the social system, and its
relationship to the separate systems of culture and personality. His
theoretical project promised to coordinate and unify conceptually the
empirical work of all the social sciences. It was an intellectual effort of
such vast scope and ambition that it occupied minds and disciplines
for some time.
  During the 1960s, Parsonian sociology rapidly lost its hold, to dis-
appear quite as dramatically from open terms of reference by the time
Parsons died as had, for example, Spencerian sociology before it. The
apolitical       and ahistoric character of Parsonian theory could not be
         ii   •   A Crisis of Representation in the Human Sciences

sustained through the upheavals of the                     1960s. In purely analytic
terms, reducing the richness of social             life,   especially conflict, to the
notions of function and system equilibrium on which the Parsonian
vision depended,  proved unsatisfactory. Parsonian social theory has
not vanished; too many generations of students, now prominent schol-
ars, were trained in terms of it for that to happen.But the theoretical
edifice of    Parsons has been thoroughly delegitimated, though mam
ideas within      it   remain intellectual resources at present, along with a
multitude of other influences.
    Furthermore, it is not that contemporary attempts to revive Parso-
nian sociology         do not sometimes occur (as in the work of Niklas
Luhmann 1984 and Jeffrev Alexander 198Z— 8}) or that different, but
equally ambitious efforts at grand theory do not arise (for example.
sociobiology, "the new synthesis"           —   see Wilson 1975). It is simply that
they each become just one more voice to be heard at the moment, with
little   likelihood of achieving hegemonic status. Indeed, if Talcott Par-
sons were writing today, his synthetic scheme would merely take its
place among several other grand, and not so grand, programs and
suggestions for research, each capturing its own fragment among
scholars within and across disciplines.
    So, too, in the       contemporary period a similar diffusion of legit
imacy and authority attends Marxism. Marxism is a nineteenth-ccn
tury paradigm which presented itself as a natural science of WOOtX)
that not only had an intellectual identity but also a political one. It was
a grand theory to be enacted and measured against history. In the
period of Parsonian hegemony in the United States, Marxism main
tained itself as an alternative, suppressed and awaiting its release.                 I




day, there are         still   those   who desire to preserve           the   framework,
dogma, and canonic terminology of Marxism formalists like          —
Maurice Godelier and Louis Althusser. But there are also more in
terpretivc Marxists, accepting the framework loose!) as a realm of
shared discourse, but probing within it to find out in cultural and
experiential terms what concept! such as mode of production. 0000
modify   fetishism, or relations and forces of production might
                                                                mean
under diverse and changing world conditions. lie label Marxist1
                                                                 itself


has become increasingly ambiguous; the used    Marxist ideas m  social
                                                              seem K)
though! has become diffuse and pervasive; and there nolonfH
                                         Marxism.    here is indeed I
be am clear paradigmatic  boundaries  to                            I




new empirical, and essentialK ethnographic documentar\ mood in
                                                                              diffusion of
Marxist writing 'see Anderson [984). It is |tist this sort 0!
ideas across boundaries that is to be expected m
                                                    a period such as this
      1 2.   •   Chapter One


when paradigmatic styles of social thought are suspended. Old labels
are thus a poor guide to the current fluidity and crosscurrents in intel-
lectual trends. While Marxism as a system of thought remains strong
as an image, in practice, it is difficult to identify Marxists anymore, or
to locate a contemporary central tradition for it.
   Parsonian social theory and Marxism        (as well as   French struc-
turalism, more recently) have all served prominently during the post-
war period as paradigms or disciplined frameworks for research in the
human sciences.       All   remain today as sources of concepts, meth-
odological questions, and procedures, but none authoritatively guides
research programs on a large scale. They have become merely alter-
natives among many others that are used or discarded at will by re-
searchers operating     much more independently. The current period,
like the  1920s and 1930s before it, is thus one of acute awareness of
the limits of our conceptual systems as systems.
    So far we have viewed the present crisis of representation as one
distinctive, alternate swing of a pendulum between periods in which
paradigms, or totalizing theories, are relatively secure, and periods in
                                                            —
which paradigms lose their legitimacy and authority when the-
oretical concerns shift to problems of the interpretation of the details
of a reality that eludes the ability of dominant paradigms to describe
it, let alone explain it. It is worth playing back this broadly conceived

vision of intellectual history, which sets the context of the present ex-
perimentation with anthropological writing in terms that specifically
capture the literary and rhetorical qualities of such shifts. To do so, we
consult the pioneering study by Hayden White, Metahistory (1973),
which traces the major changes in nineteenth-century European histo-
ry and social theory, registered at the level of techniques for writing
about society. In briefly considering White's framework, we see twen-
tieth-century anthropology, as well as any other discipline which has
depended on discursive, essentially literary accounts of its subjects, as
comparable to the efforts of nineteenth-century historiography to es-
tablish a science of society through presenting realistic and accurate
portraits of conditions and events.
  Any historical (or anthropological) work exhibits emplotment, ar-
gument, and ideological implication, according to White. These three
elements may be at odds with one another as well as being in an unsta-
                            attempt to encompass and order. From
ble relation to the facts they
                 come shifting modes of writing which also show
these instabilities
connections with broader social currents. The struggle to reconcile
conflicts among these elements in the writing of texts, especially of
         13   •   A Crisis of Representation in the Human Sciences

important, influential works, poses problems of method for other
practicing historians that define a theoretical discourse about the in-
terpretation of reality. White's scheme is of interest to us here precisely
because it translates the problem of historical (and anthropological
explanation, most often conceived as a clash of theoretical paradigms,
into the writer's problem of representation.
  Nineteenth-century historical writing, according to White, began
and ended in an ironic mode. Irony is unsettling: it is a self-conscious
mode that senses the failure of all sophisticated conceptualizations;
stylistically,    it   employs rhetorical devices that signal real or feigned
disbelief on the part of the author toward the truth of his own state-
ments; it often centers on the recognition of the problematic nature of
language, the potential foolishness of all linguistic characterizations of
reality; and so it revels          — or wallows —         in satirical techniques. Yet, the

irony at the end of the Enlightenment was quite different from that at
the end of the nineteenth century. In between, historians and social
theorists attempted at least three major alternatives to break out of the
conditions of irony and thus to find a proper (read paradigmatic                              rep-
resentation of historical process.
   In    White's literary terms, these alternatives are best conceived as
strategies of emplotment in constructing works of history                           and soda!
theory   — Romance, Tragedy, and Comedy. Romance                           is   the empathetic
self-identification by the writer with quests that transcend specific pe
riods of world history: in ethnology, an example would be Sir James
Frazer who envisioned The Golden                         Bough as a quest of reason bat-
tling through centuries of superstition.                   I   ragedy is a heightening of the
sense of conflicting social forces, in which the indiv idual or the eveni is
merely an unhappy locus, one, however, in which there can be a gam
in consciousness and understanding through experiencing the power

of social conflicts. It is more world-wise than Romance; an example
would be Marx's vision of class conflict, derived from his earlier e\
plorations of the alienation or human labor. ( omed) is the reverse
side of Tragedy:            it   cultivates the sense that there can be temporary
triumphs and reconciliations, often figured in the euphoria of festivals
and rituals that bring competitors together and temporarily still con
flict.   An example would be the vision of SOCial Solidarity m                            I   >uik

heim's Elementary Forms <>f Religious I ife.
    lor nineteenth-centurj                historiography, White describes             >   move
mem from Romance to                  I          omedy, ending finally in a Any
                                         raged) to   (



irome mode.        I   he irony at the end of the nineteenth century was dirfei
ent from that          at   the end of the Enlightenment.                Nineteenth ii-ntur\
         1   4    •    Chapter One


historiography was uniformly less abstract, and more empirical than
that of the Enlightenment.            During the nineteenth century there had
been a sustained series of efforts to find a "realist" mode of descrip-
tion. All         ended in irony, however, because there were a number of
equally comprehensive and plausible, yet apparently mutually ex-
clusive conceptions of the same events.  At the end of the nineteenth
century, writers such as Nietzsche   and Croce took the ironic con-
sciousness of the age as their problem and attempted to find ways of
overcoming its unsettling, self-conscious inability to have faith in it-
self. Croce attempted the romantic move again, trying to purge history

of irony by assimilating it to art, but he succeeded only in driving
deeper the awareness of the ironic conditions of knowledge.
   Twentieth-century human sciences have not so much repeated the
cycle White describes for the nineteenth century; rather they have ex-
hibited a persistent oscillation between more realist modes of descrip-
tion     and irony. For example, the later work of the anthropologist
Clifford Geertz, who was among those prominent in developing the
idea of the cultural system out of the Parsonian framework discussed
earlier, turns away from Parsons and represents a romantic move. Like
Croce, he utilizes an image or symbol to uncover, define, and impose a
recognizable pattern in cultural thought, be it the cockfight to explore
the patterning of Balinese thought, or the theater state to discuss an
aspect of politics undervalued in Western thought. At the same time,
however, his mode of selecting such symbols and images draws atten-
tion to questions of perspective and questions assumptions of "scien-
tific"objectivity. Similarly, the persistent contemporary interest in
Marxist perspectives continues the tragic move in the writing of Marx
himself, while also exhibiting increasing concern about issues of epis-
temology. Thus, throughout the twentieth century, irony has remained
consistently strong and has become particularly salient during the two
periods      — the 1920s and 1930s and the 1970s and 1980s — that have
exhibited a pervasive suspension of faith in the idea of grand covering
theories and reigning paradigms of research in a number of fields.
   The task, particularly now, is not to escape the deeply suspicious
and critical nature of the ironic mode of writing, but to embrace and
utilize      it   in   combination with other strategies for producing realist
descriptions of society. The desirability of reconciling the persistence
of irony with other modes of representation derives in turn from a
recognition that because all perspectives and interpretations are sub-
               review, they must finally be left as multiple and open-
ject to critical
ended alternatives. The only way to an accurate view and confident
         15    •   A Crisis of Representation in the Human Sciences

knowledge of the world is through a sophisticated epistemology that
takes full account of intractable contradiction, paradox, irony, and

uncertainity in the explanation of human activities. This seems to be
the spirit of the developing responses across disciplines to          what we
described as a contemporary crisis of representation.
      Periods of heightened irony in the means of representing social real-
ity seem to go with heightened perceptions throughout society of liv-
ing through historic  moments of profound change. The content of
social theory becomes politicized and historicized; the limiting condi-
tions of theory become clearer. Those fields most closely tied in their
concerns to describing and explaining social phenomena undergoing
complex changes exhibit strong internal challenges to reigning para-
digms, and to the idea of paradigms itself. Thus, during the i9~os and
early 1980s, we find such generalist works on social theory as An-
thony Giddens's New Rules of Sociological Method (1976) and              <




tral Problems of Social Theory: Action Structure, and Contradiction

in Social Analysis (1979), Alvin Gouldner's The Coming Crisis m
Western Sociology (1970), R. J. Bernstein's The Restructuring 0/
cial and Political Theory (1976), and Pierre Bourdieu's     )utline of a
                                                                  (



Theory of Practice (1977). Simultaneously, the problems posed in
such works of theoretical discourse are more directly and cogently
being addressed in the research process itself, which tor fields such .is
cultural      anthropology and history, is significant!) a matter of repre-
senting in      a narrative form social and cultural realities. Empirical
research monographs, through self-conscious attention to their writ
ing strategies, equally become works of heightened theoretical signifi
cance and ambition. Intellectually, then, the problem of the moment is
less one of explaining changes within broad encompassing frame-

works of theory from a concern tO preserve the purpose and legitimacy
of such theorizing, than of exploring innovative wa) s ol describing t!

a microscopic level the process of change itself.
      A jeweler's-eyc view ol the world is thus urgently needed, rod this is
preciselywhere the strength and attr.Kii\eness ol cultural inthfO
pology reside at the moment. As WC will see in the next chapter, an
thropology's distinctive method of research, ethnography, has long
been touised preusek on problems of the recording, mleipietatiou,
and description <>t closel) observed social and cultural processes.
While long associated In its public With (hi- Itud) of so called pnmi
tive, isolated societies, rothropologj in fact has been spplying
                                                                    us

"jeweler's-eye" method tor some time t<> complex nation-state 10
ueties, including, increasingly, oui own. Moreover, the contemporary
         1   6   •   Chapter One


innovations in anthropological writing, occasioned by the same crisis
of representation affecting other disciplines, are moving it toward an
unprecedentedly acute political and historical sensibility that is trans-
forming the way cultural diversity        is   portrayed. With   its   concerns
firmly established across the traditional divide of the social sciences
and humanities, anthropology (among other disciplines such as liter-
ary criticism) is thus serving as a conduit for the diffusion of ideas and
methods from one to the other. The current changes in past conven-
tions for writing about other cultures are the locus of operation for
this strategic contemporary function of anthropology.
   Within anthropology itself, the current absence of paradigmatic au-
thority is registered by the fact that there are presently many an-
thropologies: efforts to revitalize old research programs such as
ethnosemantics, British functionalism, French structuralism, cultural
ecology, and psychological anthropology; efforts to synthesize Marx-
ist   approaches with structuralism, semiotics, and other forms of sym-
bolic analysis; efforts to establish more encompassing frameworks of
explanation such as sociobiology to achieve the aim of a more fully
"scientific" anthropology; efforts to merge the influential study of lan-
guage in anthropology with the concerns of social theory. All of these
have merits and problems in different measure; yet, all are inspired by
and inspire the practice of ethnography as a common denominator in
a very fragmented period.
   The explicit dicourse that reflects on the doing and writing of eth-
nography itself is what we call interpretive anthropology. It grew out
of the cultural anthropology of the 1960s, gradually shifting in em-
phasis from the attempt to construct a general theory of culture to a
reflection on ethnographic fieldwork and writing. It lias a major
spokesman in Clifford Geertz, whose work has made it the most influ-
ential style of anthropology among the wider intellectual public. It is,
as well, the trend in the anthropology of the 1960s from which the
contemporary experimental ethnographies, our central concern in this
essay, took off.
   We now turn from the broader intellectual trend affecting an-
thropology to this inside story. We first discuss the central role that the
ethnographic method, and especially the production of ethnographic
texts,       has occupied in modern cultural anthropology. Then we trace
the emergence of interpretive anthropology as a discourse on this cen-
tral   research practice, to its revision in response to the crisis of repre-
sentation we have discussed in this chapter.
2     Ethnography and Interpretive
      Anthropology



Twentieth-century anthropology is quite different from what it was in
the mid- and late nineteenth century. Then, as a burgeoning field of
Western scholarship in an era imbued with a pervasive ideology oi
social progress, it was dominated by hopes for a general science of
Man, for discovering social laws in the long evolution of humans to-
ward ever higher standards of rationality. What arc now the spe-
cialized    subfields   of   anthropology   — archaeology, biological an-
thropology, and sociocultural anthropology        — were then integrated in
the competencies of individual anthropologists,        who sought gener-
alizations about humankind from the comparison of data on the range
of past and present human diversity. For contemporary sociocultural
anthropologists, the most prominently remembered intellectual an-
cestors of that era are   Edward Tylor and James Fra/cr in England,
Emile Durkheim in France, and Lewis Henry Morgan in the United
States. Each, characteristically, pursued ambitious intellectual projects
that sought the origins of modern institutions, rituals, customs, and
habits of thought through the contrasts oi evolutionar) stages in the
development of human society. Material on contemporaneous "sav-
age," or "primitive," peoples served them as living cultural analogies
with the past. Theirs was an era of "armchair" ethnology. Although
traveling occasionally, they depended on such sources as traveler's ac
counts, colonial records, and missionary scholarship tor firsthand data
on such peoples. These major writers, among others, set the agenda
for the style, scope, and subject matter <>t anthropological debates into
the twentieth century.
    The critical transition in the nature ot British and American an
thfOpological scholarship came during the first third ot the twentieth
century. This change should be understood Ul the broader COnteXl oi
the protessionah/atioii ot the SOtial sucikcs and the humanities into
specialized disciplines oi the university, especial!) in the United States
'see Haskell 1977). Divisions of academic labor, specialization b) dii

upline, the taking on ot distinctive methods, analstu languages, and
standards, all became the order «»l the A.w    \inbitiousl\ guici.ilist

fields ot the   nineteenth century    those well established, like history,




       17
       1 8   •     Chapter Two


and the upstarts,          like   anthropology   — were now mere   disciplines
among a multitude of others; their grand projects became the spe-
cialties of bureaucratized academia.

   Finding an institutional place in the university as one of the social
sciences,    anthropology has been the most disorderly and              inter-
disciplinary of disciplines to both the delight and despair of the aca-
demic establishment. Social and cultural anthropology, Ernest Becker
lamented in his essay, The Lost Science of Man (1971), has survived
on the margins of the social sciences, tied uneasily to its historical
partnerships with archaeology and biological anthropology, and often
accused of being committed only to the description of the most alien,
exotic, and "primitive" of customs. While both the rhetoric and spirit
of its nineteenth-century vision still survive in anthropology, and while
some remain committed to a general science of Man, especially in the
teaching of the subject, anthropologists have practically become more
specialized in their methods and remarkably diffuse in their interests.
This has caused an image problem for social and cultural an-
thropology, since the public and many other scholars continue to
think of anthropology in terms of its nineteenth-century goals, and fail
to understand the important shift in the central focus of this subfield
during the early twentieth century.
   This shift made a distinctive kind of method the center of social and
cultural anthropology in  its new disciplinary placement as a social

science.Once conceived of retrospectively as a "revolution" in an-
thropology (Jarvie 1964), the change has been more recently shown to
have occurred as a continuous transition and remaking of the an-
thropology of the past (Boon 1982). This distinctive method was eth-
nography.        Its   main innovation was bringing together into an inte-
grated professional practice the previously separate processes of col-
lecting data among non-Western peoples, done primarily by amateur
scholars or others on the scene, and the armchair theorizing and analy-
sis,done by the academic anthropologist.
   Ethnography is a research process in which the anthropologist
closely observes, records, and engages in the daily life of another
culture  —an experience labeled as the fieldwork method            —
                                                              and then
writes accounts of this culture, emphasizing descriptive detail. These
accounts are the primary form in which fieldwork procedures, the
other culture, and the ethnographer's personal and theoretical reflec-
tions are accessible to professionals and other readerships. One legacy
of anthropology's generalist past in its new world of academic profes-
sions and specializations is the diversity of subjects to which it has
         19   •     Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


turned its ethnographic attention. While still identified by its tradi-
tional interest in simple, so-called primitive societies, anthropologists
have done research in all kinds of societies, including Western ones, on
topics ranging from religion to economics. Theoretically, anthro-
pology has always been creatively parasitic, testing out (often eth-
nocrentric)         generalities   about   man on the basis of specific other
culture cases, investigated firsthand by the ethnographic method.
   The transition to the ethnographic method has a complex history
which has not yet been written (for example, there were main dis-
tinguished semiprofessional ethnographers working in British colonial
areas, each of which has a different history of ethnography from that
of the metropole, whose version of anthropological practice only grad-
ually became authoritative.) 1 Nonetheless, one anthropologist is now
remembered by both American and                     British anthropologists as the
founder of the ethnographic method: Bronislaw Malinowski, whose
opening chapter describing the method in his first major work. Ar-
gonauts of the Western Pacific (1922), heralded a practice tor the pro-
fession emerging in departments of British and American universities.
Sir James Frazer wrote an approving preface to the book, and Mai

inowski first promoted ethnography as a superior \\a\                            to   pursue the
established goals of nineteenth-century anthropology. However, Mai
inowski's opening chapter is now often read as the classic statement of
the method which became the substantive justification tor and mark of
a transformed discipline.
     The predicament of modern social and cultural anthropology, then,
is   that it settled for the primary function of systematically describing
cultural diversity across the world, while the encompassing project <>t
achieving a generalized science <>t Man had effectively withered in the
transformation of academic organization that we have mentioned.
The formidable intellectual challenge and attraction of ethnography
            among an array of changing claims to large! purposes
for itself, set
within the fashions of Western social thought, has continued t<> dial
acterize social and cultural anthropology evei since.
   During the 1920s and [930s, American cultural anthropology pro
ceeded under the cmcring perspective «>t cultural relativism, and Brii
ish social anthropology under that of tuiictmnalism.   he latter, which      I




                                         essentialh   theOf)  t..i think
we will discuss in the next section, W8S            a

mg about field materials .\wd organizing ethnographic  accounts;     was                   ii



a strain in European social theory thai was domesticated  foi  whai  had
become        the    specific   descriptive   and   c   <   >mp.i r.U i\ r   purposes     of         M
thropology. Like functionalism, cultural relativism was originally                              .1   set
         2o   •    Chapter Two


of methodological guidelines, 2 which facilitated the predominant in-
terestof anthropology in recording cultural diversity. However,
through academic and broader ideological debates in the United States
during the 1920s and 1930s, the expression of cultural relativism de-
veloped more as a doctrine, or position, than as a method. It waned as
a salient topic in American anthropology by the end of World War II
(only to make a comeback in the present, as we shall see). For its part,
functionalist theory remained closely tied to the methodological con-
cerns of doing ethnography at the core of anthropology. Conse-
quently, it became as influential a covering discourse about theory and
method among American anthropologists (particularly after World
War II and the demise of explicit discussions about cultural relativism)
as it had been among British anthropologists.
   Yet, widely identified by      its public with the position of cultural

relativism,       anthropology did keep a generalist tradition alive in the
American social sciences. Anthropology made essential contributions
to debates, arising within the social sciences, about rationality, the
existence of human universals, the cultural malleability of human in-
stitutions,       and the nature of tradition and modernity in a changing
world. In the United States, cultural anthropology was a strong ally of
and influence on liberalism. It has provided an empirically based and
ethically informed relativism to challenge the reduction and neglect of
human diversity characterizing the work of other social sciences in
their perhaps overzealous commitment to a model of generalizing, law
discovering science. Further, it laid the groundwork for the critique of
the idea that there could be a value-free social science, an idea which
was popular in the 1950s, but was increasingly challenged during the
1960s. 3
  Thus, if the locus of order and the source of modern anthropology's
major intellectual contribution to scholarship were to be identified, it
would be the ethnographic research process itself, bracketed by its two
justifications. One is the capturing of cultural diversity, mainly among
tribal and non-Western peoples, in the       now uncertain tradition of an-
thropology's nineteenth-century project.       The other is a cultural cri-
tique of ourselves, often underplayed in the past, but having today a
renewed potential for development. Because of the current crisis of
representation and the interest in the rhetorics of disciplines, we are
particularly concerned in this essay with only one part of the eth-
nographic research process        —
                               ethnography as a written product of
fieldwork, rather than with fieldwork experience itself. There are two
main ways that the centrality of ethnography in modern social and
         2i    •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


cultural anthropology might be discussed. One is in terms of its devel-
opment as a genre of writing, and the other is in terms of the role that
it   plays in the professional definition and practice of anthropology.
We will deal briefly with each.
   From an institutional perspective, the significance of ethnography
can be attributed to three roles it has played in the professional careers
of anthropologists. First, the reading and teaching of exemplary eth-
nographic texts have been the major means of conveying to students
what anthropologists do and what they know. Rather than becoming
dated as in other fields, classic works in anthropology, remain vitally
relevant, and their materials are a perennial source for the raising of
new conceptual and theoretical problems. This can give a conser-
vative, ahistorical cast to the internal discourse of anthropolog\       ,   since
it is   the vision of certain peoples studied decades ago and fixed in the
classic works, rather than a registering of their present          and changing
circumstances, that tends to have a cognitive hold in shaping the terms
of anthropological debates. This source of ahistoncism has been under
repeated attack. In this essay we will consider the degree to which
contemporary ethnographies insist on a self-consciousness about their
historical context of production, and thus discourage readings ot them
which would fix their descriptions as eternal social or cultural forms.
   Second, ethnography is a very personal and imaginative vehicle b)
which anthropologists are expected to make contributions to the-
oretical and intellectual discussions, both within their discipline and
beyond.       In   some sense, because he or she did fieldwork alone, the
ethnographer is more autonomously m charge ot this medium ol e\
pression than        is   the case with the expository genres ot other disci-
plines. Restudies and multiple projects on the same group ol ethno-
graphic subjects are increasingly common, but the ethnographer is still
writing from a largely unique research experience to which onl) he of
she has practical access         in   the academic   community. As we will sec.
only very recently have the creative potentials ot tins medium begun to
be explored on a wide scale.
     Third, and most importantly, ethnography has been the initiator)
activity which has launched careers and established reputations. he           I




significance ol the expectation thai all neophyte snthropologisa
should be tested by hcldwork in a foreign language, culture, and living
arrangement cannot be overemphasized, since whatevei the) g" "ii H>
do later      —
           and anthropolog) provides a broader latitude foi diverse
inquiry  than any other discipline— an often romanticized ethno
graphic fellowship is what all anthropologists share. his unex.nnincJ
                                                               I
        22   •   Chapter Two


consensus about the nature of ethnography has been profoundly af-
fected by strong internal critiques of anthropology during the past
decade or more, which are having their impact on the way ethnogra-
phies are now being written.
   Why this relative inattention to what after all has been the central
practice of social         and cultural anthropology? It seems to be in large
part a result of the sensitivity and vulnerability among anthropologists
to the uneasy placement of their discipline in the modern organization
of academia,   amid the positivist social sciences' valuing of formal
methods and research designs. Not that social and cultural an-
thropology has been any less ideologically positivist during the post-
World War II high period of this style of inquiry. This, however, has
only made anthropologists all the more sensitive about their uncon-
ventional method. Although some have argued for a more rigorous
approach to research design and data elicitation in fieldwork (es-
pecially the cognitive anthropology or ethnoscience movement of the
1960s, discussed in the next section), and although there has devel-
oped a formalist jargon for talking about fieldwork (as participant
observation), essentially it has been a messy, qualitative experience in
contrast to the positivist social-science vision of method. 4
   With regard to the written product of fieldwork, the genre conven-
tions that have embodied ethnographic writing have incorporated
much of the generalist orientation of anthropology's nineteenth-cen-
tury project. In so doing, they have allowed for the possibility of quite
a different vision of social theory         and research than the dominant
positivist style in which modernanthropology has been cast. The si-
lence about ethnographic writing has been broken precisely because
the crisis of representation has challenged the legitimacy of positivist
goals for social science generally, and in this trend anthropology has
been precocious.
   In the transition         from the nineteenth-century grand vision of an
anthropological science of Man to its twentieth-century intensive and
distinctive reorganization around the ethnographic method, the gener-
alist   ambitions of social and cultural anthropology were redrawn
within the practice of ethnography in two ways. First, the nineteenth-
century tendency to make sweeping global statements was rescaled. As
an ethnographer, the anthropologist focuses his efforts on a different
sort of holism: not to make universally valid statments, but to repre-
sent a particular way of life as fully as possible.       The nature of this
holism — what means to provide a picture of a closely observed
                      it                     full

way of    — one of the cornerstones of twentieth-century ethnogra-
         life    is
        23   *    Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


phy that is currently underoing serious critique and revision, as we will
see. The point is, however, that ethnographers take on a responsibility

for at least providing access to an ever  more complete view or' the
cultures they describe. The essence of holistic representation in mod-
ern ethnography has not been to produce a catalog or an encyclopedia
(although the classic assumption supporting the authority of the eth-
nographic writer is that he commands this sort of background knowl-
edge), but to contextualize elements of culture and to make systematic
connections among them.
     Second, the comparative dimension of anthropology's global vision
was no longer framed by an evolutionary scheme or oriented to the
measurement of relative progress toward "rational" values, though
comparison has remained embedded in the rhetoric of any eth-
nographic text. The underdeveloped, relatively implicit side of eth-
nographic description focused on a cultural other is the reference                   it


makes to the presumed, mutually familiar world shared by the writer
and his readers. One of the key contemporary justifications tor an-
thropological knowledge has derived from this us-them, comparative
side of ethnography, and it, too, is undergoing important revision.
     The loose set of genre conventions that came to define ethnographic
texts and form the basis on which they have been evaluated during the
past sixty years of social and cultural anthropology have been collec-
tively labeled     ethnographic realism by Marcus and C ushman               u>8i),
among others. 5 The allusion is to nineteenth-century realist fiction.
Realism is a mode of writing that seeks to represent the realit) o( I
whole world or form of life. As the literary scholar,     |.    I'.   Stun   i
                                                                                 .




has said, for example, of a descriptive diversion in a Dickens novel:
"The fullest purpose of the diversion is to add and superadd to that
sense of assurance and abundance and reality that speaks to us from
every page and every episode of the novel ...'*.       p. 1     Similarly, real
ist ethnographies are     written to allude to a w hole In means of parts or
foci of analytical attention which constantly evoke t social and cuhui

al   totality.   (Jose attention to detail and redundant demonstrations
that the writer shared       and experienced this whole other world are
further aspects of realist writing. In fact, what gives the ethnographa
authority and the text a pervasive sense- ol Concrete realit) IS the wnt


er's claim to represent world as onl\ one who h.is known it firsth.uul
                           .1



can, which thus forges an mtunate Imk between ethnographic writing
and fieldwork.
     This allusion to realism does no!     mem th.it ethnograph) h.is in
joyed the same flexibility or play of the imagination          m writing sti.it
       Z4   •   Chapter Two


egies as the realist novel has; its ability to experiment with realism and
even to transcend these conventions is only very recent and not uncon-
troversial. Rather, in   its   interest in holistic representation of other
ways of life, ethnography has developed a particular (and from a liter-
ary standpoint, narrow) kind of realism, tied to the dominant historic
narrative motifs in which it has been framed. Ethnographies as a genre
had similarities with traveler and explorer accounts, in which the main
narrative motif was the romantic discovery by the writer of people and
places unknown to the reader. While ethnography encompassed some
of this sense of romance and discovery, it also attempted in its scien-
tific aims to distance itself from the traveler's account and the amateur

ethnographer. To do this, the main motif that ethnography as a sci-
ence developed was that of salvaging cultural diversity, threatened
with global Westernization, especially during the age of colonialism.
The ethnographer would capture in writing the authenticity of chang-
ing cultures, so they could be entered into the record for the great
comparative project of anthropology, which was to support the West-
ern goal of social and economic progress.         The salvage motif as a
worthy scientific purpose (along with a more subdued romantic dis-
covery motif) has remained strong in ethnography to the present. The
current problem is that these motives no longer serve well enough to
reflect the world in which ethnographers now work. All peoples are
now at least known and charted, and Westernization is much too sim-
ple a notion of contemporary cultural change to support the motif of
anthropology's interest in other cultures as one of salvage. Yet, the
function of ethnography is certainly not outmoded just because its
enduring narrative motifs have worn thin. The cultures of world peo-
ples need to be constantly rediscovered as these peoples reinvent them
in changing historical circumstances, especially at a time when confi-

dent metanarratives or paradigms are lacking: as we noted, ours is an
era of "postconditions"    —
                           postmodern, postcolonial, posttraditional.
This continuing function of ethnography requires new narrative
motifs, and a debate about what they might be is at the heart of the
current trend of experiments with the past conventions of ethno-
graphic realism.
     A thorough treatment of these conventions would require a sepa-
rate study (which has been initiated elsewhere, Marcus and Cushman
1982, and Clifford 1983b). We will identify and discuss some of them
in   more detail as we comment on experimental ethnographies in the
next chapter. Here, we only wish to note that from the perspective of
the professional reader of ethnographies, a         "good" ethnography,
         25   •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


whatever its particular arguments, is one that gives a sense of the con-
ditions of fieldwork, of everyday life, of microscale processes (an im-
plicit   validation of the fieldwork      method      that itself indicates the
anthropologist "was there"); of translation across cultural and lin-
guistic boundaries (the conceptual and linguistic exegesis of indige-
nous ideas, thus demonstrating both the ethnographer's language
competence and the fact that he has successfully captured native
meanings and subjectivity); and of holism. The latter two genre char-
acteristics of ethnography are, in particular, key points for referencing
changes that are occurring. The achievement of the realist goal of ho-
     portrayal of culture has gotten the major emphasis in past eth-
listic

nographic writing; it was the one that functionalism, the theoretical
discourse that had dominated social and cultural anthropology, was
designed to facilitate. However, from the 1960s on, theoretical discus-
sion and interest in anthropology shifted, for reasons we will discuss in
the next section, to translating and explaining "mental culture"
                                                                         — "to
grasp the native's point of view, his relation to life, to realise bis vision
of his world," as Malinowski put it in his classic statmeni ol the eth-
nographic method (192.2, p. 25). It was from reflection on this task of
fieldwork and feature of ethnographic writing that interpretive an-
thropology emerged.



         The Emergence of Interpretive Anthropoids
Interpretive anthropology is a covering label for a diverse set ol reflec-
tions    upon both     the practice of ethnograph)           and the concept   ol

culture. It grew out of the confluence in the lyfcos and 1970s ol ideas
from the then-dominant version of social theory —the sociology ol
Talcott Parsons; from classic Webenan sociologyand from the simul-
                                                         ;




taneous impact of a number of philosophical and intellectual fashions,
including phenomenology, structuralism, structural and transforms
tional linguistics, semiotics, Frankfurt School critical theory, and her
meneutics. These theoretical resources provided the elements tor the
appearance of unprecedentedlv sophisticated discussions concerning
the primary aspiration ol ethnography       ,
                                                present from its modem inotp
                                          " and tO elucidate bo* different
tion, to elicit the "native point of vie*

cultural constructions of reality iffecl SOCial action. At the same tune,
these theoretical influences were also Applied tO examinations ot the
communicative processes by which the snthropologisi in the field
gams knowledge «>f his subjects' systemi ot cultural meaning in orde
to represent them in ethnographic texts.   he validity ol ethnographic
                                                  I
      2.6    •   Chapter Two


interpretation came to rest on fuller understandings and discussions of
the research process itself. Interpretive anthropology, thus, operates
on two levels simultaneously: it provides accounts of other worlds
from the inside, and reflects about the epistemological groundings of
such accounts.
   Commentary on developments in anthropological thought during
these two decades has tended to focus on the shift in stress from be-
havior and social structure, undergirded by the goal of "a natural sci-
ence of society," to meaning, symbols, and language, and to a renewed
recognition, central to the human sciences, that social life must funda-
mentally be conceived as the negotiation of meanings. Interpretive an-
thropology thus gives priority to the study of the "messier" side of
social action, which had been relegated to marginal status in perspec-
tives that instead emphasized the study of behavior, objectively mea-
sured and assessed by the detached scientist. However, commentaries
on the emergence of interpretive anthropology have given less atten-
tion to how, almost without being noticed, the effort to conceive of
culture primarily as systems of meaning has come to focus on the pro-
cess of interpretation itself, that is, on ethnography as a process of
knowledge.
   The metaphor of cultures as texts, popularized by Clifford Geertz
(1973d), served to mark vividly the difference between the behavioral
scientist and the cultural interpreter. According to this view, social
activities can be "read" for their meanings by the observer just as
written and spoken materials more conventionally are. What's more,
not only the ethnographer reads symbols in action, but so do the ob-
served —  the actors in relation to one another. The critical question is
what this evocative metaphor of interpretation as the reading of texts
both by the observer and the observed stands for in the actual process
of research. This has led to the present dominant interest within in-
terpretive anthropology about how interpretations are constructed by
the anthropologist, who works in turn from the interpretations of his
informants. What has happened is not so much that anthropologists
have become a strange breed of literary critic, or that they have neces-
sarily given up the goals of a unified science encompassing behavior as
well as thought, but rather that their attraction to theories, which pose
the activity of interpretation as a challenge to long-term goals of the
social sciences, has led them to engage in wider-ranging critical reflec-
tions on their central practice of ethnography. Under the hegemony of
positivist social science, this practice   had been masquerading, rela-.
tively unreflected upon by anthropologists or others, as a method like
        27   •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


any other. The attraction of interpretive anthropology at the moment
is   precisely its sophisticated inquiry into the nature of ethnographic
reporting, which  is not only the basis of all anthropological knowl-

edge, pursued in whatever theoretical direction, but also one palatable
source of inspiration for other social sciences in resolving their own
predicaments, stimulated by the contemporary crisis of representa-
tion; historically, anthropology has been near to them in institutional
definition as a social science, but far in the singularity of its subject
and method.
   One can trace the growth of interpretive anthropology most simply
by reviewing the changing styles of ethnography since the 1920s. Early
American ethnography (from the later nineteenth century to the
1930s) was diversely done and in its own way experimental, ranging
from Adolph Bandelier's effort to write an ethnographically informed
novel about Pueblo Indians (1971 [1890]), to the documentary efforts
of Franz Boas to salvage cultures facing imminent change through Eu-
ropean contact; from the committed enthusiasm ol rank C ushing evi-
                                                                 I




denced by the degree of his immersion in Zuni culture, to the distanced
search of Ruth Benedict for organizing styles and emotions across
cultures in her Patterns of Culture (1934).
  From the 1930s on, the writing ot ethnography was increasingly
informed by the functionalism developed in England under Bronislaw
Malinowski and A. R. Radcliffe-Brown. Functionalism was a set ol
methodological questions designed to guide the doing and writing ol
ethnography;   it was not a theory ol society, although particular!)

through Radcliffe-Brown, it was strongly influenced b) Durkheunian
sociology. These methodological questions were to ensure that an eth-
nographer would always ask how am particular institution ot belie!
was interrelated with other institutions, to what extent contributed    it



to the persistence either of the sociocultural system as a                   whole or ol
particular patterns ot social action. Functionalists were particular!)
fond of showing how the ostensible economic institutions ol societ)
were in tact structured In kinship or religion, how the ritual System
stimulated economic production and organized politics, or how myths
were not      idle   stones or speculations but charters thai codified and
regulated social relations.
     Functionalist     questions      wen' exciting   in   then      day,    contrasting
sharply      with    the   projects    ol   nineteenth CCntUT)        anthropological
thought, concerning, tor example, the tracing 0! the diffusion ol
culture traits or <>t the evolution ot institutions independent ot then
varied social contexts,         lo ask such ques           is   bedim pan         ol   an
     28    •   Chapter Two


thropological      common sense in the twentieth century, and func-
tionalist ethnographies, initially      imbued with a sense of pioneering
discovery and self-conscious of the role of the ethnographer, became
routinized into set sequences of chapters (ecology, economy, kinship,
political organization,      and lastly religion), the elimination of refer-
ences to the role of the investigator, and the reification of institutions
into typological pigeonholes for cross-cultural comparison. Debates
increasingly became concerned, for example, with why the notion of
lineage developed in Africa did not apply as well in New Guinea, or
why the concept of descent applicable to African kinship did not work
as well for South Asia.
  This impasse of increasingly rigid scholastic typological debates
and dry compendiums of institutions was first relieved during the
1960s in work influenced by French structuralism, and ironically, by
the major functionalist theorist of the day, Talcott Parsons. Parsons
made room in his abstract and macroscopic theory of society for the
cultural system, which he himself largely ignored, leaving it for an-
thropologists      to   elaborate.   Two of the leading pioneers     in   the
emergence of interpretive anthropology during the 1960s had indeed
received graduate training in Parsons's Department of Social Relations
at Harvard     —
              Clifford Geertz and David Schneider.
   Both of these initiatives, from divergent directions, attempted to
break through the sociological reifications of functionalism by asking
how institutions were constructed in conceptual terms by the cultures
in question.    The Parsonian cultural system attempted to deal with
each society in its own terms, while Levi-Strauss's structuralism at-
tempted to find a universal grammar or syntax for all cultural systems.
Both thus had the effect of shifting attention from social structure
(social systems) to mental or cultural phenomena.
   Linguistics became a model for emulation, both because language
was seen as central to culture, and because linguistics seemed to have
developed a more rigorous way of eliciting culturally patterned phe-
nomena, and of defining these phenomena in terms of so-called deep
structures not conscious to speakers. The experimentations with lin-
guistic   models were diverse: cognitive anthropology (Tyler 1969),
structuralism (Levi-Strauss 1963, 1965, 1969 [1949]), and symbolic
analysis (Geertz 1973a) were the major varieties. The first attempted
to map cultural categories against "objective" grids of culturally neu-
tral categories; the second attempted to describe culture as a system of

differences, wherein the meaning of any unit is defined through a sys-
tem of contrasts with other units; and the third attempted to establish
       29    •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


the layered multiple networks of meaning carried by words, acts, con-
ceptions, and other symbolic forms.
   Attention to linguistic phenomena and models led to more general
considerations about communication as a process and how individuals
formulate understandings of the worlds in which they operate, includ-
ing not only the subjects of ethnography, but also, in a reflexive sense.
anthropologists themselves. Cognitive anthropology's hopes for objec-
tive grids   came to be seen as just one set of cultural constructions
among others; its frameworks were not at all culturally neutral, but
were shot through with the analyst's own cultural categories and as-
sumptions, thus vitiating the project. Structuralism was critiqued, with
lessdevastating results, as being too distant from the intentionahtv
and experience of social actors, while symbolic analysis in an-
thropology was charged with the reverse sin of being insufficiently
systemic, of seeing meaning wherever and however the anal\ st « ished
rather than having any objective method or criteria of evaluation.
   One response to these dilemmas was to say that cross-cultural un-
derstanding, like any social understanding, is but an approximation,
variably achieved through dialogue, that is, a mutual correction of
understanding by each party in conversation to a level of agreement
adequate for any particular interaction. The anthropologist, as
Clifford Geertz was eventually to conclude (1973c), chooses anything
in a culture that strikes his attention        and then fills in detail and de-
scriptive elaboration so as to inform readers in his own culture about
meanings in the culture being described. In this eminently pragmatic
solution, ethnography is at best conversation across cultural codes, at
minimum a written form of the public lecturer adjusting st\le and
content to the intelligence of the audience. Geeitz's stress on levels 01
degrees of approximation and open-endedness as characteristics of in
terpretation is salutary, although he has tended to conceive of the in-
terpreter as being a certain distance from the object of interpretation.
as a reader might engage a text, rather than in terms of .1 metaplioi of
dialogue, which      more literally suggests the actual situation of III
thropological interpretation     in heldwork. As we will see, this latter

metaphor has more recently become         .1   powerful image t.»r setting the
continuing discourse of interpretive anthropolog)
   Other responses to dissatisfactioni with the iw<> s linguistics domi
nated approaches to vulture were to intensify efforts to coriceptualiie
more precisely what n means to represent the native point of rien and
to expose how the documentation process toward this goal proceeds,
m order to allow the reader tO monitor the reliability of ethnographic
         30   •   Chapter Two


data. These efforts have drawn eclectically from various developments
in   European thought. In anthropology, phenomenology became a la-
bel for the detailed attention paid to the way natives see their world,
while bracketing as much as possible the ethnographer's point of view.
This was seen as a fulfillment of Weber's       call   for a verstehendes
Soziologie, a sociology which gives a central role to the "understand-
ing" of the actors, and of Dilthey's earlier programmatic outline for
the Geisteswissenschaften (human sciences, as contrasted with natural
sciences). Hermeneutics similarly became a label for close reflection on
the way natives decipher and decode their own complex "texts," be
they literally texts or other forms of cultural communication, such as
rituals;it concerned their rules of inference, patterns of association,

and logics of implication. Hermeneutics also refers to the anthropolo-
gist's   concern with his own reflexivity in the course of the task of
cross-cultural interpretation. Marxist analysis became a label for con-
cerns with the way cultural ideas serve particular political or economic
interests, again, including those of both the observed and the observer
in ethnographic research.

   It is these three kinds of broad theoretical influences in interpretive

anthropology that have informed the writing of experimental eth-
nographies. Discussions of the activity of writing itself have recently
focused around the metaphor of dialogue, overshadowing the earlier
metaphor of text. Dialogue has become the imagery for expressing the
way anthropologists (and by extension, their readers) must engage in
an active communicative process with another culture. It is a two-way
and two-dimensional exchange, interpretive processes being necessary
both for communication internally within a cultural system and exter-
nally between systems of meaning. At times, the dialogue metaphor
has been taken too simplistically, allowing some ethnographers to slip
into a confessional mode of writing, as if the external communicative
exchange between a particular ethnographer and his subjects was the
most important goal of research, to the exclusion of a balanced, full-
bodied representation of communication both within and across cul-
tural boundaries. Within the deceptively simple notion of dialogue are
more sophisticated ideas relevant to ethnographic practice, such as
Gadamer's dialectical perspective on dialogue, Lacan's notion of
"third parties" present in any two-way conversation or interview, and
Geertz's juxtaposition of "experience-near" and "experience-far"
concepts. 6
     Understanding the native's point of view, Geertz points out, does
not require intuitive empathy or somehow getting inside the heads of
        3i   •     Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


others. Empathy can be a useful aid, but communication depends
upon an exchange. In ordinary conversation, there is a redundancy or
messages and mutual correction of understanding until agreement or
meaning is mutually established. In cross-cultural communication,
and in writing about one culture for members of another, experience-
near or local concepts of the cultural other are juxtaposed with the
more comfortable, experience-far concepts that the writer shares with
his readership. The act of translation involved in any act of cross
cultural interpretation is thus a relative matter with an ethnographer
as   mediator between distinct sets of categories and cultural concep-
tions that interact in different           ways at different points of the eth-
nographic process.
     The first juxtaposition and negotiation of concepts occur in the di-
alogues of fieldwork; the second, in the remaking of the former as the
anthropologist communicates with his readership through writing an
ethnographic account. Much of contemporary experimental writing
concerns strategies for incorporating more authentic representations
of the experience-near and experience-far concepts, which occur dur-
ing the process of fieldwork, directly into the resulting ethnographies
themselves.
     Juxtaposition, thus, becomes one important component of                                 in-

terpretive anthropology, envisioned as dialogue. Hut                        it    is    not jux-
taposition       of     concepts   or   categories,       isolated   from        their    social
contexts. Lacan, and others, have pointed out that                   in a    conversation
between two people, there is always at least a third, that is, the media
tion of the embedded or unconscious cultural structures                          in    language,
terminologies, nonverbal codes of behavior, and assumptions about
what constitutes the imaginary, real, and symbolic. Muse- structures
that mediate   communication are the object ol ethnographic analysis
framed in terms of the dialogue metaphor.
   Gadamer's historical hermeneutics, finally, is a conception o( di-
alogue which incorporates both the above notions .»( juxtaposition
and mediation. Gadamer is concerned with interpreting past horizons
of history, but the problem of interpretation is the s.nne whether pui
sued through time or across cultures. Each historical period has us
own assumptions and prejudices, and the process «.t communication ^
the engaging of the notions of one's own period <" culture with
                                                                those

of another.     thus inevitable th.it the qualit) and content "t undo
                 It   is

standing gained tn.m reading, say, rregor) <>f fours, will be different
                                             (



for a ninth-century reader than for              .1   twentieth ,eniui\     <»ne.      A hisn.r
ical   hermeneutics should be able to identit) and darif) the nature "I
       3 z      •     Chapter Two


this difference, and a cultural hermeneutics should do the same in the
ethnographic process.
   How, then, do these most recent developments in anthropological
theory     — from the      shift during the   1960s to the interest in interpreta-
tion, to the present intense concern with the ethnographic process it-
self   —   relate to the discipline's past? In the context of the         modern
history of American anthropology, interpretive anthropology might
best be understood as the reinvigorated and sophisticated heir of rela-
tivism, the perspective which cultural anthropology pioneered and on
which it was founded in the 19ZOS and 1930s. Relativism has all too
often been portrayed as a doctrine rather than as a method and reflec-
tion on the process of interpretation itself. This has made it especially
vulnerable to critics who charge that relativism asserts the equal valid-
ity of all value systems, thus making moral judgments impossible, and

that in      its    insistence on   fundamental respect for cultural differences
among human societies, it has paralyzed all schemes of generalization,
by which the progress of any science must proceed.
   It is indeed true that in American political thought the anthropo-

logical concept of relativism was a strong ally of liberal doctrine in the
promotion of the value of tolerance and respect for pluralism, against,
at one point, such racist doctrines as eugenics and social Darwinism.
In the polemics of political debate both inside and outside academia,
the relativist position was sometimes posed in extreme terms. But the
stakes were high, and the outcome was critical. Liberalism, including a
strong relativist component, triumphed as the explicit ideology of pub-
lic policy, government, and social morality in America. It became the

defining framework for discussions of rights and justice to which
groups of all kinds were entitled in a plural society and welfare state.
Only now, in the late twentieth century, as the long reign of liberalism
comes under attack, are there appearing renewed academic discus-
sions of relativism, both defenses and critiques (see Hollis and Lukes
1981; Hatch 1983; and Geertz 1984).
    This time, however, relativism has a strong theoretical manifesta-
tion in the perspectives of interpretive anthropology, and the issues at
stake are much more complexly posed and historically grounded than
during its pioneering period. Contemporary interpretive anthro-
pology, summarized in the dialogue metaphor we have discussed, is
the essence of relativism properly conceived as a                 mode of inquiry
about communication within and between cultures. In the face of un-
deniably global structures of political and economic power, ethnogra-
phy,       as   the    practical    embodiment of    relativism   and interpretive
        33     •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


anthropology, challenges all those views of reality in social thought
which permaturely overlook or reduce cultural diversity for the sake
of the capacity to generalize or to affirm universal values, usuallv from
the still-privileged vantage point of global homogenization emanating
from the West. While neither denying a hierarchy of basic human
values (with tolerance near the top), nor opposing generalization,
interpretive anthropology in its expression as a reflection on ethno-
graphy exercises a valuable critical function in relation to the social
sciences and other disciplines with which it is associated. Thus, con-
temporary interpretive anthropology is nothing other than relativism,
rearmed and strengthened for an era of intellectual ferment, not un-
like, but vastly more complex than, that in which             it   was formulated.


        The Revision of Interpretive Anthropoi og>
The emergence of interpretive anthropology should be understood as
one of three internal critiques of anthropology that appeared during
the 1960s. It was the only one, however, that had an early and impor-
tant impact on changing the practice of anthropologists. As                      wt have
seen,   it          emphasis of anthropological analysis awa\ from
             shifted the
behavior and social structure toward the study of symbols, meanings,
                                             —
and mentality. The other two critiques of fieldwork as the distinctive
method of ethnographic research, and of the ahistork and apolitical
nature of ethnographic writing        —
                                 were mere manifestos and polemics,
part of the highly politicized academic           atmosphere        ol that       period.
Only with the current experimental moment in ethnographic writing,
as anthropology's own version of tin contemporary widespread crisis
of representation, have these methodological and political critiques
caught up with the earlier shift in the way Culture was written about.
This work of integrating all three critiques and bringing them to In .11
as an unprecendented transformation of the dominant model of eth
nographic research is occurring notabl) in the writing <>t those who, .is
graduate students during the [960s and it-s, were trained in the
new developments in interpretive anthropology, and who are moved
by the implications for research of the other critiques as well.
   The early critique of fieldwork was embodied in an outpouring ol
memoirs about         field   experience and guides for siudenis,        among du-
llest   of   which remain Bowen         1964 . < asagi ande  196         .   (   hagnofl

 1968), Goldc         1970), and Maybury-Lewis            1965).   U though the ek
menu of a methodological critique could be read into these works,
they were not presented as such. Rather, theii overall tone was cek




                                     Murr   ir*   I
                                                      '

                                                             -v
                                 New Coii
       34   •   Chapter Two


bratory, a genre of confessions about the doing of fieldwork that while
exposing the     trials   and flaws of   this   activity,   portrayed the an-
thropologist as hero, in the nice phrase of Susan Sontag.
     Of a somewhat different order were the availability in translation
of Levi-Strauss's Tristes Tropiques (1974 t I 955])> an ^ tne publication
in  1967 of Malinowski's field diaries, A Diary in the Strict Sense,
which engendered a momentary, but unsettling controversy. The for-
mer was philosophical, elegant, and worthy of reflection and reread-
ing, destined to be taught in literature classes as a model of belles
lettres. The latter was private, self-psychoanalytical, and was de-

mystifying and sobering for anthropologists raised on the author's
other glowing, pioneering statements (192.2) for fieldwork as the disci-
pline's   method.
     In the 1970s, a new series of reflections on fieldwork began to ap-
pear, which were more overtly and acutely critical of the ethnographic
research process. Such distinctive work as Paul Rabinow's Reflections
on Fieldwork in Morocco (1977) and Jean-Paul Dumont's The Head-
man and I (1978) retained the personal and confessional character of
earlier fieldwork accounts, but they were influential in opening a se-
rious discussion about the epistemology of fieldwork, and its status as
a method. Both wrote their accounts around the substantive dialogues
between anthropologists and cultural others encountered in fieldwork,
thus marking the shift in interpretive anthropology toward a the-
oretical focus on communication within and between cultures. Both
also revealed a keen sensitivity and sophistication about the historic
and political contexts of fieldwork, thus reflecting the concern of the
third critique of anthropology.
     This third critique, targeting anthropology's insensitivity or ineffec-
tiveness in dealing with issues of historical context and political econo-
my, relevant not only to its subjects, but also to its own research
process, developed during the 1960s specifically as a questioning of
the discipline's relationship to colonialism, and more recently, to neo-
colonialism. The most prominent statement of this critique in British
anthropology was the collection of papers in Anthropology and the
Colonial Encounter (edited by Talal Asad, 1973). Earlier, in the
United States, a volume of critique also appeared, Reinventing An-
thropology (edited by Dell Hymes, 1969). In retrospect, this volume is
very much a document of the moment, when much of academia was
temporarily radicalized, and given to a rhetoric of revolutionary
change in response to the Vietnam War and domestic turmoil. While
the aim of the critique in this volume was often true, the overall effort
            35        •     Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


was too immoderate and ungrounded in practice to have much effect. 7
Cases that particularly raised the political consciousness of American
anthropologists were Project Camelot (an abortive effort in the 1960s
to tempt social scientists with grants in return for research useful in
Latin American counterinsurgency); and the Thai Affair (charges, at
the 1970 Asian Studies Meetings, and later investigated by a quickly
constituted Ethics  Committee within the American Anthropological
Association, that ethnographic research in northern Thailand was em-
ployed           in       counterinsurgency efforts against groups associated with
communist forces in Indochina).
      In    terms of ongoing anthropological research during the 1960s, a
strong historicist and political-economy interest was characteristic of
the        work of self-labeled "materialists" (based notably at Columbia
University), whose approach mixed cultural ecology with a mildly for-
mulated Marxism. There was also a general rediscovering of Frankfurt
School critiques of mass liberal societies, which found their way into
the conceptual repertoires of American social scientists, including an-
thropologists. Political-economy research in anthropology has indeed
continued strongly since the revitalization                 it   was given during the
1960s by such scholars as Eric Wolf, Sidney Mintz, and June Nash.
However, as we shall discuss in a later chapter, the status oi culture
and cultural analysis has been problematic in this most strongly devel-
oped strain of political-economy research within anthropology, and
only now are experimental works appearing that address head-on in
their construction the problem of reconciling these politic al-cconom\
and interpretive varieties of contemporary anthropological research.
   To get a more vivid sense of how the above critiques are changing
the consciousness of anthropologists, one has to understand their
problematic impact on the ethnographic research proOSM itself, d
pecially in terms of its two major stages- going into the field, that is,
finding a site where the anthropologist can immerse lnmselt m another
culture, and eventually returning home to write about the knowledge
he has gained from heldwork for scholarly and, sometimes, more pub
lie   readerships.
     has been the ease since the beginnings of modem heldwork that
      It


anthropologists ha\e passed through colonial and pOStCOloniaJ states
and societies in search <»t field sites that approximate pristine culture,
"where they still do u," despite the uiiiui ies old integration oi the
third world into a global economy. Moreover, in this quest, in
thropologists have regularlv sought the cooperation .\nd assist. m>
such states ,\\m\ "modern sectors" ol the soueties m which the\ have
     36   •   Chapter Two


worked. As long as out-of-the-way, backcountry field sites could con-
tinue to be perceived as pristine in professional habits of thought and
writing, anthropologists could be fully aware of the political, eco-
nomic, and historic contexts of their work as a practical matter with-
out this awareness influencing the way they perceived themselves as
professionals in the field or produced accounts from fieldwork
afterward.
  As a result of the intellectual trends at home, which we have dis-
cussed (for example, the appearance of hard-hitting critiques of West-
ern representations of cultural others), and real changes in the third
world, the kind of field sites anthropologists have traditionally sought
can no longer be found, or even imagined without dissonance. Paul
Rabinow's discussion of his awakening during fieldwork to the effects
of colonialism on life in the Moroccan town in which he was living
(1977), and Jean-Paul Dumont's account of his discovery of the identi-
ty he had for the Amazonian tribe that he  was studying (1978), are
poignant testaments to the change of consciousness that attends con-
temporary fieldwork. 8
  One of the most significant processes that has subverted the inclina-
tion to find the pristine in fieldwork has been the adaptation of peo-
ples who have been long-term subjects of anthropological interest to
anthropologists themselves and their habitual rhetorics. Apocryphal
stories abound in professional folklore about the American Indian in-
formant who, in response to the ethnographer's question, consults the
work of Alfred Kroeber, or the African villager in the same situation
who reaches for his copy of Meyer Fortes. The cogent irony in these
stories can no longer be received merely as folklore by anthropologists
who approach their isolated communities and cultures, not as com-
plete strangers, but as known types.
   Those peoples who in particular have become classic anthropologi-
cal subjects, such as the Samoans, Trobriand islanders, Hopi, and
Todas of India, know their status well, and have, with some am-
bivalence, assimilated anthropological knowledge about them as part
of their sense of themselves. A recent example of which we have per-
sonal knowledge was the visit of a Toda woman to Houston. A trained
nurse among her people as well as a cultural broker, she was on tour in
the United States, giving talks about the Todas, of the sort that an-
thropologists might have given in past decades. By chance, she was
visiting the home of a colleague of ours just as a BBC documentary
about the Todas appeared on the television, in which the visitor was
featured prominently as the filmmaker's prime informant. Her com-
          37   *    Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


ments as she watched the program along with our colleague did not
much concern the details of Toda culture, but rather dealt with the
ironies of the multiple representations of her people           — by   herself,   by
anthropologists, and by the BBC.
   Such a story may be taken as a more contemporary updating of the
ones that have long been professional folklore, but its lesson is even
more compelling. The penetrations of a world economy, communica-
tions,and the problems of identity and cultural authenticity, once
thought restricted to advanced modernity, have increased markedU
among most local and regional cultures worldwide, thus engendering
an ethnography in reverse among many peoples who not only can
assimilate the professional idioms of anthropology, but can relativize
them among other alternatives and ways of knowledge. This does not
mean that the traditional rhetorics and task of anthropology to repre-
sent distinctive and systematic cultural forms of life have been funda-
mentally subverted or appropriated by its own subjects. Rather,                   its

traditional task        is   now much more complicated, requiring new sen-
sibilities in      undertaking fieldwork and different strategies for writing
about it.
     On the return from the field, the anthropologist faces a different,
but not unrelated, set of challenges in preparing to write an ethnogra-
phy. One challenge is narrowly professional in nature, and the other is
rooted in the present conditions for the more general reception oi an
thropological writing outside the discipline. In terms oi the first, the
problem has always been one of reducing the diverse, diffuse materials
from fieldwork, captured in memory as well as intermediate forms ot
writing such as diaries and notes, into texts shaped In genre conven*
tions. Yet, given the sort of heightened critical self-consciousness with
which fieldwork is undertaken and conducted, the usual dissonance
between what one knows from fieldwork and what one is constrained
to report according to genre conventions can grow intolerable. IVr
haps genre controls bear down most stronglv at the point of profel
sional qualification         —
                       the writing ot ethnography tor the doctoral
dissertation. Beyond this career point, boweVCT, when the dissert. lOOU
is   turned into a book or  is ibelved tor some other kind of writing

project that permits  one to  make fuller use of the range of matctials
produced m   the field and  after, opportunities arise tor experimental
efforts, especially at the present       moment.
      terms of the intellectual atmosphere in whkh anthrODOfco
     In
writing is received, there was once a mote same, purposiw DUCC KM
reports of other cultures than there appears to he HOW         »WI1
       38    •   Chapter Two


discuss in our later consideration of anthropology's function as a form
of cultural criticism at home, the appeal among a more sophisticated
reading public of the primitive or exotic as a powerful rhetorical
framework for delivering critical messages about American culture is
declining. Here we wish merely to note aspects of the current reception
of anthropology among scholars and a reading public which challenge
the authority and relevance of its wriiting. There is      now a skeptical
public for anthropological works that       "knows better" than to think
that there are completely isolated or totally different cultures.
   Skeptics, as impressed by profound changes in the world as those
social scientists charged with describing and explaining them, wonder,
finally,    whether undeniable cultural differences really matter in the
play of world events. Ironically, part of this skepticism derives from
liberal    thought having absorbed the lessons of anthropological rela-
tivism earlier in the century. Extreme beliefs in difference expressed as
racism and ethnocentric valuations are dangerous and self-promoting.
Cultural differences can be recognized, but if they appear to challenge
an overarching belief in one mankind, or a universal humanity, they
approach the sort of problems that liberalism fought hard to over-
come. Not that anthropology pushes cultural differences so far, but
the American intellectual atmosphere is one that is biased toward at-
tenuating the importance of salient cultural differences, downplaying
their consequences in favor of either the     "hard" facts of political or
economic interest or a general humanism. Consider, for instance, the
humanist assertions of Mircea Eliade and others that, despite dif-
ferences, all religions are ultimately the same, answering the same exis-
tential questions, and are capable of being placed in a common
evolutionary sequence. Or consider the penchant of Parsonian and
Marxist sociology alike for reducing cultural differences to surface
phenomena covering more dynamic social functions that promote
forms of solidarity or conflict identifiable in any society.
   This acceptance of cultural differences, but with skepticism about
their consequentiality,    is   reinforced by the   more recent widespread
perception that the world is rapidly homogenizing through the diffu-
sion   of    technology,   communication,    and population movement.
Again, it is not that people do not believe in the existence of surviving
cultural diversity; rather, from the privileged vantage point of Western
societies, they no longer believe that cultural differences or alternative
views of the world can affect the workings of a globally shared system
of political economy. Anthropologists, who have long argued against
premature predictions about modernity transforming the world, are
           39     •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


increasingly dismissed as romantics or as revelers in inessential min-
utiae and decorative surfaces. For example, the resurgence of funda-
mentalist Islam in the Middle East, a significantly cultural process, is
routinely translated by the media and other analysts in political and
economic terms that we can understand, as if mullahs were merely a
political elite, or as if the Iran-Iraq war would end merely because it is
an economic drain. What we cannot understand is respectfully as-
signed to the mysterious residual category of culture. Development
theorists continue to argue that all practical issues are essentially tech-
nical in nature,             and can be analyzed into more or less efficient and
cost-effective strategies.           Culture for these thinkers constitutes           pri-
marily a category of resistance, which must be taken into account in
planning for change.
      These challenges to the traditional rhetoric of ethnographic                     ac-
counts have grown            proportion to the "shrinkage" of the
                                 in direct

world into an increasingly interdependent world system. N't) longer
can        the    Zulus,      Timorese,      Namibians,   Meskitoes of         Nicaragua,
Kurds, Afghans, or Maronites and Shiites in Lebanon be treated as
totally alien, self-contained cultures, even for the purpose of defining
the traditional unit of analysis for anthropology                  — culture. Ever)
                                                                        a

newspaper reader or television watcher knows them as integral parts
of the world that affect his own society. Ethnography thus must be
able to capture more accurately the historic context of its subjects, m^\
to register the constitutive workings of impersonal international politi-
cal    and economic systems on the local level where fieldwork USUall)
takes place. These workings can no longer be accounted for as mereU
external impacts upon local, self-contained cultures. Rather, external
systems have their thoroughly local definition and penetration, and
are formative of the symbols and shared meanings within the most
intimate life-worlds of ethnographic subjects.              I   Kcepi   in   the most gen

eral overview, the distinction  between the tr.ulition.il and the modem
can have little salience in contemporary ethnographic analysis.
   These, then, are the crucial dimensions of the challenging anno
sphere that anthropologists face when the] return from the field in
order to produce ethnography. It then work is to have s ignifica nce
beyond a limited circle of specialists, who speak their own angu age           l       ,
                                                                                           it



it    is   to    distinctive contribution to other fields thai find IB
                 make   .1



terpretive anthropology attractive               m
                                       t.iung their own version! of the

current mtellectu.il crisis of representation, then the self critical con
sciousness that has already been shaped must find expression in the
ethnographic research process, both in the field, and mOIt COttSCqUCfl
        40   •   Chapter Two


tially, in anthropological writings.   This is precisely what is happening
in    the experimental   mood that now characterizes the writing of
ethnographies.



        The Spirit and Scope of Experimental
        Ethnographic Writing
The present moment of experimentation with both the form and con-
tent of ethnography should not be viewed as an elitist conceit. Rather, it
is   a pervasive expectation among readers of ethnographies and a self-
conscious frame of mind among writers. Both readers and writers of
ethnographies wait in anticipation for more and more texts that do
better, and make more interesting moves, than their predecessors in
expanding what can be done with ethnographic writing. Not just any-
thing goes, however. For example, Carlos Castaneda's The Teachings
of Don Juan (1968) was experimental in trying to portray an an-
thropologist's experiences of undergoing the mental transformations
both of conversion under the tutelage of a wiley shaman and of peyote-
induced hallucinations. Although a powerful poetic move, influencing,
for instance, important Chicano literary figures, such as Alurista, most
anthropologists firmly rejected this experiment as ethnography because
it violated the obligation to provide readers with ways of monitoring

and evaluating the sources of information presented. Nonetheless, Cas-
tandea's works, along with many other examples of fictive writing,
have served as one of several stimuli for thinking about alternative
textual strategies within the tradition of ethnography.
    Most experimental ethnographies look backward for inspiration to
recognized classics by Malinowski, Evans-Pritchard, and others, felici-
tously misread them, and draw out their underplayed, forgotten, or
latent possibilities. 9 An experimental ethnography works if it locates
itself recognizably in the tradition of ethnographic writing and if it

achieves an effect of innovation. Legitimating an experiment by re-
covering a forgotten possibility is most often how an ethnographer
balances these two opposing tendencies.
    Thus, while most experimentation does not involve any sharp
break with past ethnographic practice, it does constitute a rather fun-
damental reorientation. Ethnographies have always been in some
sense experimental, and occasionally, ethnographers have worried ex-
plicitly about writing strategies: Gregory Bateson's Haven (1936) is an

early and striking example of a text that exposes its concern with alter-
native modes of representation. However, not until the present have
        4i   •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


these concerns become a pervasive and highly self-conscious interest.
Bateson's experimental ethnography, which worries over several alter-
native analyses of a single ritual of a New Guinea tribe, is remarkable
precisely because        it    was exceptional and unassimilated             in   the an-
thropological literature for such a long time, but now it is an inspira-
tional text in the current trend of experimentation.
   In the broader intellectual context that we established for the cur-
rent crisis of representation, periods of risk-taking and innovation at
the level of a discipline's method are not unprecedented and in tact
have certain distinctive characteristics. Such experimental periods are
common both at the beginning or at the point of exhaustion of guiding
theoretical paradigms. In anthropology, then, it should not be surpris-
ing that there     is   a recognized fellowship        between today's self-styled
experimenters and those who forged the ethnographic method during
the first third of the century.
   The pioneering ethnographies of the 1920s and 1930s came to be
read  as models, and the "theory" which informed them, tunc-
tionalism, provided a framework for writing holistic accounts of self-
contained social units: tribes, peoples, cultures. Until the present,
through the loose             set   of genre conventions that          we   labeled   eth-

nographic realism, anthropologists believed they shared a consensus
                                       —
about ethnographic writing about what a good, solid monograph
should be. While numerous theories or analytic approaches have de-
veloped since the heyday of functionalism, the form of ethnographic
writing itself has remained largely conservative. In relative terms, then,
the current shift in attitude and expectation among protessiou.il read
ers and writers of ethnographies seems radical: from imagined and
unexamined consensus to restless dissatisfaction with past modes <>t
writing and intensive examination of ways to recast ethnographies,
      Sympathetic readerships ot experimental ethnographies scrutinize
them, not with the hope of finding a new paradigm, bill rather \\ uh an
eye for picking up ideas, rhetorical moves, epistemological insights,
and analytic strategies generated In differeM research situations. Ik                 I




liberating atmosphere ot experimentation is m allowing each readei
cum-writer to work out incremental!) new insights. Specific works an
ot general interest as much tor what lit x are doing U xtualK as fo|
                                                 t




their contents.
      I-ach readcr-cum-writer is thus mOTC           m charge   <»»   his <>r her project,

and rewards, in terms ot praise and publisher interest, Sit t<" nonCOtl
fortuity, rather than crattsmanlikc replu.ui. .11 ol
                                                      models    hat is \wj  W
Ocularly important              m
                           the discussion   that     hovef!  around    silt
        42   •   Chapter Two


consciously experimental texts           is   not experimentation for   its   own
sake, but the theoretical insight that the play with writing technique
brings to consciousness, and the sense that continued innovation in the
nature of ethnography can be a tool in the development of theory.
      The motivating spirit of experimentation is thus antigenre, to avoid
the reinstatement of a restricted         canon like that of the recent past.
Individual works have influence on other writers of ethnography, but
are not self-consciously written as models for others to follow, or as
the basis of a "school" of ethnographic production. Particular texts
can be judged as awkward, or even as failures in terms of the goals
they set themselves, but they may be interesting and valuable nonethe-
less for the possibilities they raise for other ethnographers.

      The danger in an experimental period is precisely that it will be
foreclosed prematurely, that some experiments will be mistaken for
models, that they will establish a mechanical trend of imitators or
reestablish conventions        on shaky grounds. Certain experiments set
themselves particular problems to explore, which they do more or less
well; they may take to the limit a certain issue, and their contribution
is    to demonstrate such limits.      A particular work may do a job that
there is no point in repeating. But a line of experimentation may lose
its   point if it becomes identifiable as a subgenre.
   For instance, unlike the functionalist ethnography in which the
writer was absent or had only a marginal voice in footnotes and pref-
aces, the presence in the text of the writer and the exposure of reflec-
tions concerning both his fieldwork             and the textual strategy of the
resulting account have become, for very important theoretical reasons,
pervasive marks of current experiments. But there is also a tendency to
dwell on the experience of fieldwork and its problems. The pleasure in
relating fieldwork experience can be overplayed, to a point of exhibi-
tionism, especially by writers who come to see reflexive meditation as
not only the means but the point of writing ethnography. Useful to a
degree, fieldwork introspection endlessly replayed can become a sub-
genre that loses both its novelty and payoff for developing a knowl-
edge of other cultures.
      Because experimental periods are by nature unstable and tempo-
rary, situated betwixt and         between periods of more consolidated re-
search conventions,      it   is   difficult to   assess future directions.   The
current period     may appear to be suggesting a change in the whole
direction of social and cultural anthropology, since its founding prac-
                     we do not think so. We view the current experi-
tice is in question, but

ments as adapting and bringing anthropology forcefully into line with
         43   •   Ethnography and Interpretive Anthropology


itstwentieth-century promises of authentically representing cultural
differences and using this knowledge as a critical probe into our own
ways of life and thought. The experiments are coming to terms with
problems that were indeed recognized in the past, but thev were ig-
nored or elided by the reign of other dominant ideas. The least that
will come from this experimental moment is a much more sophisti-
cated and fulfilled ethnographic practice, responding to world and in-
tellectual conditions quite different       from those in which it became a
particular kind of genre.
      The actual scope of contemporary experiments in ethnographic
writing follows from the impact that the revision of interpretive an-
thropology is having on the ethnographic research process, which we
described in the last section. We distinguish two trends, each of which
will be the subject of a following chapter. One trend is a radicalization
of concern with       how cultural difference is to be represented in eth-
nography. It is stimulated by a sense that previous ethnography has
not really gotten across, convincingly enough, the authentic and con-
sequential sources of distinctiveness among cultures. In the effort to
improve accounts of the long-sought-after "native point of view."
these experiments attempt different textual strategies to convey to
their readers richer  and more complex understandings of their sub-
jects'    experience. These ethnographies of experience, as we broadl)
term them, strive for  novel ways  to demonstrate what it means to be a

Samoan, an Uongot, or a Balinese, and in so doing, to persuade the
reader that culture matters more than he might have thought At the
same time, they are also exploring new theoretical territory m the ana
of cross-cultural aesthetics, epistemology, and psychology.
      The essential tension fueling this kind ot experimentation resides in
the fact that experience has always been more complex than the repre
Saltation of it that     is   permitted by traditional techniques .>t Jes^np
tion     and analysis in social-scientific writing.   I'ositivist   social science

has not considered the full description ot experience as its task, lea\ illg
it instead to art and literature. In contrast, anthropology
                                                             has long had
a rhetoric that     encompasses the representation ot its tubjectt' experi
ence, even though its guiding concepts and writing conventions have
not facilitated the substantive achievement of this rhetoric. EthnOgTS
phies ot experience are now trvmg to make full use ot the loiOwh
that the anthropologist achieves from tieUw.-rk. which is much ruber
and more diverse than what he has been able to distill int.- COnVCfl
tional analytic     monographs. The task ot this iiend <»t expeiunentation
                                                                          i-.enre
is    thus to expand the existing boundaries ot the eChl)Ographi<                   ffl
       44   •   Chapter Two


order to write fuller and more richly evoked accounts of other cultural
experience.
  The other trend of experimentation is relatively well satisfied with
the current capacity of interpretive approaches to represent convinc-
ingly the cultural distinctiveness of their subjects. Rather,   it   tries to

find more effective ways to describe how ethnographic subjects are
implicated in broader processes of historical political economy. These
political-economy ethnographies, as we label them, attempt to fulfill
in practice the recent calls for a reconciliation between advances in the
study of cultural meaning achieved by interpretive anthropology, and
the concerns of ethnographers to place their subjects firmly in the flow
of historic events and the long-term operation of world political and
economic systems.
   In sum, one trend of experimentation is responding to the imputed
superficiality or inadequacy of existing means to represent the authen-
tic differences of other cultural subjects; the other is responding to the

charge that interpretive anthropology, concerned primarily with cul-
tural subjectivity, achievesits effects by ignoring or finessing in pre-

dictable ways issues of   power,   economics, and historic context. 10
While sophisticated in representing meaning and symbol systems, in-
terpretive approaches can only remain relevant to wider readerships
and can only be a convincing response to the perception of compelling
global homogenization of cultural diversity if they can come to terms
with the penetrations of large-scale political and economic systems
that have affected, and even shaped, the cultures of ethnographic sub-
jects almost anywhere in the world.
        Conveying Other Cultural
        Experience: The Person,
        Self, and Emotions


Perhaps the most effective focus for descriptions that would deal with
the ways in which cultures most radically differ from one another is a
consideration of conceptions of personhood             — the grounds of human
capabilities  and actions, ideas about the self, and the expression of
emotions. Such a focus serves to cut through the apparent homogc-
nization of contemporary institutional forms of social life, particularly
now that there seems to be a withering away of publicly enacted tradi-
tions. American public rituals, for instance, have been described as
increasingly ironic, and this seems to be an especially modern condi-
tion: rituals are not seen by their "knowing" participants or observer!
to be invested with cosmic or sacred truth, but merely as one among
many equally valid group displays that may engender momentar) ca
tharsis, but have little enduring cognitive hold on their per for men or
audiences.     If   anthropologists can no longer depend as certainly                     <>n

their traditional media, such as public          rituals, codified belief systems,

and sanctioned familial or communal structures, tor capturing the clis
tinctiveness of a culture, then they must resort to cultural accounts of
less superficial systems of meaning. The focus on personhood is an

attempt to do just this.
      This focus counters the subtly ethnocentric assumptions about
human agency embedded in the frameworks with which anthropolo-
                                   onsider the debate earlier in the
gists have represented their subjects. (
century over "methodological individualism" as the criterion ol tC

ceptability for any social theory. It was proposed to contest politicall)
dangerous racist and romantic theories ol collective mentality.       In              I




criterion was that any action described by a social theor) must in prill

ciple be explicable in terms of the behavior and choices «>t individual
actors, since these are the obvious empirical units            ..(   social   life.   Hut
what if persons in certain other cultures act from different conceptions
of the individual?       This   is   the provocation forcefull) raised b) i<>ins
Dumont (1970) on the basis ot Indian ethnography, and on behalf «»t
all              societies affirming explicit cultural premises of in
      hierarchical
equality, such as the .mucin ut\ state <>t Greece, the Islamic umm.i.
and feudal uropc. In these cases, the individual, while I physical CD
               I




        4S
        46   •    Chapter Three


tity, has no     autonomous sociological status, and is conceived as but an
integral part of a larger unit. The political ethics raised by the debate
over methodological individualism remains a vital, contemporary is-
sue in hierarchical societies, stimulated by the creation of Western-
styled middle classes, as the postindependence situation of India elo-
quently testifies, and as is increasingly apparent in the Muslim world.
But it is foremost a cultural issue, not one solved by the "correct"
postulates of sociology, or one easily dealt with politically. Focusing
                                              —
on the person, the self, and the emotions all topics difficult to probe
in traditional ethnographic frameworks        —
                                            is a way of getting to the

level at which cultural differences are most deeply rooted: in feelings
and in complex indigenous reflections about the nature of persons and
social relationships.
  This subject is not strictly new in ethnography. Important earlier
work that has influenced anthropological thought includes Marcel
Mauss' cross-cultural survey of notions of personhood and indi-
viduality (1968),and Sigmund Freud's efforts to describe the rela-
tionships between conscious understandings and unconscious dy-
namics embedded in social relations and cultural forms. What is new
in the currentexperiments is a much firmer grasp of how all these
forms of understanding are culturally variable, rather than being a
part of some panhuman evolutionary sequence. Furthermore, the ex-
periments recognize more profoundly that feelings and experience can
never be apprehended directly, and certainly not conveyed across
cultures, without careful attention to their diverse, mediating modes of
expression. Such experimental ethnographies are especially interested
in theories      and constructions of the person, derived from indigenous
discourses and commentaries. These contain reflections on human de-
velopment and the life-cycle, on the nature of thought, on gender dif-
ferences, and on appropriate expressions of emotions       —   all   seen from
within different cultural perspectives.
   Anthropologists have always collected information on such mat-
ters,   but in using such material to pursue the experimental interest in
an ethnography of experience, what is required now are innovations in
writing strategies. These experiments are asking, centrally, what is a
life for their subjects,   and how do they conceive it to be experienced in
various social contexts. This requires different sorts of framing catego-
ries and different modes of text organization than conventional func-

tionalist ethnographies, which relied primarily upon the observation
and exegesis of the collectively produced symbols of their subjects, to
intuit the quality of their everyday life experience. Today, in writing
         47   •    Conveying Other Cultural Experience


ethnography, there is relatively less attention paid to social activity,
and more to the categories, metaphors, and rhetorics embodied in the
accounts that informants give of their cultures to ethnographers.
   Clifford Geertz's influential essay, "Person, Time and Conduct in
Bali" (1973b), illustrates and helped initiate this move toward cultural
definitions of the person as an important focus of ethnography. Geertz
demonstrates how Balinese notions of personhood are sharply con-
trasted with European ones. Introspective philosophical speculations
about categories of experience, which have informed European social
and moral philosophy, are shown to be inadequate for making subtle,
but profound distinctions among cultures. Geertz uses the work of the
philosopher Alfred Schutz, a student of Max Weber, who wanted to
extend Weber's efforts to gain access to categories of understanding bv
which social actors operate. Schutz attempted to map out how various
types of persons are classified in        common-sense understanding. He
suggested that typical behavior and degrees of intimacy vary by cate-
gories of distance from ego      — distance    in generation (time), in location

(space), as well as relationship (kinship, friendship, occupation).                 I   he
Balinese superficially would seem to operate with just such categories
of experience, conveying internal states of feeling, but they take them
seriously in a way that Europeans do not. The Balinese ad as                   it   per-
sons were impersonal sets of roles, in which all individuality and emo-
tional    volatility    are   systematically     repressed.   Their        notion       of
personhood and emotional structure is quite different from the Euro-
pean autonomous ego, as described by Freud, in which hydrauliclike
emotional pressures must be vented and channeled to avoid explosion.
In contrast, the Balinese try to achieve a choreographed smoothness in

interpersonal relations, in which the presentation of sell            is   affecdess,
even in the midst of calamity or at the death of a dose relative.
   The most appealing and effective aspect ot Geertz's essay is thai he
does not resort to discussions of psychology, even though he is CC1
tainly talking about "the Balinese mind." Rather. (.ecrt/ brings to
bear diverse observations concerning balinese Systems of naming,
ways of calculating time, and ritual practices on a central discussion of
the life-cycle, conceived not literally     interms of individuals, but as               .1




systematic        indigenous conception    theory, it yOU \mII    about the
nature ot personhood, which also constitutes simultaneous!) i system
aticconception o( experience.
   David Schneider's work on American kinship 196S provided an
equally fundamental demonstration that terms such as "individual,"
"person," "relative," and "kinsman" caiUIOt DC Simply used CTOSS
      48     •    Chapter Three


culturally       as   generic   or   neutrally   objective   units   of   analysis.
Schneider's work stimulated a           number of ethnographies by his stu-
dents and others, which exhibited great sensitivity in the elicitation of
cultural formulations of categories of            personhood, appropriate to
their particular settings. Also, by defamiliarizing our own categories,
which we tend to take for granted, it powerfully argued that all no-
tions of human agency are culturally constructed and are matters of
empirical investigation in any society.
   Indeed, if one compares the best of the contemporary experimental
ethnographies with the classic ethnographies of the first two genera-
tions of modern anthropology, a striking difference in the quality of
eliciting the native point of view emerges. The earlier ethnographies
were effective in romanticizing and making vivid the situation of the
fieldworker and in demonstrating how exotic customs made sense in
their own contexts. In their pervasive reflexivity, some of the most
interesting contemporary ethnographies make the situation of the
fieldworker problematic and even disturbing for the reader, so as to
explore philosophical and political problems of cultural translation.
Proving the rationality of exotic customs for the benefit of ethno-
centric readerships is no longer a major challenge. Rather, current
works explore indigenous epistemologies, rhetorics, aesthetic criteria,
and sensibilities with a richness comparable to the way in which only
Greek, Roman, and European cultures (or more rarely the "high cul-
tural" strata of the Orient, such as India, China, and Japan) were
previously treated.
   For simplicity of discussion, we will divide contemporary experi-
mental texts concerned with "personhood"               — using personhood        as
simply a convenient token for concerns with representing culturally
variable experiences of reality        —
                                   into three groups: psychodynamic,
realist,and modernist. Several of the texts we discuss will, as befits
experiments, exemplify more than one of the typological pigeonholes.
   Psychodynamic ethnographies are only gradually becoming experi-
mental in our sense. There is, however, great potential in a view of
these works as trying out different textual strategies that are con-
cerned not so much with the "high" theoretical debates about the
validity of Freudian and derivative analyses, as with reexploring, in
the course of writing about other societies, the terrain first surveyed by
Freud. Freud demonstrated that we can trace out systematic interre-
lationships between conscious understandings of social relations, un-
conscious or "deeply structured" dynamics, and the ways ambiguous,
        49   •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


flexible symbols are turned into almost deterministic patterns of cul-
tural logic. He used the literary canon of bourgeois European society
and dream phenomena in providing keys for patient and analyst to
think about both symbolic logic and unconscious dynamics. In less
literate cultural settings, other devices for exploring psychodynamics

must be drawn upon.
   Three ethnographies, among several others, point in innovative di-
rections: Robert Levy's Tahitians: Mind and Experience in the Society
Islands (1973) is organized around the ways in which Tahitians talk
about and express emotions and thereby construct a distinctive sense
of personhood and self. Levy's ethnography, moreover, demonstrates
that even in societies that seem to be absorbed into the "homogeni/a-
tion" of the modern world, or are simply culturally "thin" (as Henr\
Adams described Polynesians), there may exist culturally distinctive
shared private behavior contrasting with less distinctive public forms.
Waude Kracke's Force and Persuasion: Leadership in an Amazonian
Society (1978) looks to dreams as an access to structures of mental
association that may not otherwise be elicitable. Dream material tends
not to be prestructured by either the ethnographer's questions or tin-
informant's intention to present the ideal norms of his culture.
Gananath Obeyesekere's Medusa's Hair: An Essay on Personal Synt-
bols and Religious Experience (1981) shows how Freudian analytic
concepts can be used as guides for generating questions without \ mlat
ing the cultural integrity of the ethnographic setting, and at the same
time,   how culturally formulated projective systems come into being
and change under the influence of socioeconomic forces.
   Levy's Tahitians is highly regarded among PolynesianistS as a majoi
breakthrough       in   dealing with the dilemmas ot conveying the          dis-

tinctive feel of societies lacking the rich   forms ot cultural displa)    that

either appeal to romantics or are ideal subjects tor traditional eth
nographic tactics of translating cultural exotica into sociological intd
ligibility. Some of this lack ot cultural flamboyance among    ahitians is
                                                                    I




attributable to the impacts o( missionary activit) ovei the past three
centuries, and to the decay ot culture induced b) colonialism,           World
War II, and subsequent existence on       the margins ot the   world econo
my. But in large part, it is simply a style «>t lite indigenous!) developed
long before colonial tunes. evj describes tlusst\le as placing StTCM Ofl
                                I




"casualncss, on Jean and fragrantly presented surfaces.        I   ahitian style

lacks...  mystery... complicity... symbolk forms suggesting
meanings beyond u>muion sense" p. \6\ People lit "not involved
      5<d   •   Chapter Three


in the culturally provided 'institutionalized' fantasies           of religion and
the supernatural    .   .   .   [they] inhabit a fairly literal sense-bound" world
(ibid.).

   What gives Levy's experiment general interest, far beyond the con-
cerns of Polynesianists, is the possibility that the seemingly nonexotic
face of Polynesians provides a mirror of the future, of the dilemmas
that ethnographers will increasingly face if the world is in fact homog-
enizing in its public surfaces. Furthermore, Levy's work opens a di-
alogue with Geertz's essays on Bali. If Geertz seems to suggest a direct
relation between public forms and emotional dynamics, Levy suggests
a division between public surfaces and private behavior. Geertz is in
the tradition of Durkheim (ritual or public form helps generate senti-
ment) and of philosophers George Herbert Mead and Gilbert Ryle
(there is no private language; all consciousness is intersubjective, me-
diated by public communicative forms). Levy                is   in the tradition   of
Freud (concentrating on layered notions of personhood and the self),
yet he is able to establish the shared intersubjective nature of the most
private behavior. Locating cultural organization at the level of person-
al emotional    expression and self-definition is thus one of Levy's main
achievements.
   The technique for clarifying the layerings of personhood and, at the
same time, for conveying the distinctive cultural reality that the non-
flamboyant Tahitian public style makes elusive is the psychodynamic
interview. Trained as a psychiatrist before becoming an anthropolo-
gist, Levy flexibly adapts the method of psychoanalysis to his eth-

nographic purposes, inviting twenty people over the course of two to
eight sessions each to talk about such subjects as death, anger, and
childhood, and eliciting "the kind of personally organized state-
       —
ments clumping of themes, slips of the tongue, obvious defense ma-
neuvers, evidence of emotion, fantasy, and speculative thinking
which is the stuff of psychodynamic model building." But unlike a
psychoanalytic interview in which one searches out previously un-
described defense mechanisms unique to an individual, Levy is con-
cerned to look for generalized, shared patterns. Unlike many earlier
psychoanalytically inspired efforts at ethnography, Levy is also careful
not to violate the cultural integrity of the Polynesian worldview with
inappropriate theory from Western experience; Western experience is
acknowledged as an important comparative tool, but is not allowed to
overdetermine interpretation. Levy attributes the success of his inter-
views precisely to the substantive division between casual, low-key
         51   •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


public culture and a private culture consisting of feelings about the
body and of recognitions of the emotions: "It was surprising to me
how frankly they did talk. In part this was perhaps because for most
people the interviews provided a unique chance to explore and share
their private worlds in contrast to the very public, psychologically su-
perficial interpersonal styles      and pressures of Tahitian community
life" (p. xxiii).

     Levy's text develops this experiential level of Tahitian life around
such topics as cleanliness, sexuality, friendship, authority, thinking.
feeling, fantasy,     adjustment. The text, thus, is organized differently
from a traditional ethnography focused on public life. There arc An
exegesis of native terms, as well as liberal quotations both from the
interview material and (to give time depth to patterns encountered)
from visitors' descriptions over the past three centuries. Instead of pre-
senting an elegant personality model      —
                                         for which his data arc both too
rich and not rich enough      —
                             Levy figures Tahitian emotional dynamics
in three distinctive Tahitian practices: male transvestism, the statis-

tically significant occurrence of adoption, and supermcision as an

emotionally salient event in the life of young males.
     The strategic pinpointing of these practices is Levy's crucial choice
in writing his ethnography, since they give his readers access to a level

of indigenous consciousness and understanding that have been missed
in     most other Polynesian ethnography. They provide a             \\a\   to ap-

prehend Tahitian culture as personal behavior, otherwise obscured b)
the superficiality and weightless tone of public lite. In this way, e\\      1




conveys Tahitian culture as fully a part of the contemporary world,
rather than as a colorless remnant of some culturally whole and an
thentic past.
     Waud Kracke's Force and Persuasion plays with psychodynamic
textuality in a different manner from Levy's work. kra^kc is explicit!)
concerned to fuse psychoanalytic portraits ot individual diversit) with
accounts of social structure and small-group dynamics. Leu con
cerned than Levy with asserting cultural differences, and less con-
cerned than Obcyesckerc with explaining social change, kta.kc is in
an enviable position to be able to use inherent!) exotic and structural!)
simple material      —
                   shifting cultivators with male valued hunting and
fishing, still only    marginal to Brazilian lotiefj    to reflect   back upon
the dynamics ot leadership and followerthip m our own society. ( ul
tural differences     need not be stressed, and are indeed DOTC powerful
left    unstressed: it is almost as it these small groups ,,l us.. 01 time
         52   •   Chapter Three


nuclear families each could       still   perform that   classic    function of
providing a "natural" control group for the exploration of universal
motivations common to all humankind.
   Kracke begins by pointing out the affective dimensions of lead-
ership and followership. He traces the structural correlations, for in-
stance, between a leader's favorite (a son-in-law of an only daughter)
versus a scapegoat (a husband of an adopted daughter of a deceased
elder sister), and examines the persistent patterns of small-group dy-
namics. Then, in the second half of the book, which            is   marked off
from the traditional introductory account of small-group processes,
Kracke presents the results of psychoanalytically conceived interviews
(some sixteen separate sessions with each of the two group leaders,
including twenty-eight dream reports from one of them, and shorter
series with other group members). Kracke credits the local cultural
interest in dreams as partly responsible for the richness of the material,
and expresses admiration for those of his informants who have ready
access to their childhood fantasies and memories, and who remember
their dreams vividly and easily. Among the interesting dynamics are
the repetitions of childhood configurations in adult group settings,
e.g., Miguel's sense of being a less favored child, fears of being aban-

doned, and seeking reaffirmation of love through food are repeated in
his relationships in one group which he leaves due to his fear of his
own anger getting out of control (expressed not consciously, but
through dreams); in the second group, the leader, instead of aggravat-
ing these fears, helps Miguel to control his anger and provides a sense
of security for him.
   Such dynamics not only improve our understanding of the Amazo-
nian culture being described, but also provide a partial mirror for lead-
er-follower dynamics in our own society, a contribution to such classic
models as Robert Bales's distinction between task leaders and ex-
                          and the various emotional patterns dis-
pressive leaders in groups,
cerned in the charismatic attractions of political leaders. To the degree
that Kracke's use of psychoanalytic speculations are but guides to his
pattern-seeking and do not force the data, and to the degree that his
text   shows us how he does this, he transcends traditional psycho-
analytic accounts that press all cultural variation into universal pat-
terns. As Kracke reminds us, the method of confirming a hunch in
psychodynamic interviewing is not like a mathematical proof where
the conclusion repeats and affirms the starting point:

         The important thing is not so much whether [the informant]
         affirms or denies [an interpretation]   — a yes may be merely
       53    •    Conveying Other Cultural Experience


       obliging agreement, and a no may simply mean he is
       embarrassed to acknowledge it      — but, rather, whether he then
       goes on to express the idea more openly, elaborating it or
       adding other thoughts and memories that complete the idea, or
       make it more understandable and give a sense of where in his
       life it   came from [1978, p. 137].
   Kracke includes interview material at great length to show the kind
of data on which psychoanalytic interpretations are based. Without
such detailed interview material, psychoanalytic writing                is   next to
useless for scientific purposes or for inspiration to any but the convert-
ed. Indeed one of the striking differences between psychoanalysis as a
practice and ethnography is that the former does not normally end in a
written text and is not subject to the canons of acceptability of schol-
arly texts. Most psychoanalytic writings have little to do directly with
clinical experience, but seem to be primarily exercises in systematizing
theoretical terminology. Ethnographers with psychoanalytic clinical
training, such as Kracke and Levy, provide an important experimental
initiative   by demonstrating how psychoanalysis might be pursued in
cross-cultural settings. Kracke's use of more straightforward case his-
                               frame works on one level to give a
tories in a narrative life-history
more powerful sense of experience than does Levy's more discursive
writing tactic. What is gained, however, in Kracke's text is also paid
for by a less distinctive sense of cultural difference.            One might also
want in addition a sense of the ways that cultural systems formulate
projective processes, and of the nature of indigenous interpretations.
For this, we turn to the recent work of Gananath Obeyesekere.
   Obeyesekere's Medusa's Hair focuses on the links between private
meanings and public symbols in Sri Lanka, showing how in the effort
to explain inchoate distress and emotions to themselves and to relieve
traumatic pressures, individuals appropriate available cultural models
and, under patterned social stresses, create, each individually, signifi-
cant   new patterns. In this ease, a number of rural Buddhists adapt
Hindu ecstatic forms of devotion as a viable therapeutic frame tor
existence, intelligible to both the Hindu social environment and other
Buddhists. Obeyesekere explores psvehodynamus, social patterning,
and cultural symbols as a        single mutually interdependent flow              that

reflects the increasing pressures on rural Buddhist village families as
their members move into the equally stressful urban lower classes.   lc            I




provides detailed case histories, among the most vivul lite histories
available in the ethnographic literature.        1   rend   is   used not as an    in

terpretive frame for the data, but        as a   parallel source of questions
         54    •   Chapter Three


wielded by the anthropologist to stimulate the interviewees. Some-
times Freudian ideas and associations are "confirmed" or, better, help
locate life-history events that generate obsessive symbols during a later
portion of the life history.
  Textually, Obeyesekere's explorations of these ecstatics and curers
appear relatively traditional and easily accessible to the conventional
reader: the case material          is   set   within more general descriptions of
social  background, social processes (demographic and economic
forces causing familial and village breakdown and migration into ur-
ban areas), and an explicit theoretical apparatus. But interestingly
for this helps to make the point about the current experimental mo-
     —
ment the explicit theoretical apparatus is the least provocative and
enlightening of the textual devices. Without it, however, the case ma-
terial might appear quite as puzzling as a text we will discuss below,

Vincent Crapanzano's Tuhami, an experiment with modernist devices
for presenting a life history. The case studies of Medusa's Hair, more-
over, provide a grounding for readers of Obeyesekere's The Cult of the
Goddess Patini (1983), in which elements of religious systems are ex-
plored as projective systems of particular social structures. Without
the detailed case histories of Medusa's Hair, talk of projective systems
is too easily dismissed as the imposition of overenthusiastic Freudian

systematizers.
   In sum, rather than attempting to validate old psychological theo-
ries, the     mark of contemporary experiments in psychodynamic texts is
the display of discourse      —
                           self-reflective commentaries on experience,
emotion, and         on dreams, remembrances, associations, meta-
                     self;

phors, distortions, and displacements; and on transferences and com-
pulsive behavior repetitions            —
                                all of which reveal a behaviorally and

conceptually significant level of reality reflecting, contrasting with, or
obscured by public cultural forms. More intensively than any other
kind of current experiment, these psychodynamic texts demonstrate
how ethnographies can be specialized and organized around concepts
of the person and indigenous discourses about emotions in order to
reveal the most radically distinctive level of cultural experience for any
society.
   Realist ethnographies, unlike the               psychodynamic searchings be-
neath public cultural forms, tend to draw their initial frames of analy-
sis from the public      commonsense world (of either their own culture or
that under investigation). Unlike the modernist texts discussed later,
which are concerned to highlight the eliciting discourse between eth-
nographer and subject, or to involve the reader in the work of analysis,
        55   •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


realist texts allow the ethnographer to remain in unchallenged control
over his account, delivering a distanced representation of cultural ex-
perience. Realist writers may be reflexive and self-consciously critical,
but only to the extent that it serves the solitary act of interpreting a
distanced subject. The role of reflexivity in modernist accounts is quite
different, as we will see, and is the root of their challenge to the rhet-
oric of omnipotent authority which realist ethnographers employ.
     Realist texts constitute the dominant legacy of the influential genre
of British ethnography created in the 1920s by Bronislaw Malinowski
and A. R. Radcliffe-Brown. In the 1920s and 1930s this genre
achieved authoritative force by contrast with prior ethnological syn-
theses based on scattered observations of variable reliability. Part of
the authority of these texts derived from their writers "having been
there" as fieldworkers for an extended period of time, but there was a
further scientific claim that the trained fieldworker's results were supe-
rior to the observations of much-longer-resident missionaries and co-
lonial administrators.
     In part, this claim to superiority stemmed from direct concern with
the native point of view, uncompromised by commitments to Chris-
tian truth or to    metropolitan policy-making. But, more significantly,
the faith in the fieldwork     method stemmed from the legitimacy thai
functionalism accorded to a strategy of representing the whole by the
part in both research procedures and textual reports. Since everything
in a culture was functionally interrelated, one could strategically focus

in   on the description of selected parts     that      would simultaneously
evoke the whole. Ethnographies could thus be built around key in-
stitutions (Trobriand kula, Azande witchcraft), emblematic cultural
performances (latmul naven, Balinese cockfights), or privileged struc-
tures (kinship systems, ritual and belief complexes, and political
factions).
     This strategic and analytic access to other societies could |ustit\              is

well the problematic control of language that an ethnographer might
gain in a standard two-year initial field period. Even if lull master)                <>t


the language could not be achieved, a suttiuent control for analytic
understanding could. Consequently, the convention                ol   including       in

ethnographies many native terms with their exegeses and contextual
usages is an important monitoring device lor estimating the depth and
range of knowledge covered by the text.       I   his   is   sometimes dismissed
as   ethnography declining into mere annotated VOCabular)               lists,   or    is


denigrated as evidence of anxietv over linguistic control, but disCUl
lion of other cultures without sikIi linguistic touchstones becomes as
      56    •   Chapter Three


useless as psychoanalytic interpretations without the clinical interview
material.
  Two texts are often taken as key turning points in the development
of ethnography as an articulation of functionalist theory and field-
work description: Evans-Pritchard's The Nuer (1940), and Victor
Turner's Schism and Continuity in an African Society (1957)- Evans-
Pritchard presents The Nuer as an argument, not a descriptive text. He
provides dramatic context by describing almost impossible field condi-
tions, and yet shows how the trained ethnographer can nonetheless see
into the society and emerge with a powerful structural understanding.
By structure, Evans-Pritchard here means an understanding of the re-
lationships between lineages, age sets, ecology, and other elements of
social organization. He contrasts this analytic understanding with the
haphazard descriptiveness of Malinowski and Margaret Mead.
  Closer analysis of how Evans-Pritchard constructed his text reveals
an interesting interplay between translations from Nuer idiom, im-
plications of the reader through the use of second-person pronouns,
and evocations employing Nuer metaphors (see Clifford 1983b). The
problem with The Nuer, noted at the time, was the narrowness of the
information it provided. The American anthropologist G. P. Murdock
caustically observed that whereas once an ethnography could be done
in one volume, with The Nuer a trend was being initiated of needing at
least a volume per institution. This was to become an increasing prob-
lem: while Malinowski included information he did not understand as
a form of documentation     — allowing   later readers to reanalyze his ma-

terial,                                                      —
        and later fieldworkers to supply further context the mono-
graph epitomized by Evans-Pritchard's analytic style increasingly
became portrayed as "problem focused." You included only such in-
formation as confirmed your thesis. Such ethnographies had explicit
theoretical ambitions, but were less amenable to reanalysis.
   Victor Turner's Schism and Continuity marks the high point of an-
other style of functionalist monograph, that of the "Manchester
School" of Max Gluckman, in which attention is paid to the indi-
vidual actors, to social structure in Evans-Pritchard's sense, and to
social dramas in which the interaction between structure, cultural idi-
oms, and individuals can be displayed in the narrative of a complex set
of real-life events. The Manchester School's interest in conflicts in
which individual interests seemed opposed to social forces, and con-
flicts in which the resolution was reinforcing of social-structural

norms and sanctions, fostered a textual form that maintained a greater
          57       •    Conveying Other Cultural Experience


openness to different perspectives on social complexity. Ethnography
was in less danger of being reduced to a single argument of the writer.
Rather, the effort was to expose the complexity of the social fabric.
The use of cases, inspired by the case method in law, of a dramatistic
narrative technique, and of the analysis of rituals that in Turner's felic-
itous phrase transformed ideological social norms into emotionally
felt individual desires, were all devices that contributed to a compen-

diously rich textual form that could be analytically powerful without
being reductive of social complexity.
   The descriptive power of Malinowski, the structural analysis of
Evans-Pritchard, and the dramatic frame of Victor Turner all remain
powerful guides for contemporary ethnographic writing. What is ex-
perimental today in this "mainline" realist tradition, which composes
the majority of contemporary experiments on                         self,   personhood, and
the cultural expression of emotions, is the writer's self-consciousness
about his own textual-display devices, and his interest in exposing the
frames of reference for describing experience that are used by native
informants themselves (see, for example, Karp 1980, and Karp and
Kendall 1982). Such self-conscious attention to form is an effort to
disentangle and control perceptual conventions in the writer's culture
as opposed to those of the culture being described. As a result ot this
epistemological sophistication,                   we   believe that    contemporary       eth-
nographies are conceptually and descriptively far more able to pursue
comparative epistemologies, aesthetics, and sensibilities than were die
first   generations of ethnography.
   As illustration, we select five "commonsense" frames or devices for
ethnographic display, which are used in a functionalist fashion (that is,
allowing the part to stand for the whole culture), but which are also
pressed beyond their traditional commonsense uses. These five frames
are     life   history, life-cycle, ritual, aesthetic genres,               and the dramatic
incident of conflict.
       Life history.          Of these five devices, the life history shows 111 almost
inherent tendency toward experimentation with modernist                               textual
forms and              will    be considered again        under that rubric.       Margorie
Shostak's Ntsa: The Life and Words <>/ a IKung Woman                               [981 and
Vincent  rapan/ano's Ftthamti Portrait "/ fl MOTOCCOH (lyHob) ate
               (



two prominent examples. Both are more than conventional lite blStO
ries:they are also meditations Oil the relationships ot anthropologists
with their informants, and invoke a model ot dialogue revealing how a
life    history        is   elicited   and   jointly constructed,   traditionally, die    life
         5 8   •   Chapter Three


history was merely a documentary device for representing the charac-
teristic formative experiences of persons in a particular culture,
                                                        1
through the case of a specific individual or family.
   What is experimental in the contemporary life histories is the effort
to explore the multiple points of view that go into the construction of
any life history. These experiments highlight, so as to factor out, the
mechanical aspects of a conventional account in order not to force the
life-history narrative into inappropriate, Western-biased molds. They
instead emphasize the native conventions, idioms, or myths that com-
pose the ideas of life histories or similar meaningful narratives about
individual experience, growth, the self, and emotions, as they are
formed in the conversations and interviews of fieldwork.
   Shostak's Nisa comprises the edited transcripts of fifteen interviews
with an especially articulate fifty-year-old woman. Commentaries
based on interviews with other women introduce each chapter so as to
control for the representativeness of Nisa's account. An epilogue con-
siders the ways in which the text is the result of a specific intercultural
encounter between two individuals at different points in their life-
cycles. There is, as one supportive reviewer comments, the intrusion of
a third perspective: the issues of contemporary American feminism for
and with which Shostak is also an interlocutor, issues such as the ef-
fects of menstrual cycles on moods, the coercive powers of conven-
tional sex roles, and the slow acceptance of adulthood and parental
roles.

   Shostak finds Nisa's account corrective to previously overgeneral-
ized descriptions of !Kung as gentle: there is much violence and trag-
edy in Nisa's life. Life, seen through an individual's eyes, is not idyllic:
Nisa has lost all four of her children and her husband: kinship is not a
frictionless alternative to        our divorce-and separation-ridden world.
The concentration on sexuality in the transcripts causes Shostak to
worry that a Western obsession has somehow made her overdetermine
the course of the interviews: "!Kung depicted me in one of their amus-
ing (and often scathing) character portrayals as someone who ran up
to women, looked them straight in the eye and said,, 'Did you screw
your husband last night?' "; but after a second trip she is reassured
that it is !Kung women who like to talk about sex.
   These questions about Shostak's relationship to Nisa, Shostak's
questions  deriving from contemporary American feminism, and
Shostak's perceptions of Nisa's account as corrective to previous an-
thropological accounts raise in turn other issues, not addressed in the
        59   •    Conveying Other Cultural Experience


text.   How were these tapes edited? Would there have been something
gained by analyzing the form of each interview and the dynamics of
the relationship between interviewer and interviewee from one inter-
view to the next? Are the fifteen chapters coordinate with the fifteen
interviews, or,     more likely, are the chapters mosaic compilations by
subject matter of bits from different interviews? Would it have been
worth cross-tabulating the interviews by references to emotions (an-
ger, greed, fear, types of love), definitions of self, descriptions of char-
acters of others, tropes and idioms used for expression, so as to make
the text somewhat less evocatively descriptive and analytically                 more
precise? Such questions have been productively explored in several
recent modernist texts to which we will turn below. Shostak's text
thus remains relatively traditional and "realist" in form; it is experi-
mental in what it provokes the reader to think about beyond itself. 2
   Life cycle. Closely related to the     life   history    is   the use of the    life

cycle to structure accounts of personhood and the quality of experi-
ence in a culture. Here the emphasis is not on exposing the cultural
construction of personhood through the deeply probed life of a partic-
ular individual, but rather on the typical phases and events that each
individual passes through. Among recent works that utilize this frame
is Michelle Rosaldo's Knowledge and Passion: llongot Notions of Self

and Social Life (1980). Rosaldo begins with a puzzling experiential
datum: the passionate interest in headhunting among males of a hill
tribe in the Philippines is not merely a means of achieving adult status,
not merely a result of the dynamics of feuding, and not a regrettable
but necessary means of self-defense. It has little to do with gaining soul
substance,       magical   power, or anything     else     <>t   transcendent     cos-
mological import. Rather, it has powerful,          \i   not central, emotional
resonance in defining masculinity by serving to release a sense of op-
pression and heaviness of heart at critical moments in the development
of individuals as persons.
   Rosaldo repeatedly notes that she cannot personally understand or
empathize with the experience of headhunting; to her, it is brutal kill-
ing. When voting men sing about headhunting, the) assume !<>r her an

ugly and bestial character, and she finds it virtually impossible to re<
oncile the same men as "killers" and as the generous hosts and kind
neighbors ot her everyday     field experience. All she can do is relate
their headhunting to its context       the typical mode ot explanation,
when the ethnographer focuses on a phenomenon th.it is both compel
ling and radically alien to his or her experience Blld  alius.  his COO
                                                                  t       I
        6o   •   Chapter Three


text turns out to be the place of headhunting in the cultural definition
of the male life-cycle and its relation to the way gender differences are
thought about among the Ilongot.
     Ilongot society, in which adult males must demonstrate their power
to be respected     and to protect their families, is strongly egalitarian.
Adult maleness is thus defined by a sense of power and vitality which
is   most extremely validated in the ability to take another's life. Such
vitality is also destructive,     not merely of life, but of social relations.
Headhunting and its excessive violence belong to the bachelor phase
of becoming adult. With marriage and the obligations arising from it
adult males grow in their knowledge of the ways of constructive social
existence, which serves to constrain their violent passions. Such
knowledge is initially gained by going on the hunt with fathers who
introduce their sons to a scale of geographical and social experience
not given to women. This gender difference enhances and mystifies
experience as a self-conscious problem, much discussed among Ilongot
men. It is this discourse about the trade-offs between the passions of
youth and the knowledge of adulthood as special qualities of maleness
which Rosaldo taps and makes the focus of her general account of
Ilongot culture.    It is   not a complete account, but it is holistic in the
sense that an illuminating or key part of the culture provides an access
to, or has ramifications for, all other parts of the culture.
     Rosaldo thus explores the consequences of the manifestly plain
facts about Ilongot life, such as its egalitarianism and its salient prac-
tice   of headhunting   — the    sort of exoticism that has always attracted
ethnographers and their readers        —   in   terms of the expression of emo-
tions in Ilongot culture. Conventional ethnographies might have play-
ed out the political, economic, and religious implications of these same
facts while backgrounding by general evocations the less descriptively
accessible "quality of life" matters, such as the nature of persons, on
which the distinctiveness of their portraits of their subjects would
nonetheless significantly depend. Rosaldo's text is experimental in our
sense because she reverses these conventional priorities: she back-
grounds the institutional implications of basic ethnographic facts
about Ilongot life, and develops the life-cycle as an organizational de-
vice for her text in order to examine            head-on the nature of Ilongot
(male) personhood as her primary subject. The effect is striking in that
we come to know much more about emotional tones and organization
in the person, as a central process of culture, and in a much more

rigorous manner, than in previous modern ethnography. Without ben-
        61     •    Conveying Other Cultural Experience


efit   of the psychiatric training of Levy, Rosaldo demonstrates          how
conventionally trained ethnographers can organize their field mate-
rials to     write convincing accounts about matters that before were es-
sential to the effect of ethnographies on their readers, but had eluded
the conventional standards for writing ethnography.
     Ritual. Anthropologists have long looked to ritual as the appropri-
ate vehicle for understanding sentiment, emotion, and the endowing of
meaning upon experience. Rituals are public, are often accompanied
by myths that declare the reasons for the ritual, and are analogous to
culturally produced texts that ethnographers can read systematically.
They are thus much more empirically accessible as the collectively and
public "said" in contrast to the "unsaid," the understated, and the
tacit meanings of everyday life. Not surprisingly, then, the description

and analysis of ritual have been major devices for organizing eth-
nographic texts. From Emile Durkheim to Victor Turner, ritual has
been analyzed as a means of converting the obligatory norms of soci-
ety into the desires of the individual, of creating socialized sentiments,
of transforming statuses, effecting cures, acting out mythic charters for
social action,       and reintegrating agonistic social groups. Almost al-
ways,      ritual   has been seen as a relatively self-contained dramatic
frame.
     Vincent Crapanzano's essay, "Rite of Return: Circumcision in Mo-
rocco" (1980a), calls this into question, and relates ritual integrally to
a long-term process of how anxiety is created and shaped in persons
through the ambiguous cultural messages that they receive in re-
petitive life situations. Analyses of life-cycle rituals from van Gennep
to Victor Turner have usually invoked emotion and intellectual poles
of symbolic experience within ritual performances that            mark the as-
sumption of new social statuses. In the transition from one status to
another, the experience must be both intellectually marked and emo-
tionally felt by all those involved. What ( rapanzano shows, however,
is   that in the case of a seven-year-old     Moroccan boy undergoing cii
cumcision, being made a man by being "unmanned" does not m hid
give him a   new status. He remains part of the world of women and
children.  The pain, symbolism, and talk associated with the' ritual,
instead, establishes a profound anxiety m the uivumused, which must
be worked out over tune, most intensive!) m the msting-tcsting peri-
                                                          |<



od of boyhood and youth. Emotional Structure and a sense o( self are
thus a dynamic becoming, not something created at a point in time b)
a ritual. Rather, the ritual engenders attachment to           deeph cathected
         62   •   Chapter Three


cultural symbols and plays upon anxiety as the psychological state in
which such symbols have their most powerful meaning for those un-
dergoing it.
   Crapanzano's account is innovative in that it demonstrates how
ritualis formative of the most intimate experiences of personhood,

which are distinctive of particular cultures. Moroccan masculinity, al-
though superficially similar to masculinity in many other cultures, is
not a token of some universal definition of maleness. Rather, as Cra-
panzano shows, it is a precise product of a distinctive kind of sen-
sibility and experiencing of specific forms of ritual and everyday social

life.

    In his    account of the Kaluli of New Guinea, The Sorrow of the
Lonely and the Burning of the Dancers (1976), Edward Schieffelin
                 more traditional way as a puzzling exotic perfor-
uses a ritual in a
mance which, in the course of his explanation of it, generates a full
ethnography of the culture. But Schieffelin makes this device do two
further novel tasks. First, he treats the Gisaro ritual as a figure of
emotional styles rarely explored in such depth for New Guinea peo-
ples. 3 It is as much the quality of cultural experience as the structure of
interaction that is elucidated by Schieffelin's ethnography, and in this
sense, he pushes the standard organizing device of the ritual focus in a
novel direction.
    Second, just as Crapanzano emphasizes the cricumcision ritual as
but one crystallized moment within a much larger process of the per-
sonal development of the emotions and of self-definition, so too
Schieffelin       uses   the   Gisaro   ritual   among   the   Kaluli   as   but one
crystallized exemplar of a pervasive cultural logic of exchange, regis-
tered in experience by associated feelings of anger, sadness, and con-
tentment. All aspects of everyday life are dramatically structured in
terms of reciprocity from childhood games to marraige, economics,
and even personal sentiments. Reciprocity as a basic moral imperative,
especially in tribal societies, has          been an enduring anthropological
theme at least since the work of Malinowski and Marcel Mauss. But
the standard ethnographic image of the             New Guinea, tribesman is as a
"tough, practical, hard-working manipulator caught up in an endless
game of obligations, exhanges, debts and credits, which he tries to
play to his own and his group's advantage" (p. 2). Schieffelin shows
not only that there is a richly sentimental side to Kaluli life, but that it,
too, imbues and is structured through cultural scenarios of reciprocity.
By his reference to "cultural scenarios," Schieffelin wishes to indicate
not only the basic Kaluli scheme of interpretation by which they them-
         63    •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


selves explain widely heterogeneous events, but the kind of ongoing
process of expressing and inculcating emotional tones in personal be-
havior that defines Kaluli experience.
   What is most remarkable about the Kaluli, as perceived by their
ethnographer, is the degree to which they interpret the natural worlds
(seen    and unseen) through sound rather than vision. Schieffelin de-
scribes this as follows:

         A man will never characterize a rat as a small, furry animal
         with a pointed nose and sharp teeth. Rather he will make a
         squeaking noise, pinch himself gingerly to indicate a small,
         cautious, fast animal biting him.                                      .       .   The perception of creatures
         by their voices and movements in the forest gives a peculiar
         sense of presence and dynamism to things that are unseen, to
         surrounding but invisible life  amid the pervading .       .   .




         stillness.   .   .   The calls of the birds have the sudden and curious
         appeal of a spoken voice           .   .   .       the self-satisfied, declamatory
         squawk of a hornbill suddenly comes clapping, as though
         someone had shouted a greeting        the plaintive "juu-juu-juu"  .       .       .




         of the kalo (a small pigeon).  "You hear that? It is a little
                                                        .       .




         child who is hungry and calling for its mother      ." [pp. 9^-                                    .   .




         96]

By his appreciation of the Kaluli sensitivity to the aural/oral construc-
tion of meaning, Schieffelin gives ethnography's conventional interest
in social relations an effectively experiential and sensory twist. But it is

his colleague, Steven Feld, who advances this ethnography of experi-

ence into an even more intensive exploration of Kaluli aesthetics, epis-
temology, and poetic form.
   Aesthetic genres. Related to the anthropological study of ritual                                                                       is

the much less developed study of aesthetics and expressive genres.
There are a number of contemporary efforts to write ethnographies
devoted to strikingly different aesthetics than our own, such as fohfl
Chernoff's African              Rhythm and African Sensibility                                                      [979   ,
                                                                                                                               (   harles
Kcil's    Iw Song (1979), and Steven Feld's Sound and Sentiment                                                                    [982
This topic has assumed new relevance since it probes die expressive
dimensions of             ritual   more   directly                      than do the conventional SD-
proaches. In contrast to these, tor example,                                                    I   eld's       ethnography           It

counts his coexpenencing of music                                       with Ins informants, and this
provides, through an inquiry in aesthetics, a much more elaborate rep-
resentation of (in this case, Kaluli) emotional lite.                                                 I   le eliuts their           com
mentanes on their own music. I le also attempts Ins ow n compositions
        64    •   Chapter Three


in their idiom, and he experiences in return the power of the weeping

and tears that his music draws from Kaluli listeners. The test for the
reader is the sense that one could with Feld's book in hand begin to
evaluate experience the Kaluli way, thereby gaining a set of conceptual
tools with sensory and cognitive bases radically different from our
own. 4
    Having provided this critical apparatus for his readers, Feld then
emerges from it to express a further ambition that is based on a reflex-
ive understanding of limits in his own efforts: there are remaining
levels of experience which he has penetrated in some sense, but which
cannot be captured by the text he had thus far written. He ends his
ethnography with a brief observation about the difference between
two photographic attempts he made to capture a Gisaro dancer. One
is a conventional medium-distance portrait of a dancer in full regalia;

the other is a dreamy blur of movement. The point he wishes to make
is that while the former iconic image is more easily readable, the latter,

more "symbolist" image is the more evocative-expressive, given a
viewer already informed of the meanings and emotions of the dance. It
does not escape Feld that in trying to find an expressive mode within
his own cultural idiom to convey deep levels of Kaluli experience, he
turns to a visual form, rather than a Kaluli-preferred sonic one. There
is, then, no absolute comprehending of other cultural experience, only

degrees. And greater sophistication in such comprehension depends
upon an ability ultimately to "coexperience," and to translate ever
more fully back and forth between different cultural aesthetics and
their respective critical apparatuses. Feld's ethnography, which exhib-
its a series of powerful means to convey the radical difference of for-

eign cultural experience, has been a useful example for us to explore,
since   it   resonates with the different kind of textual innovation that
Schieffelin was exploring in his account of the Kaluli.
   The dramatic incident. Bradd Shore's Sala'ilua: A Samoan Mystery
(198Z) uses a dramatic incident    —
                                   a murder in the community in which
he worked     as  —
                 an ethnographic   display tactic. Within careful limits,
ethnographers can learn from such techniques of fictional narrative
effective ways to relate abstract, analytic discussions of principles of
social structure and categories of cultural meaning to the representa-
tion of the full-bodied experience of discrete events in social life. Shore
uses the dramatic incident of homocide only as a frame, and thus is
only suggestive about   how this device might be employed. He de-
scribes the murder and its immediate repercussions; he then gives a
structural account of the village and the rules of Samoan life and pol-
         6$    •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


itics   as a   background discussion for identifying the mechanisms of
conflict inherent inSamoan society; finally, before returning to an
explanatory follow-up on the murder, there is a series of chapters on
cultural meaning, personhood, and emotions. This is where Shore lo-
cates the true human mystery of Samoa. The chapter on "Persons" is
perhaps the finest in the set. It begins with the same epistemological
challenge that motivates many of the experiments we have cited:

         There is perhaps no more powerful barrier to our accurate
         perception of Samoan culture than a complex set of
         assumptions that most Westerners (and perhaps especially
         contemporary Americans) hold about the nature of the person.

The Samoan language has no terms corresponding to "personality,
self, character"; instead of our Socratic "know thyself," Samoans say

"take care of the relationship"; instead of the European image of a
rounded, integrated personality, like a sphere with no sides, Samoans
are like gems cut with many distinct sides. The greater the number of
sides, or parts, defined by relationships, the more brilliant the form,
the greater the craft and skill of the person. Personal qualities are rela-
tive to   context rather than descriptive of a persistent and consistent
quality or essence.      Samoans comment upon these differences in con-
cepts of personhood between Euro-Americans and Samoans as much
as do Westerners themselves. The Samoan sense of shifting, flexible
personhood explains the difficulty traditional anthropological theory
has had in accommodating Samoans within its constructs of kinship
systems as static frameworks of roles associated with well-defined
rights and obligations.
     This flexibility goes along with the cultivation of public Faces,   a

reluctance to discuss purely private experience. Like the Tahitians,
who Levy says experience an uncanny panic when alone, and the Hal-
inese,    whom Geertz describes as experiencing a kind of embarrass*
ment or stage fright should their social masks slip, the Samoans, too,
have a similar, culturally labeled tear. In their ease evil inheres in un-
ruly drives and desires that are controlled and compensated tor In the
elaborate, publicly enacted schemes ol social etiquette and constraints
for which Samoan culture is famous. Samoans, in fact, often talk as it
the  body were a decentralized aggregation oi parts, much like Ho
merk Greeks seem tO have talked; and like the HomerK (.reeks, the)
therefore acknowledge responsibility only in public there is no prh ate
                                                         ;




guilt, only shame when caught.

    Indeed, a neat clue is the artistic figures Samoans draw with limbs
       66   •    Chapter Three


going off in different directions and an absence of a central core. Shore
contrasts these drawings with Renaissance figures in which limbs radi-
ate from a center encircled to emphasize compact integration. Un-
acknowledged by Samoan ordinary discourse, but obvious to an
outside observer, is the considerable amount of impulse training and
restraint in Samoan socialization, monitored in part by their aesthetics
of personhood. Samoan persons are thus not disciplined only by per-
scriptive public styles and shame, but also by an internalized aesthetic.
   Shore's intention is to demonstrate that Samoan aesthetics are con-
centrated, not in some distinct genre like music or dance, but rather in
the performance of social relationships themselves, and in the molding
of appropriate personal orientations to life. In some sense, the quality
of Samoan everyday life is comparable not to everyday life in the West,
but to the forms and aesthetics of classic Western "high" culture.
There may be some idealization of his subjects here, but Shore effec-
tively shows that experience in Samoa is at least partly a very formal,
reflected-upon matter that is accessible by conventional ethnographic
techniques, if only the sensitive fieldworker follows indigenous guides
about where to look. Shore's account alternates between very system-
atic model-building designed ambitiously to explain where and how
social conflict appears in Samoan life, and the exegesis of key concepts
as a way to represent the more private organization of emotional ex-
pression in the person. Unlike the Kaluli, for example, the representa-
tion of Samoan experience,       on which Shore's account hinges, seems
more amenable to established realist conventions of writing.
  As with many of the contemporary experiments, Shore leaves the
reader in a state of provocation, rather than with a packaged, au-
thoritative image of Samoan life. Just how different are Samoans from
ourselves?      How different is the Samoan sense of evil passions lurking
beneath the surface from Freudian hydraulics? Shore has indicated
well  enough that there is a difference, which is masked by surface
similarities between Samoans and any other people, including our-
selves. The problem is that such difference can never be represented
absolutely, as was perhaps hoped in a more naive period of eth-
nographic writing. While realistic    —                     —
                                       because it is realistic Shore's ac-
count is full of the fluidity, paradox, and indeterminants that animate
Samoan forms. Rather than trying to portray a single absolute and
static reality   — a monolithic Samoan national character — Shore per-
suasively demonstrates that the aim instead must be to represent the
parameters of such fluidity which characterize both experience and
cultural form.
         67   •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


   In sum, all of these realist texts are relatively traditional in form.
They are experimental in the way they deploy their frames for descrip-
tion, and thereby raise epistemological questions about representing
experiential differences across cultural boundaries. Whether the focus
on personhood, the self, and emotions will continue to be as central in
future experiments remains to be seen.           It   may be that these experi-
ments are in fact transitional to a more sophisticated appreciation for
and ability to explore alternative aesthetics, epistemologies, and sen-
         that survive strongly and subtly in a homogenizing world.
sibilities

   Furthermore, the promise of ethnographies of the person is traded
off against a cost    — that they tend   to elide or background the estab-
lished ethnographic function of describing such topics as social struc-
ture, politics, and economics. Some texts, such as Shore's, do deal in a
balanced and successful way with structure and experience. But how
to dovetail the two and show their intimate relationships in imagina-
tively   constructed texts is a crucial area for further experimentation.
Theory-building in social and cultural anthropology at present is a
simultaneous function of devising textual strategies that modify past
conventions of ethnographic writing.
   Modernist texts arise centrally from the reciprocity of perspectives
between insider(s) and outsider(s) entailed in any ethnographic re-
search situation. The use of the term "modernist" to label these eth-
nographies is intended here as a parallel reference to allude to the late
nineteenth-and early-twentieth-century literary movement in reaction
to realism. If realist texts continue the convention of allowing the eth-
nographer to remain in unchallenged control of his narrative, modern-
ist texts are constructed to highlight the eliciting discourse between

ethnographer and subjects or to involve the reader in the work of
analysis. In the frame of the ethnographies we have |ust discussed, the
origin of modernist       ethnography might be imagined            as   it   .111   eth-

nographer had begun with the goal of representing the experience ol
his subjects by one or another of the above techniques, but Lame to the
conclusion that this could not be done with authenticity, at                 least In

any conceivable means of realist description. Ratjbfr, the experience
representee! in the ethnography must be that <>t the dialogue between
ethnographer ami informants, when textual space is arranged tor the
informants to have their own voices.       I   his might   be viewed as a derail-
ment of the traditional object of ethnography and a radical ihifl in
perspective on what ethnographies are supposed to he about and how
they arc to be w rittcn. Modernist ethnography is fax used primarily <>n
delivering a message In manipulating the form ot a text and is radi
        68   •   Chapter Three


cally concerned with what can be learned about another culture from
full   attention to the enactment of the research process itself.
    There is the potential in modernist ethnography for considerable
experimentation with textual presentation, some of which has taken
its cues from French surrealist, structuralist, and poststructuralist liter-

ary theory. Modernist writers seem to be holding the conventional use
of the concept of culture itself in question. This is what makes them so
potentially radical. Most of the personhood ethnographies discussed
previously still rely firmly on a conventional notion of a shared cultur-
al system on which to build their texts. Experience is thus a direct
outcome or reflection of coherent sets of cultural codes and meanings.
This is not necessarily the case for those who write with the dialogic
motif at the center of their texts. They are at the very least uncertain
about the coherence of culture in the terms in which anthropology has
developed this concept. Starting from such uncertainty, they can do no
other than to concentrate upon the immediacy of discourse and the
dialogic experience of fieldwork. While such texts have the ability to
disturb and startle, they literally take the ground from under ethnogra-
phy and shift its purpose. There are even moderate positions in this
radical posture, but generally, the modernist strategy in ethnographic
writing fails to communicate, as yet a satisfactory alternative to most
anthropologists, even as it powerfully delivers its unsettling effect.
   Dialogue is the fashionable metaphor for modernist concerns. The
metaphor can illegitimately be taken too literally or hypostatized into
philosophical abstraction. It can, however, also refer to the practical
efforts to present multiple voices within a text, and to encourage read-
ings from diverse perspectives. This is the sense in which we use
dialogue.
       Two risks and one criticism may be dealt with at the outset. It is
possible for this sort of inquiry to slide into simple confessionals of
field experience, or into atomistic nihilism where it becomes impossi-

ble to generalize from a single ethnographer's experience. The danger
in both cases is allowing the anthropologist-informant dialogue to be-
come the exclusive or primary interest. Insofar as texts do this, they
are of no particular ethnographic interest.
       A recent criticism (Tyler 198 1) has suggested that since ultimately
the ethnographer holds the pen, true dialogue         is   not represented in
 recent modernist experiments,    and cannot be in any fundamentally
 authentic way. There is, of course, a purist Platonic sense in which this
 critique is valid: since oral discourse is labile, continually monitored,
 and modified by both parties, a text is an extremely poor, if not out-
        69   •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


right false, representation of such discourse.          For ethnographic pur-
poses, however, the point is to see what any dialogic mode of textu-
ality can convey. There are several interesting rhetorical choices avail-
able.   We will consider four of these: dialogue, discourse, cooperative
texts, and surrealism.

    First, the focus on "dialogic" interchange can be used to reflect

upon experience in another culture as it reshapes the definition of real-
ity of someone from our own culture. This is a component in all good

accounts of field experience: the ethical dilemmas faced by "Elenor
Bowen" [Laura Bohannan] in Return to Laughter (1964), the learning
to control expressions of aggression and irritation in Jean Brigg's Nev-
er in Anger (1970), and Paul Riesman's efforts (1977) to use himself as
a cross-cultural    monitor of changing processes in the definitions of
self,   privacy, emotion, and individuality in Nigeria and America.
   Some such accounts, which concern the anthropologist's experience
of an altered state of consciousness through the learned categories of
another culture, are usually self-consciously posed as passing beyond
the realm of ethnography; they constitute a critique of conventional
ethnographic inquiry for failing even to appreciate the most significant
areas of indigeneous      knowledge and discourse. Carlos Castaneda's
Don Juan series is the popular archetype, but other accounts exist as
well (viz., Grindal 1983).          The best of these "sorcerer's apprentice"
ethnographies demonstrate the connections between the local cultural
symbolism, the physiological stimuli            (fasting, hyperventilation, per-
cussion, lighting, intoxicants, etc.),         and most importantly,        the eth-
nographer's relationship with a native manipulator of the experience
(be it a shaman or the anthropologist's cook-informant). In all of these
efforts, the data base is the memory of the ethnographer, prompted bv
field   notes and diaries, including situational reactions, associations,
dreams, and reflections on sources of information.
   Several recent works        most prominently those of Paul Rahmow and
Jean-Paul Dumont mentioned in the last chapter              have focused atten
tion on the dialogue between anthropologist and informant as a wa)
of exposing how ethnographic knowledge develops. One such text ill
terestmgly tied to the ethnographic project is Kevin Dwyer's Morot
can     Dialogues    (19X2),    a    virtual   compendium    o(   light!)     edited
transcripts of field interviews.       Ihwcr's pom! is i<> expose, first, what
ethnography's neat textualization of the immediate experiential data
of heldwork conceals about cultural otherness, and, second, the field
worker's imperfect, shak\ control of material about which he later
writes with authority.
        70   •   Chapter Three


   Dwyer stresses the growth of knowledge and recursiveness from
one interview to the next. He manages to present some poignant mo-
ments (the pain of a divorce, the loss of a child, the unhappy marriage
of a daughter); he presents modes of expression and patterns of think-
ing (he is especially good on the relative pragmatism and flexibility of
thought patterns as opposed to their usual characterization as rule-
governed); and he portrays some brief but sharply defined incidents
(circumcision, wedding, dealing with the police about a theft). He, in
effect, starkly presents the      raw material of fieldwork and challenges
the reader to judge what can be done with it. In a spirit of experimen-
tation,   he explicitly indicates that he wants the book assessed by its
display of "structured inequality and interdependence of self              and
other" (p. xix). The text is meant to be neither definitive nor a model
for others to follow, but rather a way of stressing the vulnerability of
all   participants in the ethnographic project: anthropologist, infor-
mant, and reader. Dwyer accomplishes the task of revealing the di-
alogic roots of ethnographic knowledge, but in so doing, he also
disturbingly questions the value of continuing with the project of rep-
resentation in any of its conventional senses.
      A second modernist strategy is structuring the text in terms of a
rhetoric of the magic or creativity of verbal interaction.       We might call
this the discourse model of ethnography, in which one draws on the
philosophies of language that insist on the activeness of oral discourse
and emphasize the problems of capturing it textually. J. Favret-Saada's
Deadly Words: Witchcraft in the Bocage (1980 [1977]), for instance,
uses the account of the author's involvement with the rhetorical strat-
egies of witchcraft in rural France to undermine the reader's initial
understanding of witchcraft as either archaic folklore or as a straight-
forward mechanism of social control. Instead, the reader is gradually
brought to see it as a kind of countercultural discourse that reveals
how radically ethnocentric metropolitan views of provincials are, and
how suspicious and self-protective provincials can be in the presence
of outsiders.
      Part of the force of the text is to place the reader on the defensive as
potentially party to the stupidities the author is exposing.         From this
defensiveness, the reader        is   gradually initiated into the discourse of
witchcraft that the ethnographer has herself been learning. It is a dis-
course that can be illustrated only through presentation of the work-
ing out of cases, including liberal quotations from interviews with the
bewitched and unwitchers. Favret-Saada's procedure is to show how
peasant discourse operates, how the lexical choices they make are apt,
        7i    •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


and how she herself was gradually initiated into their use. It is an
exercise parallel to an experience of psychotherapy, where one is at-
tempting to pay attention at the same time to the language and the
psychological dynamics of the process in which one is engaged.
   Embedded in both of the above modernist choices, more or less
explicitly, is a goal of cultural criticism of the anthropologist's home

society, a topic to which we will return in a following chapter.
   Third, there is the notion of a cooperative text composed by infor-
mants) and anthropologist together. In early ethnography, infor-
mants routinely wrote out materials for anthropologists, which were
included in ethnographic reports (as in the famous collaboration be-
tween the Indian George Hunt and Franz Boas). Maurice Leenhardt,
as James Clifford (1982) has recently reminded us, wanted to use col-
laboration not only for accuracy of information, but to present,
through the process of involvement in a mututal project of inquiry, a
mirror of self-reflection that would serve as a stimulant for critical
thought and change among his informants. Leenhardt was originally a
missionary, and while not a blatant hunter of souls, he assumed that
this collaborative process of clarification would move pagans toward

Christian enlightenment.
   Other recent collaborative texts are Birds of My Kalam Country by
Ian  Majnep and Ralph Bulmer (1977), and Piman Shamanism by
Donald M. Bahr, Juan Gregorio, David I. Lopez, and Albert Alvarez
(1974). The most interesting aspect of these efforts is their introduc-
tion of polyphony: the registering of different points of view in multi-
ple voices. Clifford (1983b) shows how Victor Turner, when he wrote
about Muchona as his key Ndembu informant (in Casagrandc iyfro),
downplayed the role of a third party, Kashinakaji, who helped trans-
late Muchona's language into one Turner could better grasp. Multiple

voices were thus reduced to    dialogue, one thai could then be further
                                  .1



subjected to the authoritative single voice <>t the ethnographic writer.
Mow much more interesting, instead, to retain the different perspec
ti\es   on cultural reality, to turn the ethnographic text into a kind ot
display and interaction among perspectives. Once tins is done —either
in   terms of the direct inclusion ot material authored bv others, or in
more sociological terms ot the description ot the idioms ot different
classes or interest groups    —
                           the text beuunes more BCCeSSiblc tO read
erships other than the usualK targeted professional one.
     Fourth, and finally, we turn to Vincent ( rapanzano'i Tuhami, P01
trait of a Moroi an 1     yHob;, which is perhaps the most provocativel)
                          \




modernist ot the texts we have Considered. It presents a lite hisior\ and
           72     •         Chapter Three


the eliciting of an interview, as a puzzle, asking the reader's help in
interpretation. The most difficult parts of the account for Crapanzano
(and the reader) are the moments when Tuhami conveys a sense of his
pain and dilemmas by grasping for vivid metaphors, whether they
come from what we would recognize as real-life or from fantasy pasts.
Crapanzano considers the psychic processes and linguistic metaphors
of fantasy as valid means of communicating experiences. They, how-
ever, require considerably greater skill in interpretation than more
realist modes of narration. Interpretation, moreover, may impose dis-

tortions; it may be overinterpretation. So, Crapanzano offers edited
transcripts and invites the reader to help in the process of interpreta-
tion. Some of his                  own commentary is provided, including suggestions
about the transferences that were probably occurring, and his uncom-
fortable feelings about being obliged to assume the role of healer in the
course of his elicitations. But Tuhami derives its rhetorical power from
Crapanzano's holding back on what would normally be the authority
of the ethnographer over his own account, thus making room for an
active reader drawn into a process of inquiry, presented as puzzling
and mysterious.
      Tuhami is presented as a work on the problems of metaphor and
other devices employed by individuals to express their personal dilem-
mas, compounded by difficulties of interpretation generated by trans-
ferences. Transference  is an essential part of the interview situation

and the resulting portraits of reality by Tuhami and by Crapanzano.
Dealing with transference is a challenge rarely considered in past eth-
nographies. Tuhami is difficult not only because this is a complex sub-
ect, but also because the material on which it is based is highly edited.

It    is   as    if    the author          were not quite certain whether he wanted to
present the reader with an analogue of the kind of puzzlement he him-
self had to face in deciphering Tuhami's discourse, or whether he

wanted to present a faithful transcript of what that discourse was like
in elicitation              — that   is,   the text itself resembles the fragmentary nature
of the series of interactions that it describes. The former case would be
a step          beyond the traditional realist conventions of ethnography, a
quite different use of this genre for the evocation of a reality rather
than for its direct representation. 5
  Crapanzano's text breaks the traditional life-history frame, and al-
though it is "realistic" in attempting to represent the actual interview
situation,             it    is   one of the first major experiments to use self-con-
sciously modernist techniques.                It is fragmentary, almost surrealist in

its    force;         it    manipulates form to capture style, mood, and emotional
     73   •   Conveying Other Cultural Experience


tone; and it effectively engaged the willing reader in the work of in-
terpretation. However, this work is subject to the same sort of ques-
tions raised about Shostak's account of Nisa: Just how was the editing
done?Would it not be important to provide more commentary on the
social locus of this individual? In what ways are Tuhami's indi-
viduality, has expression of personhood,     and his mode of discourse
representative of a particular cultural segment of Moroccan life?
  From Crapanzano's other work (1973) among the curing cult mem-
bers of the Hamadsha in the shantytown areas of Meknes, one might
well read his portrait of Tuhami as illustrating the consciousness of the
urban sub-proletarians. Tuhami's inability to find secure employment
and a family niche has severely disturbed his mental condition, not to
the point of clear biomedical pathology, but to where he withdraws
periodically into illness, and is often hospitalized. He employs fantasy
almost interchangeably with accounts of reality as equally valid
sources of metaphor for communicating his impossible existence.
   Such sociological placement of Tuhami does not explain anything
away, but rather makes Tuhami's account even more significant as an
ethnographic document. At the very least, Crapanzano's experiment
with modernist forms of expression provides an important encourage-
ment to other experimental writers of ethnography to think about
how personal accounts are constructed and how experiential vividness
of life in other cultures can be conveyed.



      A Note on Ethnographic Poetics, Film,
      and Fiction
We limit ourselves in this essay to experiments that arc- altering the
traditional ethnographic account. Yet, motivated by the      same scum
that in the contemporary    world such accounts have tailed to conve)
cultural differences in terms of full-bodied experience, other experi-
ments have shifted more radically to different genres and media ot
representation. In contrast to the field of play explored In experiments
considered here, such shifts perhaps indicate a lack <>t confidence m
the capacity of the traditional genre to be developed an\ further. We
take passing note <>t these other kinds ot contemporary work, recog
m/mg that as part of the present experimental moment, tlu\ deterVC
separate treatment as detailed as our consideration <>t the transform!
tion ot the traditional ethnography.

   Ethnographic poetics tries to establish culturally authentic ways t<>
read indigenous oral narratives as literarv tortus. Some majoi studies
         74   •   Chapter Three


(e.g.,   see Hymes 1981), are developed in formalist fashion with nota-
tion systems for capturing the affect, kinesthetics,        and other per-
formative dimensions of oral narratives. Other studies            (e.g.,   see
Tedlock 1983; and Jackson 1982) are well within the dialogic, her-
meneutic framework of interpretation that we have discussed. They
produce translations of oral texts that are particularly sensitive to the
contexts of elicitation in the field as well as to the general problems of
transforming the spoken into the written. Tedlock's new translation of
the Popol Vuh (1985) draws upon       —
                                     as all such translations should
the interpretive knowledge of its users; the oral here is the commen-
tary which supplements the text.
   Ethnographic poetics also concerns itself with the literary produc-
tions of anthropologists themselves, as another mode of expression of
their ethnographic research experiences.      For example, there is much
contemporary interest in the poetry written by past and present an-
thropologists (see Rose on Stanley Diamond, 1983; Tyler on Paul
Friedrich, 1984; and Handler on Edward Sapir, 1983), and in the au-
tobiographical components of         some    self-consciously experimental
works (see Rose 1982). A recent Symposium of the Whole (Rothen-
berg and Rothenberg 1983) has attempted to make the connections
between anthropologist and indigenous literary production. Because
of the collaborative nature inherent in fieldwork, ethnographic poetics
challenges the conventional        view of   literary   production as indi-
vidualistic; such works by the anthropologist and his ethnographic
subjects, while certainly composed separately in time and cultural
space, are, in a more important sense, part of the same, seamless do-
main of creativity in which attribution of authorship remains intracta-
bly ambiguous.
   Besides oral narratives of peoples studied in the field, there is a rich
contemporary production of fiction and literature from most parts of
the third world, which is also becoming an object of analysis that
combines ethnography and literary criticism (see, for example, Fisher
1984). Such literatures offer not only expressions of indigenous expe-
rience, unavailable in any other form, but also constitute, as similar
literatures do in our own society, indigenous commentaries as a form
of autoethnography that in particular concerns itself with the repre-
sentation of experience. For anthropologists, third-world literature is
important not only as a guide for their inquiries in the field, but also
for suggesting ways in       which the form of the ethnography might be
altered to reflect the kind of cultural experiences that find expression
both in indigenous writing and in the ethnographer's fieldwork.
         75        •    Conveying Other Cultural Experience


   Initially, in         ethnography the interest in the film medium reflected
the hopes of documentary realism that flourished in America during
the 1930s. Such realists held that film had great advantages over writ-
ing in conveying its subjects' experience more naturally and un-
problematically. The dullness and distancing exoticism of most eth-
nographic films done with this attitude have forced reconsideration of
this   medium. Informed by sophisticated criticism of commercial and
"art" films, contemporary practitioners of ethnographic film are well
aware that it is as much a constructed text as are written works. Eth-
nographic film making thus poses challenges similar to that of eth-
nographic writing: problems of narrative and focus, of editing and
reflexivity.           Perhaps the ethnographic film cannot replace the eth-
nographic text, but it may indeed have certain advantages over it in a
society where visual media are strongly competing with written forms
for the attention ofmass users, including intellectuals and scholars.
   The ethnographic novel has long been a durable kind of experiment
for fieldworkers who have been dissatisfied with the ability of the con-
ventions of their genre to portray the complexity of their subjects'
lives.   Here the use of fiction is legitimated by the clear marking of a
genre separate from the scientific monograph, and most often, novels
have appeared as a subordinated, and somewhat fanciful, part of an
ethnographer's corpus. Similar to the ethnographic novel, there is an
older and  much more popular genre of the historical novel about
which there has been a considerable debate concerning the quality of
the history that is written into this explicitly fictional form. This issue
for historians has much relevance for anthropologists, who also ques-
tion the validity of ethnography shaped by the imaginative license of
fiction.

   The use of fiction or fictive devices within the ethnographic genre
itself is another matter. In experimental works that              focus Oil the repre-
sentation of experience and describe encounters between tieldworker
and specific others, delving into the lives of particular individual! and
assuming multiple perspectives, or voices, become attractive textual
strategies. As a matter of ethics, which is concerned with protecting
privacy, or indeed of narrative effect, the rearrangement of events,
tacts, and identities in the construction of composites permit! the en

trance of fictive devices into the ethnographic account.              I   here has hem
some consideration of the use o( ficti\e devices in ethnographic and
historic accounts see Webster lyK}, and de      ertean [983), hut the
                                                              (


most sophisticated discussion             of   this   issue   has developed   m |otU
nahsm.        It   arose   OVd the New |ournahsm of the 1960s (Wolfe and
     76     •   Chapter Three


Johnson 1973), which used blatant storytelling devices to enhance for
the reader the experiences of the subjects in its reporting. Since then,
the same controversy has periodically resurfaced, for example, in the
appeal of investigative journalism after Watergate, and more recently,
in the   admission by a New Yorker writer of his use of composites in
purportedly factual accounts (see Dowd, New York Times, June 19,
1984, p. 1). The point for ethnography is that the motivation to devel-
op more effective ways of describing and analyzing cross-cultural ex-
perience makes the use of more explicit fictional narrative devices
tempting, and with this temptation, the status of ethnography as scien-
tific or factual description, analogous to journalistic reporting, comes

into question. 6
         Taking Account of World Historical
         Political Economy: Knowable

         Communities in Larger Systems

The usual objection  to interpretive ethnography is that "cold,"
"hard" issues of power, interests, economics, and historical change
are elided in favor of simply portraying the native point of view as
richly as possible.       While this objection has had some validity, many
interpretive ethnographies now try to take account of power relations
and history within the context of their subjects' lives. However, there
seems to us to be a more radical challenge in this, by now conventional
charge against "symbol and meaning" ethnography: how to represent
the embedding of richly described local cultural worlds in larger im-
personal systems of political economy. This would not be such a prob-
lematic task if the local cultural unit was portrayed, as it usually has
been in ethnography, as an isolate with outside forces of market and
state impinging upon it. What makes representation challenging and a
focus of experimentation is the perception that the "outside forces" m
fact are      an integral part of the construction and constitution ot the
"inside," the cultural unit itself, and must be so registered, even .u the
most intimate levels of cultural process that we discussed in the last
chapter.
   In his discussions of social-realist fiction (1977. 1981b), Raymond

Williams, the Marxist literary critic, has posed basic issues applicable
to this kind of experimentation with ethnography. Williams has been
concerned with the increasing difficulty in realist fiction of represent-
ing whole worlds and complex social structures within the limited nar-
rative   frame of a plot and set of characters. With the great skill ot           .1



Charles Dickens or a Thomas Hardy, this kind of representation u.is
still   achievable   in   the nineteenth-century   world   ot   industrial     cap
italism, but the complexities       and scale <>t late capitalism m the twen
tieth    century seem to otter      a   much more formidable      task   for    the
                                        Experiments are needed to
politically and historically sensitive realist.
merge knowable communities conceived by novelists and observed bj
ethnographers; with the "darkly unknowable." Williams suggests
combinatory texts, which Imk intimate, ethnographic like detail con
cerning language and manners, with portraits o( larger, impersonal
systems that abstractly attest local communities, on one hand, and arc




         77
     78    •   Chapter Four


an internalized component of characters' (ethnographic subjects')
lives, on the other.

   Williams's major concept is the "structure of feeling," which, as the
principal concern of realist writing,   is    the articulation of richly de-
scribed experiences of everyday life with larger systems and the subtle
expressions of ideology. Williams uses this concept to escape from the
habit, deeply ingrained in Western theory, of fixing the states of soci-
ety and culture as already formed, and understood as such, by social
actors. Instead, experience, the personal, and feeling all refer to a do-
main of life that, while indeed structured, is also inherently social, in
which dominant and emergent trends in global systems of political
economy are complexly registered in language, emotions, and the
imagination. Williams's requirements for realist description in the
modern world are complex, and his concepts are by no means un-
problematic, but he does clarify the task of experiments      —   fictional or
ethnographic   — which         merge their preferences for the under-
                          try to
standing of their subjects' points of view in circumscribed social set-
tings with the difficulties of also representing accurately the pene-
trations of larger forces.
   Most local cultures worldwide are products of a history of appro-
priations, resistances, and accommodations. The task for this subtrend
in the   current experimental moment is thus to revise conventions of
ethnographic description away from a measuring of change against
some self-contained, homogeneous, and largely ahistoric framing of
the cultural unit toward a view of cultural situations as always in flux,
in a perpetual historically sensitive state of resistance and accommoda-
tion to broader processes of influence that are as much inside as out-
side the local context.
  The experiments in this trend of innovation can be distinguished by
a further difference in task, which will dictate the organization of this
chapter. Certain recent ethnographies are most concerned with mesh-
ing interpretive approaches and political-economy perspectives, such as
that of Marxism, and more recently, of a so-called world-system theo-
                                        much past ethnographic writ-
ry. In reaction to the ahistoric quality of

ing, other recent texts take the   forms and content of indigenous
historical consciousness as their problem, juxtaposing them to the
dominant form of Western historical narration through which the ex-
perience of third-world peoples has been understood in the West. The
historicized ethnography is thus not only a corrective to its own
ahistoric past, but also a critique of the way Western scholarship has
assimilated the "timeless" cultures of the world.
       79    •   World Historical Political Economy

   In developing         our following discussion of the ethnographies ad-
dressing issues of political        economy, we treat, in separate sections,
first, the attraction of ethnography for those in other disciplines              whose
traditional concerns are the study of political and economic systems;
then, the meshing of interpretive and political-economy perspectives in
anthropology itself; and finally, the sorts of texts, combining eth-
nography and political-economy analysis, that are "in the air," so to
speak. They are envisioned as experimental ideals, but achieved only
incompletely in existing efforts, be they in anthropology, political
economy, or some other discipline.


       The Ethnographic Mood in Political Economy
Political economy is the old term for the study of economics, which
had been inseparably bound up with the study of history, politics, and
statecraft. The term and subject declined during the nineteenth century
as the popularity of the theory of the self-regulating market, derived
from Adam Smith, grew. As a result, the study of economics became
isolatedfrom the study of politics. In recent times, there has been a
resurgence in the use of the term political economy, and a number of
conventionally trained economists and political scientists are designat-
ing themselves as political economists.
   There are three major references for political economy in contem-
porary usage: a literature on public choice and the dilemmas of collec-
tive action in democratic societies; the work of latter-day Marxists,
especially on dependency and underdevelopment in the third world;
and a more generically defined interest in the mutual determination of
political processes and economic activity in a historically viewed
world system of nation states.
   We are primarily interested in the third reference, since we believe                it



embodies, within the conventional academic divisions tor the Stud) ot
politicsand economics, a recognition <>t the crisis oi representation
erosscutting the human sciences. From an American perspective, the
following changes are undermining confidence in the dominani rramc
works tor describing reality, which have separated the Study of m.ir
kets   and    politics    in   liberal   nation-states:   the    dissolution     oJ   the
mternation.il regime of the post- World             War    II   period   in   which the
United States has been hegemonic             tor example, the breakdown ••! the

Bretton-Woodi agreements which Ins brought disorder to the final*
rial relationships between rich and p<>ot st.ues; and the weakening o(

politic.il-milit.nv alliances such .is NATO   and domestically, the de
                                                      i
        8o   •    Chapter Four


cline ofNew Deal liberal ideology (as evidenced by the shifting of
powers within branches of government, and the failure of a system of
party politics to articulate real political alignments in society). Paral-
                                                   1970s was the
lelling a growth in awareness of these trends during the

move among some liberal, mainstream academics toward a reintegra-
tion of the study of politics and economics as political economy.
      What is most impressive from our perspective is the sense among
political economists that it is the understanding of political  and eco-
nomic processes themselves, at the level of facts, which is in doubt.
These processes are more complex than the dominant paradigms seem
able to represent them, and thus one obvious course is for political
economy to rebuild understandings of macrolevel systems from the
bottom up. In its most radical form, the new political economy is
pushed toward the particularistic, toward the interpretive and cultur-
al, and finally toward the ethnographic.
                                                1



    While Marxism has been the enduring framework for keeping po-
litical economy alive, world-system theory, introduced by Immanuel

Wallerstein in the early 1970s (1974), had an important impact on
American social thought. Drawing on the work of the French historian
Fernand Braudel and anticipated by the work of Latin American de-
pendency theorists, Wallerstein directly challenged the failure of devel-
opment theories of the 1950s and 1960s and proposed within the
ahistoric and separated disciplines of political science, economics, and
sociology to explain what was happening in the third world. The con-
temporary third world, or any other part of the globe, had to be un-
derstood in the context of the history of a capitalist world economy
developing since the sixteenth century. A theoretically grounded ac-
count of this history was to be Wallerstein's coordinating vision for
interdisciplinary research. Wallerstein thus insisted that the only effec-
tive social      theory was one that was tied to detailed considerations of
world-historical events and processes. Although incorporating Marx-
ist   ideas, this   major historic interpretation of world capitalism also
provided a loose theoretical frame of reference and orientation for the
resurgence of an interest in political         economy in American social
science.
      Significantly, the world-system proposal arrived precisely at a time
when it met the needs of scholars from all the social sciences who,
sensing a world in transition, were losing confidence not only in reign-
ing theoretical paradigms, but in the reign of paradigms           itself.   The
world-system perspective is indeed a macroview of society and history,
but its very attraction has been       its   simple (and at times, simplistic)
         81   •   World Historical Political Economy

theoretical formulations, contrasted with its emphasis on working out
its   concepts through the interpretation of historical detail. It has thus
served less as a full-blown theory than as a framework for debates and
discussions. And these debates depend vitally on ethnographically and
historically sensitive research in political economy.
      Wallerstein rested his account of the capitalist world system on the
distinctions between central, semiperipheral,          and peripheral areas of
world-political and economic development, and on the historic condi-
tions for shifts in the relationships of these areas. The capacity of this
framework and Wallerstein's use of it to explain what has happened in
various local situations over the past four centuries have been vig-
orously debated. Regardless of evaluations of the scheme or its current
status,   what is important is the impetus the debate about it gave to
political-economy research. Rather than hardening into dogma or a
i950s-style paradigm, the so-called world-system theory survives to-
day primarily as a general orientation that thrives on the detailed stud-
ies of regions and historical periods. Rather than their emphasis being

on the "system," appropriately for the times, political economists
have focused their attention on close analyses of the historic and eth-
nographic conditions of regions and locales. While Wallerstein himself
has attempted to make world-system theory the basis of a school with
a politically committed vision, its broader, orienting influence on dif-
fuse areas of work in the social sciences has been         more important. It
has powerfully communicated           the idea that the significance of any
particular project of research in history or ethnography lay                    in   its

placement within a larger         world-historical framework        of       political

economy.
  The current status of world-system theory as an effective Frame fol
methodologically flexible research in political economy is a prune ex-
ample of the current suspension of paradigms tor the sake of tree pla\
with concepts and methods, and of the attention to microprocessea
without denying the importance of retaining some vision of larger
world-historical trends. This shift of attention in political economy to
the close- analvsis of local situations with the aim of rcenvisioiung
flawed models of macrosvstems is its point oi contact with etlinor.i.i
phy.
   There now exist a number of studies trom political economy re
search which are either full ethnographu projects themselves, or else
present the equivalent of ethnographic perspectives on then subjects at
critical junctures Of their analyses. Perhaps the most sophisticated of
                                                                1-'-'        a British
 the former is Paul Willis's Learning to Labout          1981            ,
         8z   •   Chapter Four


study of the schooling of working-class males and their preparation as
eventual labor in industrial production. The impersonal processes that
organize modern societies must be understood, he argues, as histor-
ically    and culturally generated in a contingent manner, and this re-
quires an approach that richly explores the subtle details, forms of
behavior, and manners of speech exhibited in everyday life. The ab-
stract concepts of major paradigms such as Marxism, in which Willis
works, must be translated by ethnographic inquiry into cultural terms
and grounded in everyday life. One gains a thorough understanding of
human subjects who exist buried as abstractions in the language of
systems analysis. Without ethnography, one can only imagine what is
happening to real social actors caught up in complex macroprocesses.
Ethnography is thus the sensitive register of change at the level of
experience, and it is this kind of understanding that seems critical
when the concepts of systems perspectives are descriptively out of joint
with the reality to which they are meant to refer.
    Willis is explicitly concerned both with the remarkable insights of
his working-class subjects about the nature of capitalist process and
with the limited self-understanding that they display concerning the
ironic implications of their rebellious behavior at school. In learning to
resist the school environment, his lads establish the kinds of attitudes

and practices that lock them into their class position, foreclosing the
possibility of upward mobility. Resistance is thus an intimate part of
the process of reproducing capitalist-class relations. The linkage of the
local situation of cultural learning and resistance at the level of the
school to the situation of labor in capitalist production at the level of
the shop floor is thus one of unintended consequences.
   Willis works within a Marxist rhetoric and framework, but he is
not merely employing, for the sake of expediency, such a familiar
background imagery of the larger political and economic order so that
he can concentrate his energies on the ethnographic analysis of a par-
ticular locale. Rather, in England, socialist/Marxist theory itself has
historically been a pervasive, indigenous interpretive frame both for
intellectuals and for large parts of the working class. Through eth-
nographic methods, Willis is thus clarifying for his largely liberal and
leftist readerships the relative validity, range, and incisiveness of dif-

ferent native understandings of capitalism from the point of view of
the shop floor, of government school grounds, and of the university.
Willis shows the cultural barriers of communication and experience
between proletarian life and academic socialism despite their equally
sophisticated understandings of capitalism. Within its British context,
        83    •   World Historical Political Economy

then, Willis's ethnography has the additional politically motivated agenda
of commenting on the possible conditions for socialist alignments.
   Another study, Charles Sabel's Work and Politics (1982), uses an
ethnographic perspective strategically, first to situate its argument, as
a critique of conventional ways of understanding the labor process in
industrial societies, and then to present case material from Italy as an
illustration of a much more ambitious thesis. At the most general level,
Sabel observes the breakdown of the global hegemony of neo-Fordism
(the    mass-production model) as both the central ideology and the
practice of industrialization.     He argues for the revitalization of de-
centralized, flexible production modes that rely on a kind of artisanal
model of production which most scholars have assumed is no longer
practical in a high-technology world.    As evidence, Sabel presents a
detailed real-life case in which neo-Fordism was in fact replaced by a
modern version of the artisanal model in northern Italy's "third zone"
during the late 1960s. Large factories were successfully reorganized
into decentralized, high-technology workshops. Sabel was a shrewd,
de facto ethnographic observer of the political maneuverings that led
to this shift, and he records these on both the level of elite policy-
making and that of the shop floor. In particular, he exhibits intimate
ethnographic knowledge of the latter: the life-styles and outlooks of
various categories of workers and how they interacted in the forma-
tion of small-scale, high-technology production units. The powei of
his book is that it ethnographically documents a case that in its general
terms suggests a clear and attractive alternative to the model oi mass
production in many other places with histories and local situations
that both compare and contrast with Italy.
   In   analyzing one of the most frequently discussed topics ot labor
history   — worker-capitalist relations   —
                                        Sabel demonstrates the contri-
bution of ethnographic knowledge. Sabel's elaborate typoiog) of divi-
sions within working classes, based on his knowledge oi differences in
    and outlook of various kinds ot workers, stands as a critique <>i
skill

the simple  dichotomous capitalist-worker or management workei
model that has dominated the training ot issues in scholarship on m
dustnal relations and the labor process. By displaying the detail ot
ethnographic distinctions and then showing how thev can be used to
elucidate "big picture" problems ot change and transition in the orgs
m/ation      ot   industrial production, Sabel exposes the insensitivit)   to

conditions "on the ground" that most theoretical discissions ot nidus
trial procc-ss have displayed, and thus then limited ibilit) to explain <>t
                        2
affect rial conditions.
           84   •   Chapter Four


      In   contemporary political-economy research, which is specifically
influenced by ethnographic methods in anthropology, the works of
such prominent writers as Pierre Bourdieu (1977), Clifford Geertz
(1973a), and Marshall Sahlins (1976) are commonly invoked. In their
various ways, all three stand for the autonomy of cultural analysis and
  power to inform issues that are conventionally phrased in terms of
its

more abstract concepts of system and structure. Each scholar articu-
lately      provides theoretical arguments for the advantages of ethno-
graphic perspectives and the reasons why processes of communication
and meaning are constitutive of structures of political and economic
        Often used as invocations for novelty and new departures,
interests.
references to these writers are rhetorical signs in political-economy
texts of where the analytic emphasis is or should be in the concerns of
their disciplines.



           The Meshing of Political Economy and
           Interpretive Concerns in Anthropology
While it is clear that ethnography and interpretive anthropology have
an important contribution to make in the move toward political econ-
omy in other disciplines, we should ask about the reciprocal influence.
There has long been an explicit concern with political-economy issues
in anthropology, beginning at least with the 1940s programs of re-

search designed by Godfrey Wilson and Max Gluckman in British East
Africa to study processes of colonialism, which channeled labor into
towns and plantations, while undermining tribal economic, political,
and domestic institutions. But most ethnographies then and since have
tended to be locally bounded and relatively ahistoric, to avoid consid-
ering the larger system of colonial political economy itself. In Ameri-
can anthropology, a counter to this tendency developed in a strong
tradition of a Marxist-informed concern with political economy, pi-
oneered during the 1960s by such scholars as Eric Wolf, Sidney Mintz,
June Nash, and Eleanor Leacock. However, this tradition tended to
isolate itself from cultural anthropology's concurrent development of
a more sophisticated ethnographic practice on interpretive lines. It re-
treated into the typically Marxist relegation of culture to an epi-
phenomenal structure, dismissing much of cultural anthropology itself
as idealist.
      For its part, interpretive anthropology clearly has not paid as much
attention to issues of political economy and historical process in field-
work and the writing of ethnography as it should have, and as many of
        85   •   World Historical Political Economy


its practitioners would have liked. The time now seems ripe for a thor-

ough integration of an ethnographic practice that remains markedly
interpretive and interested in problems of meaning with the political-
economic and historic implications of any of its projects of research.
    The difficulty of reconciling the best of political-economy research
and the best of cultural analysis in anthropology is well illustrated by
Eric Wolf's recent work, Europe and the People without History
(1982). It is both a specifically anthropological version of the world-
system framework and a powerful statement of the political-economy
perspective in contemporary anthropology. While this work is an ex-
cellent survey of the traditional subjects of ethnography              —   tribes   and
peasants of the third world as well as Europe              — placed   in the context

of the history of capitalism, attention to culture is systematically elid-
ed.    Perhaps this      is   because Wolf associates it with the kind of an-
thropology that in the past has obscured the historic dimensions of its
subjects' lives, which he wishes to reclaim. In a short afterword, Wolf
places the interpretive view of culture, seen as a form of idealism,
within the category of ideology, thus relegating it to its superstructure!
position in classic Marxism. After so sophisticated a global analysis,
this treatment of culture is hardly satisfying.

      On the side of interpretive analysis, the use of the idiom of "pro-
duction" or "practice" has become quite salient recently (sec, for ex-
ample, Bourdieu 1977, and Fabian 1983). The point underlying the
use of this idiom seems to be that the production of cultural meaning
and symbols, as a central practice or process in social action, deserves
more emphasis at the moment than the systematic exegesis of symbols
and meanings alone. In part, this is merely a counterweight to a per-
ceived imbalance of interpretive approaches toward concerns with
content over form, and the effort            is    thus to reeenter interpretive an
thropology       at a point      where it squarely focuses on both form and
content, on meaning in action.
      More importantly, though, the use of the specific Marxist keyword
of production (and such derivative notions as Pierre Hourdieu's "s\m
bolk capital") signals an effort to meet materialist and political
economy perspectives on their own terms. Not onl\ is the cultural
Construction of meaning and svmhols inherentlv a matter of political
and economic interests, but the reverse also holds   the COncemi <>t
political economy are inherentlv about conflicts OVCT meanings and
symbols.     Ilms, what the use of          llic   cultural production idiom unli
cates, again,     is   that   am materialist idealist distinction between politi-
cal -economy      and interpretive approaches is siinpb not supportable.
          86   •   Chapter Four


The move toward an emphasis on cultural production in interpretive
analysis is an interesting effort, not yet fully developed in ethnographic
writing itself, to transcend a dead-end split within contemporary so-
cial and cultural anthropology. 3

   The dilemma in anthropology between a literature weak on culture,
but strong on political-economy analysis, and one strong on cultural
analysis, but       weak on political economy is primarily a problem of
representation or textual construction, rather than a difference of
good intention or political conviction. There appear to be as many
ideological radicals doing interpretive anthropology as there are doing
political-economy studies, and as many conservatives and romantics
on each side as well.
   One virtue of texts coming out of the interpretive tradition is that
they are self-conscious attempts to resolve the above dilemma, where-
as those       from the tradition of political-economy research appear
mostly to devalue cultural analysis or are satisfied with     its   present
state, and thus perhaps perceive no dilemma to be resolved. When
faith in the paradigmatic structuring of knowledge is low, as it gener-
ally is   now across academia, interpretive anthropology is valuable pre-
cisely because of the absence of a strong commitment to working
under and toward a single disciplined and dominant paradigm. It is
flexible and thus free to experiment in a way that political-economy
studies, polemically polarized from the interpretive trend, are not.
   An interpretive anthropology fully accountable to its historical and
political-economy implications thus remains to be written.          How to
write about multiple cultural differences that matter in a world system
that seems to be developing either toward homogenization or a simple
polarization between rich and poor?      How to take account of a reci-
procity of perspectives, which requires the ethnographer to consider
seriously the de facto counterethnography of subjects, who, far from
being isolated from the same world system that forms the an-
thropologist's cosmopolitan consciousness, are often equally, if not

more, aware of its operation than the anthropologist himself? Most
importantly, the assumption of a sociocultural unit, spatially and tem-
porally isolated, is deeply embedded in the conventional framing of
subjects for ethnographic analysis and must be modified. These ques-
tions and problems require a radical reworking of the grounding as-
sumptions by which anthropologists have conceptually constructed
their subjects.
   In our ranging through existing examples and prospects for a body
of work in interpretive ethnography that grapples with these issues, we
        87   •   World Historical Political Economy

perceive two areas of the ethnographic atlas from which such work is
likely to come. First,     it is   likely to arise from the well-established in-
terest in the    continuing transformation of peasant societies, that by
definition reflect encapsulation in larger entities. Second, it is also like-
ly to   come from less established ethnographic interests in the middle
classes, elites, professionals, and the reorganization of industrial work
forces. Indeed, any framing of research in terms of class and ethnicity
beyond locally bounded communities might lead to the kind of experi-
ments that are interpretive in focus, but also sensitive to issues of polit-
ical economy.

    Furthermore, many of the political-economy experiments occur,
and are likely to occur for some time, within a loose framework of
Marxist concepts. While other frameworks are possible, the most
powerful background image of larger systems, as a necessary comple-
ment to political-economy-sensitive ethnography, is that of capitalism,
coherently and familiarly evoked in a long tradition of Marxist writ-
ing, including the more recent and more eclectic world-system theo-
rists. The view of the world order in terms of capitalism is common

intellectual currency in the West as well as in the third world where
anthropologists still largely work. Using this imagery is a great rhet-
orical advantage for interpretive ethnographers, who devote their ana-
lytic   energies to elucidating local situations and thus need a ready-
made construction of the larger context of historical political economy
in which to place their subjects.
    However, the promise of such experiments is that they will
eventually reconstruct (or even replace) from the bottom up an influ-
ential paradigm like the Marxist vision of capitalism, which, in the
absence of ethnographic studies, loses touch with the changing real-
ities it is intended to encompass. For example, Marx's chapter on com-

modity fetishism in Capital is the classic formulation of perhaps the
most widely held view of the cultural side of capitalist process: that m
capitalist societies, systematic social relations          Income embedded in a
productive process and are expressed in the consciousness of then par
                                   form of the relationship among
ticipants in the fetishi/.cd, displaced
things produced for the market. This one chapter has conscc|ucnth
been the point of entrance for interpretive anthropology into an elab-
oration of a cultural perspective on the theor\ of capitalism as u
knowledged,       for   example. In      its   inclusion   m   a   major reader on
symbolic anthroplogy, edited by Doigin, Kemnitzer, and Schneider
1977). The question is whether such an elaboration, earned out in
local projects of ethnographic research, will merel) icmsc the theorj o(
        88   •   Chapter Four


capitalist society by complementing it, or will eventually conflict with
its   broader assumptions and replace it.
      The most obvious immediate subject for ethnographers working
loosely within a Marxist cultural perspective is the study of the forma-
tion and conditions of working classes, and indeed this is where much
recent interpretive work in political economy, like that of Willis and
Sabel, has been concentrated. It focuses on the origin of new working
classes from agrarian social systems and the generational social and
cultural reproduction of older   working classes in industrial democ-
racies. Other classes and social groups, less well demarcated or unre-
cognized within the Marxist theory of capitalism, are bound to be
discovered by ethnography, and this is where its conceptual novelty
and revisions of older social theory are likely to arise. For example, to
write today of the Islamic world in terms merely of Marxism or mod-
ernization (resistance or capitalism) is to do violence to the under-
standings which motivate and create solidarities or divisions among
the followers of Ayatollah Khomeini, the Muslim Brotherhood, or the
Jamiyat-i Islamiyya (Fischer 1982c).   Few readers in the non-Islamic
world, however, are ready for texts that invoke any but the grossest
discriminations within the cultural worlds of the Islamic fifth of the
world's population. The ethnographic task lies ahead of reshaping our
dominant macroframeworks for the understanding of historic political
economy, such as capitalism, so that they can represent the actual
diversity and complexity of local situations for which they try to ac-
count in general terms.
   Michael Taussig's The Devil and Commodity Fetishism in South
America (1980), and June Nash's We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat
Us (1979) have provoked considerable discussion as examples of ex-
perimental work that bridges the gap between interpretive and politi-
cal-economy traditions in anthropological research. Both deal with the
impact of capitalism in shaping South American laboring classes, and
both emphasize cultural analysis. Taussig's book is the more provoca-
tively written, and thus perhaps the more widely read. It is an account
of the reaction of Colombian peasants and Bolivian tin miners to their
integration into a money economy and proletarian-wage labor. Tau-
ssig begins with a long discussion of Marx's concept of commodity
fetishism, and follows this with an account of the indigenous represen-
tation of the processes of capitalism and the market as evil. Taussig
argues that the Colombian small peasants, who supply seasonal labor
to the plantations, think in terms of natural economy and use values
only with regard to their own lands. They see money as sterile and
        89   •   World Historical Political Economy


nonreproductive, and as tied to the plantation economy which pro-
duces for a world market. People who acquire money have made se-
cret pacts with the devil; the land from which earnings are harvested is
condemned        to   declining   fertility;       and the pact-maker             is   doomed
eventually to a painful death. Such pacts with the devil are made only
on plantation land, which is tied to world capitalism, and never with
regard to the labor exchanges or hiring that occur on the peasant's
own lands and among themselves.
   Taussig's second case, which he compares with the Colombian
peasant-proletariat concerns Bolivian tin miners. The Bolivian miners
also deal with spirits of reproduction, postconquest Christian dieties
above ground, and preconquest Indian dieties below ground: Pacha-
mama, a female earth spirit, is associated with agriculture, while the
male spirit Tio controls the mineral wealth of the mountains. Taussig
interprets Tio as a symbolic mediation. Like the devil in Columbia,
Tio mediates between the workers' precapitalist beliefs in the renewa-
ble cycles of nature and the intrusion of the capitalist exploitation of
nonrenewable resources. Unlike the Colombian example, dealings
with Tio are not secret. His image, carved in tin ore, is set at mine
entrances, llamas are sacrificed to him, entreaties are made to him to
renew the minerals and reveal them to the miners. But he guards the
mines with bloodthirsty eyes, and is, as in the Colombian example, a
devil to be propitiated. Moreover, his changing historical form sup
ports Taussig's claim that he is a mediating figure between nam civ
controlled modes of economy and external, foreign-controlled nodes
of economy: during the colonial period Tio was represented as a royal
inquisitor; later he was portrayed as a grotesque gringo with COWDO)
hat.
   In   We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat Us, June Nash, however,
inteprets Tio     somewhat differently. She sees him as representing an
authentic pre-Colombian tradition. For Nash, Tio functions as pari o(
a ritual structure that integrates miners within the work site and pro
motes worker solidarity. Such worker organization lervei both tamilv
and personal needs as well as being a vehicle for the growth «>f an
effective class politics (miners have been major political actors in
Bolivia since World War II). lor her, Tio is    rclativcK traditional
                                                                 .1



figure of caprice who controls fortune and who is propitiated tor that
reason, rather than either a culturally dynamic device <>t mediation or
a seductive devil leading         men into          capitalist        self   destruction.   I   he
strength of Nash's account lies in her treatment of the soual tonus ot
solidarity among the workers that              I   10   helps to coordinate.
       9o    •   Chapter Four


  Differences between Taussig's and Nash's presentations of overlap-
ping material center on two key tasks in developing an interpretive
anthropology sensitive to issues of political economy: first, interpret-
ing the     complex roles of ideological or cultural systems of belief in
relation to a system of political economy; and second, reformulating
them    for effective textual     presentation in ethnographic accounts.
Nash's book in many respects is more satisfactory than Taussig's be-
cause of its inclusion of more descriptive detail, derived directly from
her fieldwork. Yet, it lacks the self-conscious questioning of the status
of concepts and arguments that gives Taussig's book its experimental
appeal. For many, Taussig's book provided a conceptual challenge in
the writing of ethnography      —   to show how what had previously been
dismissed as cognitive remnants (folklore, devils), or as increasingly
anachronistic social mechanisms, could be seen instead as a gesture of
resistance to a new mode of production.
  As a pair, Taussig's and Nash's works suggest that ethnography is
an effective medium for representing the range of moral and cultural
responses to capitalist penetrations. Indigneous responses to culture
contact is an old theme in anthropology, but what is new about these
works is the demonstration of the sophistication of these responses. 4

       Ethnography and the Invisible Hand:
       Attempts to Trace Large-Scale Political
       and Economic Processes
The examples discussed so far, while they are keenly aware of the
penetrations of larger systems into their subjects' lives as formative of
culture     itself,   do not challenge the convention of   restricting eth-
nographic description to a delimited field site, or locale, and set of
subjects.    They still very much frame their research and writing in
terms of knowable communities, to use Raymond Williams's phrase,
the kind of setting in which, by definition, ethnographers have always
                                                                 —
worked. Yet the traditional holistic ambition of ethnography its cen-
tral genre convention      —
                         has pushed it in the direction of an equal con-
cern with representing the large-scale historic processes of political
economy themselves. At the current moment in this domain of experi-
mentation, the reach of the interpretive/political-economy ethnogra-
phy has exceeded its grasp, so to speak. That is, there are kinds of texts
imagined that are not yet fully achieved. This section briefly reviews
one of these unfulfilled, yet influential ideals of experimentation in the
domain of political economy which does influence contemporary
             9i     •     World Historical Political Economy

thinking about  how interpretive approaches and political-economy
concerns can be merged in the writing of single texts.
   What we have in mind is a text that takes as its subject not a con-
centrated group of people in a community, affected in one                             way or
another by political-economic forces, but "the system" itself                      — the po-
litical      and economic processes, spanning different locales, or even dif-
ferent continents. Ethnographically, these processes are registered in
the activities of dispersed groups or individuals whose actions                          haw
mutual, often unintended, consequences for each other, as they are
connected by markets and other major institutions that make the
world a system. Pushed by the holism goal of ethnography beyond the
conventional community setting of research, these ideal experiments
would try to devise texts that combine ethnography and other analytic
techniques to grasp whole systems, usually represented as impersonal
in nature,              and the quality of lives caught up in them. These are the
truly ambitious experiments in the political-economy vein.
   How to present rich views of the meaning systems of a delimited set
of subjects and also to represent the broader system of political econo-
my that links them to other subjects, who are also richly portrayed in
their own world, is an experimental ideal for ethnographic theory and
writing. While there are texts of this complexity in fiction                       e.g., Solz-

henitsyn's The First Circle), we know of none yet                       in   the literature of
ethnography. The traditional ethnographic response to tracing out the
interdependencies of complex systems such as colonialism or market
economies has been the call for multiple studies produced by team
research projects. For instance, the Seven Year Plan, composed by
Max Gluckman for the Rhodes Livingstone Institute in 1940, pro-
posed a series of studies of different tribal economies and the effects of
the colonial system on them. The composite result was to have been a
detailed comprehension of the regional integration and variation of
Northern Rhodesia. The achievement of this composite view proved
to be the weak part of the project; making systematic connections was
left       to individual readers of the separate studies, hi place of sikIi ulti-
mately uncoordinated team projects, we wonder whether it would not
be possible to construct smgle-text, multilocale ethnographies thai are
the result of the standard individual reaseareh project                      m anthropolog)
(which does encompass occasionally                   the   work   <»t    coresearchers/co
authors).           Two strategies ot text construction suggest themselves.
       I   irst,   the ethnographer might trv to represent in a single text. In
sequential narrative and the effect oi simultaneity, multiple, hluulK
        92   •     Chapter Four


interdependent locales, each explored ethnographically and mutually
linked by the intended and unintended consequences of activities and
orientations within them.If the intent were merely to demonstrate

random, but consequential interdependencies by which everyone is
unexpectedly connected to everyone else in the modern world, if only
one looked hard enough (see Stanley Milgram's "small world" experi-
ment, Travers and Milgram 1969), this would be an absurd and point-
less project     —
               to show, say, the connection between mental health in
America and the price of tea in China. Rather, the point of this kind of
project would be to start with some prior view of a macrosystem or
institution, and to provide an ethnographic account of it, by showing
the forms of local life that the system encompasses, and then propos-
ing novel or revised views of the nature of the system itself, translating
its   abstract qualities in more fully human terms.
   Markets (Adam Smith's "invisible hand" as a metaphor for blind
interdependencies) and capitalist modes of production, distribution,
and consumption (Marx's version of the invisible hand commodity    —
fetishism) are perhaps the most obvious views of systems as objects for
experimentation with multilocale ethnographies. These would explore
two or more locales and show their interconnections over time and
simultaneously. The difficulties of writing such works are well illus-
trated by existing journalistic accounts that do approximate the eth-
nographic, such as Stephen Fay's Beyond Greed (1982). It is an
explanation of the recent attempt by the Hunt brothers of Dallas and
their Saudi allies to corner the world silver market. The narrative com-
plexity is considerable in an account like this, which in fact is dealing
with the human dimensions of the operation of the invisible hand
markets      —   in capitalist societies.
      To tell this story, Fay has to juggle over a dozen locales and actors'
perspectives, simultaneously and blindly influencing each other, and
he must sustain a narrative sequence of events besides. He explains
how commodity markets work; he speculates about what the Hunts
are thinking and portrays their social background; he does the same
for the Saudis; he explains the operations of federal regulatory agen-
cies   and other bureaucracies, as well as their responses to events; he
explains the perspectives and actions of other major commodity trade-
rs;    and he describes man-on-the-street and industry reactions to the
crisis in    the silver market. Now, this is the kind of subject that eth-
nography ought to be able to take on, especially if it intends to say
something about the culture of capitalist societies, but Fay's book is a
demonstration of the practical              difficulties in constructing a multi-
          93   •   World Historical Political Economy


perspective account of a system or a major social drama that is encom-
passed by it. 5
   Second, and much more manageably, the ethnographer might con-
struct his text around the strategic selection of a locale, while back-
grounding the system, but without obscuring the                               fact   that   it   is

integrally constitutive of             life    within the bounded subject matter.                A
rhetorical and self-conscious emphasis on the strategic and purposeful
situating of ethnography is an important move in such works, linking
the ethnography to broader issues of political             economy. The fact is
that the situating of                                                    —
                                    most ethnographic projects why this group
rather than another,                why this locale rather than another              — has not
been acknowledged as a major problem in anthropology, or at least as
an issue that relates to any broader aim of research, and instead has
often been dictated by opportunity.                   Not so, with ethnography sen-
sitive to political economy. The rhetorical self-consciousness about the

selection      and bounding of ethnographic subjects should be seen as
following from a practical foreshortening of the ideal, but less man-
ageable multilocale ethnography. Other options or alternatives for sit-
uating the ethnography are always present. One is obliged to be self-
consciously justifying (or strategic)               in    the placement of ethnography
precisely because of the sensitivity to the broader system representa-
tion which is at stake, but which is foreshortened by the practical
advantage of ethnography that remains fixed in a single locale.
  The two modes or strategies for addressing the experimental chal-
lenge of a single text, multi-locale ethnography are thus not concep-
tually mutually exclusive             — the second       is   a compromised version of the
first   — but textually they            are.    For example,       in   his   ethnography        of
working-class males at school, Willis writes in the second                            mode of
strategically situated  ethnography, and he employs Marxist concep-
tual    imagery for the macrosystem background. More generally, the
recent interest in a world-system framework for discussing macrolevel
issues of political economy has heightened the degree of self-conscious
political-economy         sensitivity          written routinely into COntemporar)
community          studies of villages,         towns, and urban neighborhoods. In
particular, this framework has stimulated sophisticated analysis o( po
litical   economy which takes as its unii regions, rather than Villages 01
towns (see dray 1984, Smith [976, 1978, and 1^X4; and Schneider
and Schneider 19-6). >ne <>t the significant payoffs of such studies h.is
                                (


been the anthropological reworking of geographers' models concern
mg the ideal region. location of m.irkets and nrb.in Centers. Bj <.<>n
                           il


tr.istm^ actual market patterns with models of economical!) <>i
        94   *   Chapter Four


spatially rational distribution, it is possible to pinpoint sociopolitical
mechanisms of underdevelopment. Rather than assuming a process of
gradual maturation toward the normative rational model of a "devel-
oped economy," anthropologists have explored those social and polit-
ical mechanisms which distort development, and which channel

wealth or political control of markets toward certain groups and block
it from others.

    One of the drawbacks of most of these studies is that while they
take culture into account, the problems of interpretive anthropology
do not interest them very much. The complexities of what motivates,
say, peasants and local elites, and how they think are either not recog-
nized as problematic or seen as capable of being resolved by simpler
assumptions about the influence of local culture on issues of power
and economics. The ethnographies of Taussig, Nash, and Willis, how-
ever, demonstrate the importance of interpretive analysis, directed to-
ward elucidating Raymond Williams's "structure of feeling," as a
component of any work of political economy.
   Regional analysis should thus involve not only geographic-
economic mapping of what happens where, but also the relative
power-linked articulation and conflict over ideologies, world views,
moral codes, and the locally bounded conditions of knowledge and
competence. As they stand, ethnographies written in terms of regional
analysis do not display, strictly speaking, the multilocale strategy that
we described, nor are they self-consciously experimental, but they do
clearly reflect greater ambitions for ethnographic representation, de-
riving from a sense of the inadequacy of the way in which ethnography
has narrowly bounded its subjects in the past. With the inclusion of
the interpretive perspective on local and regional cultures, such studies
might be moving in a more experimental direction that would operate
on two levels simultaneously, one that would provide culturally moti-
vated views of what goes on within connected locales, and one that
would provide an account of the system which connects them.
   It   should be noted that the realization of multilocale ethnographic
texts, of even regional analysis as it    now exists, may entail a novel kind
of fieldwork. Rather than being situated in one, or perhaps two com-
munities for the entire period of research, the fieldworker must be
mobile, covering a network of sites that encompasses a process, which
is in   fact the object of the study. 6
   As the versatility and sophistication of ethnographic writing in-
crease, so too do the possibilities for its utilization outside its tradi-
tional    frameworks. Correspondingly, as general knowledge about
      95     •   World Historical Political Economy

cultural process and global interdependencies increases, the rhetorical
power      of attempting to present portraits of self-contained, other
cultures declines. Readers       want to know as much about variation
within a culture as about a holistic portrait of the culture     — the pres-
sure to reconceptualize the traditional ethnographic goal of holistic
representation as one of a largely       homogeneous social and cultural
unit increases. The vision of multilocale texts that we have outlined is
but one way of reconceptualizing this fundamental convention of eth-
nographic method and writing and adapting it to cultures in fragments
increasingly held together by their resistance and accommodation to
penetrating impersonal systems of political economy.



      HlSTORICIZING THE ETHNOGRAPHIC PRESENT
While one set of experiments addresses the problems of representing
the relationship between large-scale systems of political economy and
local cultural situations,   another area of experimentation focuses on
the representation of historic time      and context in the ethnographic
account. Twentieth-century ethnographers have frequently been ac-
cused of a deep synchronic bias. The setting of ethnographic accounts
in a timeless present does not arise from a blindness to history and the

fact of continual social change, but rather is a trade-off for the advan-
tages that bracketing the flow of time and the influence of events offers
in facilitating the structural   analysis of systems of symbols and social
relations. The conventional responses to this dilemma in the writing ot
ethnography have been either to finesse the historical context by the
repetitive use of standard rhetorical devices for temporally situating
ethnographic accounts, or to abdicate to history altogether. Finessing
the historical context is accomplished by situating one's ethnograph)
either before or after "the deluge": either claiming thai one's observa-
tions constitute a last chance to view a traditional set ol      customs or
social forms before they are fully engulfed by modernity or, alter-
natively, providentially finding authentic cultural      remnants of BOU1C
past purer period of cultural existence- now decayed through contact
with the West. Father way, a temporal setting is superficially intro-
duced into the account, while the essential static training ol tin- anal)
sis is preserved. Hits, then, is a rather crude means ot acknowledging

history, which serves the classic salvage justification tor ethnograph)
as a recorder ot cultural diversit) that was disappearing or being irre-
vocably altered.
   The other alternative- to these supertic i.il rheloric.il ele\ ue-s has ken
       96   •   Chapter Four


to do social history, just as a historian might. The best works of histor-
ical ethnography, such as those of Anthony Wallace (1969, 1978),
adopt the narrative forms of history and match the standards of that
discipline. They tend, however, to treat ethnographic experience and
the theoretical apparatus derived      from it as merely complementary
information on a par with journals, letters, censuses, and other docu-
ments. Most students who read Wallace's tour de force, The Death
and Rebirth of the Seneca (1969), discover the theoretical ambitions of
this work only after they read his articles on revitalization cults, equi-
librium models in mental health, and psychological anthropology.
   Clearly, we do not think that ethnographers need either finesse the
historic setting of their accounts or abdicate to conventional social-
historical narrative. Rather, the thrust of current experiments is to
approach issues of historical consciousness and context within the tra-
ditional conventions of ethnographic writing. Indeed, there are good
reasons for retaining the relatively present-oriented framework of eth-
nographic writing, not the least of which is that fieldwork itself is by
nature synchronic, conducted at a particular moment or point in time.
Insofar as fieldwork provides the grounding, as a kind of witnessing
by the ethnographer, for an account of indigenous life in 1954 or
1984, the present moments of fieldwork should be faithfully repre-
sented. In a sense, ethnographies that really report present conditions
are future historical documents, or primary sources, in the making.
The challenge, then,      is   not to do away with the synchronic eth-
nographic frame, but to exploit fully the historical within it.
   However, one obstacle to the historic use of the synchronic dimen-
sion of ethnography is that in very subtle ways, traditional ethnogra-
phy turns out to be not that synchronic         at all   or,   rather, to be
synchronic only in the sense of a timeless present. Ethnographies have
in fact rarely reported what ethnographers actually see of the present
in the field. There is a gap between the contemporaneity of fieldwork,

during which the ethnographer and his subjects share the same imme-
diate present,    and the way these same subjects are temporally dis-
tanced from the back-home world of the ethnographer in his account
derived from field research. This gap, linked to the distorting conven-
tions that ethnographers have long adopted to represent their subjects
in writing, is the starting point for an important critique of the repre-

sentation of time in ethnography, Johannes Fabian's            Time and the
Other (1983).
   Following a survey of differing historic conceptions of time in the
West from "pagan" cyclical views, via Judeo-Christian notions of time
          97    •   World Historical Political Economy


as linear       and sacred, to bourgeois secular notions of sociocultural
stages along an evolutionary progression, Fabian notes that time in the
latter conception, from which much nineteenth-century anthropology
developed, is actually spatialized. Those furthest from the centers of
civilization   belong to more primitive/earlier stages of culture, men-
tality,   and social organization. While schemes of evolutionary stages
have long been out of               style    in   social    thought, sociocultural    di-
chotomies nonetheless remain ubiquitous in social science: traditional-
modern, peasant-industrial, rural-urban, preliterate-literate, etc. Like-
wise,  modern ethnography, developed in reaction to evolutionary
schemes as a means of capturing the here-and-now of its subjects by
fieldwork, incorporated these very schemes as a subtle legacy. Because
spatial distance was conflated with temporal distance in earlier an-
thropological thought, the subjects of ethnography, observed far from
home, have been habitually coded as existing in a time other than the
present historical moment of the fieldworker/ethnographic writer. As
Fabian says, "Primitive being essentially a temporal concept, is a cate-
gory, not an object, of Western thought" (p. 18). Thus, there has been
a habitual discrepancy between the here-and-now reality of fieldwork
and the way anthropologists write about their subjects in accounts
derived from it.
   Fieldwork involves engagement between ethnographer and subject,
an intersubjective sharing of the same historic time and space    what        —
Fabian terms coevalness             —
                            whereas ethnographic rhetoric has system-
atically distanced the subjects of fieldwork primarily by denying them
contemporaneity and a modern history of their own. The radical im-
plication of this critique is that this denial in turn has served to block
anthropology's awareness of its own politicized context and intellec-
tual history.       Much like Edward Said's critique of Orientalist writing,
Fabian shows how ethnography lias tended to devalue its subjects tela
tive to the West, often in spite of Us best intentions, by premises about

time embedded in its rhetoric and categories ot thought.
     Because anthropology           m the held employs a different concept ot
tune (one that         is   fully   cognizant ot the contemporaneity           ot    ttli

nographic subjects and the fad thai they possess historical con
sciousness) than that m us written reports, an) hope ot overcoming
this   contradiction or discrepancy lay             in     moves toward exploring the
historical consciousness ot             ethnographic subjects as well as fixing the
historic       moment ot the actual doing o( fieldwork in the writing ot
ethnography         this is the only way to eliminate the embedded denial
ot   coevalness that Fabian critiqued. ( onsequently, the most interest
      98   •   Chapter Four


ing experiments with the historical dimension of ethnography are
those that are responding to this critique.
   Renato Rosaldo's Ilongot Headhunting, 1883-1974: A Study in
Society and History (1981) takes as a starting point exactly this prob-
lem of the anthropologist's tendency to deny the historical con-
sciousness of his "primitive" subjects during fieldwork, even in the
face of it. It aims to destroy the notion that "pagans," even if nonlite-
rate and relatively isolated, have only eternal cyclical history, and thus
are "without history" in our sense. In The Conquest of America (1984
[1982]), Tzvetan Todorov lends precision to Fabian's critique by ex-
amining the writings of Bartolome de Las Casas, Diego Duran, and
Bernadino de Sahagun as examples of the encounter between Europe
and America where a full recognition of the coevalness of cultural
others began to insert itself through serious (de facto ethnographic)
attempts to finally come to terms with the point of view of the
conquered.
  Beginning with Rosaldo, we will discuss three kinds of recent texts
which exemplify efforts to deal with time and historic perspective
within an ethnographic frame: ethnohistorical texts that attempt to
present conceptions of history among contemporary nonliterate peo-
ples, juxtaposed to Western history that narrates the development of a
world system into which these peoples have been incorporated; works
that attempt to demonstrate that two of the most influential styles of
synchronic analysis in recent decades  —  structuralism and semiotics
can in fact assimilate and explain the particulars of historic events and
the social changes that they register; and works that show how indige-
nous discourses concerning the past can both serve collective memory
and be the media for debates and political struggles about au-
thoritative interpretations of present circumstances.
  Renato Rosaldo's ethnography has an experimental sense about it
because he indicates that the Ilongot themselves, in his fieldwork en-
gagement with them, forced him to write a different sort of account
than he had originally envisioned according to ethnographic conven-
tions. He came to the field with a plan to research and write a standard
structural (and synchronic) account of Ilongot kinship and social orga-
nization, constructed out of their patterns of feuding and marriage
alliance. His book does contain such a standard account, which can be
read together with other traditional accounts of feuding among peo-
ples of Southeast Asia  and elsewhere, but this is not what receives
emphasis in his ethnography. In recording genealogies, listening to sto-
ries about feuds, peace covenants, marriages, migrations, and changes
        99   •        World Historical Political Economy

of residence, Rosaldo found himself subjected to endless                                    lists       of
"names of every brook and hill and craggy cliff where people walked
or ate or spent the night." "What," he had to ask himself, "does it
mean to say that men take heads or marry in quick succession like
people walking along a path?" To make sense of the Ilongot, Rosaldo
had to learn that these lists not only constituted geographical maps
and time lines, which could be correlated one with another, as well as,
with stories of war and politics                       —
                                   the stuff of their history but also                  —
were the components of a mental map that provided Ilongots with a
way of flexibly organizing social relationships to accommodate con-
stantly shifting alliances, opportunities, and domestic events. He
recalls,


        Perhaps the most tedious stories were about the flight from the
        Japanese troops in 1945. While people were moved to tears as
        they recited place name after place name                     —
                                                 every rock, hill, and
        stream where they ate, rested, or slept                    — my usual response was
        to continue transcribing in uncomprehending boredom, [p. 16]

Forced by the Ilongot to learn to see things their way (the coevalness
that Fabian describes as the unavoidable condition of fieldwork),
Rosaldo finds problematic the textual translation of these lessons he
learned from the Ilongot into ethnographic writing for professional
readers.

        [Ilongot]       .   .   .   excursions into the past are meticulously mapped
        onto the landscape, not onto a calendar         This is a problem
                                                                      .   .   .




        as basic as it is vexing in the translation of culture. Were  to                     1




        use their multiple ways of speaking about places, would                     I



        capture the tone of their texts but lose their historical sense.
        Through my use of our calendar dates     I haw instead chosen to



        sacrifice a feature of the idiom through which                            UongotS
        represent their past, in order to convey the sense in which .111
        event placed in space is also intelligibK located in time. [p. 48)

   Rosaldo uses techniques of oral histor\ CO demonstrate thai Mongol
social forms are not tuneless and that the Ilongot have then own COfl-
sciousness ot structural change and the social consequences ot unique
historic periods. They are thus not "'without history," even though
theirtonus ot memory do not match our own. Me uses the notion ot
development cycles to describe the dynamics ot tending among the
Ilongot, but at issue                 is   what   is   c\clic, or repetitive as social process,

and what         is    transformative, or historically definitive change.                           I   he
         i   oo    •    Chapter Four


study of stories told within peer groups and styles of remembering
provide clues to how Ilongot understand their past. Some of the most
enduring antagonisms between Ilongot groups, for instance, seem to
be more directly related to the influence of colonial pacification than
to primordial, cyclical kinship process, and are understood as such by
Ilongot. What is remembered is selective and emotionally compelling:

     To recall a kin relation from earlier times for example is both
         to remember correctly and to justify a developing marriage
         alliance; to recount how one's uncle was beheaded is at once to
         revive a painful memory and to urge one's children to retaliate.

         [P-      3i]

Value codings and periodization in Ilongot memory are marked by
linkages to their involvement in the events of world and Western histo-
ry. June, 1945, when a third of the population died during the flight of

the Japanese into Ilongot territory before the American advance, is a
watershed in contemporary Ilongot memory. For many, the pre- 194
period is generally remembered as pistaim (peacetime), but within this
frame, what is salient for missionized Ilongot is an interlude of vio-
lence,       1942-45, when the taking of heads became frequent again,
whereas others tend to remember a period of tranquility (1929—35) as
representative of the pre- 194 5 era.
  By collating different accounts, a picture emerges of periods of
headhunting alternating with periods of tranquillity. This explains
why foreign observers of the Ilongot at different times repeatedly saw
themselves on the scene at the moment when headhunting was dying
out. What they witnessed were episodes in the Ilongot reaction to the
ebb and flow of Spanish, American, and Filipino government power in
their territory. Of course, the Ilongot, while registering the influence of
outside events in their stories and symbolic landscape, did not present
this patterned account of their history in neat narrative form.       Rather,
this was a job for an ethnohistorian like Rosaldo         who could construct
a valid European-style history of the Ilongot only by collating various
indigenous accounts, which entailed, in turn, coming to terms with the
distinctly Ilongot          forms of historical consciousness. Rosaldo figured
out the ethnographic puzzle of the disappearance and reappearance of
headhunting, but the really interesting dimension of his book is its
exposure of the sense of history of the Ilongot, as they are caught up in
events also familiar to the Western reader in terms of conventional
historical narrative.
   Rosaldo self-consciously focuses the reader's attention on the nar-
          ioi       •   World Historical Political Economy

rative techniques he uses; he takes rhetorical pains to emphasize how
his account is different from standard ethnographies. The real innova-
tion     is   in   form rather than content. His text fuses scholarly conven-
tions of argument and more Ilongot-like series of biographical stories.
He wants to illustrate Ilongot styles of thought and to bring home
their strong belief that lives unfold not according to rules, norms, or
structures, but as improvisations. Individuals walk individual paths;
paths often have a recursive form through cycles of marriage and resi-
dence, although they are as often divergent. Any account of Ilongot
history should, in its form, convey a sense of this indigenous metaphor
for history and process, and this is what Rosaldo's text does though its
organization     is somewhat "messy" from a conventional viewpoint.

       Richard Price's First-Time (1983) is similarly an attempt to recon-
struct the history of a nonliterate folk             — the Saramaka, who are de-
scendants of escaped slaves in Surinam               — with the aid of both       their
own historical genres and European written records. Price is particu-
larly    concerned to document the narration, validation, and political
inflection of the Saramaka historical tradition.
       Knowledge of fesi-ten (first time)        — the period from the  first escapes

in                                                                   —
    1685 to the peace treaty with the government in 1762 is restricted
and guarded. It is dangerous, and one must take care with its proverbs,
all the implications of which the speaker may not know. It serves as

charters for land claims, sucession to political office, and rituals. This
historical knowledge is slowly acquired by old men, individually and
in fragments. No one reveals all of what one knows; no one can know

all.   The knowledge comes in many forms: genealogical fragments, epi-
thets, placenames, proverbs, elliptical speech, lists of nanus, songs,
and prayers. Much of the information embedded in these forms is not
otherwise available          — there   is   no master narrative. However, there is   .1



central ideological force underlying these various genres of historical
remembering. This is 'never again," an ethos of vigilance so that con-
ditions of slavery will never be allowed to reappear. In the modern
context, this attitude is the source of the Saramaka's reputation for
self-respect        and for the concern with status that thev displ.n        in   then
participation in coastal wage labor.
   lake Rosaldo, Price self-consciously conceives of Ins book as ex
perimental. He intersperses Saramaka texts that he recorded with Ins
own commentaries, which are presented simultaneously on the page.
In effect, what we have is a simplified return to medieval textual tradi-
tions, inwhich multiple commentaries were written in the margins
around the text to In- clarified, a procedure with which [acques Dei
        102   •   Chapter Four


rida has also been experimenting in literary criticism. There are hints
of more elaborate commentaries possible.       The section entitled "Of
Speakers to Readers" suggests the concerns made prominent by Wal-
ter Ong, Jack Goody, or Stephen Tyler about translations from oral to
written sensibilities. In presenting photographs and brief biographies
in this section, Price takes pains to expose to his readers glimpses of his

Saramaka collaborators. This reflects the characteristic attention to
the representation of multiple voices in contemporary experimental
ethnographies which we have previously noted.
   Through the parallel presentation of European sources and
Saramaka knowledge, each can be validated and extended by the
other. The reader is encouraged to play back and forth between the
two, and thus become actively involved in the simultaneously operat-
ing modes of historical interpretation, textually orchestrated by Price
as ethnographic writer.
  Like Rosaldo's work, First-Time elicits with care the indigenous
sense of history, the hermeneutics and critical apparatus of that tradi-
tion, and the genres in which it has been carried.    Most interesting is
Price's (and his collaborators') concern that having been written down
and thus having breached the old prohibitions against easy disclosure
of fesi-ten, the tradition itself will die. The text will become canonical;
knowledge will lose its power and become frozen, no longer flowing
with the rhythms of particular men's skills or particular group needs,
no longer allowing multiple versions.
   The consolation is that the old tradition is dying anyhow. Aware of
irreversible changes and loss of knowledge, many of the old men were
thus willing collaborators in Price's project. In the 1970s, Saramaka
territory became subject to a barrage of government officials, tourists,
and film crews. Cultures, of course, do not simply die; they are trans-
formed, and the likelihood of this process of change being in indige-
nous hands depends, in part, on the acquisition of new means of access
to the past, which collaborative work such as Price's ethnohistory can
provide.
   If   Rosaldo's text is worked out fully in terms of an ethnographic
encounter, and if Price's relies on mutual clarification between archival
and ethnographic recordings, Marshall Sahlins's Historical Metaphors
and Mythical Realities (198 1) is fully a historical reconstruction, rely-
ing little on direct ethnography. He seeks to interpret the events of early
Hawaiian-European contact within a framework of structuralist analy-
sis that identifies codes of meaning in Hawaiian culture which both

influence the course of events and are transformed by them. His essay
        103    •   World Historical Political Economy


constitutes a radical alternative to simple historical narration, yet im-
merses itself in the same material.
   Focussing on the circumstances of the murder of the English ex-
plorer Captain James Cook, Sahlins portrays how Cook and the Brit-
ish were assimilated by the mythic structures of Hawaiian society. By
incorporating the arrival of Cook into the annual ritual enactment of
their   myths, the Hawaiians ensured the persistence of their cultural
structures, but at the same time, brought about their transformation.
The fortuitous timing of Cook's arrival and his manner of circum-
navigating the islands fit exactly the Makahiki festival procession of
the god Lono, for whom Cook was taken. Coming ashore, Cook was
escorted to the temple and made to imitate the shape of the Makahiki
image while a pig was offered to him. He was anointed in the manner
of Lono, and was fed by the priest associated with the ruling chief.
Cook set sail at the end of the ritual, just as Lono was expected to do,
but he unexpectedly returned because one of his ships had sprung a
mast. He received quite a different reception this time; tensions sur-
rounding his return precipitated an outbreak of violence in which he
was killed by a mob of Hawaiians. However, the Hawaiians treated
this actual death as the annual ritual death of Lono; they returned his

remains to the British and asked them if Lono would return again next
year. Part of Cook's remains were to reappear in subsequent proces-
sions of Lono during the Makahiki          rite,   now understood as bearing
the mana of Cook who came to be understood as an ancestral chief.
     Clearly, in this first tableau, a historical event was assimilated into
a cyclicalmythic structure, but not quite neatly, since the unexpected
actual killing ofCook had to be accounted for. This indeed raised
doubts for Hawaiians whether the structure could maintain itself.
   Cook's arrival also fit the mythic structure of political succession:
chiefs come  from abroad and usurp power, bill arc- domesticated b)
the indigenous population through taking local women from tin- de-
posed line and producing children. Hawaiians viewed the \isit of
Cook in these terms. As gods/chiefs, ( ook mu\ the British were differ-
entially approached by chiefs and commoners. The former wished
privileged access to and exchange of valuables; the Litter gave gifts m
hopes of seeking patronage, with the commoner women m particular
seeking sexual intercourse with sailors in the hope of bearing children
by them and thereby harnessing some of the power of the foreigners.
(              however, interpreted the women's BeductiOIU as COfD
    OOk'fl sailors,
mercial exchange relations, giving them valuables, which their hus-
bands encouraged them to receive.    he women also came to share
                                           I
     104    •   Chapter Four


meals with the sailors, thus violating strict taboos on mixed-gender
eating in Hawaii. Through these patterns of exchange with the visiting
whites, the entire Hawaiian ritual, political, and social structure was
rather dramatically transformed: instead of a hierarchy in which men
were to women, as chiefs were to commoners, as gods were to chiefs, a
class structure, based on differential interests in relation to the Euro-
peans, developed between chiefs and commoners (including men and
their apparently more subversive women). Meanwhile, perceptions of
Europeans themselves were changing. Through the gradual de-
sacralization of trade and their unwitting defilement by dining with
women, the British, once gods, became men for Hawaiians, although
of a strange sort.             )
  It took   about twenty-five years after the death of Captain Cook for
the taboo system to fall apart completely and officially, when in a
famous event of 1819, the politically active wife of the deceased king
Kamehameha, who politically consolidated Hawaii in the period after
Cook, ate in the presence of his successor, Liholiho, with whom she
acted as coregent. An ambiguity in the mythic structure was exploited
by Kamehameha's widow and her faction. Traditionally, the taboo
system was suspended until a new king was installed. Because of the
unique historic situation, what the widow did had revolutionary im-
plications, although it was technically in accord with Hawaiian
custom. Kamehameha's widow merely extended this custom of sus-
pending the taboo until Liholiho died, at which point, a new taboo
system was reinstituted, but this time that of Calvinism and the mis-
sionaries with whom her faction had allied.
   Sahlins provides a masterly account of the political competition
that ensued between this "European" faction (the collateral descen-
dants of Kamehameha by marriage) and the traditional faction (the
direct lineal descendants of Kamehameha and his line) in rebellion. By
the 1830s, where Sahlins's account appropriately ends, the Hawaiian
system had been turned inside out in mythic terms. This mutual deter-
mination of myth and history, complexly intertwined, is elucidated by
Sahlins with clarity and skillful application of French structuralist
ideas. Sahlins makes uprecedented sense out of the puzzling, exotic
aspects of Hawaiian behavior which were frequently recorded by ob-
servers during the early decades of contact.
   Although Sahlins uses French structuralist analysis in an unprece-
dentedly flexible way to account for specific behaviors of historical
events, he still uses a notion of structure that is relatively insensitive to
the details of communication in intercultural relations. He might best
         io5    •    World Historical Political Economy

be read as writing in a transitional language between structuralism
and the more fluid analytic framework of poststructuralist semiotics,
such as are employed by Tzvetan Todorov.
   Todorov's The Conquest of America (1984 [1982]) is a project sim-
ilar to Sahlins's, in that it operates at the historic conjuncture between

two civilizations, and is similarly concerned to describe the mental
structures of each, how they appropriate and misappropriate each
other, and thereby how structural change occurs over time in small
increments. His procedure is to reread the primary documents of Co-
lumbus, Cortes, Las Casas, Duran, and Sahagun in order to describe a
rather fundamental threefold shift in perspective vis-a-vis cultural oth-
ers:   from enslavement, or seeing others as merely objects; to coloni-
alism, or seeing and keeping others as producers of objects which can
be appropriated; to communication, or seeing others as parallel sub-
jectivities to oneself. Just as the Hawaiians received Captain Cook as a

god, so the Aztecs understood Cortez as a returning god. As Todorov
notes, thismade sense in terms of the Aztec worldview in which all
new events had to be projected into the past.
  For Aztecs, significant communications were between the universe
and men, and not among men themselves. Likewise with the Euro-
peans preceding the conquistadors, Columbus was not a dissimilar
mentality from the Aztecs whom Cortes encountered. He, too, priv-
ileged    what he could          assimilate to Scripture over                what might be
learned from direct communication with the Indians.                            Communica-
tions    were meaningful only as they fit into a preset Catholic world-
view. His misunderstandings about the Americans he encountered
were quite as ludicrous as Montezuma's with regard to the con-
quistadors.  Cortes, however, was already a different kind of in-
terlocutor. A sharp and open observer of the language and internal
politics of the Mexicans, he could use this understanding to subordi-
nate them. The post-Conquest mentality was one of increasing under*
standing       in   order to better assimilate (Christianize) the Mexicans.
Better understanding through various kinds ot recordings of beliefs
and history in Nahuatl (by Duran and Sahagun inadvertently affected
a change in the sensibility of the recorder, and there appeared the
beginnings ot nonsubordinatmg, nonassimilating, reciprocal OOmmtl
mcation. This is clear in the List period <>t          I    .is    (   .is.is's    lite,   when he
demanded that the Spanish             return sovereignty ot the              America* to the
Indians' leaders, and explicitly described sacrifice                    is   .1   valid religious
,ki    within a value structure different from             th.it       of the Spanish.         I   he
beginnings of        .111   anthropology .ire   here in the transition from post
         io6   •   Chapter Four


Conquest thought to the acknowledgment of the coexistence of possi-
ble universes.
     Todorov's book is an elegant variation on Sahlins's project: history
isaccounted for, not as a narrative progression, but as shifts in mean-
ing structures. These shifts, moreover, are not merely seen in terms of
interaction, but are linked both to technologies of communication and
to moral positions. In simplified terms, the absence of writing requires
the presence of speakers and an oral history in a repetitive ritualized
form. The Incas were the least familiar with writing, having only an
elaborate mnemotechnical use of braided cords; Aztecs had pic-
tograms; the       Maya had rudiments of phonetic writing. Todorov
claims there was a corresponding gradation among these groups in the
relative intensity of the belief that Spaniards were gods. The Maya did
not count the Spaniards as gods, but the Incas and Aztecs did. Further-
more, the Aztecs privileged "the speech of the ancients" and called
their ruler "he who possesses speech." This valuation generated com-
plex ritualized genres of speech and schools of interpretation of great
political import.     It   was the challenge of understanding these in their
own terms that some clerical scholars began to recognize. With the
writing down of Nahuatl history and religion late in the sixteenth cen-
tury, Spanish priests such as Duran and Sahagun struggled with one of
the constitutive issues of ethnography            — how much do they interpret     in
the process of translating; how do the voices of two cultural visions
interfere with one another; is it possible to mediate without destroy-
ing? This is the challenge both to contemporary civilization and, spe-
cifically, to ethnography.

     Todorov uses the device of reconstructing worldviews from a series
of texts as a way of attacking the naivete of those who think cultural
transmission can occur without mediation or interpretation, that eth-
nographers can merely be scribes, that the world contains pure signs.
He demonstrates the necessary mediation in any cross-cultural di-
alogue through his critical rereading of texts which deal with historic
contacts,      and by his carefully orchestrated juxtapositions of these
texts.
     History, in broad view,          is   a shift in structures:   Montezuma and
Columbus lived in a different kind of reality from that of Cortes or
Duran, and they from us. Structural transformation occasionally may
occur through cataclysmic events, but more commonly, it occurs in-
crementally. As Todorov concludes (p. 254), "to become conscious of
the relativity (hence of the arbitrariness) of any feature of our culture
is already to shift it a little   .   .
                                          ." [history] is nothing other than a series
      107     •   World Historical Political Economy


of such imperceptible shifts."     It is   the task of a historically sensitive
ethnography to perceive structural shifts in the details of everyday life,
which are the primary data of fieldwork and the raw materials of
ethnographic representation.
   We turn finally to an example of another kind of experiment in the
treatment of issues of history within an ethnographic frame. History
does not register uniformly within any group of ethnographic subjects.
Change entails competing interpretations, and even periods without
dramatic change exhibit forms of understanding that keep alive alter-
native experiences of a shared history and culture. Michael Meeker's
Literature and Violence in North Arabia (1979) is a reading of Rwala
bedouin poems, collected by the ethnographer, Alois Musil, at the turn
of the century. On one level, the study is a recapturing of dialogue, in
Todorov's sense, a rescuing of meaning from a sterile folkloric style of
data collection. The corpus includes a number of versions of the same
historical events, the discrepancies among which allow Meeker to ana-
lyze the rhetorical techniques and pragmatic dilemmas that concerned
the narrators. These include a debate about the nature of politics       — the
attractions and risks of heroism versus the boredom and prudence of
leadership.
   On the historical level, Meeker is able to show that this debate is
inflected by the changing technology of personal violence. These sto-
ries take place at the time of the spread of firearms,       when killing at a
distance is thus possible, and heroism is threatened with obsolescence.
Several of the narratives are reflections on the difference between bed-
ouin honor-motivated heroism and the unheroic use of violence by
Ottoman forces. The dilemmas involved are both specific to the
nomads of the turn of the century, and general to a middle-eastern
world still caught up in the cultural logics and dynamics of the institu-
tion of the feud. Such features as ideologies of male individualism,
family paternalism, and disdain for agrarian labor and sedentary life
belong, according to Meeker, to a long era of gradual settlement b)
bedouin on the peripheries of sedentary groups and states, during
which the horse and camel made the aggressive indivklu.il mobile and
the capital of livelihood (sheep, goats, and camels) vulnerable to raids.
He thus takes "timeless" ethnographic characteristics of the bedouin
and gives them a historical context through his sophisticated reading
of texts collected at a   moment ot transformation,
   Meeker's reanalysis of earlier ethnographic materials is ot interest
for our purposes because he explores the historical associations m COD
temporary situations of actively used genres that express distinctive
        io8   •   Chapter Four


problematics or moral perspectives. These genres combine a remember-
ing mixed with registers of current class and ethnic conflict, of which
they are ideological and deeply emotional expressions. Nomadic raid-
ing for white camels is a sport of declining import among noble bed-
ouin, but the message of a balance between heroics        and prudence,
which the frequent retellings of this indigenous genre of history impart,
remains strong among contemporary listeners.



        The Two Broad Trends of Experimentation
        Compared
The political-economy experiments tend to be well within the conven-
tions of realist writing, and are less explicitly conscious of themselves
as experiments than the interpretive ethnographies that focus on the
representation of experience. Nonetheless, there is no necessary op-
position between the two trends. The most experimental ethnogra-
phies often mix goals and interests of both, and texts which concern
the same ethnographic setting, but which differ in the experimental
trend that shapes them, can be fully complementary. The two Ilongot
books by the Rosaldos with their smooth intertextuality is a good
example of such complementarity.
   It should also be appreciated that while issues of political economy

are not the explicit problematic of ethnographies of cultural experi-
ence, most of these latter do register a political and historical sen-
             circumstances of their fieldwork and their writing. For
sitivity to the

ethnographies of the person, the effort to convey difference in cultural
experience is itself a recognition of a global situation that challenges
the older, conventional forms for compellingly portraying cultural di-
versity.   This   is,   in a sense, as   much a matter of historical political
economy as are the more explicit concerns of the other trend in experi-
mentation. Often, as in Levy's work, ethnographies of the person em-
ploy as a situating device the work of previous observers, in place of
the older rhetoric of discovering a pristine culture. Or they understand
very well the contemporary social-structural positions of their sub-
jects   — Obeyesekere's exploration ofecstatic religious behavior is ex-
plicitlyposed as a contribution to understanding the emergence of a
new kind of socioeconomic stratum in Sri Lankan society, and Cra-
panzano's study of Tuhami invokes questions of impotence in a lower-
class situation under decolonization. Or, finally, ethnographies of ex-
perience reveal a double agenda           —
                                     Shostak not only offered her ac-
count as a corrective to past portrayals of the !Kung, but situated it
         109   •        World Historical Political Economy

within feminist concerns of the 1970s, and Favret-Saada posed her
ethnography as distinctive of the struggle between the rhetorics of con-
temporary Parisians and provincials, rather than as a conventional
contrast between tradition and modernity. Thus, the ethnographies of
experience that we discussed are neither ahistoric nor politically naive.
   Certain moves in one trend, however, can serve as a critique of
moves in the other. For example, Willis's claim to be authentically
representing a critique of capitalism embedded in the words and ac-
tions of working-class boys, elicited through his fieldwork dialogue
with them, is a matter of insistent skepticism among those whose main
experimental concern is the ethnography of experience. They are only
too aware of the editing and other intervening mediations that occur
in the   naive ethnographic presentations of dialogue to achieve an ef-
fect of authenticity. For Willis, ethnography remains merely a method,
whereas for some experimenters with the dialogic, it becomes the en-
compassing purpose for writing. Willis and Taussig in response might
well accuse the epistemologists of dialogue of refinements to the point
of absurdity  and derailment from the valid traditional purposes of
research   — the pointis to use elicitation for the evaluation and under-

standing of class conflict and change, and not as an end in itself. Such
implicit, and at times explicit, confrontations and mutual critiques of
what is happening within one trend of experimentation, relative to the
other, constitute a process of influence at the present moment which is
animated and stimulates novelty.
   In this chapter,          we have discussed experiments that are motivated
either by a radical concern with representing difference in           itself,   111       a
world in which this has become difficult to do, or by representing
difference adequately in its larger and more impersonal regional, na-
tional, and global contexts of political economy. Together, both
trends of experimentation are reshaping ethnography to take                     in        a

much more complex world than it previously assumed               — one   in which

the subject        is   equally a commentator on the world from which the
ethnographer comes.             In   continuing to record and represent cultural
differences, yet at a time when the classic salvage rationale ot captur-
ing the primitive before he finally disappears will no longef suffice as a
covering justification, ethnographers find, in an unprecedentedly com
pellmg way, that they are themselves deeply implicated in their task                  .   >t



representation. They are thus motivated to emphasize                the reflexive
dimension that has always underlain ethnographic research. This re
flexivity demands not only an adequate critical understanding ot
oneself through all phases ot research, but ultunateK such an undei
     no    •   Chapter Four


standing of one's own society as well. This critical reflexiveness of
ethnographers about themselves and their own societies is in fact inter-
secting with a strong actual trend of repatriation of research projects
among anthropologists.
  Indeed, in terms of potential broad readerships of anthropological
writing, both here   and abroad, the effectiveness of the cultural dif-
ferences that the ethnographer wants to convey is put to the test not in
such experiments as we have been discussing in this chapter, but in the
use to which they can be put in offering a distinctive kind of cultural
critique which   anthropology has always promised its own societies,
but only now is in a position to powerfully develop. Such criticism
would depend on the sophistication and quality of representation of
cultural others that contemporary ethnographies are producing, since
the latter would serve as probes and frameworks for critique in the
doing of ethnography at home. We now turn to a consideration of this
other historic justification and promise of modern anthropology.
5       The Repatriation of Anthropology
        as Cultural Critique



What has propelled many modern anthropologists into the field and
motivated resultant ethnographic accounts          is   a desire to enlighten
their readers    about other ways of life, but often with the aim of dis-
turbing their cultural self-satisfaction. Thus, as they have written de-
tailed descriptions and analyses of other cultures, ethnographers have
simultaneously had a marginal or hidden agenda of critique of their
own culture, namely, the bourgeois, middle-class life of mass liberal
societies, which industrial capitalism has produced.
      The juxtaposing of alien customs to familiar ones, or the relativiz-
ing of taken-for-granted concepts such as the family, power, and the
beliefs that lend certainty to our everyday life, has the effect of disori-
enting the reader and altering perception. Yet, the promise of an-
thropology as a compelling form of cultural critique has remained
largely unfulfilled. Explicit comparisons usually appear only as asides,
marginal comments, or concluding chapters in ethnographies. Home-
grown cultural critics such as Thorstein Veblen have often made more
use of ethnographic materials than have anthropologists themselves.
Those few recent works that claim to be anthropological assessments
of predicaments in American culture, such as Marvin Harris's America
Now (1981) or Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky's Risk and
Culture (1982), fail to take account of the existing literature of domes-
tic   cultural criticism; ironically, they are careless precisely about thai
which      would be sacred      to   anthropologists    in   considering other
cultures   — indigenous commentaries. For the most           part, anthropolo-

gists have taken the job of reflecting back upon ourselves much less
seriously than that of probing other cultures.
   The developing body of experimental ethnography, however, sug-
gests arenewed possibility      —
                              not experienced since the earlj days 01
ethnography     —
              for realizing the promise of cultural critique b) which
modern anthropology has partly justified itself as a held of knowledge.
On the one hand, a characteristic oi COntemporar) experiments is an
awareness of the subtle influences <>t the ethnographer's own culture
upon the work of interpreting another culture. As we have seen, at the
heart of experiments       so   concerned with persuasively representing
         in   •   Chapter Five


other cultural experience is a salient epistemological and political cri-
tique of the foundations of modern anthropological knowledge. This
encourages, if not requires, ethnography to turn on itself, so to speak,
and to create an equally probing, ethnographic knowledge of its social
and cultural foundations. On the other hand, the fact that all contem-
porary ethnography is done in an interdependent and mutually in-
formed world, where the ethnographer and his subjects are both a
priori familiar and alien to one another, sensitizes anthropologists to
bring their subjects' points of view with them when they repatriate
their research interests. The experiments in ethnographic writing have
stimulated a search for creative ways to apply both the substantive
results and the epistemological lessons learned from ethnography
abroad to a renewal of the critical function of anthropology as it is
pursued in ethnographic projects at home.
   This renewal of critical function comes at a time when cultural and
social critique has  become a rationale for research in a number of
fields   whose subject has always been the West and modernity, and
which are themselves experimenting with ethnographic techniques, or
at least interpretive perspectives. This fashion of cultural critique   is

another expression, we believe, of what we have called a crisis of rep-
resentation occurring to varying degrees within most disciplines of the
humanities and social sciences. In these fields, long-standing commit-
ments to general, totalizing systems of theory are suspended for the
sake of intimately representing, and valorizing, difference and diver-
sity in the face of widespread perceptions of an increasingly homoge-

nized world.      Our interest here is how cultural critique in anthro-
pology, stimulated by the spirit of experimentation in its traditional
arenas of concern might cut into this fashion, and contribute some-
thing distinctive and valuable.
   There has always been a domestic interest in anthropology, es-
pecially in American anthropology where the exotic subjects were
American Indians, immigrants, and urban migrants. But the current
application of ethnography by anthropologists and others to a vast
range of topics in American life, ranging from the culture of corpora-
tions and laboratories to the meanings of rock music, is unprece-
dented. The training of anthropology students is still centered in the
classic ethnographies about Africans, Indians, and Pacific Islanders,
and prestige still accrues to careers which begin by doing ethnography
abroad. But increasingly, anthropologists whose first ethnographic
projects are in foreign settings later develop serious research interests
in some domestic topic. It is also the case that many students, while
        ii3   *   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


trained in the classics, are defining their initial projects within the cul-
                American society. However, we find the cases of
tural diversity of
those who have worked abroad and then at home most interesting:
they define the situation with the greatest potential for the develop-
ment of cultural critique intimately linked to projects elsewhere.
  The reasons for this trend that we call repatriation are multiple.
There is less funding for social-science research, especially for eth-
nography abroad, the practical applications of which are not appar-
ent. Host societies, protective of their nationalisms, have complicated
the acquisition of research permits. And there is indeed a growing
awareness in anthropology that the functions of ethnography at home
are as compelling and legitimate as they have been abroad. Fears that
the subject of anthropology, the exotic other,   is disappearing have

proved groundless: distinctive cultural variation is where you find it,
and is often more important to document at home than abroad.
  There are many modes in which anthropology is repatriating itself.
These include providing ethnographic data designed for admin-
istrative policy and, in the interest of social reform, alerting the public
to   problems of society's victims and disadvantaged. Such rationales
for ethnography are both relevant and valuable. We, however, wish to
concentrate on the critical spirit that comes from the Janus-faced char-
acter of the ethnographic project      itself,   which we think provides die
basis for the most powerful forms of cultural criticism that an-
thropology can offer. What follows is an attempt to place an-
thropology within the Western tradition of cultural critique and its
more recent variations.


        Thl Idea of Cultural Critique
The writings of all the major social theorists and philosophers ot the
nineteenth century can be read as reactions to the transformation ot
European societies by industrial capitalism:         all   contain    a critical di-

mension. The greatest of these writers, such as    Marx,          I   rend, Weber,
and NietZSChe, have inspired a COntUlUOUS, it diverse, tradition ot self
conscious criticism oi the qualit) of life and thought in capitalist econ«
omies and mass liberal societies up to the present. he genres ot this
                                                              I




criticism have ranged from realist and modernist literature- to modes ot
social-science research such .is community studies, comparative 10
ciology, and ethnographies conceived .is portraits ot alternative social
arrangements to those ot the West. In each generation, there also have
been individual cultural <.ntKs who transcend the particular! o( on
      ii4   •     Chapter Five


going social research and who provide long-range views of social his-
tory. In contemporary America such figures have included Margaret
Mead, David Riesman, Philip Rieff, Richard Sennett, Daniel Bell, and
Christopher Lasch, among others. While these figures may participate
in the genres of social research, their mark is made through synthetic
generalization and speculation in the essay form.
   Cultural critique is always one possible justification for social re-
search, but in some periods it becomes more widely embraced by so-
              and other intellectuals as the rationale and purpose for
cial scientists

their work. The late nineteenth century was such a period. So were the
interwar years of the 1920s and 1930s. We argue that the present from
the late 1960s on is another.
   In these periods two basic styles of cultural critique have been
important. First, at its most philosophical, cultural critique has posed
as an epistemological critique of analytic reason, of the Enlightenment
faith in pure reason and in the social progress that rationality is sup-
posed to engender. This philosophical critique is most securely
grounded in the sociology of knowledge, a questioning of the relation
between the content of beliefs and ideas, and the social positions of
their carriers or advocates. The effect of this style of cultural critique is
demystification: it detects interests behind and within cultural mean-
ings expressed in discourse; it reveals forms of domination and power;
and thus, it is often posed as the critique of ideology. Demystification
as an emphasis in cultural critique has been pursued within Marxist
and Weberian social analysis, Freudian psychoanalysis, and
Nietzschian cultural analysis. More recently, semiotics, the study of
contemporary life as systems of signs, has been a major tool of de-
mystifying cultural critique, as in the hands of its master, Roland
Barthes.
   The second style of cultural critique has been a more direct, and
seemingly more empirical, analysis of social institutions, cultural
forms, and the frames of everyday life. Cast in terms of economics,
politics,                —
         and religion or access to wealth, power, status, influence,
                  —
and salvation this approach has fostered a pervasive romantic style
of cultural critique. It worries about the fullness and authenticity of
modern life and idealizes the satisfactions of communal experience.
Behind the growth of the market, bureaucracies, large corporations,
and professional social services, it sees a decline of community and of
that sense of individual self-worth necessary to mental health. It charts
the relative inequalities of wealth, the concentration or decentraliza-
tion of decision-making powers, the shifting allegiances to parties and
        ii5     *   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


denominations, and the dissemination of commodities and choice of
life-styles.   On the basis of this charting, it argues for or detects alter-
natives to individualism in both social conditions and ways of thinking
about society. This style of cultural criticism is behind much liberal
debate over welfare, justice, and democratic participation in mass,
market-oriented societies; it also informs more radical efforts to re-
organize society. The concern for the loss of community and the quali-
ty of life in industrial society finds salient expression as a critical
dimension of much social-realist literature and commentaries upon it,
as, for example, in Leo Marx's The Machine in the Garden (1964) and

Raymond Williams's The Country and the City (1973).
     Part of the challenge of twentieth-century cultural criticism has
been the merging of these two styles of critique        — paying attention to
both ideology and social life      — into   a single project. This requires the
cultural critic to be self-critical of the origins of his        own ideas and
arguments, while delivering interpretations of life in a society of which
he, like his subjects, is a full member. In other words, cultural criticism
must include an account of the positioning of the critic in relation to
that which is critiqued, and secondly, the critic must be able to pose
alternatives to the conditions he is criticizing. In the past, the position-
ing of the critic and the posing of alternatives have been resolved by
some form of idealism, romantic historicism, utopianism, or reference
to the cross-cultural. Cultural critics have proposed a pure, abstract
principle or standard against which to measure the contexts of modern
life (as in    liberal debates over justice in democratic societies), or they
look at the present from the vantage point of a more satisfying past, or
they evoke a more promising future, or they see salvation in forms of
social life contemporaneous with, but alien to, the West
     Each of these can be done more or less effectively, but as rhetorical
strategies they have become exhausted in a contemporary world that
brooks no easy comparisons with other cleanly wrought alternatives
in time or space, but which insists on its own problematic and global

uniqueness. While the globe is still full of cultural differences, n is also
true that  most possibilities are known, or at least have been consid-
ered,   and that all other cultural worlds have been penetrated b) M
pects of modern lite. What mailers, then, is nOI ideal lite elsewhere, or
in   another time, but the discovery ot new recombinant possibilities
and meanings in the process ot daily living anywhere. Alternatives,
then, must be suggested within the bounds ot the situations and life
styles that are the objects ot cultural criticism.       I   he traditional rhet
Orical strategies ot the cultural critic are thus     mcreasingb e.is\    to dlS
        1 1 6    •   Chapter Five


miss     because they are either so thoroughly pessimistic that no
alternative at all can be foreseen, or else so thoroughly idealist or ro-
mantic in posing alternatives as to lack credibility.
     The cultural criticism that anthropology has offered in the past has
been immersed in the above styles of critique, and anthropology has
all too often indulged in its        own cross-cultural romanticism: critiquing
contemporary society from the vantage point of a more satisfying
other, without considering with much seriousness the practicalities of
transferring or implementing that otherness in a very different social
setting. Nor has such a strategy faced squarely the negative side of the
satisfying other when viewed in a balanced way within its own social
setting.

     Nonetheless, in thinking about what anthropology might offer as a
renewed, more vital, form of cultural criticism, its ethnographic meth-
ods would seem to provide realistic and satisfying solutions to the
above-mentioned key problems of the positioning of the critic and the
posing of alternatives. With regard to positioning, ethnography offers
engagement with others' lives through fieldwork. The ethnographer is
always implicated in his critique through his self-conscious interac-
tions with a particular group of subjects. This does not relieve the
ambiguity of the          critic's   positioning (the fieldworker being simul-
taneously part of and outside the critique); to the contrary, the eth-
nographer confronts the ambiguity of positioning head-on and makes
it   an explicit object of reflection.
     With regard to posing            alternatives,   ethnography explores pos-
sibilities      that are strictly within the conditions of      life   represented,
rather than beyond them in some other time or place. In subtle ways,
the ethnographer as critic can play with Utopian extrapolations or im-
plications in his material, but a commitment to scrupulousness in de-
scription, combined with a rhetoric of self-doubt, demands that the
existing situation, as experienced by ethnographer       and subjects, be
fully explored for the reader. And it is here that the power of ethnogra-
phy as cultural criticism resides: since there are always multiple sides
and multiple expressions of possibilities active in any situation, some
accommodating, others resistant to dominant cultural trends or in-
terpretations, ethnography as cultural criticism locates alternatives by
unearthing these multiple possibilities as they exist in reality. Contem-
porary experimental ethnographies, particularly, exhibit a shrewdness
about the Utopian vulnerabilities of earlier accounts of exotic others,
and in their self-critical reflexivity, focused on the situation of field-
work, sustain a rounded, here-and-now orientation to their subjects.
         ii7   •   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


      This insistence on a fundamental descriptive realism is what makes
ethnographic techniques so attractive at the present moment in a
number of different fields that claim cultural critique as their function.
For anthropology, the issue is how to conduct critical ethnography at
home by making use of its cross-cultural perspective, but without fall-
ing prey to overly romantic or idealist representations of the exotic in
order to pose a direct alternative to domestic conditions.              A dis-
tinctively anthropological cultural critique must find ways to explore
equally the possibilities for alternatives in both situations    —
                                                            the domes-
tic                            —
    and the cross-cultural using the juxtaposition of cases (derived
from ethnography's built-in Janus-faced perspective) to generate crit-
ical questions from one society to probe the other. This scholarly pro-

cess is really only a sharpening and enhancement of a common
condition globally, in which members of different societies themselves
are constantly engaged in this same comparative checking of reality
against alternative possibilities. Yet, we realize that, contrary to the
idea of looking to exotic cultures simplistically for models,          many of
the alternatives that they pose are not importable like some form of
technology. The Japanese, Tongans, or Nigerians do not provide clear
contrasts with ourselves; any juxtaposing of them with us generates a
complex inquiry about our respective situations in a contemporary
world order in which relationships between societies must be presup-
posed.



         The Current Fashion of Cultural Critique
         and Its Precedents
One of the interesting aspects of the 1970s and 1980s is that cultural
criticism as a self-conscious or de facto justification for research has
come to infuse a number of disciplines. It is no longer |ust the indi-
vidual essayists such as Daniel Bell, Richard Sennett, or Christopher
Lascri  who claim this function, but many of the historians, social ^1
entists, and literary scholars who provided the data tor the essayists
now see cultural critique as a major purpose ot then own ongoing
research. Literary criticism has emerged from its New   ritiusm hostil-
                                                             (


ity to the social   Sciences and seeks relevance in a larger an 11.1 ot cultur-
al studies in which the production ot texts itselt is \ lewed as a political
and social process. Marxists and others have rediscovered the rank      I




turt School's "critical theory" and probing ot the COmmodificatiorJ ot

culture. Philosophers SUCfa .is (harks la\lor. Richard iVmstein, and
Richard Rorty .ire concerned with the challenge that the problem ot
        1 1 8   •   Chapter Five


contextuality poses to hopes for discovering universal principles, and
have recognized the appeal of the critical purpose at a time when intel-
lectual system-building is unattractive.
  This fashion in cultural critique would seem to be another man-
ifestation of the general crisis of representation in contemporary aca-
demic fields. The two related characteristics of this crisis are, first,
disarray in attempts to build general and historically comprehensive
theories that would subsume all piecemeal research, and, second, a
widespread perception of a fundamentally changing world for which
tried-and-true "base" concepts that have served empirical research,
such as class, culture, the social actor, among others, no longer work
as well. The consequences for the individual scholar have been two-
fold. First, he has assumed responsibility for defining the significance
of his own particular projects because the general theoretical umbrella
of justification of the field no longer adequately does this. Theory and
purpose in research are thus far more personalized, and this defines
the experimental quality of both ethnography and other related kinds
of writing in contemporary genres of cultural criticism. And second,
cultural critics focus in      on details of social life to find in them a re-
definition of the phenomena to be explained in uncertain times, and
thus to reconstruct fields from the bottom up, from the problem of
description (or really of representation) back to general theory which
has grown out of touch with the world on which it seeks to comment.
  This hunkering          down on detail in the social and historical sci-
ences   — move toward the ethnographic —
           a                                        registers even at the level of
the figures who, as essayists, have established themselves as generalist
cultural critics for a mass intellectual readership. During the 1950s, in
the work of cultural critics like David Riesman, the problem was seen
as bureaucratic alienation         and conformity in mass society, and the
response was, in retrospect,          a   naively   optimistic   brief   for   indi-
vidualism. In the 1960s, despite the revolutionary imagery then cur-
rent, there was a more subtle view of the hegemonic power of "the
system" over culture and the individual. While notions of indi-
vidualism were thus demystified, still there was a sense that "the sys-
tem" was understood or at least understandable, and that it might, as
an object, be subject to revolutionary change either through violent
means in the third world, or through concerted, nonviolent, political
mobilization in the first world. During the 1970s, this revolutionary
imagery was itself demystified, leaving images of change and transi-
tion without broader theoretical frameworks that might make sense of
these changes. The notion that "the system" was well understood
         ii9     *    Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


slowly evaporated. A key indicator of this sense of living in the after-
math of ideas that still provide intellectual capital, but have suffered
serious deflation, is the convention we noted of talking about the pre-
sent, not in paradigmatic or positive terms, but with the self-labeling
prefix "post-": postmodernism in literature and art, poststructuralism
in anthropology and literary criticism.

   Perhaps the most similar recent period was the 1920s and 1930s.
Again, by self-identification alone, there seems to be a connection in
the     ways current critics have rediscovered their predecessor of this
interwar era. It will be recalled that this was also the time when the
ethnographic method became installed as the central practice of
anthropologists.
   It    worth describing here the major movements of cultural crit-
         is

icism in  Germany, France, and the United States of the 19x0s and
1930s, in order to query how they addressed the key problems of the
positioning of the critic and the posing of alternatives in the conduct of
criticism. In Germany, the early Frankfurt School developed an in-
teresting theoretical program of research for examining the links be-
tween modern culture and society. In France, the surrealists provided a
sense of how juxtaposing ethnographic fragments from exotic cultures
could revitalize perspectives on one's own culture. In the United
States, the 1920s and 1930s were a fertile period for experimenting
with documentary and ethnographic forms in a trend of social realism
which cross-cut many media of expression. In the following brief anal-
yses of the strengths and weaknesses of each of these movements in
cultural criticism,             we seek to identify the elements for a revitalized
critical      purpose in the practice of ethnographic research.

         THE FRANKFURT SCHOOL
Perhaps the most important stimulus to the revitalized sense of cultur-
al criticism among the younger generation of American anthropolo-

gists    during the late 1960s and 1970s was the Frankfurt School of
Max Horkheimer, Theodor Adorno, Herbert Marcuse, Walter Ben-
jamin, and their associates (including               at   various tunes, the psycho
analyst Erich Fromm, the political scientist               I   ran/   Neumann, the legal
sociologist          Otto       Kirshheimer,   the   sociologist       ot   literature    I   60
I.owenthal,      economist
                     the      ricdrich Pollack, the antkleterminist
                                          I




Marxist theoretician Karl Korsch, and the then -communist Karl Witt-
fogel).       Formed       in   the   1910s and   I93OS, the      I   rankturt   School       at

tempted to analyze the failure ot revolutionary socialism 111 Western
Europe, the totalitarianizatioii ol communism in Eastern Europe, the
     1   20   •   Chapter Five


economic crisis of 192.9 and the continuing growth of monopolies in
the economy, and the rise of fascism.
   The most exciting tool wielded by the Frankfurt School was their
demystifying series of questions about the ways culture and psychol-
ogy might be manipulated by political and economic processes. In pro-
bing why the highly cultured bourgeois societies of Western Europe
should allow themselves to fall into mass dictatorships, and why the
industrial proletariat seemed increasingly unlikely to develop a revolu-
tionary consciousness, Horkheimer and Adorno asked if the psycho-
dynamics of identity formation in the family was not changing in a
manner that made authoritarianism increasingly natural. Secondly,
they questioned if the industrial production of culture was not work-
ing to reinforce such authoritarian trends. Although Horkheimer and
Adorno gave overly pessimistic answers to these questions, in part
because of the looming threat of fascism, their mode of formulating
questions remains important for cultural critique up to the present.
Unlike much other social science of their time and since, their probes
into the nature of industrial society arose from a lucid and self-
conscious vision of the historical moment in which they were writing.
This heightened sense of the predicaments and crises of the present is a
distinctive   mark of periods when cultural criticism as a function of
social theory is salient.Furthermore, the Frankfurt School pioneered
politically sensitive approaches to the study of the family and the
culture industry as means for understanding mass culture in modern
societies. Subsequent cultural critique as well as the routine sociology
of culture have followed this lead.
   Horkheimer and Adorno argued that in a technological economy,
as the father loses his function as transmitter of skills, experience, and
access to wealth, the social conditions of the psychological dynamics
within the family are decisively changed.      The child's superego is
formed in school by peer groups, and through the propaganda of the
state and mass media, rather than by an individual father. As Freud
had pointed out, when many individuals put one and the same object
in place of their ego-ideal, their emotional and intellectual acts become
increasingly dependent on reinforcement by being repeated in similar
ways by other members of the group. The superegos of the majority of
individuals become thus increasingly rigid and intolerant, and depen-
dent upon strong authoritarian leaders.
   This was not just an argument about the conditions for fascism in
Europe. It was also much more broadly an inquiry into the nature of
the industrial production of culture, especially in the United States.
      i2i   •   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


The culture industry consisted of Hollywood movies, radio, records,
photography, popular culture in all its forms, reproduced in millions
of identical copies and disseminated through the market. Horkheimer
and Adorno suggested that these means of mass culture were con-
nected to the increasingly authoritarian family, which fed on a regres-
sion from independent thinking to fantasy that could be manipulated
for commercial and political ends. Adorno worried that insofar as
mass culture is subject to the pressures of the market, what succeeds is
what has the greatest sales, what thus appeals to the lowest common
denominator, and hence what is least likely to stimulate critical think-
ing, differential response, or mature flexibility which come from deal-
ing with nonstereotypic situations and difficulties.
   The concerns of the Frankfurt School were domesticated during the
1950s by their devaluation as merely wartime research on political
propaganda and authoritarianism. The questions about the changes in
the psychological structure of individuals, the family, and politics were
now posed in genteel liberal debates about whether mass culture was
good because it was democratic or bad because it was mediocre. But
with the struggles of the civil-rights movement, the campaign against
the Vietnam War, and the concern with the imperialist nature of
American multinational corporations, the demystifying style of the
Frankfurt School again became attractive, especially in the United
States. Through his writings and his teaching at Brandeis and Berke-
ley, Herbert Marcuse became a key transmitter of Frankfurt School

ideas, albeit in a much modified and transitional form: Marcuse's fu-
sion of psychoanalysis and political-economic probings were far more
optimistic about the possibilities of a postscarcity society, and his
analyses of post-Freudian man resembled other ivsos critiques <>t con-
formity in democratic consumer societies.
  As the civil-rights and Vietnam struggles intensified, students be-
came increasingly open to sharper and more skeptical analysis. And
when those struggles subsided, the skeptical edge was not lost, but
instead Walter Benjamin was rediscovered .is a Clitic who elaborated
the oppositional side of modern culture      which had resisted assimila-
tion to existing modes of production      and exchange, while protesting
against the relocations of culture.
   Adorno had defined true art as Stimulating critical thought through
negations of the empirical realities from which it arises. According to
him, art creates images of heautv or order wIikIi are dissonant with
reality,and disassembles everyday perceptions ot the world. Adorno
feared that as the culture industry spread, true art would become ever
          122   •   Chapter Five


more isolated as the irrelevant work of a tiny elite. Benjamin was more
optimistic that the means of modern technology would allow groups
within society to express themselves and disseminate their particular
subcultures. With this idea, the study of popular culture has recently
taken an impressive and invigorating turn.             No longer dismissed as
impoverished relative to "high culture," studies of rock-music and
youth subcultures have been probing the ways that working classes,
particular ethnic groups, regional subcultures, and youth generations
define themselves against one another, against other groups in society,
against their material and social conditions, and against history. Not
surprisingly, this turn has         depended heavily upon an ethnographic
spirit of investigation.

   The early Frankfurt School of Horkheimer, Adorno, and Benjamin,
in sum, provided a powerful demystifying research paradigm focusing

on the relationships among market economies, mass-society politics,
and cultural forms. While attractive to the temper of the 1970s, how-
ever, the contributions of the early Frankfurt School leaves something
to be desired now. It posed no explicit alternatives, instead residing
resolutely in the specificity of the present circumstances of Europe and
America; it proposed no comprehensive theory, but deftly employed
the critical capital of prior, nineteenth-century theories, while know-
ing those theories themselves to be dated. The aftermath of the col-
lapse of Parsonian sociology in the 1960s and the problems of reviving
fossilized      and factionated Marxist alternatives provided the 1970s
with a parallel situation, for which the Frankfurt response in an earlier
similar period had some appeal. The style of the Frankfurt School was
that of the essay: the fragmentary insight in an age when knowledge
was felt to be too complex and too rapidly changing to be subsumed
easily in grand theory. The clearest failings of the Frankfurt School
stemmed from purely theoretical deductions, that is, from failing ei-
ther to test their ideas empirically, or to address the ambiguity of their
own position as intellectuals which might reinforce certain perspec-
tives and block others out. It would take firsthand microstudies, such
as ethnography promotes, to validate and extend Benjamin's insights
about the possibilities of liberation and resistance in everyday            life

itself.



          SURREALISM
If the contribution      of the Frankfurt School to contemporary modes of
cultural criticism is explicit and on the level of theoretical questioning,
that of French surrealism          is   more internalized, diffused, and on the
        12.3    •   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


level of ethnographic        concerns with describing the real. Surrealism's
articulation of the modernist consciousness                 is   well   known; its rela-
tionship with ethnography, both epistemologically and institutionally,
is   less often reflected upon.

     Like the Frankfurt School, the surrealists contested a reified culture,
in which they viewed traditional norms, conventions, and collective
meanings as artificial, constructed, and repressive. They reveled in
subverting, parodying, and transgressing those dead conventions
through unexpected juxtapositions, collages of incongruous elements,
drawing from the erotic, the unconscious, and the exotic. Indeed their
juxtaposition and collage techniques acknowledged the increasing
speed and normality with which fragments of once different cultures
could come together in the modern world. They used the term "eth-
nographic" to convey their relativist, subversive attitude which could
contest every local truth or custom with an exotic alternative, drawn
from the contemporary work of French anthropologists in Africa,
Oceania, and aboriginal America.
  James Clifford (1981) suggests three features of a modern "eth-
nographic surrealist attitude" shared by the surrealist movement and
anthropological        ethnography.         First,   "to   see   culture    and and        its

norms    — beauty,     truth, reality   —   as artificial arrangements, susceptible
to detached analysis and comparison with other possible dispositions,
is   crucial to an ethnographic attitude," and indeed is the foundation of
the modern semiotic sense of how culture is constructed. Second, the
inescapable availability of other beliefs, other social arrangements,
and other cultures made the study of "the other" central to modern
consciousness, and fostered an ironic attitude toward one's                            own
culture. Thirdly,       both surrealism and anthropology came                     to   view
culture as a contested reality among various possible interpretations,
espoused by parties with different situations of power relative to one
another.
     There were, of course, serious differences between the ethnographic
as used by surrealist artists simply to provoke and renew creativity in
their   own cultural idiom, and as understood by anthropologists ie
riously interested in other cultural realities.             The clarification >>t these
differences took intellectual form both through the schisms within die
surrealist     movement and through the way in which French ethnolog)
developed. Among Andre Breton's partisans in the e.uK days ol BUI
realism were Michel I. cms and deorges Bataille; both defected during
the late       1920s and were drawn toward the Pans                     Institute of   I   th

Oology, established by Marcel Mauss, Paul Rivet, and                        1   uuen lew
       1   24   •   Chapter Five


Bruhl in 1925. Bataille edited a journal, Documents: Archeologie,
Beaux Arts, Ethnographie, Varietes (1929-30), which served as a
meeting ground for dissidents from the "orthodox" surrealists of the
Breton group and for future ethnographers such as Marcel Griaule,
Andre Schaeffner, Leiris, Georges-Henri Riviere, and Paul Rivet.
Bataille, himself a maverick, developed Marcel Mauss's notions about
the ambivalence of culture in somewhat eccentric directions. He main-
tained a lifelong close relationship with Alfred Metraux, the ethnogra-
pher of the Tupinamba Indians of Amazonia; helped Rivet and
Metraux with the first Parisian exhibition of pre-Columbian art; and
strongly influenced the current French generation of poststructuralists,
such as Michel Foucault (who edited Bataille's complete works),
Roland Barthes, Jacques Derrida, and the Tel Quel group.
   In 193 1, anumber of the contributors to Documents Griaule,              —
Leiris,    Schaeffner     —
                   went on the great ethnographic expedition, the
Mission Dakar-Djibouti, to the Dogon of West Africa. Their results
reflected the transitional state of these ethnographers                between their
modernist interests and their anthropological ones. By comparison
with British or American ethnography of the same period, the material
collected on the Dogon is rich in its elaboration of an alternative cos-
mology and philosophic mind-set to that of Europe, but poor in its
portrayal of the practicalities of how Dogon life is actually lived.
   Two other institutions were central for this group of French eth-
nographers who remained interested and involved in the avant-garde:
the Musee de l'Homme (organized by Rivet) and the College de So-
ciologie (Bataille, Leiris, Roger Caillois), which met from                 1938 until
1940. Walter Benjamin frequented the latter, and one of the first cells
of the French Resistance to the Nazis was begun in the former.
   Surrealism can be viewed either as an important and pervasive gen-
eral component in modern consciousness, or more specifically as an
artisticset of techniques which helped articulate modern con-
sciousness in the 1920s and 1930s, and which continues as an interest-
ing    vehicle      for   literary   cultural   criticism   in   several   third-world
countries today.  As artistic technique, surrealism was a liberating
commentary on modern life, providing a vocabulary of cultural crit-
icism and opening up a view of culture as alterable and contestable.
But it tended to remain playful, ungrounded in sociological critique,
focused ethnocentrically on European concerns, and unreflexive about
its own epistemological viewpoint               —
                                      more semiotic guerrilla warfare
than systematic cultural criticism. The ethnographers who emerged
from the dialogue with surrealism, however, are                     left   with a dual
        125    •   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


legacy. First, to bring out the critical potential       embedded in the eth-
nographic method requires that anthropologists take seriously the no-
tion    of    modern   reality   as   a    juxtaposing of alternative cultural
viewpoints, which exist not merely simultaneously, but in interaction,
and not as static fragments, but each as dynamic human constructions.
Second, the view of culture as a flexible construction of the creative
faculties encourages ethnographers to expose their procedures of rep-
resentation, makes them self-conscious as writers, and ultimately sug-
gests to them the possibility of including other authorial voices (those
of the subjects) in their texts.


        DOCUMENTARY CRITICISM IN AMERICA
If   the Frankfurt School in the 1930s was theoretically probing in its
cultural criticism, but ethnographically           ungrounded; and if French
surrealism in the 1930s powerfully employed a technique of juxtapos-
ing the familiar to the exotic or primitive other, but failed to develop
its cultural critique systematically and only toyed with ethnography;

American cultural criticism in the 1930s became ethnographic with a
vengeance. As William Stott (1973) puts it, "a documentary motive
was at work throughout the culture of the times in the rhetoric of the
New Deal and the WPA arts projects; in painting, dance, fiction, and
theater; in the new media of radio and picture magazines; in popular
thought, education, and advertising" (p. 4). There were case-worker
reports written to educate the public about the unemployed; there
were picture books experimenting with the photographic medium to
capture "human experience" (for example, Archibald MacLeish's
Land of the Free, 1937, Dorthea Lange and Paul Taylor's An Ameri-
can Exodus, 1939, and James Agee and Walker Evans's Let Us Now
Praise Famous Men, 1941), and there was social-science writing 111 die
documentary mode, particularly that pioneered by the Chicago school
or urban ethnography.
    There was a hunger for reliable information, a widespread suspi
cion that newspapers were manipulating the news, a recognition that
government officials in the Hoover administration responded to eco-
nomic crisis by denying problems in the hopes of thereby Stimulating
business confidence, and a simple unavailability <>t public facts.   he    1




Depression, Stott points out, was virtually invisible in its dimensions
and contours to the casual observer: not until 1^40, tor instance, did
the government adopt an effective measure ol unemployment
(monthly interviews ot              households, representing a CTOSS
                                 }<>,ooo
section of the population). It is we, a later generation, who have sharp
      126     •   Chapter Five


images of the Depression provided by the photographs and other doc-
umentary efforts of the 1930s.
   The documentary hunger can be seen even in the arts: nonfiction in
the 1920s outsold fiction by two to one; newsreel houses and pho-
tomagazines were extremely popular; fiction itself shifted toward real-
ism with a documentary feel; even the Martha Graham ballet shifted
in themes toward the condition of America or social disorders in Eu-

rope. From the viewpoint of precedents for the contemporary renewal
of anthropological cultural criticism, two projects were most central:
the WPA arts projects and the Chicago school of urban ethnography.
  Stott credits the    WPA projects with creating a cultural revolution,
allowing America to discover itself as a culture, and to appreciate its
regional diversity. Not only did it encourage artists as diverse as Aaron
Copland, Moses Soyer, and Robert Sherwood to turn to American
subjects, but it created a mass audience: art galleries in thousands of
towns, theater productions, recordings of folklore, and 378 guide-
books. The documentary mode was a radically democratic genre, dig-
nifying the   common man, and showing the rich and powerful as
ordinary.   The WPA guidebooks gloried in this democratic spirit,
where blacks and Indians stood a better chance of inclusion than
whites of equal stature, where, as a reviewer, Robert Cantwell, put it,
"the gestures that bear most fruit in terms of communities come usu-
ally from the little man."

   The Chicago school of urban ethnography, developed by the De-
partment of Sociology at the University of Chicago, was also imbued
with the documentary spirit, pioneering the participant-observation
method, denigrating statistical methods as superficial (if necessary),
and developing case studies. Some of this research identified too much
with its subjects, erring into sensationalism and lack of objective pro-
portion; more of it was simply theoretically unfocused in its purpose.
Nonetheless, the Chicago studies established the groundwork for in-
vestigations of social mobility, neighborhood patterns of succession,
local community organization, processes of immigration from Europe
or the South into industrial cities, and symbolic arenas of competition
for cultural hegemony and control. At a time of great social change of
which most Americans were aware, these ethnographic studies,
strongly empirical and attentive to the details of everyday life, re-
sponded to the need to know what was happening to society at a
concrete level of description. William Lloyd Warner's Yankee City
studies, W. F. Whyte's Street Corner Society, and the various studies
of Chicago by Wirth, Park, Burgess, McKenzie, and their associates
remain important ethnographic beginnings.     1
       12.7    •        Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


  Perhaps the primary problem of this new style of sociological eth-
nography (and a problem shared by other documentary modes in the
1930s) was the assumption that documentation or the description of
reality was technically unproblematic, that empirical evidence is more
or less self-explanatory. The problem is sharpest with photography:
reanalyses of how pictures were selected, how people were posed, how
captions were written, the way images were cropped,                    all   reveal the
subtle, or not so subtle, manipulation of reality and viewer's impres-
sions. So, too,          with ethnography. The most ambitious ethnographic
project of this period, W. Lloyd Warner'sYankee City series, is volu-
minously rich in information, but unclear as to what to make of all
the material, or so rich as to be able to bear reanalysis in different
ways, especially on the key questions of the nature of class stratifica-
tion, and whether America was an open, socially mobile society, or an
increasingly closed, class-bound system.
   Few fields were untouched by a self-conscious critical mission dur-
ing the 1920s and 1930s, least of all anthropology. It was during this
period that the practice of ethnography was being established as the
central professional activity of this discipline, with which, as we have
argued, a promise to be relevant to the problems of its own society
became associated. For the students of Franz Boas, particularly, this
critical function of their fieldwork, grounded not in mainstream
America, but mostly among American Indians and occasionally
abroad, became important. Margaret Mead is a key example, utilizing
patterns she discovered about child rearing, sex roles, and the emo-
tions in Samoa and New Guinea to critique American patterns and to
call for their modification. It was Mead who developed the strategic-

juxtaposing of a foreign perspective, gained from firsthand fieldwork,
to disassemble for Americans their sense that their own customs were
"natural" and immutable. Thus, the pioneering of the ethnographic
method in anthropology during an intense period of cultural criticism
in American intellectual life also reflected this critical spirit.

    In sum, American cultural criticism in the 1920s and mmos was

experimental in its efforts at documentary representation, aiul m an
thropology's early moves at juxtaposing the ethnographic other-
cultural subject to domestic situations.            It   lacked the theoretical imag-
ination ot the more detached           I   uropean varieties <»t critique m the same
period, and        it   assumed that documentation oi realit)        \sas technically
unproblematic, 2 which, in contrast, was precisely the problem tor the
surrealists.   A strong and distinctive practice <>t cultural critique b)
anthropologists should combine the empiricism ot American docu
mentary realism with the theoretical vision and vitalit\ of the rank            I
         128   •   Chapter Five


furt School in its early period, along with the playfulness and daring of
the     juxtapositions of French   surrealism.   Before assessing such a
strengthened critical function for anthropology, we should consider
more fully what its long-term tradition of critique in its own cultural
contexts has in fact been.



        The Tradition of Cultural Critique
        in Anthropology

It is   not without reason that the roots of contemporary anthropology
are always traced to the nineteenth century. The comparative method
in the  nineteenth century attempted to make sense of the variety of
contemporary societies by fitting them into an evolutionary sequence,
not necessarily a rigid one, or a single chain of being, but in the form
of a branching tree. It is faddishly popular to dismiss the evolutionary
thought of the ninteenth century as ethnocentric, crude, and self-
serving of domestic elites and colonial rulers. But in terms of cultural
critique, it is well to remember that this form of the comparative meth-
od played a profound role in nineteenth-century battles to establish a
secular-scientific outlook, to argue for the malleability, and thus re-
formability, of society, and finally to initiate the modern sense of toler-
ant pluralism.
    Much of the comparative method was progressive for its day       — the
defense of the psychic unity of mankind against blatant racism, the
insistence upon the principle of uniformitarianism against theological
assertions of arbitrary acts of divine intervention (and hence the au-
thority of theology), the denial that the primitive was an example of
the fall from grace (and hence subjectable on moral grounds to slavery
and other tutelary dependencies), and the use of examples from the
non-Western world or from American Indians to critique Victorian
society on issues of property rights, inegalitarian political relations,
family, law, and religious authority. James Frazer's Golden Bough,
arguably the evolutionary work with the widest readership and im-
pact, became a treasure trove of symbols and images for the modernist
generations of poets and writers. Its elegant style was an inspiration,
through these same writers, for the ironic mood of the twentieth cen-
tury in which there was a recognition of the plurality of alternative
perspectives on truth, and the idea that beliefs and behaviors should be
taken with a wry sense of human fallibility.
      The challenge of twentieth-century anthropology has been to make
the critique of the civilizing process, begun by the evolutionists, more
        129   •    Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


trenchant, less romantic, and less Utopian. It seems intuitively obvious
that evolutionary schemes provide poor platforms from which to cri-
tique societies that are conceded to be the most evolved. Despite the
examples drawn from other societies to critique aspects of these most
modern societies, such critique remains ad hoc, fragmentary, and
nostalgic; the subliminal message tends to be affirming of the basic
superiority of modern European or American society. This legacy of
evolutionism remains a firmly embedded part of popular contempo-
rary thought: the continua of modernization or development, or the
paried schemata of traditional/modern, preliterate/literate, peas-
ant/industrial, draw upon the Victorian doctrine of progress, and rein-
force American or European self-congratulatory complacency.
   In the 1920s and 1930s, anthropology developed the ethnographic
paradigm, which entailed a submerged, unrelenting critique of West-
ern civilization as capitalism. The idea was that we in the West have
lost what they      — the   cultural other    —   still   have, and that we can learn
basic moral and practical lessons from ethnographic representations.
Generally and simplistically, ethnography has offered three broad crit-
icisms. They      — primitive man — have retained a respect           for nature, and
we have lost it (the ecological eden); they have sustained close, inti-
mate, satisfying communal lives, and we have lost this way of life (the
experience of community); and they have retained a sense of the sa-
cred in everyday life, and we have lost this (spiritual vision). Presented
out of the context of any particular ethnographic case, these criticisms
seem gross, but they are nonetheless the central critical ideas that are
an underside of the development of the ethnographic method in the
1920s and 1930s.
   Two themes or styles of cultural critique emerged from the respec-
tive development of ethnography in Britain and America during this
formative period: in America, as we have seen, relativism became a
general organizing concept, appropriate to a society being formed
from a diversity or immigrants; in Britain, the nature ot rationalit)
became a similar general organizing theme, perhaps appropriate to a
more class-conscious society m which the intellectual elite was gradu
ally being made aware that           its   own modes of thought were not no.es
sarily the only valid ones.

   In   America, Iran/ Boas spanned both the nineteenth centur) pro
jed ot   anthropology ami the development ot the ethnographic para
digm. The debates that he entered and the cultural criticism dial he
ottered addressed both eras ot anthropology.                   However, his students,
>.(>mm^ professional!)        <»t   age in the    [910s ami 1930s, defined what
        130   •   Chapter Five


relativism    was subsequently to be about, and the emphasis of their
cultural criticism   was a critique of contemporaneous conditions in
American society. This is the source of difference between Franz Boas
and his student, Margaret Mead, who became the model of the an-
thropologist as cultural critic. Boas used ethnography to debate re-
sidual issues derived from the framework of nineteenth-century
evolutionary thought and to challenge racist views of human behavior,
then ascendant. Mead, and others like Edward Sapir, Elsie Clews Par-
sons, and Ruth Benedict, were much more focused in their cultural
criticism. They began to use anthropology's subjects as specific probes
into American conditions of the 1920s and 1930s. While Boas himself
had been a critic of intellectual doctrines that had great social implica-
tions, his students were primarily critics of society under the banner of
relativism.
   The English ethnographers as cultural critics took a lead from the
implicit criticisms of British society in the work of such leading figures
as Malinowski and Evans-Pritchard. They boldly took such practices
as witchcraft and magic, and compared them with Western science
and common sense, on an equal footing. The effect was to initiate an
innovative questioning of the idea of rationality by relativizrng it, by
showing in comparative terms what philosophers of science were be-
ginning to demonstrate in logical terms: the ways in which belief sys-
tems,   including science,       are   protected from disproof. They also
considered the basic division of Western institutional        life   —   politics,
economics, religion, kinship      — and asked how   tribal societies, lacking
such institutional differentiation, nonetheless accomplished              all   the
same functions that our society did. They showed, in effect, that there
are alternative ways to order society that are just as rational as our
own, or more so. Respect for Central African ecological knowledge,
for instance, increased after European efforts to intensify production
"more rationally" led to erosion and famine. Respect for traditional
curing techniques increased where Western biomedical knowledge
was inapplicable.
   Both British and American ethnographic enterprises attracted
women, foreigners, Jews, and others who felt themselves marginal, but
yet belonged to social systems in which they were privileged intellec-
tuals, and to which they were finally committed. Thus, in the 19ZOS
and 1930s, the forms of cultural criticism that arose in anthropology
were none too radical, in the Marxist or surrealist sense of the Conti-
nent. They were the critique of marginal scholars whose primary con-
cern was not their own societies, but others. The twentieth-century
           131     •    Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


tradition of cultural criticism in anthropology              had its roots in this
qualified marginality of its practitioners. Thus, anthropologists as cul-
tural critics developed a liberal critique, similar to that being expressed
in   other social sciences; they expressed sympathy for the oppressed,
the different,         and the marginals, as well as emphasizing the modern
dissatisfactions with privileged middle-class         life. It was a critique of

conditions, but not of the system or the nature of the social order
itself.

     In    the   1960s,     when revolutionary rhetoric and visions were in
vogue, a more historical sense of the role of anthropology itself began
to develop.        Rather than remaining content simply with microstudies,
anthropologists raised questions about the nature of global systems of
power, economic dependency, psychic relations with more powerful
cultures on the part of third-world societies, and coercion.           How these
issues        should inform the practice of ethnography remained an un-
answered question during the 1960s. However, now, in the experi-
mental moment we have described, such issues intimately inform the
writing of ethnography. The effect of such consciousness finally per-
meating practice is to suggest possibilities for forms of cultural crit-
icism in anthropology that are  more innovative, more realistic than
those of the nineteenth century, and more systematic than those of the
1930s.



          The Contemporary Relevance of Anthropology
Anthropology has a mixed contemporary image among other scholars
and the public. On the one hand, its major appeal is its ethnographic-
method, which, as we have seen, is increasingly attractive within many
disciplines as a way of developing new approaches to their tr.ulition.il
objects of analysis. On the other hand, anthropology is often identified
with the study of primitive cultures. While there still are many of these
technologically simple, small-scale kinds of culture to Btlldy, and new
ethnographies demonstrate that tins is the ease all the tune, the general
perception is that exotic cultures are disappearing and with them, an-
thropology's raison d'etre. And if the exotic Cultures thai remain are
increasingly marginal m a world that appears to be homogenizing,
then what relevance do their isolated realities and experience have tot
modern life.' Much more Fundamentally, the figure <»f the primitive,
once      1   powerful descriptive frame in which to represent difference and
alternative possibilities to American readerships, has now lost much ol
this      power.       We need to examine both sides of this atmosphere of
      1 3 2.   •   Chapter Five


mixed reception before considering how cultural critique can be more
powerfully formulated by anthropology.

     THE APPEAL OF ETHNOGRAPHY
A key example of the employment of ethnography for purposes of
cultural critique, but without        acknowledgment of anthropology, is
Paul Willis's Learning to Labour (1981 [1977]), which we discussed in
the last chapter as an important work in political-economy studies.
Willis distinguishes his strategic ethnography       — focusing on schooling
as an important formative context of working-class experience        — from
ethnography in anthropology to which he attributes a commitment to
holism, to presenting a portrait of the total way of life of a culture.
This distinction is all the more unfortunate since it assumes that an-
thropology is tied to the study of simple, self-contained societies in
which the presentation of totality is somehow easier. This view of
anthropology, separate from ethnography as a method, is in part a
legacy of its marginalization as an academic discipline, and in part a
result of the notion that anthropologists were after comprehensive
knowledge of the societies they studied, rather than recognizing eth-
nography as a method of description for the sake of theoretically in-
teresting arguments.
  Putting aside the problem of anthropology's image, Willis's book
demonstrates an important critical function that the ethnographic ap-
proach can perform. Willis writes within the Marxist tradition where
there has always been the problem of the relation of the intellectuals to
the revolutionary class     — the   proletariat. Although the intellectuals ar-
ticulate a critique of society of their own, authentically this critique
should come from the working class. A major goal of Marxist cultural
criticism is thus to retrieve, or discover, the de facto critique of society
embedded in the everyday life experiences of working-class people.
Willis's study adds to a long tradition of observation and documenta-
tion in England of the conditions of the poor and working class. But
what gives his book its power is that, as ethnographer, he claims to be
discovering the social criticisms and observations of the working class
itself through his recording of the behavior and language of working-

class youth in a strategic setting    —
                                   the state school      —
                                                      where social class-
es not only meet face-to-face, but where life courses of working-class
individuals are most importantly determined.
    By representing their critique of society, the ethnographer makes
the cultural criticism more authentic: it is no longer the critique of the
detached intellectual: rather it is the critique by the subject unearthed
         133     •   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


through ethnographic engagement. The importance of ethnography is
that there are potentially many such critiques, and it is for the cultural
critic to   discover them, represent them, indicate their provenance or
incidence, and explore their insight and meaning. These, after all, are
the sources of diversity in the cultural arena, and constitute the every-
day,     unintellectualized       cultural   criticism   of groups   from various
perspectives.
     Willis's is a Marxist version of the appeal of the ethnographic with-
in   an already strong tradition of cultural critique, but the appeal is
much broader. The task of ethnographic cultural critique is to discover
the variety of modes of accommodation and resistance by individuals
and groups to their shared social order. It is a strategy for discovering
diversity in what appears to be an ever more homogeneous world.
     The cultural critic becomes in effect a reader of cultural criticisms,
discovered ethnographically, rather than an independent intellectual
originator of critical insight. There are, of course, technical problems
involved       in the   ethnographic process; for example, it can        fairly   be
asked how much attributed to Willis's working-class lads is really con-
structed by himself in the rhetoric of ethnographic writing. Nonethe-
less,   the idea of the ethnographer's function as uncovering, reading,
and making visible to others the critical perspectives and possibilities
for alternatives that exist in the lives of his subjects is an attractive one.
It is   a function that anthropology has been performing abroad, and it
should be a style of cultural criticism it could perform at home. What
would distinguish it from Willis's work is not some unrealistic com-
mitment to holism, but the bringing to bear on America (or England)
the comparative perspective of work done abroad. One problem such
a distinctive form of cultural critique might be thought to face is the
declining appeal of the primitive or exotic as a descriptive space in
which to evoke alternatives and differences.



         THE DECLINING APPEAL OF THE PRI M ITIVE/ EXOTIC
From the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries the increasing encoun-
ter with    other cultures provided great incentive for an ethnography of
the exotic      and considerable interest at home in accounts of travels
(scientific or otherwise) among strange peoples. Today, it is commonly
thought that with advances in communications and technology, the
work) is becoming         .1   more homogeneous, integrated, and interdepen-
dent place, and with this process, the trulv exotic, and the vision of
difference it held out, is disappearing.         Ethnography cspcualK      the re
      i34    •    Chapter Five


cent ethnographies of experience that we surveyed) constantly demon-
strates that this is not the case, or at least that this disappearance is not
as rapid or as profound as many think. Yet, compelling evidence from
mass media such as television and from traveling, tourist-style, strong-
ly impresses affluent middle classes that everyone is becoming just as

much a part of the mass culture of modern plural societies.
   For a long time, the primitive other    —a vision of Eden, where the
                                                  —
problems of the West were absent or solved was a very powerful
image that served cultural criticism (as well as, in some cases, cultural
chauvinism). Indeed, the general appeal and reception of the eth-
nographic method offered by anthropology, especially in America,
were aided by this essentially romantic and popular tradition of the
noble savage that goes back at least to the Enlightenment. An-
thropologists did portray cultures that were on the wane, and this
sense of impending loss is still poignant in ethnographic writing, as
part of the narrative motif of salvage that is so important in the justifi-
cation of anthropology as a modern scientific endeavor. But there was
in fact no real indication that anthropologists were running out of
subjects.
   In the   1920s and 1930s, a comment on American culture through
evoking, say, Samoan culture by someone who had been there had
plausibility     and appeal for readerships beyond the profession. The
1970s and 1980s are indeed much like this earlier period, in that there
is both widespread awareness of great changes in the world order

along with a lack of clarity as to directions and options, but the re-
sources of anthropology, as traditionally presented, no longer seem to
have their critical, reflective appeal. One recent sign of this, for exam-
ple, is the much discussed retrospective at New York's Museum of

Modern Art, "'Primitivism' in 20th Century Art: Affinity of the Tribal
and the Modern." The exotic other inspired avant-garde artists during
the 1920s and 1930s, but now this source of innovation and critique
has lost its shock value; this show marks the definitive assimilation of
the primitive into the history of Western art.
   Our consciousness has become more global and historical: to in-
voke another culture now is to locate it in a time and space contempo-
raneous with our own, and thus to see it as part of our world, rather
than as a mirror or alternative to ourselves, arising from a totally alien
origin.For example, in regard to the recent fascination in the West
with Japanese economic success, we have learned that this success can-
not be traced simply to some mysterious cultural difference between
them and us, nor do they offer models to be cleanly transferred to us.
      13 5     •   Repatriation of Anthropology as Cultural Critique


Rather, after a period of sensational writing on the cultural secrets of
Japanese economic performance, we have a more sober, complex, and
realistic view of them as both our competitors and associates in a com-
mon world. Finally, such universally recognized and relevant phe-
nomena as the nuclear threat and consumerism blunt the vividness of
cultural differences through which anthropologists have traditionally
delivered comments on their own society. For anthropology to recap-
ture a wider audience, what is needed are accounts of difference that
nonetheless recognize real homogenizing factors in the contemporary
world.
   In purely domestic terms, the role of the exotic has been displaced
by other descriptive domains for posing important differences within
and alternatives to mainstream American life. Unlike the evocation of
far-off cultural worlds to teach us lessons about ourselves, these other
domains already exist within our own social worlds. For example, the
debate over gender differences, stimulated by feminism, is one of the
most potent of these domains, often falling into the same rhetorical
strategies that once were used for playing off the dissatisfactions of
civilized society     against the virtues of the primitive     (e.g.,    Gilligan
1982):   men are acquisitive (capitalist), women are nurturant (reci-
procity oriented). Discussions of the differences between black lives
and white, lives of the poor and the middle class, gay lives and
straight, have also contributed frameworks for the consideration of
alternative realities. Relativism, long an important message of eth-
nography abroad, has now become a commonplace of liberal dis-
course at home. The debate over artificial intelligence is yet another
domain that has perhaps more cogently appropriated the older an-
thropological concerns about the essential nature and capacities of
man, traditionally in contrast to the life of other annuals, but now, in
contrast to man-made machines (see, for example, Bolter 1984, and
Turkle 1984).
   In all    of these arenas, anthropology's traditional subject        lias   been
partly displaced by more compelling, doser-tO-home vehicles for con
temporary discussions of the same issues that historically have been
raised by anthropology. Yet, an anthropology sensitive t<> contempo-
rary conditions of      knowledge and the perceptions of us readerships
Can still offer effective cultural criticism it it can recast its use of (TOSS
cultural, ethnographic materials. CrOSS-Cultural perspectives still have
an important role to play       in   carrying out projects of repatriated eth
nography, in defining novel approaches t<> taken foi granted domestic
phenomena, m framing questions, and m suggesting alternatives «»i
      136    •   Chapter Five


possibilities among domestic subjects that are only revealed by com-
parative contrast with other cultural material. Finally, the apparent
increasing global integration suggests not the elimination of cultural
diversity,   but rather opportunities for counterposing diverse alter-
natives that nonetheless share a common world, so that each can be
understood better in the other's light. We now examine the major past
techniques of cultural criticism in anthropological writing to suggest
more effective ways to enhance this function embedded in the eth-
nographic method from its beginning.
        Two Contemporary Techniques of
        Cultural Critique in Anthropology



The effectiveness of criticism often depends as much on how it delivers
its message as on what the message is; in the most sophisticated critical

works, content and form are intimately linked. We wish to turn our
attention here to two techniques of critique in anthropology that bring
ethnographic research abroad to bear on cultural issues at home. We
are interested in exploring how anthropology's work abroad can be
the basis for a distinctive kind of cultural criticism that gives as         full

ethnographic treatment to domestic subjects on their own terms, as it
does to the "stimulus" cases of foreign subjects.
     Both techniques       — epistemological critique and cross-cultural jux-
taposition        — are variants on the basic       strategy of defamiliariza-
                                              critical

tion.   Disruption of        common sense, doing the unexpected, placing
familiar subjects in unfamiliar, or even shocking, contexts are the aims
of this strategy to          make    the reader conscious of difference.     De-
familiarization has many uses beyond anthropology. It is a basic strat-
egy not only of surrealist criticism, as we have seen, but also of artistic
expression         in general.   Arthur Danto (1981) has recently written      at

length on this function of art, and it is perhaps significant, in line with
our observation about the current appeal of cultural criticism in many
fields, that       he should do so at this moment. However, in artistic ex-
pression, the critical focus is developed through a single intense visual
or literary effect. In anthropology or other analytic-descriptive dis-
courses, the defamiliarizing effect is only a springboard for a sustained
inquiry. For example,   modern doctors may be compared to tribal
shamans as the opening of an ethnographic and critical investigation
of medical practice. However, in what we will define as the Stronger
version of such projects of criticism       m anthropology, defamiliarization
is more than an attention-grabber, but is a process that should entail          .1



critical reflecting back on the means of defamiliarization itself— using

out example, considering not only how we think about doctors, but
also how we think about shamans.

     Defamiliarization by epistemological critique arises from        tin-   vet)
nature of traditional anthropological work: going out to the periphery
ot the       Euro Centric world where conditions an- supposed to be most



         1
             |7
      M8   •   Chapter Six


alien and profoundly revising the way we normally think about things
in order to come to grips with what in European terms are exotica.

The challenge of serious cultural criticism is to bring the insights
gained on the periphery back to the center to raise havoc with our
settled ways of thinking and conceptualization. Often this enterprise is
received as merely fanciful, cute, or eccentric, rather than really conse-
quential, persuasive, or biting. While satire has its uses, more serious
effects of this enterprise can be achieved if it can alter the bases on
which we normally differentiate ourselves (in the center) from others
(on the periphery). We live in as culturally constructed and non-"natu-
ral" a reality as they; and once this fundamental unity between them
and us is recognized, there is a more valid basis for then considering
substantive differences.
   Defamiliarization by cross-cultural juxtaposition works at a much
more explicitly empirical and less subtle level than defamiliarization
by epistemological critique. It also offers a more dramatic, up-front
kind of cultural criticism. It is a matching of ethnography abroad with
ethnography at home. The idea is to use the substantive facts about
another culture as a probe into the specific facts about a subject of
criticism at home. This is the classic technique of defamiliarization
pioneered by Margaret Mead, and it is the most frequently employed
means of demonstrating cultural relativism. Margaret Mead jux-
taposed her observations of adolescence in Samoa with adolescence in
America in order to show Americans that adolescence need not be a
time of stress and rebellion, that the stress and rebellion of American
adolescence has social and cultural causes which might be altered.
   Very little, if any, of such cultural juxtapositioning, fully realized,
yet exists in anthropology, because it entails equal ethnography
among us and them, strongly linked. In the pioneer period of such
work up to the present, either serious ethnography done abroad has
been brought to bear on domestic conditions known impression-
istically, informally, or at best from secondary sources; or alter-

natively, serious ethnography has been done domestically without any
reference to parallel work abroad, or with invoking work abroad only
in an ad hoc, illustrative manner; or finally, serious ethnography has
been done both at home and abroad but without strong linkages being
made between the two. The first is the case with Margaret Mead. The
last is the case, for example, with W. Lloyd Warner whose Yankee

City studies are informed only in a general way by his previous, equal-
ly superb, work among Australian aborigines. An in-between case is

the cross-cultural, child-rearing studies directed by John and Beatrice
       139   *   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

Whiting, in which the same research design is applied to communities
abroad and in the United States, but all defamiliarization techniques
are suppressed, and the cultural-critique potential is all but eliminated.
As the strongest form of cross-cultural juxtapositioning, what are
needed, then, are dual projects of ethnography equally committed in
their own contexts and equally engaged in cultural criticism.
   As a legacy of anthropology's grand nineteenth-century vision, the
comparative scope for any specific ethnographic work should be
broad, if not global, but in practice, it has been effectively limited to
controlled comparison    — one culture compared with others like it re-
gionally. This limiting of the effective range of comparison that arose
with the scaling down of anthropological practice has made the tech-
nique of cross-cultural juxtaposition contrastive and dualistic. Where-
as the spirit of relativism   is   that our   way is just one among many
others, in practical terms it developed within the ethnographic para-
digm by comparisons among very limited sets of cultures. In fact,
while the Janus-faced nature of any ethnographic project is focused on
an us-them dualism, the actual execution of a project of criticism in-
volves multiple other-cultural references. These inevitably slip in as the
third perspective, as wehave called it, in the process of comparison
and keep the basic dualistic character of ethnographic cultural crit-
icism from becoming overpowered by simplistic better-worse judg-
ments about two cultural situations being juxtaposed. At minimum,
such cultural criticism demands that a sense of the common capacity
for communication   and of shared membership in a global system in-
form and legitimately complicate any dualistically constructed project
of criticism.
    In considering more fully the above two techniques of criticism, we
will distinguish between weaker and stronger versions of each. What
distinguishes weaker from stronger versions is their handling of the
methodological or intentional naivete entailed in most comparative,
cross-cultural research. In a now-classic argument presented in Closed
Systems and Open Minds (1964), Max Gluckman and Ell Devons con-
fronted the problem of bounding the ethnographic enterprise es-
pecially in societies with rich preexisting scholarly research. They
argued for the validity of    a    certain kind of naivete to   let   the eth
nographei get into the field with an open mind relatively free of the
prejudices ami assumptions of the preexisting research conventions.
I lure are two modes of invoking this mcthodologu.il naivete. In one,
the anthropologist as critic of his OWO socictv makes it appear as
strange as possible In blocking out all previous famiharitv and posing
          140   •   Chapter Six


as   if   he or she were entering a completely alien setting. While this
posed naivete can deliver a defamiliarizing effect, it gives up the ad-
vantage of the reflective anthropologist being his own informant; crit-
icism posed in this manner,  beyond the defamiliarizing effect itself,
remains perforce shallow.      does not start from what the an-
                                  It

thropologist in fact knows, and it makes very little use of what an-
thropologists know about other cultures.
     The other, more substantial form of studied naivete is for the an-
thropologist to pose as a critic of his own society based on what he
knows as an expert about another society, rather than on what he
knows about his own. This leads to richer criticism, but is still weak-
ened by the self-imposed naivete about home conditions. As ethnogra-
phy abroad becomes richer, and there is no longer a secure, taken-for-
granted subject matter for ethnography, it becomes more important to
treat domestic patterns with as deep        and varied an understanding as
that applied abroad. As we have argued in our discussion of experi-
mental ethnography abroad, the self-reflection that is a common
theme in these experiments has raised questions about the eth-
nographer's         own cultural background that, in repatriating his in-
terests, require him to view members of his     own society as problem-
atically as his foreign subjects.      Thus, in studying the other, the eth-
nographer's own home culture begins to come into question in new
ways. This should lead to the stronger forms of criticism that we are
proposing.
     It   should be clear that weaker and stronger kinds of cultural crit-
icism are not synonymous with worse and better, although we wish to
promote the development of stronger forms of critique. An argument
could be made that to date the most effective form of cultural criticism
offered by anthropology has been essentially satirical. The most fa-
mous example, perhaps, is Horace Miner's Nacirema paper (1956):
America spelled backward. By adopting a neutral behavioral lan-
guage, devoid of cultural recognitions, Miner makes everyday Ameri-
can behavior seem alien. True enough, there is a sleight of hand and
the exercise has the feel of a trick, but the momentary effect is a flash
of defamiliarizing amusement. There is a whole genre of writing about
American ideas, institutions, and customs that suggest in a light vein
life in    tribal or alien societies (see, for example, Weatherford's recent
look at Congress as Tribes on the Hill, 1981, and the study of Labora-
tory Life, 1979, by Latour         and Woolgar, who employ explicit an-
thropological metaphors). Veblen's use of ethnographic materials to
tweak the American middle classes is perhaps the classic model. This
      141   •   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

kind of cultural criticism can be done more or less effectively and with
more or less serious critical intent. Yet, we think that however flawed
they are, there are contemporary efforts that define stronger variants
of defamiliarization which could be developed into even more power-
ful forms of cultural critique.




     Examples of Defamiliarization
     by Epistemological Critique
This technique of criticism has been most richly developed in recent
anthropology by those scholars and teachers who, during the 1960s,
began to emphasize new views of the concept of culture, on which
American anthropology has always been based. These efforts were
fueled by the introduction of the interpretive perspectives, discussed in
chapter 2, which were directed to changing the way ethnographic ac-
counts had been written. Unfortunately, as we have seen, the central
line of debate came to be simplistically drawn between so-called sym-

bolic anthropologists (the   new culture theorists who argue for the
study of meaning and the "native's point of view" as the central object
of anthropological study) and materialists     (who retain a more tradi-
tional focus   on behavior, action, and interests, that is, on bedrock
political and economic concerns which explain social life anywhere).
Indeed a weakness of the culture theorists is that they failed to come to
terms with issues of political economy, either because it was irrelevant
for them to do so, or because their attempts to do so were a marginal,
incomplete part of their work. Because of the compelling hold on
Western thought of the importance of politics, economics, and self-
interest as the fundamental explanatory frames for what happens in
social life, any effort to argue for the power of symbols, no matter how
persuasively, is bound to be taken lightly if it does not seriously ad-
dress or rephrase materialist explanations. Just as a major task for the
students of the 1960s culture theorists is to make interpretive perspec-
tives accountable to issues of political economy and history, so a ma-
jor task of the epistemological critique offered   by anthropology is to
deal directly and in novel ways with the materialist or utilitarian bias
of Western thought in explanations of social life.
   Among the most prominent of the culture theorists are Clifford
Gcertz, David Schneider, Mary Douglas, and Marshall Sahlins. Each
of them, drawing on work abroad, has offered what we are calling an
epistemological critique of the   way we    — both social   scientists   and
people engaged m everyday life    —   think about tOQCt) and culture. We
        142.   •   Chapter Six


have selected one recent work by each of these writers. They pose their
epistemological critiques in a variety of ways: broad theoretical state-
ments (Sahlins); marginal chapters in ethnographic studies of other
cultures (Geertz); efforts to study American culture through methods
developed in the study of other cultures (Schneider); and works that
explicitly address issues of the moment (Douglas). They have ranged
between "high" cultural criticism addressed to intellectuals and more
accessible cultural criticism intended to rethink the          way some ide-
ology-in-action has been viewed by social science. These writers as
cultural critics have thus been influential, not only among other an-
thropologists, but also among other social scientists and social com-
mentators in reshaping the ways they view their own subjects.
      None of the works on which we dwell succeeds fully, because of
their   manner of self-imposed methodological naivete; yet, each sug-
gests a potentially stronger form of cultural criticism. After reviewing
these works, we turn to the students of the culture theorists and con-
sider the range of topics which they are addressing in a similar sort of
epistemological critique.
      Marshall Sahlins's Culture and Practical Reason (1976) is a bold
critique of utilitarian, materialist thought, not only in anthropology,
but also in Western thought generally.               He   argues that the an-
thropological concept of culture leaves behind such antique dualisms
as mind and matter and idealism and materialism, by turning the ma-
terialist   position on    its   head and making issues of cultural meaning
prior to issues of practical interests and material concerns. Both the
satisfaction of needs through the exploitation of nature and the rela-
tions of self-interest between men are constituted by symbolic systems
that have their own logic or internal structure. There is, for man, no
such thing as pure nature, pure need, pure interests, or material forces,
without their being culturally constructed. This is not to say that there
are not ecological or biological limits, but rather that culture mediates
allhuman perceptions of nature, and that an understanding of these
mediations is a much more important key to explaining human events
than is mere knowledge of such limits. Indeed, for Sahlins, things      — the
natural world      — are   as    much cultural constructions as ideas, values,
and interests. Honor, greed, power, love, fear are motives of action,
but they are not simple universals: all are defined and enacted through
cultural forms that may differ widely. Sahlins offers his strongly posed
argument for culture as a critique of the prestige in Western thought of
technical, materialist modes of understanding.
      The task for anthropology, then, is to produce accounts of cultures
         143     •   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

which reveal their distinctive structures of meaning. Sahlins recounts
in a   polemical way the failures of the founders of the modern eth-
nographic method         — Boas and Malinowski — to do     this.   Claims to the
contrary, they never really overcame the assumptions of practical rea-
son deeply embedded in their conceptual frameworks, and as such, the
English and American styles of anthropology that followed them never
really got to the heart of the cultures         with which they were con-
cerned. 1      Not being able to probe the deep structures of meaning in
other cultures, anthropology could hardly offer a powerful and critical
interpretation of modes of understanding in the culture from which it
arose.
   Armed with a more sophisticated analytical technique, Sahlins
makes a trenchant critique of materialist thought in the West. Then, in
a later chapter, he applies his brand of structuralist analysis to bour-
geois society as a demonstration of the validity of his epistemological
critique in the very heartland that spawned and refined practical rea-
son as a privileged        mode of thought. He strategically selects food,
clothing, and color      — familiar things not usually thought about           as or-
ganized into rigorous classifications or codes. By showing that these
classifications structure the world that utilitarian, materialist thought
operates upon, he seeks to displace this style of thought from its posi-
tion of prestige or as the commonsensical way of thinking among his
readers, and thus defamiliarize it for them. It is in this sense that Sah-
lins has written awork of cultural criticism.
   Our production of feed grains and cattle would change, and so too
our international trade, if we primarily ate dogs. In this way, the op-
portunity costs of economic calculation are secondary or posterior to
our taboos about which kinds of animal are edible, and which are not.
Again, steak remains the most expensive meat even though its absolute
supply is much greater than that of tongue. Poorer people eat cheaper
cuts of meat, cheaper because they are culturally inferior meats, not
because of their availability, as economics would have it. In ironic and
amusing terms, Sahlins pronounces that "America is the sacred land of
the dog,"   and that in its cultural model of a meal, the central meat
component, beef, evokes the masculine pole of a sexual code that must
go back to Indo-European identifications of cattle with virility. The
edibility/inedibility code has a clear logic that differentiates the edible
animal, such as cattle and pi^s, into high-StatUS meat like steak, versus
the edible, but low-status "innards" like intestines.         I    here   is   thus a
whole "tOtemic" system          in   which soual status   parallels decrees ot
edibility.
        144   •   Chapter Six


   Similarly,     what gets produced by industry in the clothing system
depends upon a prior classification of status, time, and place; clothing
can be appropriate for particular situations, activities, and categories
of people. These are the tastes to which industrial production responds
and which advertising shapes. Thus, what is produced along with ma-
terial goods themselves is not merely the cultural scheme of classifica-

tion,  but the meaningful differences among categories of persons to
                                   —
which the classification applies between men and women, between
elites and masses, between adults and youth. For example, then, wool

is thought by Americans to be more masculine, silk more feminine,

and this is reflected in the metaphors of ordinary speech: "silky,"
"soft as silk." Production, in this sense, becomes the materialization of
a cultural logic; the production of goods is the expression of American
culture, not      what the goods are materially, but what they say in a
realm of semiotic codes.
   Sahlins has written an epistemological critique: he shows how our
ordinary views of what is natural are in fact structured by an "arbi-
trary" cultural logic, and he displays how quite different segments of
our culture (agriculture, gender, culinary etiquette) are culturally in-
terlinked in a systematic way. And yet there is something unsatisfacto-
ry in his analysis. What he has rather spectacularly failed to provide is
any way of connecting his cultural analysis with historical change (this
was one of the virtues of Marxist materialism) or political conflict
(cultural codes come to be what they are, after all, as goals or unin-
tended consequences of struggles among social groups). This results in
Sahlins's rather     weak conclusion which is an agreement with Levi-
Strauss's well-known static division of societies into types   — hot,   cold,
lukewarm      — based on   their dominant modes of production (cyclic ex-
change among limited groups versus expanding industrial and market
growth). Sahlins ends by reinforcing the false categories of Western
thought which absolutely distinguish the West from the rest, to use
Sahlins's bon mot. He effectively demonstrates, as a solid contribution
of distinctly anthropological cultural criticism, that we as a culture
cannot be sharply distinguished from other cultures on the basis of
some single dominant trait. In their historical contexts, all cultures
offer a multitude of possibilities, and in juxtaposing them, one faces a
complex task of mixing and matching similarities and differences that
are rooted in a thorough appreciation of the historical and political
contexts of the ethnographic situations compared. Yet, Sahlins's ap-
proach to modes of classification neglects the political and historical
dynamism by which they are constituted, and he is led back to rigid
        145     *   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

dichotomies between the timeless worlds of us and them, which in
spirit he sought to avoid.

     Clifford Geertz's Negara: The Theater State in Nineteenth Century
Bali (1980a) offers cultural criticism as epistemological critique that is
not only characteristic of his own writing, but is also characteristic of
many other such works in anthropology. An ethnographic case is pre-
sented as the main aim of the text, and there is explicit attention to the
interpretive problems of understanding, describing, and translating an
alien subject for the reader. Then, as a marginal part of the text, in the
form of asides or a concluding chapter, there is an effort at repatria-
tion. That is, the ethnographer tries to generalize what he has learned
epistemologically by expanding the import of this lesson in a foreign
culture to the conditions of knowledge in his own home culture. In this
case, the topic is the nature of politics, and in his final chapter, Geertz
presents the epistemological lesson of analyzing Bali as a critique of
how we think about politics in the West.
  Geertz is a master of this effective mode of delivering cultural crit-
icism in anthropology.            It   tantalizes   and has rhetorical power, but it
need not be held accountable, because                   it   is   presented as an after-
thought to which the writer is not as committed as he is to the body of
the text      and his ethnographic case. Rich with suggestion, such crit-
icism ultimately lacks substance as domestic critique precisely because
itdoes not fully engage domestic modes of thought, but playfully re-
mains on the margins.
   In Negara, Geertz is concerned to make a critique of thinking about

politics and statecraft similar to that made by Sahlins of utilitarian
economics and practical reason. In an intricate and elegant analysis of
Balinese life, Geertz traces out the theatrical, symbolic form of tradi-
tional politics. By so doing, he intends to illuminate universal dimen-
sions    of    political          which our Western notions obscure,
                            relations
especially those concerned with display and performance. Western po-
litical theories, at least since the sixteenth century, have dwelt on the

command and obedience aspects of politics, and Oil related issues such
as   monopoly of violence within a territory, the existence of ruling
                                    and popular will 111 different re-
classes, the nature of representation
gimes, and pragmatic devices tor   managing conflict. Political sym-
bolism, ceremony, insignia, and myths are treated as ideology, at best
mobilizing devices in the pursuit o( underlying interests and a will to
power. As Geertz says, "The semiotic aspects o( the state remain so
                       1
much mummery'              (p.   113).
     B) contrast, Balinese conceptions ol the state stress status and cere-
      146     •   Chapter Six


monial forms: it is a "model-and-copy" conception of order. As
Geertz says, "Particular kings came and went, 'poor passing facts'
anonymized in titles, immobilized in ritual, and annihilated in bon-
fires. But   what they represented   .   .   .   remained unaltered.   .   .   The driv-
ing aim of higher politics was to construct the state by constructing a
king. The more consummate the king, the more exemplary the center.
The more exemplary the center, the more actual the realm" (p. 124).
Ceremony and the theatrical form of the state do not deny power and
command, force and obedience; rather, they are a mode of political
actualization, which also characterizes us in our politics, but which we
do not acknowledge as fully.
   In some ways, then, Geertz's message is the same as Sahlins's, and
like Sahlins's it is   "high" cultural criticism addressed to a readership
of intellectuals, broader than anthropology. But Geertz delivers his
message in a different way from Sahlins, by extrapolation in a margin-
al discussion from an ethnographic case. In its critical function, this

discussion seeks to achieve an effect of defamiliarization, but little
more. It may indeed inspire other scholars, to whom it is directed, to
look at the American presidency, for example, in a new light, but this
substantive extension is out of the hands of the ethnographer, whose
critical function stops at suggestion.

   Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky's Risk and Culture (1982) is
an attempt to apply a kind of cultural analysis, developed within Brit-
ish social anthropology, to the contemporary American environmental
and anti-nuclear movements, and thereby provide a critique of liberal
ideology in American society. Unlike the works of Sahlins and Geertz,
it does not operate on the level of "high" cultural criticism, but is

rather a critique of topical ideologies and politics. Their analysis is
played out in a much more focused and committed way than the gen-
eralized criticisms by Sahlins and Geertz of modes of thought in the
West. In so doing, Douglas and Wildavsky assume the responsibility
of mastering indigenous scholarly traditions and insights, just as they
would for a more standard kind of ethnographic case. In this, they fail,
as convincingly argued in a recent long review of the book by James
Boon (1983). Theirs is a critique written with a distinct political point
of view and with an ethnographic blind spot about major historic as-
pects of American society and culture.
   Like similar efforts before, Risk and Culture draws on eth-
nographic work in other societies and on theoretical schemes devel-
oped from that experience in order to present an epistemological
critique of American ideology and a sociological critique of American
            147   *   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

politics. The book's cover displays a ceremonial mask and a gas mask,
iconically foreshadowing Douglas's argument that we are not so dif-
ferent from tribal peoples in how we think.
  There are two parts to Douglas and Wildavsky's critique. First, they
show that American notions of causality and risk are not based on
objective practical reason and empirical assessment, but are culturally
constructed notions highlighting certain dangers while ignoring oth-
ers.       By citing experts on all sides of the environmental politics, they
argue that it is impossible to measure real risks with objectivity and
accuracy, that risks per se cannot be distinguished from attitudes
about risk, which are culturally formed. They bolster this argument
with cross-cultural examples from several African societies and Great
Britain. For example, the Lele of Zaire, among     whom Douglas did her
original fieldwork, select from among the many diseases and other
dangers to which they are subject three to worry about          —being struck
by lightning, barrenness, and  bronchitis.   Whenever     these  strike some-
one, the Lele attribute them to the ill will of a village  elder. It is easy in

foreign cases such as these,  expressed    in witchcraft    accusations    and
pollution beliefs, to understand how community consensus can relate
natural dangers to moral defects. In technologically complex, strat-
               dominated by ideologies of science and reason, it is
ified societies,

more difficult to perceive the cultural and moral dimensions that
structure perceptions of the natural world. Nonetheless, for example,
in Britain,       unlike America, there is no escalation of medical malprac-
tice suits,because the law does not recognize the intensifying stan-
dards of negligence to which American doctors are subject. Obviously,
here too, culturally quite distinct statements are being            made about
responsibility and causation in particular incidents of misfortune.
   Societies thus institutionalize mistrustand risk differently. Fears
about pollution of the air, water, and earth may operate more as in-
struments of social control than as direct responses to measurable dan-
ger. After all, say Douglas and Wildavsky, the major causes of death in
                                                            —
America are not from pollution, but from life-style alcohol, smok-
ing, road accidents, and diet       —
                                 and the politics surrounding these dan-
gers differ sharply in organizational style from environmental politics.
The antinuclear coalitions (the Clamshell, Abalone, C.rabshcll, and
Catfish Alliances), moreover, are not merely concerned with hazards
of radiation or annihilation, but equally with restructuring American
society away from the concentration oi economic and political deci-
sion-making that the capital-intensive nudeai industry reinforces.
       I   he second part of Douglas aiul WiUavskv's critique explores at
      148    •   Chapter Six


finities   between ideologies and forms of social organization      in the

United States. Those who discount fears about pollution and nuclear
hazards ("cornucopians") tend to have occupations in the industrial-
production process, whereas those       who worry about such threats
("catastrophists") tend not to be so employed. Social support for the
catastrophists,Douglas and Wildavsky suggest, has grown with the
service economy, and with the affluence and college education that
have accompanied it. This preliminary class analysis of positions on
environmental politics helps to illuminate some of the strengths of a
long populist and democratic tradition in American society that enjoys
experimenting with organizational forms. It is precisely this tradition
of which Douglas and Wildavsky are markedly critical, but from a
standpoint that displays little knowledge of the long-term American
context of political culture.
   Douglas and Wildavsky acknowledge that since the beginning of
the Republic, Americans have worried lest the central government be-
come too strong; indeed, our first Confederation erred on the side of
being too weak a center. There have been times when, thanks to exter-
nal threat or economic catastrophe, Americans have strengthened the
center toward a more hierarchical bureaucratic state (the Depression,
World War II, the Cold War). At other times, and in response to such
centrist trends, the alternatives are sought in religious communes, al-
liances such as that of the Populists, and coalitions like the civil-rights
movement and that of the contemporary environmental and anti-
nuclear movements.
   Douglas and Wildavsky claim that in their ideologies and organiza-
tional styles, these movements reveal a process of constructing cultural
perceptions from particular social positions. There are, for instance,
interesting differences between the Sierra Club and the Friends of the
Earth,  and between the Environmental Coalition on Nuclear Power
(ECNP) and the Clamshell Alliance. The former in each pair are more
middle-to-upper class, older, more easygoing, more ideologically
ready to work within the system. The latter are more systemic in their
analysis of problems, more aggressive in action. Whereas ECNP is
reformist, lobbying state and local politicians, concerned about flexi-
bility and speedy action, and tolerant of informal leaders appropriat-

ing spokesperson roles, Clamshell has a younger membership, one
concerned to make connections with the working class and minorities,
and to achieve an egalitarian democracy to replace the contemporary,
overcentralized social structure.
   Clamshell is heir not merely to the tactics of the civil-rights move-
        149    •   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

ment and its experiments in consensus decision-making, but to turn-
of-the-century anarchist ideas about participatory democracy as well.
Such participatory-democracy organizations rotate facilitators instead
of chairmen, and have an affinity for groups of ten to twenty persons
who share regional or other affiliations and who subdivide when they
grow too large for consensus.
   Douglas and Wildavsky do indeed provide a stimulating beginning
for applying epistemological and sociological lessons from cross-cul-
tural ethnography to American society, but their undisguised hostility
to the ideas of participatory democracy blinds them to certain charac-
teristics of American society which have historically distinguished it

from other Western democracies. They argue that voluntary organiza-
tions are like sects of religious zealots, that their ideologies are irra-
tional, and that modern societies must depend on bureaucracy and the
market, rationally orchestrated by a strong central government.        No
ethnographic evidence is provided to support these positions. Their
citations     from the sociological literature on American sects are both
sparse and inappropriately used. Instead, the argument reflects, on the
part of Douglas, a distinctly British-style conservatism, originating in a
society with a long tradition of culturally valued centralism. An analy-
sis   that opposes center to periphery, as this    book does, may make
sense for Britain, but not for America. Thus, the criticism that Douglas
and Wildavsky offer is ethnographically skewed by conceptually fit-
ting America into a framework that does not carefully take account of
its particular history or political culture. This is a major error when

ethnographers work in exotic societies, and an even more serious one
when they work in societies in which they believe they are more at
home.
   While not yet fully developed cultural criticism, David Schneider's
American Kinship: A Cultural Account (1968) is perhaps a model of
repatriated anthropology, which offers an epistemological critique <>t
our taken-for-granted social categories, and which is based on lessons
from the doing of interpretive ethnography abroad. Vet, it is .ilso       .1



focused and carefully researched ethnographic study of American phe-
nomena. Schneider exhibits a critical goal in Ins self-conscious attempt
to ask radically different questions    about kinship. Ill so doing, he re-
orients   homegrown ways of thinking about family and relatives in
America and, derivatively, about what mil notions >»f culture         itself

refer to as well.

      Schneider wants to expose the more basic elements ot American
cultural beliefs, having to do with the power ol biology as well as with
        150   •   Chapter Six


norms of conduct, which organize not only the covering category of
kinship but also those of nationality, law, and religion. These cultural
categories overlap and register different and changing combinations of
more basic symbolic elements.
    Schneider's study is based on solid data collection, which he coordi-
nated and supervised, among middle-class Chicagoans. Interestingly,
however, the rhetorical power of the study did not depend primarily
on a textual exposure of data analysis for either its demonstration or
its influence (the interview data were presented separately in a later

volume of limited distribution). Rather, the real interest of the book is
in its presentation of a distinctive conceptual view of culture, which is

communicated through a particular exercise in ethnographic analysis.
The central idea in Schneider's view of culture (which is derived from
Parsonian theory)      is   similar to that of Sahlins's version of struc-
turalism   — that general conceptions of "the natural order of things and
persons" are not natural or given, but culturally constructed and rela-
tive. This is the theoretical    heart of the contemporary message of cul-
tural criticism which anthropology has been offering. Schneider argues
that the cultural production of        symbols must be analytically        dis-
tinguished from norms or ought statements; and both of these analyt-
ically distinct levels      must be distinguished from social action and
statistical   patterns of behavior. Symbols are like the units of an al-
gebra; norms are like equations (combinatory statements for particu-
larpurposes); both are ideals for behavior, but behavior at best
approximates them. Symbols and norms are logically integrated,
whereas behavior has causal mechanisms. Symbols and norms
culture   — can thus be analytically separated from behavior and         social
action. These distinctions, forcefully presented, have been important
for subsequent generations of intepretive ethnographers in clarifying a
distinctive level for cultural analysis, at which questions could be pro-
ductively asked and addressed in practical research. American Kinship
was an exemplary text in this effort.
   Schneider's study thus has had several agendas. As cultural crit-
icism, it remains at best latently suggestive. There is one major reason
for this. He selected his subject   — kinship —   less with regard to its stra-
tegic utility for the critical analysis of American culture, than because
it   has been such a central topic in anthropology. Explicitly, Schneider
wanted to demonstrate that what seems to be a natural category every-
where for Euro- Americans might not be "natural" at all, but a cultural
product of a particular society, namely, Anglo-American, or more
broadly, Western European, society. Studies of kinship in other
         151   •     Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

cultures would thus likely have been            "contaminated" with American
prejudices about what kinship naturally                is,   especially regarding the
tenacious biological ideology that pervades American thinking about
it.   The most important demonstration of this bias in the way kinship
has been studied cross-culturally would be an ethnographic study of
kinship in the anthropologist's            own society, from whose common-
sense understandings special analytic concepts                  and usages, such as
kinship, are derived.
      The subtle cultural bias in the analytic use of kinship in cross-
cultural ethnography was well demonstrated by students influenced by
Schneider (for Trobriand and Bengali cultures, as well as several other
cases, for example Inden and Nicholas 1977, Kirkpatrick 1983, and
Shore 1982). Schneider himself acted as repatriated ethnographer and
showed how the anthropological concept, to be applied anywhere, is
laden with specifically American cultural assumptions. Thus, by im-
plication, his study of American kinship is only partly an effort to get
us to think differently about American kinship, rather than kinship
universally.
      Ironically,    once having reinterpreted our cultural category of
kinship into a set of more powerful and basic symbols about person-
hood, Schneider discovered that as a topic of significance in the study
of American society, kinship was matched, or even subordinated, by
such topics as law, nationality, and religion (all of which could equally
be understood as cultural           phenomena in terms of the symbolic ele-
ments that Schneider discovered). Thus, if he had actually set out to do
strategic cultural criticism of American society, he might well not have
selected kinship as his emphasis, but it was a critique of anthropologi-
cal, rather than American, thought that motivated his repatriated eth-

nography.          To expand      Schneider's   analysis      into   a   more    directly
intended work of cultural criticism would require different emphases,
strategies of topical selection, and the primary use of his notions ot the
cultural construction of the person, rather than kinship itself. His stu-
dents     have pursued contrastive           notions     of    personhood       in   other
cultures   — stimulus for much of the experimentation discussed
               a                                                                        in

chapter 3   — and few have attempted extend analyses person-
                      a                         to             his          ot

hood      in   America    (see,   e.g.,   Harnett    and Silverman,        i4"9).     Foi
Schneider, critical analysis of American culture would not be prinianK
based on institutions; law, the family, religion, and nationality would
be conceived and critically approached, instead, as complex transfor-
mations of basic symbolic processes.
      The methodological naivete in Schneider's study is similar to thai in
         i   5 2     •   Chapter Six


Sahlins's           application of his structuralist perspective to American
culture in that he does not relate the level of cultural analysis, which he
has isolated, back to a level of social-structural analysis, which has
usually addressed issues of politics, economics, and historical change.
Consequently, his cultural account is left "free-floating," unable to
define variations in cultural symbols by class, and unable to take into
                                                                            2
account other social-structural factors, or how they arise historically.
His perspective is thus difficult to relate, for example, to the substan-
tial   body of scholarship in other disciplines on the history and present
conditions of the American family. 3



         Stronger Versions of Epistemological Critique
The stronger versions of epistemological critique in anthropology are
now being undertaken by the generation of scholars who were deeply
influenced by the above writers and are extending their ideas in novel
directions. These scholars are precisely those who themselves are writ-
ing, or       who are influenced by, the experimental ethnographies, most
of which are appearing in anthropology's traditional arena of overseas
research. These experiments, as           we have seen, are revising the in-
terpretive analysis pioneered by such writers as Geertz and Schneider,
making it accountable to issues of political economy and to the self-
critical current reevaluation in        anthropology of conventions of repre-
sentation. In addition, these younger scholars are involved in the trend
of repatriation of ethnographic research and are concerned with plac-
ing interpretive work in anthropology fully within the context of rele-
vant literature in other fields such as American studies, history, and
literary           They are thus abandoning the methodological
                   criticism.
naivetes employed to good effect by their teachers, partly because
those devices have served their purpose, and partly from a desire to
focus fully upon "real world" critique. There are as yet few major
works, produced by anthropologists, which represent this stronger
form of epistemological critique as cultural criticism; the ferment and
potentiality are still mainly registered in articles.
      These works operate on two levels. First, they perform, as their
direct subject, the critique of ideology or the demystification of modes
of thought in social action and institutional life. For example, a favor-
ite    subject is the critique of the thought and practice of social-service
professionals such as doctors, psychiatrists, welfare workers, and the
police, whose concerns are the experiences of persons, categorized as
      153   *   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

clients, patients, suspects,   and victims. Second, these studies critique
conventional social-science approaches (as the mode of thought of a
particular kind of professional in society). Introducing defamiliarizing
frameworks (as did Sahlins, Geertz, and Schneider in the above exam-
ples), they expose and recast both habitual ways of thought attributed
to social actors as well as the conventional social-science ways of rep-
resenting them.
   Much repatriated anthropology predictably deals with traditional
anthropological subjects: kinship, migrants, ethnic minorities, public
rituals, religious cults, countercultural communities. The most impor-

tant subject for cultural criticism, however, is not these conventionally
defined topics, but the study of mass-cultural forms, and, somewhat
more tentatively, mainstream middle-class life. These pose the kinds of
broader questions addressed by the cultural critics of the 19x0s and
1930s about stratification, cultural hegemony, and changing modes of
perception. The study of the mass-culture industry, popular culture,
and the formation of public consciousness has emerged as one of the
most vigorous of new research directions. The 1950s elitist contempt
for  mass culture and fears that it would simply institutionalize a
lowest-common-denominator conformity have been replaced by eth-
nographic explorations of how working-class, ethnic, and regional
communities and youth generations can appropriate the "rubbish
available within a preconstituted market"        —
                                             drugs, clothing, vehi-
cles  —as well as the means of communication, in order to construct
statements of their own sense of position and experience in society.
Whether these remain merely expressions of reality or whether they
constitute contestatory political mobilizations against "the system/'
they are rich cultural texts through which       may be read the larger,
society-wide struggles for defining authoritative and other possible
meanings of events for a diverse public. For cultural analysis and crit-
icism, the contesting of the meaning of things or events is what cen-
trally constitutes politics.

   The Culture Studies Group of Birmingham, England has pioneered
some of the ethnographic techniques tor exploring this topic, and sim-
ilar efforts are being made on the much more diverse American scene. 4

The cultural critic, Raymond Williams, has recently outlined an am
bitious scheme for the sociology of culture (19.S1.1i, m.unly directed
toward the study of institutionalized, rather than spontaneous, cultur-
al productions. As epistemological critique, such studies operate both

by identifying critique! developed "out there" in various domains <>(
     154   •   Chapter Six


the social structure, and by raising questions about cultural hegemony
and how meaning structures are formed and negotiated by competing
segments within a society.
  The critique of institutions and the culture of professionals is an-
other promising area for ethnographic research. For example, the es-
                                       and history of science has
tablished field devoted to the sociology
already been   making use of ethnographic (and in sociology, eth-
nomethodological) techniques to demystify the almost theological
treatment of science, as method and ideology, in Western societies.
Laboratory Life by Latour and Woolgar (1979) is an interesting and
thoroughly ethnographic attempt to describe the everyday work of
experimental scientists, with a clearly critical intent. They go so far as
to compare themselves and their subjects repeatedly to a classic eth-
nographic-fieldwork situation abroad. This move descends at times to
caricature, but is saved by the very revealing observations that they
present about, for instance, the strategies used to convert statements
carefully hedged by citing of data, studies, and probabilities into un-
critically accepted scientific "facts."

   Another area of pioneering work here is that of "Critical Legal
Studies," in which scholars like Duncan Kennedy, Robert Gordon,
Morton Horwitz, David Trubek, Katherine Stone, and other practic-
ing lawyers and law-school faculty are participating. They intend to
critique the ideology and practice of all aspects of the American legal
system. They have adopted a de facto ethnographic approach to legal
education, the spoken and written discourse of legal professionals, and
the social effects of legal procedures. They want not merely to provide
realistic descriptions of   how the system actually operates in practice as
opposed to the formal models, to which legal scholarship, closely al-
lied with legal practice, has been prone, but also to show how law as a

process operates contrary to conventional wisdom. Critical Legal
Studies, like the mass- and popular-culture studies, contributes to the
understanding of cultural hegemony, the construction of authoritative
meanings, and processes by which these might be contested. The work
of anthropologists such as Laura Nader and Sally Falk Moore in the
established subfield of legal anthropology could easily be expanded to
engage in these efforts in cultural criticism, and seems to be moving
slowly in this direction.
   Ethnographic studies of the thought and practice of medical profes-
sionalsis a parallel initiative. The recent journal Culture, Medicine,

and Psychiatry is a rich source of a burgeoning and self-conscious
trend of cultural criticism in ethnographic research. For example, arti-
         155     *     Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

cles   by Gaines and Hahn (1982) critique models of personhood that
are evident and embedded in the way that doctors manage their rela-
tionships with patients and clients. Not only is this critique in line with
themes made prominent in the trend of experimental ethnography
abroad, but the authors also make effective use of cross-cultural tribal
examples in delivering their critique, while possessing an equally deep
ethnographic knowledge of medical settings in the contemporary
United States. Similar analysis could be done for the legal profession
and all other professions that construct, according to their interests,
secondary cultural models of clients that often conflict with the com-
monsense notions that the clients themselves have of what a person is,
in different contexts of activity. The pioneering work of Erving

Goffman on the person and self in modern societies, specifically the
United States, and the studies of such writers as Geertz and Schneider
on personhood in other cultures are merely pointers to the more sys-
tematic ethnographic work that could be done as American cultural
criticism.
   A third topical area of interest which seems ripe for a revitalized
and repatriated ethnography is ethnicity and regional identity. Both of
these topics have stagnated into banality and repetitive simplistic ques-
tioning about sociological boundaries. Inquiry into the cultural con-
struction of such identities could prove to be an avenue of renewal for
these research topics, particularly the application to ethnicity of psy-
choanalytic notions of construction of the self derived from fragments
that are not immediately assimilable by usual             modes of cognition. In
the late twentieth century, for         many Americans, questions of group
mobility or assimilation are no longer burning issues, or are easil)
identified and acknowledged problems with more or less satisfactory
modes of accommodation within the ideology and programs of the
liberal state. What seems to be far more compelling an issue are the
deep emotional ties to ethnic origins, which are obscurely rooted and
motivated, and which are transmitted through processes analogous to
dreaming and transference rather than through group affiliation and
influence. So far, such issues have been primarily explored in novels
and autobiographies, but they seem ideal problems for ethnographic
treatment. Ethnography, m the mode of the experimental rejuvenation
of the life history that we discussed in chapter }, would contribute
better understandings of accommodations to American pluralism. It
would also constitute a critique of the dominant \\a\s in which cth
nicity   is    still   conceived by social science   in   late-twentieth   a mm   \


America.
       156   •    Chapter Six


     Regional identities may operate through similar dynamics (in the
United States, for example, the South has always been a salient region-
al category, while "the Sun Belt" represents a shift in meanings and
boundaries). Unlike ethnicity, however, they unambiguously arise
from situated territorial and political divisions to which a strong col-
lective sense of history      unavoidably attaches itself. Regionalism goes
to the heart of issues about elite politics, conducted through the ma-
nipulation of cultural forms, myths, and allegiances, and about the
pervasive suspicion toward, and possible means of validating, authen-
                                   dominated by a self-conscious faith
tic cultural expression in a society

in modernity. A return to local culture, and to some degree, the past,

upon which the appeal of regional identity depends, is an ideal topic
for a critical ethnography which seeks to expose the ways the notion
of culture itself is conceived as a commonsense concept, deeply impli-
cated in the political economy of contemporary American society.
     Many other substantive arenas for exploration have been and could
be identified. Cultural criticism relating centrally to the capitalist pro-
cess itself is yet another way of approaching some of the same issues
noted before. In a society where community seems to be more an ideal
and less a tangible, easily definable unit of ethnographic observation,
relations between classes and groups as well as their cultural ex-
pression might be best approached (applying Marx's insight) through
the study of things, that is, the production of commodities, the nature
of work, the creation of a demand for commodities through advertis-
ing, the symbolic and emotional attachments to money in American
life, and the patterns of consumption and use of commodities (see

Appadurai, forthcoming). In all of these efforts, three kinds of critical
thrust are important: the critique of ideologies in action, the critique
of social-science approaches, and the identification of de facto or ex-
plicit critiques       "out there" in society, among ethnographic subjects
themselves.      It   is,of course, the last, facilitated by the former two,
which constitutes the most powerful appeal that ethnography as a
mode of cultural criticism offers.
  A long-time fantasy among Anglo-American anthropologists has
been that someday there would be Trobriand, Bororo, or Ndembu
anthropologists who would come to the United States and provide a
reciprocal critical ethnography (as Toqueville is conventionally said to
have done) from the point of view of a radically cultural other. By the
time such others are trained as anthropologists, however, they of
course are no longer radically other. The best one can achieve in this
mode is the unearthing of a critique of the West in the life-worlds of
         157    •    Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

cultural others (as, for example, Taussig does, and as does Keith Basso
                              "White Man," 1979), or the critical
for Apaches in Portraits of the
application by an ethnographer thoroughly familiar with another
culture, of perspectives from that culture to aspects of our own way of
life.   This   is   the second   major form of a distinctive anthropological
cultural critique, and the one we will next explore.



        Examples of Defamiliarization by Cross-
        Cultural Juxtaposition
Ideally, this       technique entails using detailed ethnography of cultures
abroad, with special care not to remove them from their contemporary
situations, as a critical and comparative probe for some equally inten-
sive project of ethnography at home. There are indeed many examples
of anthropological discussions which juxtapose ethnographic details
from other cultures to some aspect of our own in order to make a
critical point by means of defamiliarization, but none is fully elabo-

rated as a strategy of cultural critique. Usually, one or the other of the
juxtaposed sides is presented with less specificity and attention to de-
tail;   ironically, this   is   often the American side since anthropologists
generally have had a more penetrating understanding, by dint of field-
work, of their exotic probes than of their home society.
      An early and typical example of anthropology's critical           use of
cross-cultural juxtaposition is the classic essay by Marcel Mauss, The
Gift (1967), which uses comparative examples in order to pose ques-
tions about the moral reorganization of French (and capitalist) politi-
cal economy. In this case, Mauss himself relied upon ethnography
done by others and upon his general knowledge of his own society.
Thus, he did not pursue a strategy of matching intensive projects <>t
ethnography at home and abroad. As a result the essa) focuses on
other cultures, leaving the French case underdeveloped. The weak ver-
sion of cultural criticism by juxtaposition has usually been charac-
terized    by such an absence of balanced ethnographic analysis, and
instead by generalized argument for one or both situations juxtaposed.
A more recent example of critique by cross-cultural juxtaposition is
the comparative essay, Celebrations of Death, b) Richard Huntington
and Peter Metcalfe (1979), which concludes with a chapter on the
American way of death; this chapter has interesting implications tor a
critique of middle-class life, but tin- emphasis in the essa\ is on the
authors' own ethnographic materials, with tin- American material de
veloped through secondary sources and appended as a provocation,
      158    •   Chapter Six


rather than as a juxtaposed case to be as thoroughly treated as the
discussions of death in other cultures. Once again, the critical function
is an afterthought.
   The most prominent tradition of cultural criticism in contemporary
anthropology, which has relied heavily on a strategy of juxtapositions,
is synonymous with the career and writing of Margaret Mead. She

made a career not primarily as an academic, but as a critic of Ameri-
can culture and society, whose authority to her public was that of an
anthropologist   — as a scientific expert, who, through her fieldwork
and training, had a command of alternatives to American life-styles.
Cross-cultural juxtaposition was just one of several techniques that
Mead was to employ as a cultural critic, but her career began with the
publication of the book for which this technique was crucial: Coming
of Age in Samoa (1949 [1928]) is an evocatively written account of
Samoan culture, didactically juxtaposed as a lesson for Americans
about their child-rearing practices. It is ironic, but perhaps also a mea-
sure of the demand for this kind of commentary, that the two final
chapters of the book, which related the Samoan material to American
life, were added at the urging of Mead's publishers.

    For her teacher, Franz Boas, Mead's Samoan research was to con-
tribute to the refutation of racist social thought by demonstrating the
plasticity of human cultures. Aside from this implication of epis-
temological critique that it had in intellectual life, the book became a
best-seller for its critique of American practices of parent-child so-
cialization and of assumptions about the "natural" rebelliousness of
adolescence. This book thus operates on the two levels that have gen-
erally complicated twentieth-century cultural criticism. On the one
hand, it was a critique of intellectual or scholarly modes of thought in
American society, in which anthropology as a discipline was embed-
ded, and on the other, it was simultaneously a critique of ideology  —  of
the  commonsense ways of thinking, generally characteristic of the
culture, in which the whole scholarly establishment itself is embedded.
As befits a pioneer, Mead was not fully in control of these dual levels
of critique in her first book; Boas developed the one, and her pub-
lishers   urged her to develop the other. In contemporary critical and
reflexive ethnography, writers have become almost obsessively aware
of these dual levels, which had only a circumstantial presence in Com-
ing of Age in Samoa; most contemporary texts with critical intent
display their worries about juggling a critique of epistemology, which
has informed the research, with critical perspectives on their subjects.
As a pioneering and problematic critical work, employing the tech-
       159         •    Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

nique of cross-cultural juxtaposition, Coming of Age in Samoa pro-
vides us with an appropriate vehicle to assess the potential of this
technique as cultural criticism.
     The first part of Coming of Age in Samoa presents what now ap-
pears as a one-sided idyllic portrait of Samoan culture. The adequacy
of this view of Samoa has been hotly debated in the aftermath of De-
rek Freeman's recent attempt to debunk the quality of Mead's eth-
nography (1983). What concerns us, however, is not the issues of these
debates, but rather the further distortion in the representation of Sa-
moan ethnography when it is specifically employed by Mead as a jux-
taposed standard against which to compare and critique American
practices.    When her purpose is American cultural criticism, the por-
trait of Samoans, intentionally or not, loses touch with the full-bodied

context of life in Samoa, and the Samoans are thus in danger of be-
coming symbolic, even caricatured, figures of virtuous or desirable
behavior to be used as a platform of critique in probing aspects of
American culture.
   Furthermore, what is claimed to be American practice, which is the
object of her demystifying criticism, comes not from Mead's own or
anyone else's ethnography, but from her generalized understanding of
what American practice is, both as a member of American culture
herself and from her knowledge of available academic literature. So,
Mead is matching her own relatively intensive Samoan ethnography
against the general scholarly view, which she accepts as a true charac-
terization of American practice. A better approach would have been to
challenge the general scholarly view of the innate nature of adolescent
'Sturm und Drang' through a careful examination of American prac-
tices by independent ethnographic research, and only then compare

these specific findings with those from research in another contrasting
culture. Without the aid of such equally intensive ethnographic treat
ment, the view of the American practice in Mead's account is static,
unambiguous, overgcneralized, and one-sided. This kind of training of
the target of critique, in turn, encourages juxtaposing it with a similar-
ly static,   one-sided account of the contrast culture.
   The strength of ethnography and ethnographic criticism is he                   t   1




focus on detail, their enduring respect tor context in the making of am
generalization, and their full recognition of persistent ambiguity and
multiple possibilities in any situation.            I   lust are   prcusch the Jiat.u
(eristics    put at risk in projects of criticism          111   wlmh one 01 the other
case is presented statically by its removal from the full cultural context
in   which    it       occurs and   is   recorded ethnographically.      Mow. then, to
        1   60    •        Chapter Six


achieve a kind of criticism by juxtaposition which makes telling
points, but not at the cost of decontextualizing and stereotyping either
case represented?
     A more powerful version of the technique of criticism by juxtaposi-
tion would depend upon a dialectical, reciprocal probing of both eth-
nographic cases, using each as a probe to further stimulate questions
about the other. Here, the juxtaposed case from another culture is
more than just an alternative or an ideal contrast with American prac-
tice; it is a means of framing questions for an intensively pursued pro-

ject   of        domestic ethnography.        A   published   account of cultural
criticism        would encompass and track both projects of ethnography,
perhaps with different emphases, but in such texts, the other culture
probe would become just as exposed to critical probing itself as the
target domestic subject (in Mead's case, this would have meant a crit-
ical reassessment of her interpretations of Samoa, rather than a further

move in the direction of static representation). Keeping both poles of
juxtaposition off-center, so to speak, might indeed make for open-
ended, off-balance, and even unwieldy texts, by conventional stan-
dards, but achieving adequate representations in the pursuit of cultur-
al   criticism is precisely the challenge for experimentation.
     Such experimental revisions of Mead's use of cross-cultural jux-
taposition are appropriate for the present moment, which we have
defined as a general crisis of representation, as well as for the specific
experimental trend it has registered in anthropology. Coming of Age
in Samoa was, and continues to be, an effective work of cultural crit-

icism among a very large public. But increasingly, as we noted, general
readers are skeptical about the figure of the primitive or the isolation
of exotic others in a more integrated world system of which Americans
are very much aware. If cultural others are to be contrasted with us, to
make a critical point, they must be portrayed realistically and in the
round, sharing modern conditions that we experience also. The same
skepticism            is   reflected within anthropological practice itself   by the
contributions of the trend of experimentation in ethnographic writing;
these emphasize multiple perspectives, differing interpretations within
and about any setting of research, and thoroughly contextualized por-
traiture, and any project of cultural criticism that uses ethnographic
material must acknowledge these emphases.
   One can perhaps see most clearly the inadequacy of the older,
weaker form of criticism by cross-cultural juxtaposition in the exam-
ple of Colin Turnbull's recent book, The Human Cycle (1983), and
critical reaction to it, not only by anthropologists, but particularly by
      1 6 1   •   Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

other reviewers. Turnbull has continued to rely on static, us-them jux-
taposition to deliver criticisms of American (and Western) society. The
cultural other    becomes chauvinistically valued to the point of unre-
lenting pessimism about the conditions of American society in com-
parison. Once, such stark challenges might have worked their shock
effect, but today a mass readership knows, or senses, a more nuanced

and realistic set of possibilities in the world. Peter Berger (1983) ex-
presses the contemporary objection to TurnbulPs book:

     Since its inception as a scholarly discipline, anthropology has
     been put to two broader issues. It has served to educate and
     sensitize people to ways of life, values and world views very
     different from our own. In this way anthropology has made an
     important contribution to the formation of the liberal mind and
     humanistic awareness in an age of massive intercultural
     contacts. It has also been used as an ideological tool to
     denigrate Western civilization with allegedly superior or
     sounder cultures in faraway places. The anthropologists who
     have engaged in this activity of invidious comparisons have
     made at least a modest contribution to the failure of nerve of
     contemporary Western societies. Colin M. Turnbull, in this
     book as well in earlier ones, has some passages that continue to
     justify anthropology as a contributer to a cosmopolitan liberal
     education. But most of the book is a very clear example of the
     second use of anthropology, a protacted lament about our
     deficiencies as compared with "their" ways of coping with the
     human life cycle, [p. [3]
Not all forms of this kind of criticism are as strident .is TurnbulPs;
Mead's was not, and her writings constitute an effective form of what
we consider to be the weaker version of cross-cultural juxtaposition.
What makes the stronger version of this technique Strong is the fad
that it does not rely on mere defamiliari/.ation for an effect, but rather
tries to engage the reader in a prolonged, dialectic discourse about the

open-ended nature of similarities and differences.
  This stronger version of juxtaposition has an interesting parallel
with the contemporary predicament of postmodernism in art and litei
aturc, relative CO historic modernism out of which it has developed       Bee
foster [983).  Modernism relied for much of its effect Oil nine shock
value, but there is nothing shocking anymore, so postmodernism nou
attempts to transform the Strategy ol dcfamiliat i/ation into        a   pro
longed, sophisticated discourse that engages the readet 01 viewer.         In
     1   62   •   Chapter Six


art, the search is for experimental    textual and performative modes to
develop such a compelling critical discourse. Anthropology as cultural
criticism has faced the same predicament and searches for similar solu-
tions through changes in     modes of ethnographic representation.
                                its

Fully developed, ethnographic juxtapositions would thus be the most
powerful and the most distinctive version of cultural criticism which
anthropology might offer as a fulfillment of the other of its two prin-
cipal modern justifications.



     Stronger Versions of Cross-cultural
     Juxtaposition
What we have in mind is an ethnographic project pursued within a
domestic context that from its inception has a substantive relationship
to some body of ethnography elsewhere (ideally done earlier by the
same scholar, but sometimes, practically, involving the published eth-
nography of others). The latter serves to give the former a framework
or strategy of analysis that would not otherwise be achieved. The dual
tracking of ethnographic cases and experiences thus characterizes a
repatriated project of ethnography from the fieldwork through to a
text of cultural criticism, which, like some experimental ethnography,
may employ ethnographic detail and rhetoric, but may not be in any
conventional sense simply an ethnography. Having envisioned the out-
line of such projects and resulting texts, we hesitate to descriptively (or
prescriptively) specify further any procedures, to avoid a move toward
constructing a mechanical method or paradigm of cultural criticism.
At this generally experimental moment, any number of theoretical
sources, analytic styles, rhetorics, and descriptive procedures are in
circulation, as influences from innovative texts appearing in an-
thropology and other disciplines. Such projects, for example, may be
shaped by older traditions of critical writing, or they may arise prin-
cipally from the intellectual biography of the anthropologist, encom-
passing not only professional         ethnographic experiences   in   other
cultures, but also the anthropologist's own personal ethnic, gender, or
regional identifications.
   Although we know from personal contacts that processes of jux-
taposition embedded in the Janus-faced nature of any ethnographic
project have indeed informed the writing of a number of recent works,
we can think of no published examples that make fully explicit what
we have in mind. So, we refer readers to the Appendix of this essay,
which includes statements of work-in-progress that each of us has un-
         163   •     Two Contemporary Techniques of Cultural Critique

dertaken. It is uncertain how these projects will eventually turn out,
especially with regard to the form of their textual products, but what
is   important here is to illustrate by example how juxtaposed com-
parison might work. Fortunately, there are great differences as to
style, approach, and topical interest between the two examples, which

reinforce our point that the kind of cultural criticism we are outlining
is   by no means narrow, but might encompass any range of personal
tastes and interests in research.




         The Multiple Receptions of Ethnography
We have suggested that the stronger version of cross-cultural jux-
taposition     works dialectically in    all   phases of a project of critical
ethnography: there are critiques at both ends, of both societies. Fur-
thermore, any such project will also involve multiple references to
other cultures, along the way, triangulated with the primary juxtaposi-
tions.   This immediately raises the issue of the potential and desired
readerships for any written work from such a process of cultural cri-
tique in anthropology.        The radical implication for anthropology of
this   stronger form of cultural critique, which emphasizes juxtaposed
alternatives that critically address each other through the writer's stag-
ing, is a much more sophisticated sense about the potential diversity of
readerships for whom they might be writing. One can see this embry-
onically in        Henry Glassie's preface to his recent Irish ethnography
(1982), where he specifically addresses the problems of writing simul-
taneously for his literate, but rustic subjects as well as for the more
cosmopolitan reading public (which includes American academics and
the interested Irish public, among other kinds of readers). Writing sin-
gle texts with multiple voices   exposed within them, as well as with
multiple readerships explicitly in mind, is perhaps the sharpest spur to
the contemporary experimental impulse in anthropological writing,
both as ethnography and cultural critique.
   Presumably, members of other societies, increasingly literate, will
read ethnographic accounts that concern them, and will react not only
10 the manifest descriptions of their          own societies, but also to the
premises about our society that are embedded in the double vision of
any ethnographic work. lor their part, American readers might read
negatively to the idealized and simplified accounts of societies abroad,
and might require realistic ethnographic work at home, as well, tor
anthropological critiques to be persuasive. Such demand foi
                                                         .1    full)    -i



developed rcuprouly ot perspectives, involving two, and even multi-
     164   •   Chapter Six


pie, cultural reference   points in the writing of anthropological texts
has always been a potential. Depending upon the stimulation and
meeting of this potential demand is the expansion in the readerships
hoped for among writers of experimental works, beyond the relatively
narrow and conventional kinds of readerships to whom anthropologi-
cal writing addressed itself in the past.
   In the past, ethnography has been written with two limited read-
erships in mind. Serious ethnography has been intended primarily for
other anthropologists or for area specialists. Anthropological works of
cultural critique have been written for a larger, but still limited read-
ership: the mass American middle-class and reading public, which is
seen as undifferentiated     and lacking a distinctive, pluralist array of
cultural affiliations and ethnicities. This was the mass readership that
writing, imbued with liberalism, imagined, appealed to, and encour-
aged. The worthy messages of such criticism have often been toler-
ance, the validity of other ways of life, and the satisfactions of
community. They served to temper the parochial tendencies of this
affluent and success-oriented readership and to keep the perspective of
such readers open-minded and off-balance.
   These basic messages of anthropological criticism remain impor-
tant reasons for writing, but a fundamental change is required in the
perception of the world in which and for which critical projects of
ethnography are undertaken. This necessitates, in turn, transforma-
tions both in the way ethnography is written, and in the ethnogra-
pher's awareness of for whom it is written. The former is well under
away in the contemporary experimental trend; the latter is developing
more slowly, partially constrained by the powerful habits and de-
mands of the conventional academic contexts in which most eth-
nographic research is in fact produced.
   Today, however, it is undeniable that readerships are more diverse
and differentiated. Anthropologists have responded with various ex-
periments, which attempt to work multiple voices into their texts or,
at least, multiple points of view, which reflect the actual research pro-
cess and constructive task of writing ethnography. Sometimes these
experiments have become ends in themselves       —obsessions with repre-
senting discourses and dialogues. But these techniques eventually must
be refined in works which will engage the various readerships that
increasingly hold anthropology accountable for its representations. A
heightened awareness among ethnographers that they are in fact writ-
ing for these diverse and critical readerships at home and abroad
would further the development of texts that give substantive and self-
conscious play to multiple perspectives.
        A Concluding Note



Amid the diversity of research activity and interests in contemporary
anthropology, which some applaud and others find worrisome, lies its
central ethnographic tradition. In this essay,     we have addressed the
current predicaments of ethnography, and through the responses now
being made to them in anthropology, the opportunities that they offer
for a renewal of purpose during this uncertain period in the modern
history of disciplines.   From the perspective of developments in fields
to which     anthropology has been allied, the present moment is one of
intense concerns with the     way social reality is to be presented. The
acutely felt problem of description, then, makes this generally an eth-
nographic moment in the human sciences, for which anthropology has
great potential relevance.
     At the same time, within anthropology itself, what ethnography is,
can be, or should be, is being explored in a self-conscious and experi-
mental way. This same period, then, within anthropology is an experi-
mental moment. The ethnographic          mode of research and writing,
through which cultural anthropology developed as an academic disci-
pline in the twentieth century, marked the practical suspension of its
grand nineteenth-century vision of a science of man. The spirit of this
vision continues in ethnographic projects as a strong framing rhetoric,
but there is no turning back to the grand project itself    —   this would be

^historical wishful thinking. Ethnography is indeed the arena in which
notions of a science of anthropology are held accountable in its ability
to encompass adequately the detailed reality of motivated, intentional
life.   At a time of disarray in guiding macrotheoretic.il frameworks and
in   the absence of unifying debates, not only in anthropology, bill in .1
number of other disciplines, the practice of ethnography itseli is where
the vitality of anthropology remains. The current exploration and
free-form questioning of ethnographic practice        in   the experimental
trend    we have identified can onlv DC viewed as healthy.       It   should be
Understood as the proceu by which the rationales and promises 1h.1t
inaugurated cultural anthropology .is an academic profession in lin-
early twentieth ccnturv are being renewed in a world wliuh must be
conceived quite differently from the one      in   wlmh ethnographic K
search and writing were pioneered.
         1   66   •   A Concluding Note

      A historically and politically sensitive interpretive anthropology,
preserving relativism as the method of engaged inquiry that it was in
its   inception, reconstructs fieldwork, the cultural other, and the con-
cept of culture itself as the framing points for the field of ethnographic
representation.         Constantly matching the familiar against the un-
familiar, ethnography finally encourages a radical questioning of what
the scope of its        own reception, or, for that matter, of any work of
social science, should be. Any work of ethnography becomes a histor-
ically self-conscious document that recognizes the possibility of multi-
ple receptions,        and of relevances to several possible discourses. This
vision of expanded relevance is not at all Utopian, but is thoroughly
rooted in the traditions of research and writing of an anthropology
that would recognize the full historical and political implications of its
projects.
      The experimental moment can be variously interpreted. It can be
seen as healthy;         it   can be seen as the decline of anthropology into
intellectual chaos.       We have taken the positive view, against the back-
drop of our more general understanding of what we have called a
crisis of representation, or of what is being more broadly debated as

postmodernist conditions of knowledge (see the recent series of essays
by Stephen Tyler 1984, 1986, and the two that are forthcoming,
which go much further than we have in trying to come to terms with a
postmodernist practice for anthropology). Despite the disarray and
general disinterest in unifying theoretical systems (postmodernists
would say because of this), ethnography is more sophisticated and
intellectually challenging than ever before. In periods when fields are
without secure foundations, practice becomes the engine of innova-
tion. Just so, contemporary experimental writers are adapting eth-
nography to the well-established critiques of the historic blind spots in
the way that it has been previously written. The payoffs of these ex-
periments are both in anthropology's traditional arena of exploring
the cultural other abroad and in the trend of repatriation that we have
envisioned in this essay as a project of cultural criticism, long an un-
derdeveloped, but recognized potential of modern anthropology.
      This experimental trend is not really new in its concerns and aims.
It is   merely a fulfillment of the long-established contributions that an-
thropology, through ethnography, has promised to make. But in the
current world, this trend is indeed something more.           It   broadens the
potential relevance for any ethnography on multiple levels, and partic-
ularly as a form of engaged discourse with its subjects. As interpretive
ethnography moves more toward the literatures, dialogues, and media
      167    •   A Concluding Note

of self-expression produced by       its   subjects,   it   fulfills in   practice the
idea of relativism, which unfortunately hardened into a doctrine as the
central    contribution of twentieth-century anthropology to liberal
thought.    What the mutually reinforcing experimental trend and the
realization of the Janus-faced nature of ethnography as cultural crit-
icism promise is an engaged relativism restored and constantly adapt-
ing to the changing conditions of the world that it                is   committed to
represent with integrity. It must continue to provide a convincing ac-
cess to diversity in the world at a time when the perception, if not the
reality, of this diversity is threatened by modern consciousness. This is
what makes ethnography, long seen as merely description, at present a
potentially controversial and unsettling mode of representation. Dif-
ference in the world is no longer discovered, as in the age of explora-
tion, or salvaged, as in the age of colonialism and high capitalism, but
rather must be redeemed, or recovered as valid and significant, in an
age of apparent homogenization and suspicion of authenticity, which,
while recognizing cultural diversity, ignores its practical implications.
  We end with a word about the moral or ethical dimension that one
might expect any project of cultural critique prominently to express.
For some, advocacy or assertion of values against a particular social
reality is the   primary purpose of cultural critique. However, as eth-
nographers for whom human variety is a principal        interest and any
subjects are fair   game, we are acutely sensitive to the ambivalence,
irony, and contradictions in  which values, and the opportunities for
their realization, find expression in the everyday life of diverse social
contexts. Thus, the statement and assertion of values are not the aim
of ethnographic cultural critique; rather, the empirical exploration of
the historical   and cultural conditions for the articulation and imple-
mentation of different values is. In this essay, then, we have paid atten-
tion to the media of expression and the embedded problematics of
value, conceived as questions ot aesthetics, epistemology, and interests
which ethnographers confront both ill their engaged held research and
in their experimenting with innovative \\a\s to write about it.

   The explicit affirmation and assertion ot values against cnlic.il per
ceptions of social conditions have their genres. An and philosoph) arc
the domains in     which values, aesthetics, and epistemologv have been
systematically debated, bin these discourses thrive on a sell               conscious
detachment from the world to see their issues clearly.        draw  I   hej raaj
upon empirical research, but they leave die task ot primary and de
tailed representations ot social reality to other kinds ot thinkers.               We
understand ethnography, in us experimental transformation and crii
      1   68   •   A Concluding Note

ical possibilities, to be a disciplined vehicle for
                                                      empirical research and

writing that explore the same sorts of debates that concern
                                                                    Western
art and philosophy, but as they variously manifest
                                                   themselves in local

and culturally distinctive contexts of social life, worldwide.
       Appendix: Work In Progress




       Marcus: The Predicaments of Business Dynasties
       as Critical Perspectives on the American
       Middle-class Family
Inspired by previous fieldwork and writing on the aristocratic and commoner
elites in the contemporary Polynesian kingdom of Tonga, I took advantage of

an opportunity to study four generation-old dynasties of business wealth in
Galveston, Texas. Galveston was once the leading commercial center of
Texas, but had declined since the turn of the century, and                its   flourishing,
politically influential       community of Gilded Age wealth along with it. Three
families, however, had sustained a lineage of property and dynastic tradition
over this period of decline, though they were finally experiencing a process of
internal conflict        and dissolution of organization during the time           (the late
1970s) of my fieldwork. While openness to the probes of an anthropologist
varied among and within the families, the process of dissolution has been a
very self- reflective one for descendants and others who have been caretakers
of the dynastic organization of wealth; this fortuitously has created a role tor
an outside interlocutor as recipient of an interesting corpus of multiple over-
lapping accounts about shared histories of wealth and sentiment.
   From its inception, my Galveston research has had two other simultaneous
linkages, the second of which is most pertinent here. First, through my reading
of recent accounts of other century-old dynastic families and fortunes                    in

America,       I   discovered a broader context of significance for mv Galveston-elite
ethnography that associated the forms of wealth-holding and family con-
tinuity which it concerns with a specific regional and national history ol social
change among upper classes. Second, because the study of lineages and de
scent groups has been such a common framework for ethnographic analysis m
anthropology's traditional arenas ol interest, and because my <>wn earlier
work concerned similar issues among ongan aristocrats, the ialveston rami
                                              I                       (


lies, fullyunderstood in their own American And Texan contexts, wire ques
tioried from the point ol view of stnkmglv different cultural situations.

    My initial aim was to understand the practices and strategies b) w hidi SU< h
American capitalist dvnasties have perpetuated themselves through the twin
titth century in an environment culturally, politically, and economicall)

biased against the development ol such organizations, ami increasing!) so ovei
time. Even in Texas, with a persistem ideology oi famil) capitalism that more
generally characterized the nineteenth century, the accumulation ol unlimited
personal wealth is unanibigiiouslv admired, but not its perpetuation. In main




        1   <<<)
        1   70     •     Appendix


cases, the       answer simply was that legal expertise and the entanglements of
sharing hereditary wealth kept descendants more involved in each other's lives
than they might otherwise have desired (see Marcus 1980, 1983). But in a few
cases   —
        and these are the dynastic concentrations of wealth that have con-
tinued to have concerted and important impacts on their arenas of activity
the invention of compelling and enduring family traditions in the lives of de-
scendants, servants, advisors, and caretakers of the wealth require more com-
plex understandings.           The problem is to describe the processes by which a
notion of the sacred and an apparently anachronistic moral sensibility are kept
prominently alive among a group of people who otherwise inhabit thoroughly
secular, affluent middle-class worlds.
     The perpetuation of these lineages, against the grain of the curtailed or
weakly structured cross-generational continuity that is characteristic of Amer-
ican family life, has ironically been a mythic subject for an affluent and aspir-
ing mass middle-class, who have been avid consumers of dynastic sagas, real
and fictional. Such an affinity suggested to me that my ethnographic subjects
(and the other cases in this same historic cohort with which I was able to
associate them) hypostatize and articulate some of the elements underplayed
in a more widely shared culture of family life, such as unfulfilled longings for

cross-generational continuity. Viewed from the outside, dynasties are a rich
ground       for       American middle-class expressions of    ideals   as well   as   am-
bivalences about solidarity, success, and affluence within the family. From the
perspective of their internal discourses, which are the special access of eth-
nography, dynasties constitute a detailed critique of the American family that
can be ethnographically "read" for the capitalist classes, just as Paul Willis
claimed to have exposed the critiques embedded in working-class lives.
     For example, since the 1960s, the breakup of the configuration of the post-
World War II nuclear family and the authority structure that supported it has
been at the center of perennial sociological debates about the American (and
Western) family (e.g., see the recent book by Peter and Brigitte Berger 1983).
However, the cultural state of the family has also been a constant and salient
problematic within dynasties for much of the twentieth century, as they have
adapted and devised strategies against trends of culture that have often sub-
verted Victorian models of patriarchy and socialization. These are the models
through which bourgeois dynastic hopes had been most effectively realized.
While still projecting aspects of Victorian culture (sometimes halfheartedly in
the absence of any             more appropriate   cultural   model), successful family
dynasts have generally been realists about the cultural challenges to the per-
petuation of their traditions (and have been more insightful and anticipatory
about changes in the family than most scholarly cultural critics as well). Those
in   dynastic authority over the past decades have appreciated how the mysti-
fications in the administration of great wealth and the more subtle practices of
making ancestral tradition compelling for skeptical descendants mutually re-
inforce one another as a holding action, keeping dynastic organizations to-
gether against their inevitable dissolution.          The    final,   and perhaps most
            171       •    Appendix


enduring, carrier of a particular family's ideas is the corporate forms and in-
stitutions that a dynasty leaves after itself, if only the process of dissolution is
well planned              and orderly enough.          Internally, this social    drama    — the   self-
conscious collective experience repeatedly told by members of dynasties to the
ethnographer as witness                 — generates       a conservative cultural        criticism,   ex-
pressed in multiple versions as substantial as those from the days of Henry
Adams.
     In trying to describe the processes by which dynastic traditions have been
invented and reinvented in generational transitions,                      I    focused on the alter-
native, and often competing, sources of authority within a dynastic organiza-
tion as central to this task.                I   drew upon some of the best and most detailed
ethnographic literature which had dealt with lineage and descent groups:
Meyer Fortes's career-long studies of the West African Tallensi, and especially
his later papers, on the psychological dimensions of being a parent, descen-
dant, elder, and impending ancestor in this society (Fortes, 1973, 1974). Here,
I   was reversing the kind of juxtaposition that led earlier functionalist eth-
nographers to ask, "We have institution x; they do not, but they achieve sim-
ilar       results;       how?"    I   was asking, "They have strong             definitions of the
ancestor-descendant relationship; we do not, but we occasionally have lineage
formation based on a tradition of the founder: how?"
     Asking Tallensi questions of Texas descent groups suggested an interesting
line of inquiry in              work with the Galveston old elite. At the same time, this
juxtaposition led me to reflect back upon my earlier work with Tongan elites,
and to create a set of juxtapositions among them, the Tallensi, and the Gal-
veston dynasties. As with the Galveston families, contemporary Tongan noble
and commoner dynasties sustain a strong continuity across generations, but
without as salient an ancestor complex as among the Tallensi. The creation of
sacred property; talk about the replication of personality traits of the sigmti-
cant dead, observed among the living; and the longevity and role of elders in
shaping a collective memory all had variable effects on the continuity of lin-
eage in the Tongan, Galveston, and Tallensi cases.
       In   the three cases, the examination of events of exchange proved to be
particularly important. Gritical to the wielding of the authority of the p.ist
over the living are the activities surrounding funerals 111 each case, [uxtapoct-
tions with Tallensi               and Tongan ethnography alerted me to how the inheri-
tance of wealth occurs as a process ot distribution ot various kinds ot pcopeft)
in anticipation of generational transitions.                  This distribution OCCUTI OVCI entire
lifetime* and only surfaces as complex displays ot passions and intrusts in the
accountings               and   summations         that   characterize   the    events    surrounding
funerals.
     found that the more subtle wavs in wlmh d\nastk tradition u as made
       I



Compelling in the lives of descendants, and others connected with duiastK
caretaking, resided in a mystifying ideology of "the right miff," by which
descendants judged each other, and partu ularK by wlmh parents assessed and
encouraged their children.               (   >ften, the   model for "the right miff" ii embodied
         171   •   Appendix


in the   biographies of significant forebears, made vivid in the stock of moral
tales circulating among the family. The effectiveness of this ideology depends
in turn on a firm belief in the biological transmission of abilities and character,

much as physical traits such as hair or eye color are inherited. These are per-
haps general traits of tradition formation in American families, but they are
hypostatized among the dynastic rich, surrounded by the security of pa-
trimony, but also by its legacy of challenge, developed as a discourse among
descendants about ability, character, and worth relative to the founding gener-
ation. Dynastic authority is much more effectively embedded in this process
than in any attempts by family leaders to reestablish patriarchallike authority,
or overt ritual reverence for ancestors. These tend to be viewed as atavisms by
many descendants, who are thoroughly integrated into middle-class life-styles
and whose interests in the collective wealth are legally established, thus freeing
them from a sanction of disinheritance. American dynasts adhere far more
than contemporary Tongans do to an ideology of mana as has classically (and
perhaps ethnocentrically) been described for Polynesia.
   As a spin-off of considering ideologies of distinctiveness in dynastic fami-
lies of great wealth, I   became interested in the equivalent of "the right stuff" in
families of mass middle-class culture. I locate it in practices by which parents
come to perceive and evaluate their children's intelligence. This is not some
general view of intelligence, but intelligence as specifically tailored for success
in   educational institutions, that have been central in the creation and defini-
tion of modern middle-class status. This        is   the cultural construction of the
person which Willis's working-class subjects (and to some extent, those raised
in the   dynastic cocoon of great wealth) reject, but which            is   embraced as a
defining feature of middle-class socialization.       A main topic of recent cultural
criticism has been the narrow appreciation of intelligence officially reognized
in   1Q tests and the system of education, despite the varieties of intelligence
actually understood by science (see Gardner 1983) and manifested in as eth-
nically diverse    and plural a society as the United States. The point of eth-
nographic criticism along these lines is that the reduction of the person to the
evaluation of a particular kind of intelligence (tied to success in schooling) is a
process deeply ingrained in middle-class families, as one of their defining
features.
     Again, this spin-off inquiry has been aided by juxtapositions, this time jux-
taposing middle-class practices against those of dynasts as well as Tongans.
Among the latter, with the introduction of Western education over a century
ago, the indigenous concept of personal              skill   poto   — once    diffusely at-
tributed by particular ability and context, has gradually shifted to an assess-
ment of the whole person, independent of context and relating mainly to
prestige skills linked to mobility through the educational system.
     In sum, then, the Galveston ethnography has not only been informed at all

stages by cross-cultural juxtapositions, but I argue more strongly that the use
of such juxtapositions, which expose different patterns of cultural emphases
and thus suggest novel lines of inquiry, brought out dimensions of family life
                173    *       Appendix


that would not likely have been treated in a study limited only to an American
context. By not forcing these cases into stereotypic and sharply contrasted
molds, moreover, there is the potential of viewing mass middle-class American
patterns and elite dynastic patterns in Texas, along with those of the cross-
cultural cases used as probes, as mutual commentaries and critiques upon each
other's cultural expressions of authority, tradition, and relations of propertv
within the family.



               Fischer: Ethnicity as Text and Model
In developing a course on American culture, the purpose of which was to ask
what contribution anthropology might make to understanding America and
what contribution America might make to anthropological theory and meth-
od,   became aware of the recent fluorescence of autobiography and auto-
          I


biographical fiction that takes ethnicity as a focal puzzle, but yet is poorly
accommodated by the contemporary sociological literature on ethnicity.
Works such as Maxine Hong Kingston's Warrior Woman, Michael Aden's
Passage to Ararat, or Marita Golden's Migrations of the Heart cannot be
encompassed by discussions of group solidarity, traditional values, family mo-
      or other categories of sociological analysis applied to ethnicity. Older
bility,

immigrant novels, centered on themes such as rebellion against the family, are
more relevant to this sociological literature. What these newer works commu-
nicate forcefully is the sense that ethnicity (as well as other similar dimensions
of regional, gender, religious, class, and generational identity)                       is   something
reinvented and reinterpreted in every generation by each individual. Ethnic it\
is   a part of the self that              is   often quite puzzling to the individual, something
over which he or she is not in control. Insofar as it is a deeply rooted emo-
tional          component of identity, it is often transmitted less through cognitive
language or learning (to which sociology has almost entirely restricted itself
than through processes analogous to the dreaming and transferences of psy-
choanalytic encounters.
     A text such as Kingston's illustrates the dreaming process, Aden's tin-
transference one. Kingston's text is developed as a series of fragments              —               tr.uli

tional stories, myths, customs                   — which her parents had imposed without ade-
quately explaining them to her .it critical points in her childhood development.
It   has thus been              left   tor her to   work through this legacy embedded in her
consciousness, and to integrate it with her own experiences.                        I   he process ot
integration           is   analogous to .1      patiem who must translate from the imager) ot
dreams into linear verbal discourse so that analyst and patient c.tn reason
through it, in this case articulating what it means to he ( hinese American in
the process ot rearing a text that c.m he interrogated and made coherent.
                           i



      I       r.insterence, unlike dreaming, operates without          tin-   production ot     .1    text

Rather, behavior is directed toward someone through the same patterns that
have previously been established toward someone else. It is an acting out,
rather than           a    production ot a text. Arlen begins with the silence ot his father
           174     *   Appendix


about the Armenian past that clearly was important to both of their identities.
By attempting to spare children knowledge of painful past experiences, par-
ents often create an obsessive void in the child which must be explored and
filled in.   Throughout, Arlen describes repetitions in adult life of behavior to-
ward his father, and repetitions in his own behavior of his father's behavior
patterns toward significant others. The obsessive search of the son, fraught
with ambivalence, approach-avoidance behaviors, and denials, leads him to
travel to Soviet Armenia, and to come to terms with a past he did not under-
stand, but only knew to exist.
      This literature tends to be pervaded with a quiet, modernist irony that is
liberating. It reinforces the tolerance and pluralism of American society         — the
notion that it is       OK not to be, or behave like, that mythic WASP model of
cool, rational propriety, serving as a repressive tool of Americanization during
the 1950s. Its individualism, posing the struggle of self-definition as ultimately
idiosyncratic, is humanistically tempered by the recognition that parallel pro-
cesses affect individuals across the cultural spectrum.
      But there is more that this literature can teach. It sensitizes us to important
cultural dynamics in the postreligious, technological, and secular society of the
late-twentieth-century industrial democracies.          It   reveals to us a richness of
cultural tapestry that is not simply being homogenized into blandness.                The
great challenge is whether this richness can be tapped and turned into a re-
source for intellectual and cultural reinvigoration.
      The possibility always exists that exploration of elements of tradition will
remain superficial and merely transitional on the way to extinction. In the first
generation of immigrants, problems are communal and family related; in later
generations, vestiges of these problems remain at the personal level, and they,
too, will disappear. This is the traditional sociological position: the Yiddish
theater     is   replaced by assimilated Jewish writers like Roth, Malamud, and
Bellow, and they, too, will pass. There is, however, another more exciting
possibility      — that there are cultural resources    in traditions that   can be   re-
covered and reworked into rich meanings for the present. It is, suggests Robert
Alter (1982), not Roth,        Malamud, and Bellow who define a Jewish renais-
sance in America        — they indeed are    totally encapsulated in immigrant adjust-
ments      — but   rather, the establishment of a new serious, postorthodox Jewish
scholarship by such writers as linguists Uriel and Max Weinreich, historians
Jacob Neusner and Gershom Scholem, philosophers Hannah Arendt and Em-
manuel Levinas, and literary critics Harold Bloom and Robert Alter himself,
all   resolutely modern, yet able to involve the past in a dialogue relevant to the
present and future.
      In   thinking about how to read contemporary autobiographical texts and
scholarship informed by concerns with ethnic identity, I drew upon a variant
of my previous ethnographic research among Iranian Zoroastrians and Shi'ite
Muslims. In both cases,           I   identified elements similar to   my own Jewish
heritage. The case of Islam is the simpler of the two: the argumentative pro-
cedures, the textual traditions, the social environment of theological training,
         175    *   Appendix


and the dialectical position vis-a-vis a more powerful Christian world are all
parallel.   As for many previous scholars, Islam could serve as a proxy for ex-
plorations of one's own past, now lost forever. This is a procedure, suggestive
of the style of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan, for filling in gaps in one's own
experience and sense of tradition. What has been repressed in the process of
modernization, thanks to the stress on the rationality of the rabbinic tradition
and on the heterodoxy of mysticism and magic, can be recovered in an en-
vironment, such as Islam, that is both distant and familiar. Again, it is a tech-
nique of defamiliarization and refamiliarization. Gershom Scholem's notion
of a counterhistory, of reading against the official versions of history, and
thereby of gaining access to the sources of renewal of spirit, is suggestive of
this style of ethnographic empathy.

   We would argue that much of the best ethnography has depended upon
similar sorts of empathetic searching, and that making this explicit can foster
more powerful and realistic cultural critiques through juxtaposition. Critiques
of theological students in Iran, for instance, are not phrased as dismissals of
medieval fanatics but are tempered with the same sympathy and criticism one
might direct toward one's great grandparents or the yeshiva boy of Brooklyn.
There is a subtlety here that needs elaboration.
   We are not advocating a simple reading of ethnographies in terms of the
biographies of their authors. It is true that professionals adjust their readings
of ethnography by their knowledge of the writers. This can make the reading
richer and more informed; it allows the reader to bring to the text many of the
nuances, tacit understandings, and implicit perspectives that informed the
writer   — to bring     a   dead text to full life. But in the hands of casual and un-
sophisticated readers, reading in terms of the writer's biography can be invid-
ious and destructive, explaining away the text rather than enriching it. What
we advocate, therefore, is a reading of ethnographies as the juxtaposition of
two or more cultural traditions.
  This form of cultural reading is not limited to anthropology, but is a crucial
component in the understanding of all cross-cultural writings. It has been
noted that     many of the nineteenth-century Western scholars of Islam were
Jews using Islam as a proxy in working out their own dilemmas visa \is
Christianity; Islam could be treated as an alternative Western tradition, one
close to Judaism, but differing       m not being constrained by minority status in
Christian environment.          From these scholars, one thus gets much more s\ in-
pathetic and empathetic readings of Islam than contemporary Arahixis, who
divide the world into          Mamchean pro -Zionist versus pro-Arab tactions, arc
able to comprehend.
   Examples could be multiplied.           I   he ( acholic mystu   I   "ins Massignon siso
used Suhsm (Islamic mysticism             as a   prow tor Ins own dilemmas in s post
Christian,     antimystical      world.   Among      the   most   sensitive   snd       best   in
thropological works are those that bring personal engagements ot this suit
into play, usually however onl\ as a subtext, never highlighted or xpliutU          <




acknowledged.       (   me thinks of the association between the late Victor            I   timer's
        176      •    Appendix


engagement with Ndembu ritual and symbolic worlds, and his more recent
turn to Catholicism; of Stanley Tambiah's work on Buddhism in Thailand,
which, unlike so much written about Buddhism by Westerners, treats it with
respect as a potent political force, in an oblique attempt to understand its
dynamics in his own troubled homeland of Sri Lanka; and perhaps even of
Levi-Strauss, whose work on American Indian mythologies might be under-
stood as an act of atonement for a world destroyed, parallel to the creation of
the Talmud,          which is a preservation together with a critical apparatus en-
abling regenerative use by future generations (see Handelman 1982).
   The model in all of these searches is not unlike the ethnic identity searches
in recent American autobiographical writings, in which, through explicit jux-

tapositions      and attention to more unconscious mechanisms, cultural tradi-
tions are brought together for clarification and reworking. As cultural cri-
tique, they can work quite powerfully without distortion through stereotyp-
ing. No greater indictment of racism in America exists than Charlie Mingus's
Beneath the Underdog, Alice Walker's The Color Purple, Malcolm X's Auto-
biography, or indeed, the angry writings of Frank Chin or Jeffrey Paul Chan,
the poetry of Raul Salinas, or the traumatized portraits by the American Indi-
an authors James Welch and Gerald Vizenor. None of these merely indict, but
all fictively demonstrate the creation of     new identities and worlds. These func-
tions could also be accomplished by a reinvigorated technique of cultural cri-
tique by ethnographic juxtaposition.
   In a recent        paper (1986), I experiment with juxtaposing five sources of
recent autobiographical writings, those of Armenian-Americans, Chinese-
Americans, Afro- Americans, Mexican-Americans, and Native Americans. The
idea is to allow multiple sets of voices to speak for themselves, with my own
author's voice muted and marginalized as commentary. While it still remains
true that I stage these voices, the reader is directed to the originals; the text is
not hermetically sealed, but points beyond itself. Parallel writings from my
own ethnic tradition are evoked in the introduction and conclusions as points
of further contact in order to avoid, as Todorov puts it (1984 [1982]: 2.50—
51), "the temptation to reproduce the voices of these figures 'as they really
are': to try to do away with      my own presence 'for the other's sake'   .   .   .   [or] to
subjugate the other to myself, to make him into a marionette ..."
   What emerges as a conclusion is not simply that parallel processes operate
across American ethnic identities, but a sense that these ethnicities constitute
only a family of resemblances, that ethnicity cannot be reduced to identical
                                                           between two or
sociological functions, that it is a process of interreference
more cultural traditions, and that these dynamic mechanisms of intercultural
knowledge provide reservoirs for renewing humane values. Ethnic memory is
thus future, not past, oriented.
   If   multiple voices are engaged in such an experiment, so too, it is hoped,
will multiple readerships        be so. By invoking the discourses of a number of
different groups, each is given an opportunity for rejoinder. The discourse of
the text    is   not sealed by a professional rhetoric of authority which denies
       177     *   Appendix


standing to nonprofessional interlocutors. At the same time, it draws members
of these different ethnic discourses into the comparative project of an-
thropology. It does not allow ethnics to protest merely on the terms of their
intuitive   understandings of their own rhetorics, but attempts to conceive of
such intuition as but one valid source of knowledge.
            Notes




            Preface
       i.   "Paradigm" has become a very popular concept. We follow its now-
conventional use to mean an established set of questions that are to be an-
swered by a research program. The analogy is with a grammatical paradigm
where one fills in the forms of a declension or conjugation without asking if
the grammarian who formulated the rules has done so with as much accuracy
as possible for representing the language.         The usage of "paradigm" to talk
about fields of research was initiated through Thomas Kuhn's influential book
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962).
   1. We will define what we mean by "interpretive" in chapter z.

       3.   "Positivism" has become an increasingly ill-defined slogan word. In fre-
quent assaults on the recent dominant style of social science, it is often used
pejoratively and stands for a way to knowledge that relies on theoretical for-
malism and quantitative measurement and that holds the methods of the natu-
ral    sciences as an ideal. Historically, however,       it   can refer to such totally
different enterprises as, on the one hand, the work of French positivists such .is
Saint-Simon and Auguste Comte, who saw sociology as providing both deter
minate laws of society and a new humanistic religion by which to guide sou
ety, or on the other hand, the work of the         "Vienna Circle" logical posim ists,
who sought to clarify the validity of scientific statements. Those approaches to
science based on identifying facts with measurable entities are loose!) called
positivist, and        we use the term in this way because, .is noted, that is how the
critics of the recent dominant trend of social science         have used it.



            Chapter Two
       1.   Even in the twentieth century, M.ilmowski, K.ulJilte Brown, and Liter,
Max         (iluckm.ui maintained       sharp distinction between academic .in
                                          .1



thropologists and government anthropologists working within the colonial
administration. Malmowski and Raddifre-Brown both ran courses tor the lai
ter,income from which was used to support the former. (1l1n.kn1.1n enforced
the distinction through theRhodes ivingstone Institute In asking .u.uleniK
                                               I




anthropologists to do their field write ups back in England awa) from the
influence ol practical administrators and their problems, it is the academic line
of anthropologist which became enshrined .is the authoritative nutropole Vt            1




lion,       although much valuable ethnography came from others,          in the   United
St.nes,Franz Boas imposed    similar authoritative version, which eclipsed
                                     .1



both previous and u>ntemporar\ ethnographic traditions.


             1
                 -•,
           i8o   •   Notes to Pages 20-30


    2.     These guidelines were: that there was no one best or most rational way
to organize society; that different cultures had evolved different constellations
of values and social mechanisms; that it is often more realistic to try to learn
alternative ways of organizing societies by observing other cultures than           by
ivory-tower speculation about reforming society; that cultural values cannot
be ethically judged in abstract philosophical terms, but must be evaluated in
terms of their actual effects on social life.
      3.   The debate whether the social sciences could ever be a purely objective,
technical, or mathematical-like science is an old one. Its terms were classically
posed by Max Weber, who distinguished between certain techniques of re-
search that were objective tools (these are "value-free"), and the formulation
of research interests that were "value-relevant," that is, like any other social
endeavor, related to goals, values, and perspectives. The 1960s critics of Par-
sonian sociology's claim to be value-free accused the latter of using the pres-
tige of science to     impose a hegemonic ideology, and to exclude alternative
perspectives.

    4.     One should not overstress the qualitative, idiosyncratic nature of field-
work and its resulting written reports. Philosophers of the natural sciences
have also long distinguished between the unsystematic nature of the discovery,
insight, and hunches on which scientific development depends; and the subse-
quent systematic procedures for verification or confirmation that make of in-
sight "science." So, too, the amount and quality of verifiable data determine
the value of ethnographic work. Nonetheless the serendipitous nature of what
one happens to be able to see in the field colors the way an ethnography is
written. Moreover, there are ways to write up any set of observations which
enhance the reader's perceptions; it is this last which is significantly different
from the natural sciences.
   5. The term ethnographic naturalism has sometimes been preferred to eth-

nographic realism (see Willis 1977, Appendix; and Webster, 1982, 1983), in
order to reflect the positivist social-scientific, more than the literary, context in
which the development of the ethnography has occurred. Much of the flexibil-
ity of literary realism has not been available to ethnography, which has mostly

sought a neutral, minimally evocative language for its descriptions of social
life.

      6.   Experience-near and experience-far revise the once-influential distinc-
tion,      introduced by cognitive anthropology, between "emic" and "etic" cul-
tural categories.     The former are internal to a language or culture and are
derived from the latter which are posed as universal or scientific (the distinc-
tion is based in turn on the established linguistic distinction between phonemic
and phonetic; phonemes are the sounds selected for use by a language from
the universe of sounds the human voice can make). Etic terms were to provide
the        grid-language   for   objective   cross-cultural   comparison.   The   epis-
temological critique of this distinction showed the invalidity of the notion of
purely etic categories that        somehow stand completely outside any culture-
bound context. One can make "scientific" categories, but these remain bound
          i8i   •       Notes to Pages 35-40


to their axiomatic and arbitrary definitions (e.g., color categories can be mea-
sured against the spectrum of refracted light; confusion arises, however, when
it is   assumed that the only or primary reference of "red" is the spectrum, seen
as a domain of nature free of culture, and even more confusion arises when it
isalso assumed that English red, French rouge, and Persian sorkh mean the
same thing). Emic and etic categories thus become relative terms, a fact better
captured by the distinction experience-near and experience-far, as developed
by Geertz.
     7.   Arthur J. Vidich's dissertation, The Political Impact of Colonial Admin-
istration (Harvard University, 1952), is an even more trenchant, if little
known, account of American anthropology's role in the military administra-
tion of Micronesia after World War II.
     8.   For the current rediscovery of incidents of revelation in the earlier histo-
ry of fieldwork, similar to those of Rabinow and Dumont, see James Clifford's
account (1983a) of Marcel Griaule's 1930s fieldwork among the Dogon of
West Africa, one of those peoples of long-standing fascination to anthropolo-
gists and their readers. Beginning in the image of a colonial expedition to
conquer the cultural knowledge of the Dogon, Griaule's sense of his fieldwork
retreated to a humbler, but wiser and more fruitful image of the dialogic in his
conversations with the remarkable informant, Ogatammeli, who revealed as-
pects of Dogon culture on his own terms. French ethnography in the 1920s
and 1930s (to be succeeded by the structuralist fashion) was very precocious
in terms of the issues that are now central in Anglo-American anthropology.

Indeed, it would be unfair to say that the political and historic contexts of
ethnographic practice in Anglo-American anthropology left it completely un-
touched before the present; neither fieldwork strategies nor ethnographic
writing conventions have been totally dormant. The point is rather, that to the
extent adjustments have been             made in planning fieldwork and in writing
about it, these have been more in the nature of compromises that permit the
much stronger historic motifs of ethnography to be preserved. Despite recog
nitions of the          contemporaneity and historic molding of cultures, the drive
remains strong           in the field to find authentically traditional or minimally

touched field sites, or in writing, to show repeatedly how tradition and the
deep structures of cultures shine through despite change Works such as those
of Rabinow and              Dumont on fieldwork, and of Clifford (14Mb and Marcus
and Gushman       982) on the rhetoric of ethnographic writing create an atmo
                    (   1




sphere of self-criticism in which anthropologists are hvperauare, before the)
go into the field or approach a word processor, ot a \er\ different kind of
world from that in which ethnography has usually been assumed to he
conducted.
   9. hor example, c lifford 1983b readi vans Pritchard'i pioneering ami
                                                        l




model luiKtioiiahst ethnography, The Nuer, as hill) in line with techniq ue!
being explored              m contemporar)   experimental        works.   Likewise,    Michael
Meeker notes 'personal communication                 lli.it   ihe ethnographies of    Keo |..r
tune [The Sorcerer* of Dobu,             193a, and    Mantu Religion, 193J            anticipate
         i8z     •   Notes to Pages 44-59


many textual practices which are assumed to be contemporary. Mixed genres,
defamiliarization, social dramas, copious verbal citations, genre analysis, cul-
               and subversion, all these "contemporary" devices are to be
tural dissidence
found    in                       Marcus (1985) has noted how Gregory
               Fortune's work. Finally,
Bateson's Naven (1936) is being invoked in the context of the contemporary
experimental mood.
   10.    The two kinds of experiment are not mutually exclusive. They can
appear in separate or complementary texts, or in the most skillful works they
can be integrated in the same text. Some of the works that we will be describ-
ing are only partial ethnographies in the traditional sense. That is, they dwell
on only a single part of the ethnographic research process, such as fieldwork,
or they cite ethnographic research that the writer has done, but are actually
very "thin" in the amount of ethnographic description they include, or they
reinterpret the material of another ethnographer for their           own argument.
What is important for our purposes is that the writers of such experiments
rhetorically establish,       by whatever strategy,   their   own authority as eth-
nographers, without necessarily conforming to a narrow formula that a text
must be predominantly a report of field research to qualify as an ethnographic
experiment. Indeed, one of the points of experimentation            is   to set oneself
problems of philosophy or sociological and historical explanation different
from those ethnographers are accustomed to addressing, and to use one's eth-
nographic materials, directly or indirectly, to handle such problems as cre-
atively as possible.      Such texts may not qualify as ethnography for some
anthropologists, who may regret the decline of the ethnography as mainly a
compendium of descriptions, but we treat them as ethnographic experiments,
nonetheless.



         Chapter Three
   1.    Important predecessors to contemporary uses of the life history include
Sidney Mintz's Worker in the Cane (i960), in which the problem of editing by
the anthropologist       is   acknowledged but not further developed, and Oscar
Lewis's Children of Sanchez (1961) and La Vida (1966) in which multiple life
histories and voices (in the form of edited transcripts of taped interview mate-
rials) are included so as to give a   more varied set of perspectives than the single
authorial voice of the ethnographer could provide.
   2.    Offering a different approach to the life history, but still focused on the
interpretive problems of how life histories are constructed, are Fischer's efforts
(1982b, 1983) to deconstruct the metaphors and cultural forms that compose
the autobiography of an Iranian mullah from the turn of the century, and to
compare them with the cultural forms and richly layered emotional reso-
nances composing the persona and charisma of the contemporary leader of
Iran, Ayatollah Khomeini.        A similar account is J. M. Taylor's study (1979) of
the ways in which four myths of Eva Peron were formulated by different seg-
ments of the Argentine middle classes, were projected upon the lower classes,
                 183     •       Notes to Pages 61-76


and informed political action. In both these accounts, life histories become the
means to explore the discourses of particular strata of a society and arenas of
political competition between strata, and to ask questions about the processes
of cultural hegemony, as well as about the didactic norms of character, matu-
ration, and morality which become mass-cultural models. Life history here is
no longer simply a narrative frame for stringing together life-cycle rituals,
socialization patterns, and a generational history as experienced by one indi-
vidual; nor is it left to unique individuals. Indeed, life history deconstructs in
the fullest sense: not making the subject disappear, but rather illuminating the
social and constructive elements of an individual that make him or her potent
in social context. Insofar as a life is the locus of experience, it is important to

specify the cultural meanings that figure and compose it.
       3.    The Gisaro is a ritual about grief and sadness. Guests dance and sing for
hosts in elaborate costumes, projecting images of sadness and recalling the
hosts' recently departed relatives. When a host member is overcome with grief,
he seizes a burning torch and jams it into the shoulder or back of the dancer:
             The dancer in full regalia is a figure of splendor and pathos. This is not
             because of the ordeal of burning he must face; rather it is the very beau-
             ty and sadness that he projects that cause people to burn him.                             From the
              Kaluli point of view, the main object of Gisaro is not the burning of the
             dancers         .   .   .   the point is for the dancers to make the hosts burst into
             tears. The hosts then burn the dancers in angry revenge for the suffering

             they have been made to feel. To the dancer and the chorus, this reflects
             rather well on their songs. [Schieffelin 1976, p. 24]
   4.        Feld's account moves from a textual analysis of a poem built around the
call    of an          abandoned child, to an analysis of the Kaluli typologies of birds
based on sounds, to a musical analysis of songs such as those used in the
Gisaro, to the Kaluli rhetorical analysis of the ways words are made poetic,
and to an analysis of the Kaluli vocabulary and theory of music, in which
sonic structure is coded in metaphors of the movement of water.
       5.    Grapanzano alludes to yet another important difficulty. Although on
the face of it, his work was a dialogue between himself and Tuhami (with the
aid of an interpreter), there was always, more abstractly, a third, silent p.irts
present          — the mediation of language and culture                 itself.       (   rap. in/.   mo would
need rich footnotes or notes in the margin to incorporate this dimension into
the text, perhaps even several margins, as in medieval manuscripts.                                     I   Ins allu-

sion        is   precisely the kind of interpretive            work to which the dialogic should
lead    — the return to the mediating structures ot culture and cultural psychol-
ogy, which are often missing or relatively neglected in modernist works.                                           I   he
challenge is to find a                      more effective w.i\ of incorporating this "third parts"
within the intimacy of modernist experiments, without capitulating 10 realist
techniques, which are                        more at home with representing the commun.il                          .uul

Collective sale ot ( ulture.
   h.            The successor to the New Journalism of the 1960S, the so called iter                          I




ary Journalism of the I'y^s and [98OS             see Sims [984   is milch more tlior
                                                                                   ,
          1   84    •   Notes to Pages 80-86


ough in its research and self-consciously rigorous in its reporting than was the
New Journalism. Its practitioners, such as John McPhee, Tracy Kidder, and
Sara Davidson, do the sort of participant-observation fieldwork characteristic
of ethnography, and while their written products do not resemble an-
thropological ethnography, they insist on the accuracy of their reportage, par-
ticularly of conversations.




          Chapter Four
    1.   This move in academic political economy has two other interesting, par-
allel    expressions at the moment.  One is the appearance of a so-called neo-
liberal ideology during the       1980s, and the other is the emphasis on relativism
and contextuality in the continuing debates in political theory and philosophy
over an adequate concept of social justice in liberal, democratic societies.
Whatever one might think of neoliberalism as ideology and a political pro-
gram, it does emphasize revising classic liberalism by a recognition of "new
realities" (see Rothenberg 1984), an acknowledgment of precisely those
changes that have stimulated the departure from reigning frameworks in aca-
demia. While not forsaking the liberal emphasis on government programs,
neoliberals look for a middle ground that requires them to be open and adapt-
able to a diversity of local situations that would need an ethnographic sen-
sibility to        document. With regard to the debate over social justice, Michael
Walzer, in his book Spheres of Justice (1983), has introduced an ethnographi-
cally sensitive relativism to a discourse that has been dominated by economic
models, utilitarian arguments, and a search for pure, abstract principles by
which wealth should be justly distributed in any context and among all groups
in liberal societies. Contra such efforts by John Rawls and Ronald Dworkin,

Walzer demonstrates that such ethnographic matters as cultural pluralism and
the discrimination of discrete spheres of activity in social life are the central
considerations in         making consistent, but context-sensitive judgments about
distributive justice.
    2.    A third work, so far reported only in article form, is the study by Ber-
taux and Bertaux-Wiame (1 981) of the survival of French small bakers in the
face of mass production in their industry. Bertaux and Bertaux-Wiame delve
intimately into many aspects of the lives of these petit-bourgeois artisans: their
ethos,        household-production organization, collective strategies, and    rela-
tionships to other social strata, such as peasant youths on whom they depend
for apprentices, in order toanswer the question about their surprising eco-
nomic viability. Most importantly, Bertaux and Bertaux-Wiame provide an
unusually sharp demonstration of how certain sectors of society such as this
one are misrepresented in the statistical, legal, and documentary methods of
modern bureaucracy, on which much sociology and planning depend.
   3. One further rationale for the prominence of the notion of cultural pro-
duction might be located in the current problems with the solidity of the cul-
tural unit as a framing assumption for ethnographic analysis, given the highly
        185       •           Notes to Pages 90-9}


fragmented social and cultural realities that contemporary fieldworkers face,
and increasingly expect. Interpretive analysis of meaning and symbol systems
has often rested on the unexamined assumption that its subjects also share,
allowing for internal variations, a coherent social system. However, when
conventional concepts for segmenting and describing social reality come into
question, as they do now, the secure grounds on which cultural analysis has
rested are also undermined. In some sense, the emphasis on cultural produc-
tion is an adaptation to this challenge. One no longer leaves the social referent
of the enactment of cultural meaning, closely interpreted in its ritual or every-
day-life expressions, to an assumption about the presence of some larger social
or cultural background unit. Rather, the social context of the cultural con-
struction of meaning              — the production of culture — becomes an                       integral part of
interpretive analysis              itself.   Since the coherence of larger social and cultural
worlds is in question, the microanalysis of symbols draws its boundaries of
social reference more narrowly and responsibly: in social and cultural worlds
of uncertain dimensions, the most certain and easily assumable social back-
ground for which a cultural performance has salience is that proximately in-
volved with its production. This constitutes a means of sharply reconceptual-
izing social systems from the bottom up, since the sociological concepts with
which ethnographers frame their cultural analysis become directly a matter of
investigation. They are an integral part of the representation of the cultural
production and reception of symbols and meanings relevant to a discovered
level of social order, which can no longer be otherwise left to mere referencing

of available traditional concepts for visualizing the larger organization ot
society.

   4.   Another interesting pairing to Taussig's book is Paul Willis's ethnogra-
phy of English working-class males in government schools, to which we have
referred.    It   similarly discovers a theory critical of capitalism                            embedded in a
proletarian life-style, but                  its        implications are   more        radical   than   Taussig's
work. Willis views cultural forms as completely derived from the struggles
centering on cultural appropriations. In contrast, Taussig invokes and relies
                                                         —
on a baseline of cultural purity a sort of golden age for his Colombian                 —
peasants from which to measure the change that capitalist incorporation has
wrought; this tends to give his text a heightened moral tone. Perhaps it is
easier tor Willis to avoid "purifying" his subjects, linos he is not working in a
foreign tradition undergoing a hrst-time transition to capitalism. Rather, he is
accounting tor the routine reproduction o( the long-established English work
ing class.
   5.   I   he Study ot markets                    is    a   traditional ethnographic interest, but Fay'l
account shows up their tendency tO be low                                level   ifl   the range ot their tin
oretk.il Contributions, and BO fbcUS On the least complex and least modern
parts of the market. Indeed, the primars texts tor teaching about markets still
come from eCOnOmk historians sikh as Karl Pol.mu, rather than from eth
DOgraphk studies men as Clifford Geertz'i work on Moroccan and Indone
sun ba/aars           |   1   ^h ^, [965;      (.cert/, (.eert/,        and Rosen [979), and Richard
        1   86   •   Notes to Pages 94-127


Fox's descriptions of Indian market towns (1969). The latter, at their best,
serve as a source of ideas about the connections between the market and local
stratification, religion, or cultural notions of value. But they rarely can give an
incisive overview of the market as an expanding or contracting, thus changing,
system. Fay's book does a credible job of the latter, but a less good job of the
former. The challenge is to do both well (see Gray 1984).
   6.   The other trend of experimentation that we discussed, which attempts
to write ethnographies of experience around the image and metaphor of di-
alogue, does not really disrupt traditional notions of what fieldwork                is,   or
should be, like. Indeed, this trend celebrates, and even mythologizes further,
these notions of fieldwork. Ethnographies of experience reinforce the idea
(and ideal) that anthropology derives its knowledge mainly from face-to-face
engagement and communication, which obscures the many other ways that
knowledge is constructed in fieldwork. In contrast, the conception of a multi-
locale ethnography within the political-economy trend of experimentation
might have a potentially radical feedback effect on the way anthropologists
think about fieldwork. While the multilocale ethnography certainly incorpo-
rates the dialogue/engagement metaphor of the other trend, it must reconceive
the traditional idea of location in a single community in order to provide the
mobility necessary to pursue the different sort of object it is after     — impersonal
processes that span and encompass situated group settings. The trick in this
aim of both humanistically and holistically representing large-scale-system
processes is to preserve the dialogue image of fieldwork while modifying the
conditions of work to which it usually applies. One concrete way in which this
might work is to shift the stress in the dialogue metaphor from the commu-
nication between individuals to the patterning of communication among class-
es, interest groups, localities,     and regions.


        Chapter Five
   1.   Anthropology at the University of Chicago, splitting off from the so-
ciology department, participated in this documentary enthusiasm. Robert
Redfield, son-in-law of Robert Park, not only pioneered the new methods in
Mexico, but involved himself in the fight for equal opportunity of education in
the U.S. for blacks and other minorities; he later established a Ford Founda-
tion-funded seminar on the comparison of civilizations which helped make
contemporary India and other agrarian industrializing societies a central in-
terest of anthropology. British social        anthropology, arriving in the person of
Radcliffe-Brown        during     the   1930s,   bolstered    the   documentary      spirit.

Radcliffe-Brown, Fred Eggan remembers, was received as a liberator from the
antiquarianism of Franz Boas's style of anthropology, legitimating the work of
anthropologists on social problems made urgent by the Depression.
   2.   We have excluded treatment here of a widespread and self-conscious
interwar trend of cultural criticism in England. In many ways, it parallelled the
documentary          and   social-realist   concerns   of   the   Americans.   The    best-
              187              •           Notes to Page 14}


remembered essayist and literary figure among English critics of that era re-
mains, of course, George Orwell. With regard to a specific ethnographic paral-
lel   to the research of the Chicago sociologists, a group of English social
scientists conducted during the 1930s a fascinating, but less well-remembered
and studied project called Mass-Observation. The surveillance implications
within this research experiment, which combined social-survey techniques and
autoethnography, evoke Foucault's notion of the panoptican. We can do no
better than to quote from the preface of a volume that published results of this
project (Jennings and Madge 1937):
              Early in 1937, fifty people in different parts of the country agreed to co-
              operate in making observations on how they and other people spend
              their daily lives. These fifty Observers were the vanguard of a develop-
              ing movement, aiming to apply the methods of science to the complexity
              of a modern culture. In June 1937, a pamphlet called Mass-Observation
              was published, outlining this experiment in its theory and practice, and
              stressing the  need for a large number of Observers. This pamphlet,
              which is the fullest statement so far, was given astonishing publicity in
              the Press. Within a few weeks more than a thousand people had applied
              to be Observers and the number is steadily rising.
                 The Observers by this time cover the whole country. They are in the
              industrial centres, in rural and urban areas, in country towns, suburbs
              and villages. They include coalminers, factory hands, shopkeepers,
              salesmen, housewives, hospital nurses, bank clerks, business men, doc-
              tors and schoolmasters, scientists and technicians. A large proportion of
              them have already shown themselves able to write really useful re-
              ports      Since February, these Observers have been making reports
                           .       .   .




              about what happened to them on a given day, namely the twelfth ot
              each month. They have concentrated on normal routine events                                         .   .   .




                  .   The results that should be obtainable when the method is fully
                      .    .




              developed should be of interest to the social worker, the                                          field        .111


              thropologist, the politician, the historian, the advertising agent, the real-
              istic       novelist            and indeed any person who is concerned to know uh.it
              people really want and think. We propose to hold our files open to any
              serious worker. But in addition to special scientific uses, we believe that
              observing is itself of real value to the Observer. It heightens his power ot
              seeing what is around him and gives him new interest in and under
              standing of it                   .   .   .    Moreover Mass-Observation depends tor its vitalm
              on the criticisms and suggestions ot the whole bod)                                   ol    its   Observers,
              who must be more than mere recording instruments. Ip. ix-x]


              (   HAPTEI Six
      1   .
              Sahlina argues thai Malinowski, despite his proclaimed goals ot eliciting
the native point ot uew           recording native texts to capture as much as possible
the living richness                            <>t         indigenous discourse   ,   and despite   his     luiKtionalist
        1   88   •   Notes to Pages i$z-$i


efforts to get behind the local ideological explanations of why things are done
as they are (by      examining how different parts of a society have indirect or
interrelated effects    on other parts of the society), nonetheless allowed the
work of translation to obscure the distinctive cultural logics of the native sys-
tem. This obscuring was directly related to Malinowski's effort to show his
readers that apparently senseless customs were intelligible and rational in Eu-
ropean terms. The effect was to assimilate the culture under description into
the cultural logic of Europe, rather than to preserve the logic of the former.
Boas suffered the inverse problem: intending to submit to the cultural system
of the peoples he studied, to allow the facts to order themselves rather than
putting the facts in order, Boas ended with an incoherent mass of data. His
procedure reduced the anthropologist to the status of a recording device, and
the resultant text to an underinterpreted compilation; Malinowski's pro-
cedure overinterpreted, re-creating the native in the image of the author's own
culture. The solution to avoiding these polar dilemmas is to show the logical
structuring devices that make a culture systematic. Sahlins begins in the tradi-
tional ethnographic mode, by drawing illustrations from exotic places, and he
works in the traditional mode of anthropological scholarship by reanalyzing
classical works, making them reveal new insights.
    2. Very much aware of this criticism, Schneider in a later effort coauthored

with    Raymond T. Smith (1973) attempted to clarify the class variation of
kinship in America.
   3.   An interesting example of the kind of symbolic analysis which Schneider
pioneered, used specifically to provide a holistic and critical interpretation of
mainstream American middle-class life, is the recent work of Constance Perin,
an urban planner-turned-anthropologist, on contemporary suburbia. She rein-
terprets middle-class notions of "neighbor" as paradoxical structures that
work powerfully at a not fully conscious level to make Americans feel that
they  "do not belong." This leads to a rich conception of what the oft-
discussed  modern condition of alienation means in a specifically American
context, including the enforcing mechanisms of social control and the incen-
tives built into the credit, legal, and civic structures. Little headway can be
made in the sensitive and rounded analysis of alienated, affluent life-styles
without some approach that permits one to see different tones and degrees of
meaning in them, and to relate these to the financial and other mechanisms of
the political economy. This is precisely what Schneider's style of symbolic
analysis, in Perin's hands, achieves.

   4.   For example, Frith (1981), Hebdige (1979), and Willis (1978); and in
the United States,       Chappie and Garafalo (1982), Czitron (1982),     Lipsitz
(1981), and Greil Marcus (1976).
      References




Alexander, Jeffrey. 1982— 83. Theoretical logic in sociology. 4 vols. Berkeley:
   University of California Press.
Alter, Robert.1982. The Jew who didn't get away: On the possibility of an
   American Jewish culture. Judaism 31(3): 274-86.
Anderson, Perry. 1984. In the tracks of historical materialism. Chicago: Uni-
   versity of Chicago Press.
Appadurai, Arjun, ed. n.d. The social life of things: Commodities in cultural
   perspective.   New York: Cambridge University Press. Forthcoming.
Asad, Talal, ed. 1973. Anthropology and the colonial encounter. New York:
   Humanities Press.
Bahr, Donald,   J. Gregorio, D. I. Lopez, and A. Alvarez.     1974. Pinum
   shamanism and staying sickness. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Bandelier, Alfred. 1971 [1890]. The delight makers. New York: Harcourt
   Brace Jovanovich.
Barnett, Steve, and Martin Silverman. 1979. Ideology and everyday life. Ann
   Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Basso, Keith. 1979. Portraits of "the whiteman": Linguistic play and cultural
   symbols among the western Apache.                  New York: Cambridge University
   Press.
Bateson, Gregory. 1936. Naven:    A survey of the problems suggested by a
   composite picture of the culture of a New Guinea tribe drawn from three
   points of view. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Becker, Ernest. 1971. The lost science of man. New York: G. Braziller.
Benedict, Ruth. 1934. Patterns of culture. Boston:              Houghton Mifflin.
Berger, Peter. 1983.      Review of The Human Cycle by Colin Turnbull. New
   York Times Book Review, April                10, p. [3.
Berger, Peter, and Brigitte Berger. 1983. The war over the family:                    <   'aptunng
   the middle ground. New York: Doublcday.
Bernstein, Richard J. 1976.        The restructuring of social and political tht
   Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
            '983. Beyond objectivism and relativism: Science, bermeneutics, and
   praxis. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bertaux, Daniel, and         Is.ibelle   Bertaux-Wi.une.        [981.   Art1s.1n.1l   baker)    in

   France:    How   it   lives   and why   it    survives. In   The petite bourgeoisie, ed.
   Frank Bethholer and Brian Elliott. New York: St. Martin's Press.
                1984. Turing'i man: Western culture in the Computet Oge
Bolter, J. David.
   London: Duckworth.




       189
         190   •   References


Boon, James. 1982. Other tribes, other scribes: Symbolic anthropology in the
   comparative study of cultures, histories, religions and texts. New York:
   Cambridge University Press.
            1983. America: Fringe benefits, a Review of Risk and Culture by
   Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky. Raritan 2(4): 97-121.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge:         Cam-
   bridge University Press.
Bowen, Elenore Smith [Laura Bohannan]. 1964. Return to laughter. New
   York: Doubleday.
Briggs, Jean L. 1970. Never in anger: Portrait of an Eskimo family. Cam-
   bridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
Bruss, Elizabeth. 1982.. Beautiful theories: The spectacle of discourse in con-
   temporary criticism. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Casagrande, Joseph, ed. i960. In the company of man: Twenty portraits of
   anthropological informants. New York: Harper         &
                                                        Brothers.
Castaneda, Carlos. 1968. The teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui way of knowl-
   edge. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Certeau, Michel de. 1983. History: Ethics, science and fiction. In Social sci-
   ence as moral inquiry, ed. Norma Haan, Robert Bellah, Paul Rabinow, and
   William Sullivan. New York: Columbia University Press.
Chagnon, Napoleon. 1968. Yanomamo: The fierce people. New York: Holt,
   Rinehart     & Winston.
Chappie, S., and R. Garafalo. 1982. Rock       V   roll is   here to pay. Chicago:
   Nelson-Hall.
Chernoff, John. 1979. African rhythm and African sensibility: Aesthetics and
   social action in African musical idioms. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.
Clifford, James. 1981.     On ethnographic surrealism. Comparative Studies in
   Society and History 23: 539-64.
           1982. Person and myth: Maurice Leenhardt in the Melanesian world.
   Berkeley: University of California Press.
            1983a. Power and dialogue in ethnography: Marcel Griaule's initia-
   tion. In Observers observed: Essays on ethnographic fieldwork, ed. G.       W.
   Stocking, Jr. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
            1983b. On ethnographic authority. Representations 2 Spring 1983:
   132-143.
Clifford, James, and George E. Marcus, eds. 1986. Writing culture: The poet-
   ics   and the politics of ethnography. Berkeley: University of California
   Press.
Crapanzano, Vincent. 1973. The Hamadsha: A study in Moroccan ethno-
   psychiatry. Berkeley: University of California Press.
            1980a. Rite of return: Circumcision    in   Morocco. Psychoanalytic
   Study of Society, vol. 9, ed. Warner Meunsterberger and L. Bryce Boyer.
   New York: Library of Psychological Anthropology.
        191        •   References


        _.   1980b. Tuhami: Portrait of a Moroccan. Chicago: University of Chi-
   cago Press.
Czitron, Daniel. 1982. Media and the American mind. Chapel Hill: University
   of North Carolina Press.
Danto, Arthur. 1981. The transfiguration of the commonplace: A philosophy
   of art. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Dennett, Dennis. 1984.   Computer models and the mind              — view from the
                                                                        a
   East Pole. Times Literary Supplement, p. 1454.
Dolgin, Janet L., David S. Kemnitzer, and David              M. Schneider, eds. 1977.
   Symbolic Anthropology. New York: Columbia University Press.
Douglas, Mary, and Aaron Wildavsky. 1982. Risk and culture. Berkeley: Uni-
   versity of California Press.
Dowd, Maureen. 1984. A writer for the New Yorker says he created com-
   posites in reports.      New York Times, June 6, p.   1


Dumont, Jean-Paul. 1978. The headman and I. Austin: University of Texas
   Press.
Dumont, Louis. 1970. Homo hierarchicus. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.
Dwyer, Kevin. 1982. Moroccan dialogues: Anthropology in question. Bal-
   timore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer. Clarendon: Oxford University Press.
Fabian, Johannes. 1983. Time and the other: How anthropology makes its
   object. New York: Columbia University Press.
Favret-Saada, J. 1980 [1977]. Deadly words: Witchcraft in the Bocage.
   Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press.
Fay, Stephen. 1982.. Beyond greed. New York: Viking.
Feld, Steven. 1982.. Sound and sentiment: Birds, weeping, poetics, and song in
   Kaluli expression. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Fischer,Michael M. J. 1977. Interpretive anthropology. Reviews in An-
   thropology 4(4): 391-404.
        1980. Iran: From religious dispute to revolution. Cambridge, Mass.:
   Harvard University Press.
              1982a.    From interpretive to critical anthropologics. Trabalhos de
   Ciencias, Serie Anthropologia Social, no. 34.         Fundacao Universidade de
   Brasilia.
             1982b. Portrait of a mullah: The autobiography and bildungsroman
   of Aqa Najafi-Quchani. Persica 10:        223-57.
              1982c. Islam and the revolt of the petite bourgeoisie.              DoedahtS
   iM        i,:   1-125.
      .. 1983. Imam Khomeini: Four ways of understanding. In \ '<»;,
   Resurgent Islam, ed. John EspOfitO. New York: Oxford University Tress.
         1984. Toward a third world poetics: Seeing through fiction and film
   in   the Iranian culture area. KtlOU/ledgS ^n,l Society         s:       1^1   141.   Ni«
   York: IAI Press.
         192.    •   References


     _. 1986. Ethnicity and post-modern arts of memory. In Writing culture:
   The poetics and the politics of ethnography. Berkeley: University of Cal-
   ifornia Press.
Fortes, Meyer. 1973.       On the concept of the person among the Tallensi. In La
   notion de personne en Afrique noire, ed. Germaine Dieterlen et al., Collo-
   ques Internationaux du C.N.R.S., no. 544, 1971 (Editions du C.N.R.S.,
   Paris), pp.       284-319.
              1974- The first born. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 15:
   81-104.
Fortune, Reo F. 1932. The sorcerers of Dobu. London: G. Routledge          & Sons.
              1935- Manus religion: An ethnological study of the Manus natives of
   the Admiralty Islands. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society.
Foster, Hal, ed. 1983. The anti-aesthetic: Essays on postmodern culture. Port
   Townsend, Wash.: Bay Press.
Fox, Richard. 1969. From Zamindar to ballot box: Community change in a
   North Indian market town. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Freeman, Derek. 1983. Margaret Mead and Samoa: The making and unmak-
   ing of an anthropological myth. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
   Press.
Frith,   Simon. 1981. Sound effects: Youth, leisure and the politics of rock n
   roll.      New York: Pantheon.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. 1975. Truth and method. New York: Seabury Press.
Gaines, Atwood, and Robert Hahn, eds. 1982. Physicians of Western medi-
   cine: Five cultural studies. Special Issue of Culture, Medicine, and Psychia-
   try 6(3).
Gardner, Howard. 1983. Frames of mind: The theory of multiple                 intel-

   ligences. New York: Basic Books.
Geertz, Clifford. 1963. Peddlers and princes: Social development and eco-
   nomic change in two Indonesian towns. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.

        1965. The social history of an Indonesian town. Cambridge, Mass.:
   Harvard University Press.
       1973a- The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
        1973b. Person, time, and conduct in Bali. In The interpretation of
   cultures.     New York: Basic Books.
              1973c. Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In
   The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
      .. 1973d. Deep play: Notes on the Balinese cockfight. In The interpreta-


   tion of cultures.     New York: Basic Books.
              1980a. Negara: The theater state in nineteenth century Bali. Prince-
   ton: Princeton University Press.
              1980b. Blurred genres. American Scholar 49: 165—79.
         ..   1984. Anti-anti relativism. American Anthropologist 86(2): 263—77.
Geertz, Clifford, Hildred Geertz, and Lawrence Rosen. 1979. Meaning and
          193   *   References


   order in Moroccan society: Three essays in cultural analysis. New York:
   Cambridge University Press.
Gerholm, Tomas, and Ulf Hannerz, eds. 1982. The shaping of national an-
   thropologies. Special Issue of Ethnos. Etnografiska Museet, Stockholm.
Giddens, Anthony. 1976. New rules of sociological method. New York: Basic
   Books.
            1979- Central problems in social theory: Action, structure and contra-
   diction in social analysis. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gilligan, Carol. 1982. In a different voice: Psychological theory and women's
   development. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Glassie, Henry. 1982. Passing the time in Ballymenone: Culture and history of
   an Ulster community. Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press.
Gleick, James. 1984. Solving the mathematical riddle of chaos.                  New York
   Times Magazine, June 10, pp. 30-32.
Gluckman, Max, ed. 1964. Closed systems and open minds: The limits of
   naivety in social anthropology. Chicago: Aldine.
Golde, Peggy, ed. 1970.      Women in the field: Anthropological experiences.
   Chicago: Aldine.
Gouldner, Alvin W. 1970. The coming crisis of Western sociology. New York:
   Basic Books.
Gray, John N. 1984. Lamb auctions on the borders. European journal of
   Sociology 24: 54—82.
Grindal, Bruce T. 1983. Into the heart of Sisala experience: Witnessing death
   divination. Journal of Anthropological Research ^9: 60-80.
Handelman, Susan A. 1982. The slayers of Moses. Albany: State Universit) o!
   New York Press.
Handler, Richard. 1983. The dainty and the hungry man: Literature and an-
   thropology in the work of Edward Sapir. In Observers observed: Essays on
   ethnographic fieldwork, ed. G. W. Stocking, Jr. Madison: Universit)                   ol
   Wisconsin Press, pp. 201-31.
Harris, Marvin. 1981. America note:       I   he anthropology of a     (   hanging culture.
   New York: Simon and Schuster.
Haskell, Thomas. 1977. The emergence of professional social science. Ui
   bana: University oi Illinois Press.
Hatch, Elvm. 198;. Culture and morality.           New   York:   c   olumbia University
   Press.
Hebdige, Dick. [979. Subculture: The meaning of style. London: Methuen.
Henry, Jules. iyM. Culture against man. Sew York: Random Mouse-.
Hirsch, Fred. 1976. The social limits to growth. ( ambridge, Mass.: Harvard
   University Press.
Mollis,    Martin, and Steven hikes, nls.        1981. Rationality and Relath
   i ambridge, Mass.:      MM
                          Press.
Huntington, Richard, and Peter Metcalf 1979. Celebrations of death The
   anthropology of mortuary rituaL New York: ( ambridge Universit) Press,
         194   *   References


Hymes, Dell. 1981. "In vain I tried to tell you": Essays in Native American
   ethnopoetics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hymes,      Dell, ed.   1969. Reinventing anthropology.    New York: Pantheon
   Books.
Inden, Ronald B., and Ralph W. Nicholas. 1977. Kinship in Bengali culture.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jackson, Michael. 1982. Allegories of the wilderness: Ethics and ambiguity in
   Kuranko narratives. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Jameson, Fredric. 1984. Postmodernism, or the cultural logic of late cap-
   italism.    New Left Review 146: 53-93.
Jarvie, I. C. 1964. Revolution in anthropology.   New York: Humanities Press.
Jennings, Humphrey, and Charles Madge, eds. 1937. May the twelfth: Mass-
   observation day-surveys 1937 by over two hundred observers. London:
   Faber    & Faber.
Karp, Ivan. 1980. Beer drinking and social experience in an African society. In
   Explorations in African systems of thought, ed. I. Karp and C. S. Bird.
   Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Karp, Ivan, and Martha B. Kendall. 1982. Reflexivity in field work. In Ex-
   plaining human behavior, ed. Paul F. Secord. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage
   Publications.
Keil, Charles.     1979. Tiv Song. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kirkpatrick, John. 1983.       The marquesan notion of the person. Ann Arbor:
   UMI Research Press.
Kracke, Waud. 1978. Force and persuasion: Leadership in an Amazonian so-
   ciety. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kuhn, Thomas. 1962. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: Univer-
   sity of Chicago Press.

Lacan, Jacques. 1977. Ecrits. New York: Norton.
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1979. Laboratory life: The social con-
   struction of scientific facts. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications.
Levi-Strauss, Claude. 1963. Structural anthropology.      New York: Basic Books.
           1966 [1962]. The savage mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
           1969a [1949]. The elementary structures of kinship. Boston: Beacon
   Press.
            1969b [1964]. The raw and the cooked. New York: Harper 8c Row.
           1973 [1966]. From honey to ashes. New York: Harper 8c Row.
           1974 [1 95 5]- Tristes tropiques. New York: Atheneum.
            1978 [1968]. The origin of table manners. New York: Harper &c Row.
            1981 [1971]. The naked man. New York: Harper &c Row.
Levy, Robert I. 1973. Tahitians: Mind and experience in the Society Islands.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lewis, Oscar. 1961. Children of Sanchez: Autobiography of a Mexican fami-
   ly.   New York: Random House.
            1966. La vida: A Puerto Rican family in the culture of poverty    — San
   Juan and New York. New York: Random House.
       195       *   References


Lipsitz,   George. 1981. Class and culture in Cold War America. New York:
   Praeger.
Livingston, Debra. 1982.          'Round and 'round the bramble bush: From legal
   realism to critical legal scholarship.     Harvard Law Review 95: 1670-76.
Luhmann, Niklas. 1984. Soziale Systeme: Grundrisse einer allegemeinen The-
   orie. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Lyotard, Jean-Francois. 1984 [1979]. The postmodern condition: A report on
   knowledge. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
MacCannell, Dean, and Juliet Flower MacCannell. 1982. The time of the sign:
   A semiotic interpretation of modern culture. Bloomington: Indiana Univer-
   sity Press.

Maclntyre, Alisdair. 1981. After virtue:                 A study in moral theory. Notre
   Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Majnep, Ian, and Ralph Bulmer. 1977. Birds of my Kalam country. Auckland:
   Oxford University Press.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1922. Argonauts of the Western Pacific. New York:
   Dutton.
           1967. A diary in the strict sense of the term. New York: Harcourt,
  Brace     & World.
Marcus, George E. 1980. Law in the development of dynastic families among
  American business elites: The domestication of capital and the capitaliza-
  tion of family. Law      &
                          Society Review 14:859-903.
         1983. The fiduciary role in American family dynasties and their in-
  stitutional legacy: From the law of trust to trust in the Establishment. In
  Elites: Ethnographic Issues, ed. G. E. Marcus. Albuquerque: University of
  New Mexico Press.
           1985. A timely rereading of Naven: Gregory Bateson as oracular es-
  sayist.   Representations, Fall, no.           1 2..



Marcus, George E., and Dick Cushman. 1982. Ethnographies as texts. Annual
   Review of Anthropology 11: 25-69.
Marcus, Greil. 1976. Mystery train. New York: Dutton.
Marx, Leo. 1964. The machine in the garden: Technology and the pastoral
   ideal in America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Massignon, Louis. 1982. The passion of al-Hattaj: Mystit and martyr of Is-
   lam. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mauss, Marcel. 1967 [1925]. The gift: Forms and functions 0/ exchange in
   archaic societies. New York: Norton.
            1968 [iy^8|. A category oi the human spun                (.1   translation by   I




   Krader of "Une categoric de IVsprit huinain: a notion de personm. ceUl
                                                              I



   de 'moi'") Psychoanafytu Review ss: 4s "-90.
Mayburv Lewi*, David H.            I'.   1965.      The savage and the innocent, London:
   Evans.
Mead, Margaret [949 [1918]. Coming of Age in Samoa. Nen York Mentoi
   Hooks.
      196        •   References


Meeker, Michael. 1979. Literature and violence in North Arabia. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Miner, Horace.   1956. Body ritual among the Nacirema. American An-
  thropologist 58(3): 503-07.
Mintz, Sidney, i960. Worker in the cane: A Puerto Rican life history. New
   Haven: Yale University Press.
Nash, June. 1979. We eat the mines and the mines eat us: Dependency and
   exploitation in Bolivian tin mines. New York: Columbia University Press.
Obeyesekere, Gananath. 198 1. Medusa's hair: An essay on personal symbols
  and religious experience. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
       1983. The cult of the goddess Patini. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.
Ortner, Sherry B.        1984. Theory   in   anthropology since the   sixties.   Com-
  parative Studies in Society and History 26: 126-66.
Perin, Constance. 1977. Everything in its place: Social order and land use in
   America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Piore, Michael J.,      and Charles F. Sabel. 1984. The second industrial divide.
   New York: Basic Books.
Price, Richard.      1983. First-time: The historical vision of an Afro- American
  people. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rabinow, Paul. 1977. Reflections on fieldwork in Morocco. Berkeley: Univer-
   sity of California Press.

Riesman, Paul. 1977. Freedom in Fulani social life: An introspective ethnogra-
   phy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rorty, Richard. 1979. Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton: Prince-
   ton University Press.
Rosaldo, Michelle Z. 1980. Knowledge and passion: Ilongot notions of self
   and social life. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rosaldo, Renato. 1980. Ilongot headhunting, iB8^-i<)j^: A study in society
   and history. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Rose, Dan. 198Z. Occasions and forms of anthropological experience. In A
   crack in the mirror: Reflexive perspectives in anthropology, ed. Jay Ruby.
   Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
        1983. In search of experience: The anthropological poetics of Stanley
   Diamond. American Anthropologist 8$(z): 345-55.
Rothenberg, Jerome, and Diane Rothenberg. 1983. Symposium of the whole:
   A range of discourse toward an ethnopoetics. Berkeley: University of Cal-
   ifornia Press.
Rothenberg, Randall. 1984. The neoliberals: Creating the new American pol-
   itics.   New York: Simon 6c Schuster.
Sabel, Charles F. 198Z. Work and politics: The division of labor in industry.
   New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sahlins, Marshall. 1976. Culture and practical reason. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press.
            1   98 1. Historical metaphors and mythical realities: Structure in the
         197      *        References


   early history of the Sandwich Islands kingdom. Ann Arbor: University of
   Michigan Press.
Said, Edward. 1979. Orientalism.                        New York: Random House.
Schieffelin, Edward L. 1976.                    The sorrow of the lonely and the burning of the
   dancers. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Schneider, David. 1968. American kinship:                              A cultural account. Englewood
   Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Schneider, Jane, and Peter Schneider. 1976. Culture and political economy in
   Western Sicily. New York: Academic Press.
Shankman, Paul. 1984. The thick and the thin: On the interpretive theoretical
   program of Clifford Geertz. Current Anthropology 25(3): 261—80.
Shore, Bradd. 1982. Sala'ilua: A Samoan mystery. New York: Columbia Uni-
   versity Press.
Shostak, Majorie.                  1981. Nisa: The             life   and words of a IKung woman.
   Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Sims,    Norman, ed. 1984. The literary journalists. New York:                                   Ballantine
   Books.
Smith, Carol. 1978. Beyond dependency theory: National and regional pat-
   terns ofunderdevleopment                        in   Guatemala. American Ethnologist               5(2):
   574-617.
              1984. Local history in global context: Social and economic transitions
   in    Western Guatemala. Comparative Studies in Society and History 26(2):
   193-228.
         .,   ed. 1976. Regional analysis. 2 vols.                     New York: Academic Press.
Smith, Raymond T., and David M. Schneider. 1973. Class differences and sex
   roles in      American kinship and family structure. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
   Prentice-Hall.
Sperber, Dan. 1982. Ethnographic* interpretative et anthropologic theorique.
   In Le savior des anthropologues. Paris:                            Hermann.
Stern, J. P. 1973.           On realism. New York: Routledge & Kcgan Paul.
Stollcr, Paul.        19X4. Eye, mind and word in anthropology. L'Homme 24: 91-
    114.
Stott,William. 197^. Documentary expression and thirties America.                                     New
   York: Oxford University Press.
Tambiah, Stanley J. 1976. World conqueror and world renouncer. Nen York:
   Cambridge University Press.
Taussig, Michael. 1980. I he devil and ontmodity fetishism »' South America.
                                                           i



   Chapel Hill: University of North ( arolina Press.
Taylor, Charles. [979. Interpretation and the sciences of man. In Interpretive
   social m ;<•••,  reader, ed Paul Rabino* and William M. Sullh an. Kcrkc
                       -     \


   Icy: Unrversirj           >>\   (   alifbrnia Press.
Taylor, J.      M.    i<y^ i >.    Eva Peron. Mytht <-/ a wo an           m   ,   i   hicago: Universal) "i
   (    hi< ago Press.

Icilloik, Dennis.             19X1..      I   he Spoken    WOfd ami the work <>f interpretation
   Philadelphia: University <»i Pennsylvania Press.
      198         •    References


Tedlock, Dennis, trans. 1985. The Popol Vuh. New York: Simon            & Schuster.
Thurow, Lester. 1983. Dangerous currents: The state of economics. New
   York: Random House.
Todorov, Tzvetan. 1984 [1982]. The conquest of America. New York:
   Harper        &
               Row.
Travers, Jeffrey, and Stanley Milgram. 1969. An experimental study of the
   small world problem. Sociometry 32(4): 443—75.
Turkle, Sherry. 1984. The second self: Computers and the human spirit. New
   York: Basic Books.
Turnbull, Colin. 1983. The human cycle. New York: Simon            & Schuster.
Turner, Victor. 1957. Schism and continuity in an African society: A study of
   Ndembu village life. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
       i960. Muchona the hornet, interpreter of religion. In In the company
   of man: Twenty portraits of anthropological informants. New York:
   Harper &c Brothers.
Tyler, Stephen. 1969. Cognitive anthropology. New York: Holt, Rinehart            &
   Winston.
         1 98 1. Words for deeds and the doctrine of the secret world. In Papers

  from the parasession on language and behavior, Chicago Linguistic Soci-
  ety. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

      .. 1984. The poetic turn in post-modern anthropology: The poetry of
  Paul Friedrich. American Anthropologist 6(2): 328—36.
          1986. Post-modern ethnography: From document of the occult to
  occult document. In Writing Culture: The poetics and politics of ethnogra-
  phy, ed. James Clifford and George E. Marcus. Berkeley: University of
   California Press.
               n.d. Ethnography, intertextuality, and the end of description. Ameri-
   can Journal of Semiotics. Forthcoming.
          ..   n.d.   Post-modern anthropology. Publication of the Washington An-
   thropological Society, ed. Phyllis Chock. Forthcoming.
Ungar, Roberto M. 1976. Law and modern social theory. New York: Free
   Press.

               1984. Passion: An essay on personality. New York: Free Press.
Vidich, Arthur J. 1952. The political impact of colonial administration. PhD
   dissertation, Harvard University.
Wallace, Anthony. 1969. The death and rebirth of the Seneca.            New York:
   Random House.
               1978. Rockdale: The growth of an American village in the early in-
   dustrial revolution.        New York: Knopf.
Wallerstein, Immanuel.           1974. The modern world-system: Capitalist agri-
   culture and the origins of the European world-economy in the sixteenth
   century. New York: Academic Press.
Walzer, Michael. 1983. Spheres of justice: A defense of pluralism and equal-
   ity.    New York: Basic Books.
       199      •   References


Wax, Rosalie. 1971. Doing fieldwork: Warnings and advice. Chicago: Uni-
   versity of Chicago Press.
Weatherford, J. Maclver. 198 1. Tribes on the hill. New York: Rawson, Wade.
Webster, Stephen. 1982. Dialogue and fiction in ethnographic truth. Dialec-
   tical Anthropology 7:     91-114.
          1983. Ethnography as storytelling. Dialectical Anthropology 8: 185—
   206.
White, Hayden V. 1973. Metahistory: The historical imagination in nine-
   teenth century Europe. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Williams, Raymond. 1973. The country and the city. New York: Oxford Uni-
   versity Press.
          1977- Marxism and literature. London: Oxford University Press.
          1981a. Culture. Glasgow: Fontana Books.
          1981b. Politics and letters: Interviews with New Left Review. Lon-
   don: New Left Editions, Verso.
Willis, Paul.   1978. Profane culture. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
         1981 [1977]. Learning to labour: How working class kids get work-
   ing class jobs. New York: Columbia University Press.
Wilson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The    new synthesis. Cambridge, Mass.:
   Harvard University Press.
Wolf, Eric. 1982. Europe and the people without history. Berkeley: University
   of California Press.
Wolfe, Tom, and E. W. Johnson, eds. 1973. The new journalism. New York:
   Harper &: Row.
           Index




Adams, Henry, 49, 171                                                                    Briggs, Jean, 69
Adorno, Theodor, 1 19-22                                                                 Buddhists, 53-54, 176
Aesthetics, 7, 63-64, 66, 167. See also                                                  Bureaucracy: academic, 18; American re-
   Art                                                                                         actions against, 1 18, 148; statistical
Agee, James, 125                                                                               methods of, 184
Agriculture, 88-89,                                 I 3   >   M3~44                      Burgess, Ernest,                  1           26
Alter, Robert,               174
Althusser, Louis,                         1                                              Caillois, Roger, 1 24


Amerindians (Native Americans): Ama-                                                     Capitalism, 80, 81, 85, 87, 88, 89, 92,
   zonia, 36, 51-53, 124; North                                                             109, 156, 169
   America, 27, 36, 71, 128, 157, 176                                                    Castenada, Carlos, 40, 69
Anderson, Perry, 1                                                                       Chan, Jeffrey Paul, 176
Arendt, Hannah, 174                                                                      Chin, Frank, -6             1




Arlen, Michael,                   173-74                                                 China, 48
Art, 7, 121, 137. See also Aesthetics;                                                   Chinese- Americans, 173
   Poetics                                                                               Columbian peasants, 88-90, 185
Australian aborigines, 138                                                               Commodity fetishism,     1, 87, 88, 92                          1




Aztecs, 105-6                                                                            Crapanzano, Vincent, S4, 57, 61—62,
                                                                                            71-73, 108, iS-,
Balinese, 43, 47, 50, 55, 65,                                       145-46               Class analysis, -*, 81-82, B3, B8, B9,
Bandalier, Adolph, 27                                                                        148, 188
Barthes, Roland, 114, 124                                                                Clifford, James, 24, 71, 1:;,                                                       1   S   1




Basso, Keith, 157                                                                        Clothing,  44        1




Bataille, Georges, 123,                                   124                            Cognitive anthropology, ::. z.8, 19, 180
Bateson, Gregory, ix, 40, 41, 182                                                        Colonialism, 24, 14, 49, B4, 91, 105
Bedouin (Rwala), 107-8                                                                   Comparative method, 23, 14, 91, 128,
Bell, Daniel, 114, 117                                                                          IS", IS8-S9, 160-62, 180
Bellow, Saul, 174                                                                        (   00k,   (    aptain lames, 103
Benedict, Ruth, 27, 130                                                                  Copeland, Aaron,                                   1   26
Beniamin, Walter, 10, 119, 121, 122,                                                     (   ritical     I   e^.il       Studies, 7,                      S4         1



    124                                                                                  (   ritical     theory. See                            I   rankfurt School
Berger, Peter, 161,                            1    70                                   Croce, Benedetto,                                  1
                                                                                                                                                4
Bernstein, Richard, 15, 117                                                              Culinarj codes,                    1          4 ^-44
Bertaux-Wiame, Daniel and K.ibelle, 184                                                  (   ultur.il        ecology, t6,                            ?       s


Biographies. Se*                      1       ifc    histories                           Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry,                                                              1   s 4


Biological ideology, 149, 151, 172                                                       (   ulture Studies Group                                                Birmingham), 153
Bloom,         I   l.trold,       1       -4                                             (   ushing, Frank                 1       1.   million, 27

Boas, Franz, ix, 27, 71,                                  1   27,   1   29,    1   30,
    l
        4 1,       1   s«. 1^9, 18ft, iXX                                                Derrul.i, facques,                             1       24
Bohannan,    aura, \ \, 69
                         I                                                               I   dialogue, 29, y                   .        \\.          J       7,          6 -. 68, 69,
                                                                                                107, 109, 1^4, l8l,                                                  s ''
Bolivian miners, XX -90                                                                                                                                          '




Bourdieu, Pierre,                         1
                                               s,    84, 8s                              Diamond, Stank
Bowen,         l      Bohannan,
                       linore. See                                       l    sura       I   )iltlu \,       Wilhelm, ?o
I'r.uulcl, Pernand, 80                                                                   Discourse analysis, 8, 46                                                       47,54,68             69,
Breton, Andre,                1       2 \                                                                    187                   I




           zoi
                   Index


Documentary realism, n, 27, 58, 75,        Fromm, Erich, 119
   125-28, 132, 184, 186                   Functionalism, 16, 19, 20, 25, 27, 41,
Dogon, 124, 181                               42, 55, 56, 187
Douglas, Mary, in, 141, 142, 146-49
Drama, social, 57, 64-67                   Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 30, 31
Dumont, Jean-Paul, 34, 36, 69, 181         Gaines, Atwood, 154
Dumont, Louis, 45                          Geertz, Clifford, 1, 7, 14, 16, 28, 29, 30,
Durkheim, Emile, 10, 13, 17, 27, 50, 61       47, 50, 65, 84, 141, 142, 145-46,
Dwyer, Kevin, 69-70                           152, 154, 155, 181, 185
                                           Gender, 46, 51, 58, 60, 62, 104, 135,
Ecology, 130, 142, 147-48. See also Cul-       144
   tural ecology                           Giddens, Anthony, 7, 15
Economics, 7, 79. See also Political       Glassie, Henry, 163
   economy                                 Gluckman, Max, 56, 84, 91, 139, 179
Eliade, Mircea, 38                         Godelier, Maurice, 1
Emic/etic, 180                             Goffman, Erving, 155
England, 81-82, 132—33, 147, 185, 187      Golden, Marita, 173
Ethics and justice, 8, 46, 167, 180. See   Goody, Jack, 102
   also Moralities                         Gordon, Robert, 154
Ethics Committee of the American An-       Gouldner, Alvin, 15
   thropological Association, 35           Graham, Martha, 126
Ethnicity, 155, 173—77                     Greece, 1, 2, 45, 48, 65
Ethnoscience, 22, 180                      Griaule, Marcel, 124, 181
Evans, Walker, 125
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., ix, 40, 56, 57,    Hahn, Robert, 155
    130, 181                               Harris, Marvin,      in
Evolution, 10, 17, 23, 27, 46, 128, 130    Hawaii, 102-4
Exchange: communication model, 31;         Hermeneutics, 25, 30, 31
   Kaluli, 62; mechanism of change, 144    Historical consciousness, 78, 96, 98-
Exotic, x, 18, 38, 131, 133-36                 102, 105-6, 108—9
Experimental, ix, x, 40—44                 Historical context, 21, 31, 39, 78, 95—
                                               108, 181
Fabian, Johannes, 85, 96-97                Historiography, 12-14, 9^
Family. See Kinship                        Holism, 22—23, 2 5, ^o, 90, 91, 95, 132,
Favret-Saada, Jeanne, 70, 109                 133, 188
Fay, Stephen, 92                           Horkheimer, Max, 119—22
Feld, Steven, 63-65, 183                   Horwitz, Morton, 154
Feminism, 58, 135. See also Gender         Hunt, George, 71
Fiction, ethnographic, 27, 74-75           Huntington, Richard, 157
Fieldwork, 21, 22, 25, 29, 33-34, 37,      Hymes, Dell, 74
    56, 97, 181
Film, ethnographic, 75                     Ilongot, 43, 59-61, 98-101, 108
Fischer, Michael, 74, 88, 173,   182       Incas,   106
Fortes, Meyer, 36, 171                     India, 45, 46, 48,   186
Fortune, Reo, 181                          Individualism, 45, 118. See also
Fox, Richard, 185                             Personhood
France, 70, 109, 122-25, z $4              Individualism, methodological, 45—46
Frankfurt School, 25, 35, 117, 119-22,     Industrialization, 10, 82, 83, 120, 148,
   113. 115                                   184
Frazer, Sir James, 13, 17, 128             Interpretive anthropology, x, 16, 25-27,
Freeman, Derek, 3, 159                        *9-33> 34,39,43. 84-90
Freud, Sigmund, 46, 47, 48, 50, 53, 54,    Irony,   13-15,45
   66, 113, 114, 120                       Islamic world, 2, 39, 45, 46, 88
Friedrich, Paul, 74                        Italy, third zone,   83
            203               •   Index


Jackson, Michael, 74                                                        Massignon, Louis, 175
Japan, 48, 117                                                              Mass-Observation project, 187
Journalism, 183-84                                                          Mauss, Marcel, 46, 62, 123, 124, 157
Justice, 8,      184                                                        Maya, 1, 106
                                                                            Maybury-Lewis, David, 33
Kaluli, 62, 183                                                             Mead, George Herbert, 50
Kennedy, Duncan, 154                                                        Mead, Margaret, 3, 56, 114, 127, 130,
Kingston, Maxine Hong, 173                                                     138, 158-59, 160, 161
Kinship, 55, 56, 58, 120, 149-52, 169-                                      Medicine, 130, 137, 147, 154-55
   73                                                                       Meeker, Michael, 107
Kirchheimer, Otto, 119                                                      Metraux, Alfred, 124
Korsch, Karl, 119                                                           Micronesia, 181
Krache, Waude, 49, 51—53                                                    Middle class, American, 143-44, '49 -
Kroeber, Alfred, 36                                                             52, 153-54, 157, 158, 169-73, 188
!Kung bushmen, 57-59, 108                                                   Milgram, Stanley, 92
                                                                            Miner, Horace, 140
Lacan, Jacques, 30, 31, 175                                                 Mingus, Charles, 174
Lange, Dorothea, 125                                                        Minrz, Sidney, 35, 182
Lasch, Christopher, 114, 117                                                Modernist texts, 67-73, **>i
Latour, Bruno, 140, 154                                                     Moore, Sally Falk, 154
Law, 7, 147, 154                                                            Moralities, 8, 32, 167, 172
Leacock, Eleanor, 84                                                        Morgan, Louis Henry, 17
Leenhardt, Maurice, 71                                                      Morocco, 36, 61, 71, 73, 185
Leiris, Michel, 123, 124                                                    Murdock, George Peter, 56
Lele,   147                                                                 Musil, Robert, 10
Levinas, Emanuel, 174
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 28, 34, 176                                           Nader, Laura, 154
Levy, Robert, 49-51, 65, 108                                                Nash, June, 35, 84, 88, 89, 90, 94
Levy-Bruhl, Lucien, 123, 124                                                Neumann, Franz,                     1   19
Lewis, Oscar, i8z                                                           Neusner, Jacob, 174
Liberalism, 10, 20, 32, 38, 121                                             New Guinea, 28, 41, 62-64
Life cycle, 46,               59-61                                         Nietzsche, Fnednch, 14,                                    in, 114
Life histories,               57-59, 172, 182-83
Linguistics, 5, 25, 28                                                      Obeysekere, Gannanath, 49. Jl, S3, 108
Lowenthal, Leo, 1 19                                                        Ong, Walter, 102
Lyotard, Jean-Francois, 8                                                   Oraliry, 68, 74, 99, 100-102, 106


MacLeish, Archibald, 125                                                    Paradigm, 179
McKcnzie, Robert, 126                                                       Park, Robert, 126, [86
Malamud, Bernard, 174                                                       Parsons, Elsie Clew, ^o                      1


Malcolm X, 176                                                              Parsons,    I   alcott,        i
                                                                                                               »,    1   <
                                                                                                                             \ 11,                 12,    14,2s,
M.ilmowski, Bronislaw, ix,                     19, 17, ^4,                      28, 38,      1   22,   1   50,               180
   40, 55, 56, 57, 61,               1   30, [43, 1-4,                      Perm, c onstance,                  1
                                                                                                                    B8
   187-88                                                                   Personhood, 44-^, s                          1     1   ,       1       s s

Marcus, George, 13, Z4, 169, 181, 182                                       Phenomenology, 30
Marcusc, Herbert, 119, 121                                                  Plato, 68
Markets, 79, 88-89, 92, 121, 122, 144,                                      Poetics, ethnographic, ^\                                          ^4. Kaluli,
   149,     1   S s                                                              8<
Marxism, 11,12,13, '4. lf*. JO, )5, <8,                                     Polanyi, Karl, 18s
   78, 80, 82, 84, 8s, 8-, 88, 91,                    1   14.               Political   economy, <s, \K. 44, 78,
   122,     I
                ?2-U, 144                                                       H4H, 108
Marx, Karl, 10, 87, in,                   1
                                              s'>                           Politics, 79,        144, Balinese,  (\   46;
Marx, c),
        l             1
                          1
                                                                                kw.il.i,    1       .1 s  inn nik lear, «•"
Matt culture 100617,35, u8, 1 20-22,                            1
                                                                    s   <      Mi.1nmc111.il,          1       4<.           4').      1       1   ,S    oentrisi vt
          204        Index


Politics (continued)                          Schiefflin, Edward, 62-63
   participatory, 148; U.S. regional          Schneider, David M., 28, 47, 48, 87,
   elites,   156                                 141, M9-53> 154. i55» 188
Pollack, Friedrich, 119                       Scholem, Gershom, 174, 175
Polyphonic texts, 71, 182                     Schutz, Alfred, 47
Positivism, x, 22, 43, 179                    Science, viii, 26, 78, 130, 154, 179, 180;
Postmodernism, vii, 7, 8, 24                        scientific goals of anthropology, vii,
Price,   Richard, 101-2                             5,   24, 32; natural science of Society,
Primitive, 8, 17, 19, 38, 131,       133-36         vii,  11, 26; science of Man, 17, 18,
Project Camelot, 35                                 19, 22; social science, 16, 18, 20, 22,
Psychodynamic texts, 48-54, 72, 120-              26—27, 43> 180
                                              Self. See Personhood

                                              Semiotics, 25, 98, 105, 114, 144, 145
Rabinow, Paul, 34, 36, 69                     Sennett, Richard, 114, 117
Racism, 32, 38, 45, 128, 130, 158, 176        Shore, Brad, 64-66
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R., 27, 55, 179, 186      Shostak, Margorie, 57-59, 73, 108
Rationality, 17, 20, 23,129—30; prac-         Smith, Raymond T., 188
   tical reason, 142-43; causality, risk,     Solzhenitsyn, Alexander, 91
    M7                                        Spencer, Herbert, 10
Realism, 14, 23, 24, 25, 41, 54ft, 75,        Sri   Lanka, 53-54, 108, 176
   77-78                                      Stone, Katherine, 154
Reciprocity of perspectives, 1, 31, 67, 86,   Stott, William,     125—26
    163                                       Structuralism, 12, 16, 25, 28, 29, 68, 98,
Redfield, Robert,        186                        104-5, 106-7, M3
Regionalism, 93-94, 156, 169                  Surrealism, 68, 69, 72, 119, 122—25, z 37
Relativism, 19, 20, 32, 37, 129, 138,         Symbolic anthropology, 28-29, 87, 141,
    180, 184                                     188
Rhodes-Livingstone Institute, 91, 179
             114
Rieff, Philip,                                Tahitians, 49-51, 65
Riesman, David, 114, 118                      Talensi, 171
Riesman, Paul, 69                             Tambiah, Stanley J., 176
Ritual, 45, 57, 61-63, 89                     Taussig, Michael, 88-89, 9°> 94» *57>
Rivet, Paul, 123,    124                            185
Riviere, Georges-Henri,        124            Taylor, Charles, 117
Rorty, Richard, 8, 117                        Taylor, Julie M., 182
Rosaldo, Michelle, 59-61                      Tedlock, Dennis, 74
Rosaldo, Renato, 98—101, 102                  Text, metaphor of, 26, 29
Rose, Dan, 74                                 Thai Affair, 34
Rothenberg, Jerome and Dianne, 74             Todas, 36-37
Rwala, 107-8                                  Todorov, Tzvetan, 98, 104-7, 176
Ryle, Gilbert, 50                             Tonga, 117, 169, 171, 172
                                              Translation, 25, 31, 188
Sabel, Charles, 83, 88                        Trobriands, 36, 55, 151
Sahlins, Marshall, 84, 102, 104, 141,         Trubek, David, 154
    142-45, 146, 150, 152, 154, 187-88        Turnbull, Colin, 160
Said, Edward, 1, 2, 97                        Turner, Victor, 56, 57, 61, 71, 175
Salinas, Raul,     176                        Tyler, Stephen, 68, 74, 102
Salvage motif, 24, 167                        Tylor, Sir E. B., 17
Samoa, 3, 36, 43, 64-66, 138, 158-59
Sapir, Edward, 74, 130                        Universals, 8, 20
Saramaka, 101-2
Satire, 138, 140                              Value free, 20, 180
Saudi Arabia, 92                              Values, 105, 167, 180
Schaeffner, Andre, 124                        Van Gennep, Arnold, 61
       zos       Index


Veblen, Thornstein, in, 140              Whyte, William F., 126
Vidich, Arthur, 181                      Wildavsky, Aaron, in, 146-49
Vizenor, Gerald, 176                     Williams, Raymond, 77, 78, 90, 94,   1   14.
                                            153
Wallace, Anthony F. C, 96                Willis, Paul, 81-82, 88, 93, 109, 132,
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 80, 81               170, 185
Walzer, Michael, 184                     Wilson, Godfrey, 84
Warner, William Lloyd, 126, 127, 138     Wirth, Louis, 126
Weber, Max, 10, 25, 30, 47, 1 13, 114,   Witchcraft, 55, 70, 10-, 14-
   180                                   Wittfogel, Karl, 119
Weinreich, Max, 176                      Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 10
Weinreich, Uriel, 176                    Wolf, Eric, 35,84,85
Welch, James, 176                        Woolgar, Stephen, 140,   1   ^4
White, Hayden, 12-13                     World system, 80-82, 85
"A remarkable and very important book. It considers the present state
of anthropology, situating that state in its recent history
                                                            and in relation
to other social sciences— economics, politics, sociology,
                                                            history— and,
most importantly, to the major    features   of the social and intellectual

scene—  art, literature, literary criticism, cultural criticism,
                                                                 relativism,

and the various states of Zeitgeist from the 1900s through today. It is
thus not merely a book about anthropology but is in the
                                                               widest sense
about the major features of the   intellectual climate of today."

— David Schneider, University of California, Santa Cruz
Anthropology as Cultural Critique takes the pulse of contemporary
social science as it adapts its theories and techniques to
                                                           an increasingly
complex social reality. Using cultural anthropology    as an exemplar par
excellence for analyzing debates   that reverberate throughout the human

sciences, George E. Marcus and Michael M. J. Fischer look
                                                                closely at its
                                                           direction,
past accomplishments, its current predicaments, its future
and the insights it has to offer other fields of study.
   Marcus and Fischer argue that, since the 1960s, anthropology has
been in a phase of experimental ethnographic writing that has brought
renewed attention to anthropology's critical function, which is to use
knowledge of other cultures to examine the unconscious assumptions
of our own. They compare the continuing experimentation with de-
scriptive techniques to a similar moment in the 1920s and
                                                                 1930s, not-
ing that both eras were marked by hyperawareness of the limitations of
traditional theories of society, of culture, and of the nature of reality in
general. They show ethnography, the descriptive foundation for an-
thropological theory, as a crucible for theoretical play, reconceptualiza-
tion, and rebuilding social theory; and they argue against
                                                                 those who
would precipitously bring the current   experimental  era  to a close.

   In surveying the developments of anthropological writing as it has
 moved toward cultural critique, the authors sweep across the whole
 history of twentieth-century anthropology, from British social an-
 thropology, functionalism, and naive realism through structuralism,
 interpretive and psychoanalytic anthropology to more literary eth-
 nography and finally to cultural critique. The result is a work that is
 extraordinarily useful and provocative for scholars concerned with a
 critical approach to social science, art, literature, and history, as
                                                                       well as

 anthropology.


 George E. Marcus is professor of anthropology at Rice University.
 He is coeditor of Writing Culture and editor of the journal Cultural
 Anthropology.
 MICHAEL M. J. FlSCHFR, professor of anthropology and of science
 and technology studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
 is the author of Iran: From Religious Dispute to Revolution.



                                                          ISBN D-22b-5ai44T-2
                                                                                 90000>


                                                        9 780226"50449
