www.routledge.com
Re-Constructing Archaeology


How should we view the archaeological past? How can we come to understand it and
what procedures are suitable for constructing archaeological knowledge? What indeed
is the purpose of archaeology? Re-Constructing Archaeology tackles all these issues with
wit and vigour. It aims to challenge the disciplinary practices of both traditional and
'new' archaeology and to present a radical alternative - a critically self-conscious archae-
ology aware of itself as practice in the present, and equally a social archaeology that
appreciates artifacts not merely as objects of analysis but as part of a social world of past
and present that is charged with meaning.

Re-Constructing Archaeology ranges widely across the social and philosophical literature,
from philosophy of science to hermeneutics, structuralism and post-structuralism and
Marxism. But its concerns are not simply theoretical. The book is fundamentally
concerned with overcoming the split between theoretical argument and practical
research, be it excavation, artifact analysis or the relationship between professional
archaeologists and the public.

When Re-Constructing Archaeology was first published, it provoked a storm of controversy
on both sides of the Atlantic. The second edition is brought up to date with a new
preface and appendix, in which Michael Shanks and Christopher Tilley extend their
arguments and answer their most vocal critics. It will be essential reading for students
of archaeology.

Michael Shanks is the author of Experiencing the Past: On the Character of Archaeology
(1992). Christopher Tilley, Lecturer in Archaeology at St David's University College,
University of Wales, is the author of Material Culture and Text: The Art of Ambiguity
(1991). He has recently edited Reading Material Culture (1990) and Interpretative Archae-
ology (1992). Michael Shanks and Christopher Tilley have also co-authored Social Theory
and Archaeology (1987).
NEW STUDIES IN ARCHAEOLOGY


Series editors
Colin Renfrew, University of Cambridge
Jeremy Sabloff, University of Pittsburgh




Other titles in the series include
Graham Connah, Three Thousand Years in Africa
Richard E. Blanton, Stephen A. Kowalewski, Gary F einman and J ill Appel, Ancient Mesoamerica
Ian Hodder and Clive Orton, Spatial Ana{ysis in Archaeology
Keith Muckelroy, Maritime Archaeology
Step hen Plog, Stylistic Variation in Prehistoric Ceramics
Peter Wells, Culture Contact and Culture Change
Ian Hodder, Symbols in Action
Geoffrey Conrad and Arthur Demarest, Religion and Empire
Patrick Kirch, Evolution of the Polynesian Chiefdoms
Dean Arnold, Ceramic Theory and Cultural Process
Graeme Barker, Prehistoric Farming in Europe
Daniel Miller, Artefacts as Categories
Robin Torrence, Production and Exchange of Stone Tools
Rosalind Hunter-Anderson, Prehistoric Adaptation in the American Southwest
MICHAEL SHANKS and CHRISTOPHER TILLEY


Re-Constructing Archaeology


Theory and Practice




SECOND EDITION




~l Routledge
iii ~ Taylor & Francis Group
LONDON AND NEW YORK
First published 1987 by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge
New hardback and paperback editions published in 1992
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 4RN

Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017

First issued in hardback 2016

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor and Francis Group,
an informa business

© 1992 Michael Shanks and Christopher Tilley

British Library cataloguing in publication data
Shanks, Michael
Re-Constructing archaeology. -
1. Archaeology
I. Title
II. Tilley, Christopher
Ill. Series
930.1'01 CC72

Library of Congress cataloging in publication data
Shanks, Michael
Re-Constructing archaelogy.
Bibliography.
Includes index.
I. Archaeology - Philosophy. 2. Social archaeology.
3. Material culture. 4. Archaeological museums and collections - Great Britain.
5. Archaeological museums and collections.
I. Tilley, Christopher Y. II. Title.
CC72.S5 1987 930.1'01 86-18400

ISBN 13 978-0-415-08522-9 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-08870-1 (pbk)
For ELIZABETH and KARIN
Page Intentionally Left Blank
         CONTENTS




         List of illustrations xt
            Figures xi
            Tables xii
         Acknowledgements xttt
         Foreword by I an Hodder xv
         Preface to the second edition xvtt
         Introduction 1


PART I   ISSUES IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL THEORY AND PRACTICE:
         CRITIQUE AND DEVELOPMENT 5

     1 The present past 7
       Introduction 7
       The problematic past 8
       Time travel: getting from the present back to the past   9
       Recreating the past IS
       Archaeology - history 16
       The practice of archaeology 22
       Justifications 25
       Conclusions 27

     2 Positivism and the 'new archaeology' 29
       Introduction 29
       The new paradigm - or traditional archaeology resurrected? 29
       Grounding knowledge claims: positivism 32
       Naturalism 34
       Phenomenalism and the demarcation of science/non-science 36
       Conclusion 43

     3 Facts and values in archaeology 46
       Introduction 46
       An objective and scientific archaeology: rational method and therapy 46
       Reification and empirical regularity 48
       Manipulating the past as image of the present: economic archaeology 49
       Systems theory, the status quo and pathology 52
       Cultural evolution, the politicization of time 53

                                                                                 vii
          Contents                                                                    Vlll



          Evolution: biology and behaviour 54
          Statistics, mathematics and objectivity 56
          Mathematical archaeology 57
          Reason as method: a logistical archaeology 59
          Justifications and the meaning of archaeology 62
          Facts and values, ideology and criticism 62
          The lament of High Culture 63
          The valuable past 64
          Conclusions: notes towards a critical archaeology 65

      4 Presenting the past: towards a redemptive aesthetic for the museum 68
        Introduction 68
        PART ONE: THE MUSEUMS 69
        The artifact transformed into an object in commodified time 69
           The Museum ofAntiquities of the University and Society of Antiquaries of
          Newcastle upon Tyne 69
        The aesthetic artifact 71
          The British Museum 71
        Bringing the past alive 73
        Narrative display and the artifact as information 74
          The Museum of London 74
          Presence, absence and the authenticating quote 74
        The exhibited past 76
          A period room in the Castle Museum, York 76
          The erotics of the museum 79
          The George]oicey Museum, Newcastle upon Tyne 80
        Shop-front commodification 81
          The Castle Museum, York 81
        Heritage: visiting a mythical past 83
          The North of England Open Air Museum, Beamish, County Durham 83
        Labour and discovery: the archaeologist as hero 86
          Jorvik Viking Centre, York 86
        PART TWO: PAST AND PRESENT IN THE MUSEUM 90
        Entertaining the public: 'real' and 'popular' archaeology 91
        Archaeologists as creatures of their times 93
        Mediating past and present 94
        Conclusion: towards a redemptive aesthetic 97


PART 1I   PERSPECTIVES FOR A SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                       101
      5 Hermeneutics, dialectics and archaeology 103
        Archaeology as interpretation 103
        The hermeneutic circle 104
        The role of the interpreter 105
           Contents                                                                          IX




           Archaeology as fourfold hermeneutic 107
           Thought as embedded in historical process 108
           Beyond hermeneutics, towards dialectics 110
           Explanation 112
           Knowledge 113
           Conclusions 114

       6 Social archaeology: the object of study 116
         Introduction 116
         Artifact, culture, system 117
         Against essentialism: social system as relational whole 119
         Agency and social practices 122
         A stratified model of agency 125
         Structures, structuring principles 126
         Structuration 128
         Contradiction, power, ideology, change 129
         Material culture: objectification and social strategies 130
         Meaning in material culture 131
         Conclusions 134


PART Ill   MATERIAL CULTURE AND SOCIAL PRACTICES                       135
       7 Style and ideology 137
         Introduction 137
         How archaeologists have dealt with style 138
         An alternative perspective 146
         Style: a summary 155
         Style as ideology in southern Swedish middle neolithic ceramics   155
         Summary 171

       8 Social values, social constraints and material culture: the design of
         contemporary beer cans 172
         Introduction 172
         THE DESIGNS ON BRITISH AND SWEDISH BEER CANS 173
         Differences between British and Swedish beer can designs 175
         Differences between British beer and lager cans 180
         Differences between Swedish beer classes 183
         DRINK, THE STATE, CONSUMERISM, DISCIPLINE 186
         Early industrial capitalism and alcohol production 186
         Changes in experience of work and leisure 189
         Drink, social control and disciplinary power 190
         Consumerism, the welfare state and the medicalization of drinking practices   198
         The brewing industry 207
       Contents


        ALCOHOL IN THE MEDIA AND ADVERTISING      209
        Drink and the news 209
        Advertisements 214
        TOWARDS AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE DESIGN OF BEER CANS   236


PART IV CONCLUSIONS       241

     9 Archaeological theory and practice today 243

       Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s 247

       References 267
       Index 285
      ILLUSTRATIONS




     Figures
 1.1 Some justifications for archaeology 26
 2.1 Appearance and interpretation     37
 4.1 The aesthetic artifact 72
 4.2 The period room rediscovered 78
 4.3 Beamish valley 83
 4.4 The past brought back to life 87
 5.1 Stages in theoretical appropriation    112
 6.1 The social totality   127
 7.1 The location of the passage grave Fjalkinge No. 9 156
 7.2 The passage grave Fjalkinge No. 9 157
 7.3 Pots from thefour temporal phases at Fjalkinge No. 9 158
 7.4 A hierarchical classification system for the designs on Swedish TRB ceramics 159
 7.5 Design sequences on two pots from Fjalkinge No. 9 160
 7. 6 The percentage of vessels possessing bounded designs and the percentage of bounded designs on
      vessels for the four temporal phases at Fjalkinge No. 9 164
 7. 7 Plan ofFjalkinge No. 9 showing the excavated area and six analytical space regions 165
 7. 8 The distribution of potsherds at the entrance to Fjalkinge No. 9 166
 7. 9 The number of potsherds for 1 metre bands right to left and front to back at the entrance to
      FjalkingeNo. 9 167
7.10 The changing relative frequencies of vessels found in the analytical space regions outside
      FjalkingeNo.9 168
7.11 The frequency of oblique infill for each of the primary bounded forms of the classification
      system 169
 8.1 The variables recorded for each beer can 175
 8. 2 Thefrequency of words, representational and abstract designs on British and Swedish beer
      cans 177
 8. 3 Writing on Swedish and British beer cans 177
 8.4 Contrasts between British and Swedish beer cans 178
 8.5 Principal components and principal coordinates analyses of British and Swedish beer cans 181
 8.6 The relative frequency of words, representational and abstract designs on British beer and lager
      cans 183
 8. 7 Principal components and principal coordinates analyses of British and Swedish beer and lager
      cans 184
 8. 8 Contrasts between British beer and lager cans 185
 8. 9 The relative frequency of different colours, words, representational and abstract designs on
      Swedish beer cans according to class 185
8.10 Class I Swedish beer label 186


                                                                                                    XI
           Illustrations                                                                                   Xll




     8.11 Principal components and principal coordinates analyses of Swedish beer classes 187
     8.12 Class differences between the Swedish beer cans 188
     8.13 Per capita consumption of pure alcohol according to drink type for Britain and Sweden
           1850-1910 193
     8.14 Convictions for drunkenness in England and Wales and Sweden 196
     8.15 Activities of Swedish temperance boards 1945-80 197
     8.16 Numbers of different types of retail outlets for alcohol in England and Wales and Sweden 201
     8.17 The micropolitics of power involving an application for a licence to serve spirits in
           Stockholm 202
     8.18 Per capita consumption of pure alcohol according to drink type for Britain and Sweden 203
     8.19 Numbers of alcoholics in mental hospitals or psychiatric wards in Britain and Sweden 205
     8.20 ViewofLund, Sweden 206
     8.21 The number of breweries in Britain and Sweden per 100,000 inhabitants 207
8.22-8.33 British and Swedish beer advertisements 224-235
     8. 34 Simplified representation of the structural relationship between various alcoholic drinks 238

           Tables
      7.1 The frequency of alphabetically coded design sequences according to a four-phase temporal
           division ofthe TRB 161
      7.2 The frequency of vessels generated according to different design rules according to a four-phase
           temporal division of the TRB 161
      7.3 The frequency of bounded and unbounded design sequences according to a four-phase
           periodization of the TRB 162
      7. 4 The frequency ofTRB vessels captured by various generative rules for the combination of
           bounded and unbounded designs according to a four-phase temporal division of the TRB 163
      8.1 Ranks of the British and Swedish cans according to the frequency of background colours 176
      8.2 Representational designs on British and Swedish beer cans and bottle labels        179
      8. 3 Ranks of the British beer and lager cans according to the frequency of background colours 182
      8.4 The frequency of articles written about alcohol and alcohol advertisements in British and Swedish
           newspapers 211
      8.5 Variables recorded for the newspaper analysis 212
      8.6 Results of the content analysis of articles about alcohol 213
      8. 7 List of the variables recorded for a content analysis of the British and Swedish alcohol
           advertisements 218
      8.8 Results of the content analysis of British and Swedish alcohol advertisements 220
ACKNOWLEDGEME NTS




Thanks to Ian Hodder for contributing the Foreword, and to Tony Giddens and
Jonathan Steinberg for comments on an earlier version of Chapter 3. To K. W.
Osborne, Honorary Secretary ofthe Labologists Society, U.K.; Lars-Eric Gustavsson,
Stockholm; M. L. Willers and M. Berriman of Vaux Breweries; Pripps Brewery,
Stockholm; The Campaign for Real Ale; The Brewers Society; Centralforbundet fOr
alkohol - och narkotikaupplysning; Svenska BryggarefOreningen; Thomas Kolk,
Socialstyrelsen; Erik Malmberg and Gote Nylin, PLM Pac, Malmo, thanks for help
regarding Chapter 8.
   All the computer analyses were performed on the old Cambridge IBM 3701165 and
the new IBM 3081 computers. Thanks to Paul Callow and members of the Cambridge
University Computing Service for their help.
   The drawings were prepared in final form by Michael Shanks. Thanks to Ann
Hartshorne for Figure 4.2, John Duncan for Figure 8.20 and to Stefan Rousseau for
help with the photos of beer cans in Chapter 8.
   Christopher Tilley would like to thank the British Academy and the Swedish Institute
for funding for some of the basic research for Chapters 7 and 8; the Master and the
fellows of of Trinity Hall for providing such a stimulating environment in which to live
and work, and colleagues at Lunds Universitets Historiska Museum.
   Warmest thanks also to Jenny Vaughan, Alan Campbell, Kate Swearman, John
Goodenough, Nancy Tilley, Jonas Lindh, Mats Ericsson, Ewa Rosen, John Duncan,
Suzanne Cederfeldt, Anne Nilsson, Ole Heggen, Jan Freden, Kenneth Winsborg and
above all Elizabeth Shanks and Karin Tilley- they will know why.




                                                                                    Xlll
Page Intentionally Left Blank
FOREWORD




This book breaks ground in a number of ways. It is therefore not surprising that the text
introduces concepts to which the archaeological ear is unaccustomed. This difficulty
should not dissuade us from grappling with the challenge. For this is also an extremely
important book which issues in a new generation of archaeology - a new age of a
philosophically informed and critically aware discipline.
   It is easy to gain the impression that archaeology lags behind related disciplines.
Archaeologists hung on to, and even embraced, positivism long after serious scepti-
cism had been established elsewhere. Functionalism and systems theory were adopted
as if the critique of functionalism and the notion of structure did not exist. At a more
detailed scale, spatial archaeology owed much to the New Geography, David Clarke's
(1972) Models in Archaeology was modelled on Chorley and Haggett's (1967) Models in
Geography as earlier Glyn Daniel's (1962) Idea of Prehistory borrowed from Calling-
wood's (1946) /deaofHistory. Undoubtedly some counter-influences could be cited, but
the general pattern of a retarded borrowing is well established.
   One reason why this book is demanding to read is that it suddenly asks archaeologists
to catch up. Having for so long been content with a limited theoretical field and having
only recently begun to grapple with structuralism and limited aspects of contemporary
Marxism, the archaeologist is now asked to jump beyond structuralism to post-
structuralism, and to consider also critical theory, hermeneutics, phenomenology, and
realist and post-positivist philosophy. I am not sure that archaeology as a whole will be
able quickly and effectively to enter the debate, and in a sense the book may be before,
or out of, its time. Archaeological teaching and literature have much to absorb before the
full implications of the ideas discussed here will be adequately criticized and assessed in
relation to different bodies of archaeological data. But what the book does do, cour-
ageously, is to set us a target. Shanks and Tilley offer an integration of a variety of con-
temporary social theories in relation to archaeological data. In trying to understand what
they have done, our own level of debate is raised. That this is a demanding book should
not dismay us. Our task over the next decade is to educate ourselves so that we can read
this book.
   Perhaps the most distinctive aspect of archaeology since its inception has been its pre-
dominantly empiricist and positivist orientations. The break with this tradition is a par-
ticular way in which Shanks and Tilley prepare new ground. The debate has always
been couched in terms of the confrontation and interaction between subjective and
objective views. The fear of a cynical relativism has always lurked around the corner for
those attempting to walk towards the subjective components of human experience. The

                                                                                        XV
Foreword                                                                               xvi


empiricist and positivist emphases remained dominant, even if at times they seemed to
take insufficient account of the role of the analyst, situated in his or her time.
   Shanks and Tilley seek to transcend the tired divide between subjective and objective
approaches. They place emphasis on the social practice of the interdependence between
the real and the theoretical. Many will want to argue as to whether it is adequate to claim
that archaeology is ideological practice which sustains and justifies a capitalist present.
At times in this volume the reader will be faced with the issue as to whether the past is
any more than politics and manipulation in the present. But whatever the individual
viewpoint, Shanks and Tilley have pitched the archaeological analyst more fully into the
scene. The presentation of the past is no longer simply the concern of the government
official, but of all archaeologists, since all archaeological texts re-present the world of
today in the past. It is hardly surprising then, that a portion of this book is devoted to
the role of the museum. Theory and practice are integrally linked.
   As part of the alternative viewpoint offered in this volume, the past is seen as a forum
for debate. There is not one meaning in the past to be discovered. The process of
archaeology involves polysemy and debate. This spirit of discussion and the rejection of
a unified agreed methodology contrast significantly with the strictures of the New
Archaeology. And it is in this spirit that this book should be read. The question to be
asked is not 'is the view of the world described by Shanks and Tilley correct?' but 'do
we agree with it, and if not, why not?'.
   It has been argued by many in archaeology that the New Archaeology was more a
methodological than a theoretical breakthrough. A final way in which this volume is
novel, both in relation to recent and traditional archaeology, is that it can legitimately
claim to propose a radical theoretical proposition. Basic philosophical and theoretical
proposals stretching from the nature of archaeology, to the relationship between indi-
vidual and society, structure and action are discussed. The nature of material culture is
questioned and the meaning of style.
   Few who read this book will remain unabsorbed by some new angle on their taken-
for-granteds, their assumed dogmas. Shanks and Tilley challenge us to think- to think
harder, deeper, more critically. In so far as they encourage argument about silent issues,
the authors will have achieved their purpose, and ours.
                                                                         IAN HODDER
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION




Re-Constructing Archaeology was written in the five years to September 1985 and was
published in April 1987. As might be expected, much has developed in the discipline
since then, but we present this second edition largely unchanged. We consider that the
book can still contribute to the ongoing debate about the character of archaeology and
the forms its practices take, to what extent it is humanity or science, indeed the very
meaning of those terms. Some of the critique presented here, of positivism and science
in the humanities (Chapters 2 and 3), appeared somewhat old-fashioned to us when we
first refashioned it for archaeology some ten years ago; archaeology was lagging behind
on issues long superseded in other disciplines. But there are still many, and particularly
in the United States, who consider archaeology a scientific enterprise. Perhaps because
of the complexity and range of archaeology, there is still much disagreement among its
practitioners concerning the forms that archaeological explanation or understanding,
analysis or interpretation should take. In this context Re-Constructing Archaeology can
continue to serve its original purpose - to challenge and provoke reflection.
   We have included, as an appendix, a revised version of an article which appeared in
Norwegian Archaeological Review (Shanks and Tilley 1989a). In that journal, which is a
significant forum for theoretical debate in archaeology, a paper of ours was subject to
comment from some archaeologists to whom we replied in a second statement. These
comments do not appear here, but this revised version is an amalgam including parts of
our reply to criticisms of a general nature (Shanks and Tilley 1989b). It is included
because we think that it will clarify some of the arguments of the book, widen and update
them, and answer some criticisms.
   In the remainder of this preface we will complement the appendix with some summary
of our aims and intentions in Re-Constructing Archaeology, with a further response to
criticisms, some autocritique, and reference to some significant developments in the
discipline.

Re-constructing archaeology: some summary remarks
Theory and re-construction
The title of the book, containing a subjective and objective genitive, refers to a discipline
which reconstructs its object, and to the reconstruction of that discipline which has been
taking place for nearly three decades. We hope that the book will help raise the level of
theoretical debate in archaeology, contributing to what David Clarke called its critical
self-consciousness. We also intend to sketch an archaeology which is not a passive
reflection or representation of the things it unearths, but actively re-constructs the past,

                                                                                         xvii
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             xviii


that is, constructs pasts anew. In this we stress that archaeology is a constructive project,
a part of the present as well as of the past.

Experiencing archaeology
As much as a series of sometimes abstract arguments and descriptions, Re-Constructing
Archaeology is, to us, elaboration of some perceptions about what archaeologists do.
These are: that archaeologists bring the past into the present, archaeology being some-
thing people do now with old (usually) artifacts and things; that archaeology can never
produce a purely objective account of what happened in the past; that archaeologists
write the past, representing material remains in written and graphical form; that the
material past is experienced as archaeological work (one among many media of
experience). It was these unexceptional premises which led us to explore relationships
between time, the self and the work of archaeology, and in particular to develop those
philosophical foundations for method which would deny or overcome the split between
an objective past and a subjective archaeologist in the present. We conceive this opposition
as one which still runs deep into the discipline and does more than hinder attempts to
produce edifying archaeologies which are more than of the form 'knowledge that some-
thing happened in the past' or proposed explanation of something-in-the-past.

Finding a place for the ethical
As part of overcoming splits between an objective past and a subjective present striving
to know, we wish to find a place for the ethical, for values inherent in archaeological
work, rather than tacked on as an afterthought, and an ethics which is wider than qualities
such as those which are held to lie within scientific knowledge and enterprise (such as
precision, efficiency and comprehensiveness). This has involved an acceptance or, rather,
an embrace of the subjective and political dimensions of archaeological work: our living
today, with its attendant biases, slants, values, politics, projects and aspirations is the
condition of knowing the objective and material past. Some archaeological projects are
better, some worse, on these terms; we have not hesitated to apply political and ideology
critique to different archaeologies. We also accord great importance to the expressive
dimensions of archaeological practice, so present in writing and communicating work to
others. Chapter 4, on how museums present their aesthetics, is part of this evaluation.

Conceptions of the social
We propose that archaeology be guided less by epistemological and methodological
principles, or what should constitute knowledge and what counts as acceptable method,
than be conceived as a material practice in and of the present. Archaeology is one of our
projects and focuses on particular experiences of the material past. We would avoid any
abstract specification (philosophical or otherwise) of what archaeological knowledge
should look like (such as hypothesis formation and testing), and how archaeological
projects should proceed (such as 'scientifically'). Given that we nevertheless aim to come
to an understanding of the real and material past with which we deal in archaeology, and
this involves social reconstruction (putting archaeological finds into context), we set
about devising conceptions of the social which would enable flexible and interpretative
Preface to the second edition                                                           XIX




approaches to data, without accommodating the past within a pre-set methodological
framework. We wish to devise a set of theoretical tools which enable us to be sensitive
to the archaeological object. This is the purpose of Chapter 6.

Style and the dispersal of the archaeological object
 Chapter 7 is about the style or art of ceramics found outside early farmers' tombs in
 southern Sweden. It tackles the character of a basic category of archaeological data and
aims to locate style and design within the social through the terms and concepts we
outline earlier in the book.
   The issue of context and material culture is foregrounded in the study of beer cans
from the earlier 1980s in Britain and Sweden. Interpreting the cans led us on a great
odyssey through the industrialized welfare state, through advertising and marketing,
brewing practices, psychiatric ideologies as well as attending to the minutiae of lettering
on cans, colour and imagery. The character of the artifact, object of archaeological study,
is one of dispersal - from can to its advertising imagery to its industrialized production
to its contents and connotations to sites of consumption ... This, we argue, is more
than the realization that things are connected with others. Context has long been
acknowledged as essential in understanding the archaeological record, be it simply
material context of discovery - site and stratigraphy - or the notions of systems context
of the new archaeology, or the meaning-giving social contexts ofpost-processual archae-
ology. But how is context to be defined? It cannot be defined: lines of connection and
association forever lead us, interpreting, away from any stable object within its context,
social or otherwise. The choice of a context, sets of relationships which bestow meaning,
is entirely an interpretive decision, not epistemological or methodological; it depends on
what our purpose and interests are, and these, of course, belong with us in the present.
In our essay on beer cans we chose to present an analytic, but broken, narrative, setting
design within two historical trajectories of liberal capitalist welfare states.

Reactions and criticisms
Messianic propagandists purveying pretentious irrelevancies and extremist pedantry,
playing sceptical and cant-like word-games, deliberately misrepresenting in fallacious,
illogical and inconsistent rhetoric, verging on exuberant intellectual dishonesty. These
are some reactions to our work in Re-Constructing Archaeology and the later Social Theory
and Archaeology (1987). Considered and critical discussion and review can be found in
articles by Kristiansen (1988), Watson (1990) and in Norwegian Archaeological Review
22.1 (1989). We will present some general points of critique.

Style
Much of the opposition has concentrated on style. We chose to be confrontational,
polemical, anti-dogmatic and critical, and not simply as a rhetorical gesture. Style of
writing and presentation refer us to the expressive dimension of archaeological work; we
were ready to push supposed liberal academic debate to its limits, and to operate the
techniques of ideology critique in archaeology. We make no apology for this, nor for
breaking the rules of conventional archaeological discourse, concerning, for example,
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               XX




the range of work we cite: there has been criticism of our use of 'literary' writing such
as that of Borges in Chapter 1.

Knee-jerk reactions
We were concerned, in writing Re-Constructing Archaeology, not to misrepresent the
process which brought us to the position we were upholding. We read works of philosophy,
social theory and anthropology in so far as they provided tools for thinking through the
basic questions and issues that we have already outlined in this preface; we were careful
to avoid expressing unnecessary allegiance to an intellectual movement or position. So
we used Adorno, Benjamin, Derrida, Foucault, Giddens and many others in an eclectic
but, we would argue, not a contradictory mix. Nevertheless, as we anticipated
 (Introduction, p. 1) there are some who have made knee-jerk reactions, assimilating our
work to a type, label or position.
   We cite Foucault, Barthes and Derrida and become nihilist post-structuralist literary
critics. We write of politics and commitment and become political propagandists. We
criticize aspects of our late capitalist society and its ideologies and become apologists for
Soviet communism. We reject generalization and cultural evolution and become historical
particularists.
   We have undoubtedly been influenced by some work of Jacques Derrida. This seems
to form the basis of claims that we are importing techniques of literary criticism into
archaeology, that we are nihilists, 'deconstructionists', criticizing everything, pulling
everything to bits. It is assumed that this is what 'post-structuralism' is all about, and
we are post-structuralists, surely? We suggest that this is somewhat simplistic.
   Because we stress that archaeology is of the present, it has been claimed that we reduce
archaeology to an appendage of contemporary political interest, and we become latter-
day Kosinnas, who, of course, was read as providing an archaeological apology for Nazi
racial policy. Questions are raised - how can archaeological knowledge be political
(assuming the premise that knowledge is of a non-temporal realm)? Does not the
admittance of the present into (objective) knowledge of the past also open the gates to
political manipulation of the past? And with our advocacy of an ethical critique of
archaeologies - judging approaches to the past on the basis of their implied attitudes to
social values and change - we are accused of an intellectual Stalinism, judging an
archaeological approach according to whether or not it agrees with our political ideology.
   The charge of political pamphleteering is also widened when we criticize the present.
Our questioning of the commodity form, of consumerism brought into archaeology, of
unchecked instrumental and technical reason, and of the more deleterious aspects of
our contemporary society are taken as an advocacy of Soviet communism(!). And now
with the political modernization of eastern Europe, we are clearly shown to be very
mistaken, surely?
   We consider these charges of 'importing' politics into archaeology (always already
covertly political) to be over-hasty reactions to what we propose is a more subtle attempt
to grapple with the interplay of past and present, social context and values in the work
of archaeology.
   We question the role of generalization, cross-cultural schemes of explanation, and
Preface to the second edition                                                              xxi


cultural evolution. On analogy with changes in anthropology earlier in this century we
have been labelled Boasian particularists, focusing on individuals and free-will. The
history of ideas goes through another cycle, and we are just part of it; a middle road,
bits of both generalization and particularism, is best.
   Our arguments, on the grounds of a dialectical relationship, against such polarizations
(necessity : free-will :: society : individual; and emic : etic explanation, or substantivist :
formalist) prevent us from accepting this labelling. There is a great deal in Re-Constructing
Archaeology about how we believe such polarizations, historical or other, are best con-
ceived and acted upon.

Upholding the old standards of objectivity
Some criticisms of Re-Constructing Archaeology involve a refusal to move beyond the
opposition between objectivity and subjectivity. Because we question objectivity and
argue for a subjective reconstruction of the past, we are accused of idealism (proposing
that archaeologists simply invent the past), and of relativism (proposing that every
subjectivity, every present has its own past). This connects with the accusation that we
are political propagandists. We argue that archaeology is of the present and so involves
taking an ethical or political stand on the past in the present; we advocate an archaeology
committed to the present. This argument is claimed to be subjective. The premise is
that the present and values are insubstantial and subjective. We ask - surely values are
not merely subjective?
  These issues are all taken up in Re-Constructing Archaeology; we also refer to our later
work (Shanks and Tilley 1987; Tilley 1989a, 1989b, 1989c, 1990a, 1990b, 1991a,
1991 b, 1992; Shanks 1992. Here we repeat that we are attempting to think through this
thorny network of issues by questioning the categories and oppositions they assume.

The problem of application
For some, the matters raised in our work are irrelevant, red herrings, theoretical waffle.
And it has all been said before. It makes no difference. We should just get on with doing
real archaeology.
   There is a difficult problem here concerning the relation between theory and practice.
Indeed a lot of theory appears abstract and a world-unto-itself separate from the realities
of the digging dirt archaeologist. As we comment below, we approach the problem from
a limited perspective in Re-Constructing Archaeology. We emphasize the need to question
the divide and exhort a grass-roots theory (theoretical reflection applied to particular
aspects of archaeological work) rather than top-down application.

Nobody believes in what we criticize
The difficulty of writing, theoretically, of what archaeologists do comes out in the
criticism that the processual archaeology we take to task does not exist and hardly ever
did. Who ever was a positivist? Who ever believed in mathematics and statistics as
saviours? Who ever thought they could be absolutely objective? We fight an illusion. It
may be asked that if this is conceded, what is left of our criticisms? And what is wrong
with empirical science? It appears very reasonable (see, for example, Trigger 1989;
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               XXll




Renfrew 1989; Watson 1990) - accepting that there is a real world and trying out our
ideas upon it. Archaeologists may never get to know past reality objectively; but science
works. We are not even fighting an illusion; we have invented the enemy ourselves,
perhaps for motives of furthering our own political ends.
   To these criticisms we reply that we believe that we address a significant body of
archaeological writing in Re-Constructing Archaeology, even if some authors did not really
believe what they wrote. The scale and nature of the reaction to the book shows this, we
think. TV sets do work, but science is a subtle field of practice and is only one mode of
perception and explanation. There are others perhaps more appropriate to an archae-
ological past and this we aim to show.

An autocritique
It is clear from criticism and reaction to our work that there are great gulfs of under-
standing within and between archaeologists. The culture of the discipline is a very varied
one. We certainly underestimated this variety in the mid-1980s, though there is now a
wider community and audience for theoretical discussion. Some of the variety in Euro-
pean archaeology can be gauged in a recent book edited by lan Hodder, Archaeological
Theory in Europe: the Last Three Decades (1991).
   The variegated character of the discipline relates also to our over-estimation of the
value of academic debate. It does not reach many in the discipline and alienates some.
The separation of theory and practice is not one that will easily be overcome by academic
and philosophical critique, however necessary and important these are. And this relation
of the theory and practice of archaeology is one which Re-Constructing Archaeology does
not, we feel, successfully resolve. We do not successfully make it clear how some of the
more abstract discussions of the first chapters relate to the substantive studies of the
final chapters; it is left implicit. We have, however, continued to reflect on the relationship
(Tilley 1991; Shanks 1992).
   Given our stand for self-reflection, we might certainly have made more of the academic
location of our work for the book, in particular extending our critique to include the
structure of academic archaeology in Britain and the United States (but see the comments
on our replies in Norwegian Archaeological Review).

Changes and developments in the discipline
The World Archaeological Congress of 1986 and its subsequent multi-volume pub-
lication made archaeology's contemporary and international location very obvious (see
Miller, Rowlands and Tilley (eds.) 1989; Layton (ed.) 1989a, 1989b; Gathercole and
Lowenthal (eds.) 1990). The disputes over South African involvement in the congress
and academic freedom foregrounded questions of the politics of the discipline (U cko
1988). Relations between pasts and presents: Native American claims on 'archaeological'
material and remains of ancestor sites and cemeteries have become significant matters
in North America. Considerations of heritage and museum presentation have increased
in sophistication, certainly in Britain (Hewison 1987; Lumley (ed.) 1988; Pearce (ed.)
1989). We consider heritage and public and commercial archaeology key topics for
archaeology in the 1990s. Gender archaeology and feminist perspectives have been a
Preface to the second edition                                                       XXlll




most significant development in the discipline (see, for example, Gero and Conkey
(eds.) 1991). We might have made more of gender issues in the present work. Critical
archaeology (for a definition see Leone, Potter and Shackel 1987) has continued to
produce work of radical historical archaeology (Leone and Potter (eds.) 1988; Paynter
and McGuire (eds.) 1991). Post-structuralist archaeology has culminated, perhaps, in
the volume edited by Bapty and Yates ( 1990).
   On the whole, the discipline is more wide-ranging and richer in the social accounts it
produces of the archaeological past. The sort of problems, particularly of relations
between theory and practice, which we address here in Re-Constructing Archaeology are
being tackled with increasing sophistication. The role of scientific understanding in a
humanities discipline is open to serious consideration. Writing and presenting the past
are being subject to tentative experiment. If Re-Constructing Archaeology can continue to
inform or stimulate on any of these and other dimensions of archaeological experience
and work, we will be more than satisfied.

Bapty, I. and Yates, T. (eds.) (1990). Archaeology After Structuralism, Routledge
Gathercole, P. and Lowenthal, D. (eds.) (1990). The Politics of the Past, Unwin Hyman
Gero, J. and Conkey, M. (eds.) ( 1991). Engendering Archaeology, Blackwell
Hewison, R. (1987) The Heritage Industry, Methuen
Hodder, I. (ed.) (1991). Archaeological Theory in Europe: The Last Three Decades,
   Routledge
Kristiansen, K. (1988). 'The black and the red: Shanks and Tilley's programme for a
   radical archaeology', Antiquity 62: 4 73-82
Layton, R. (ed.) (1989a). Conflict in the Archaeology of Living Traditions, Unwin Hyman
   (ed.) (1989b). Who Needs the Past: Indigenous Ullues in Archaeology, Unwin Hyman
Leone, M. P. and Potter, P. B. (eds.) (1988). The Recovery of Meaning: Historical
  Archaeology in the Eastern United States, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington
Leone, M. P., Potter, P. B. and Shackel, P. A. (1987). 'Toward a critical archaeology',
   Current Anthropology 28: 283-302
Lumley, R. (ed.) ( 1988). The Museum Time Machine, Comedia/Routledge
Miller, D., Rowlands, M. and Tilley, C. (eds.) (1989). Domination and Resistance, Unwin
   Hyman
Paynter, R. and McGuire, R. (eds.) (1991). The Archaeology of Inequality, Blackwell,
   Oxford
Pearce, S. (ed.) (1989) Museum Studies in Material Culture, Leicester University Press
Renfrew C. (1989). 'Comments on archaeology into the 1990s', Norwegian Archaeological
   Review 22: 33-41
Shanks, M. (1992). Experiencing the Past: On the Character of Archaeology, Routledge
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. (1987). Social Theory and Archaeology, Polity Press, Cambridge
   (1989a). 'Archaeology into the 1990s', Norwegian Archaeological Review 22 (1): 1-12
   (1989b). 'Questions rather than answers: reply to comments on "Archaeology into
   the 1990s" ',Norwegian Archaeological Review 22 (1): 42-54
Tilley, C. (1989a). 'Interpreting material culture' in The Meaning of Things, ed. I.
   Hodder, Unwin Hyman
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            xxiv


Tilley, C. (1989b). 'Excavation as theatre', Antiquity 63: 275-80
   ( 1989c). 'Discourse and power: the genre of the Cambridge inaugural lecture', in D.
  Miller et al. (eds.)
   (1990a). 'On modernity and archaeological discourse', in I. Bapty and T. Yates (eds.)
   (ed.) (1990b). Reading Material Culture, Blackwell, Oxford
   ( 1991 a). 'Materialism and an archaeology of dissonance', Scottish Archaeological Review
   8: 14-22
   (1991 b). Material Culture and Text: The Art of Ambiguity, Roudedge
   (ed.) (1992) Interpretative Archaeology, Berg
Trigger, B. (1989). 'Hyperrelativism, responsibility and the social sciences', Canadian
   Review of Sociology and Anthropology 26: 776-97
Ucko, P. (1988). Academic Freedom and Apartheid, Duckworth
Watson, R. A. (1990). 'Ozymandias, king of kings: postprocessual radical archaeology
   as critique', American Antiquity 55: 673-89
INTRODUCTION




The doctrines and values of the 'new' archaeology are in the process of being broken
 down; for many they were never acceptable. Books such as Hodder's Symbols inAction
 (1982b), The Evolution of Social Systems (Friedman and Rowlands (eds.) 1978),
Symbolic and Structural Archaeology (Hodder (ed.) 1982), and Ideology, Power and Pre-
history (Miller and Tilley (eds.) 1984) have demonstrated the value and importance of
fresh research orientations for the analysis of the relationship between social practices
and material culture patterning. Many archaeologists may very well be persuaded that
the kinds of studies undertaken in these works do represent a significant and important
departure from the kinds of research characterizing the new archaeology while still
remaining unclear as to the kinds of knowledge claims being advanced. It is the case that
no systematic evaluation has been made of the epistemological and methodological basis
underlying a non-positivist and non-functionalist archaeology. Similarly, criticisms of
the new archaeology have been largely confined to demonstrating the inadequacy of
specific approaches such as systems theory or ecological frameworks for the understand-
ing of the past. Metatheoretical issues of fundamental importance, for example the
relationship of theory to data and the idea of value-freedom, have hardly been touched
upon.
   This book is designed, in part, to try and fill that gap. The purpose of the book is to
attempt to clarify some of the goals, the conceptual structure, explanatory content and
procedure of a social archaeology concerned with material culture as not merely an
object of analysis but forming part of a social reality charged with meaning. It is
intended both as a challenge and as a radical alternative to the disciplinary practices of
both traditional and 'new' archaeology.
   The book ranges widely across a number of schools of thought that have remained
largely unconnected within archaeology or have not been discussed at all. Reference is
made to positions in the philosophies of science, of history and of action, Marxism in a
number of variants, most especially critical theory, hermeneutics and structuralism.
However, the book is not simply a theoretical work but argues strongly for the need to
dismantle current barriers between theoretical argument and the business of practical
research - be it excavation or analysis, or the relationship between professional
archaeologists and the public. This concern with linking theory and practice is a funda-
mental feature of the book. The linkage developed involves a transformation of such
perspectives as the problem orientated hypothetico-deductive approach. It is main-
tained that theory mediates data and vice versa, and that any adequate consideration of
the connection must involve setting archaeology in its historical context- contemporary

                                                                                        1
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                2


society. Through a systematic critique of the pathological antimonies (e.g., subject/
object; fact/value) of established positions, archaeology is revealed as truly being what
it can only aspire to be, an active relationship between past and present.
   In this, the book is intended to be a contribution towards a reflexive archaeology, an
archaeology which is critically self-conscious. It is argued that any adequate conceptual
and theoretical framework developed in studying the past must incorporate reflection
upon archaeology as a professional discipline in the present. The process of gaining
knowledge of the past depends on exploring the meaning, form and context of that pro-
cess in the present.
   This book is not a discussion or exposition of the arguments and positions of others,
be they archaeologists, philosophers or sociologists. It is a critical encounter rather than
an attempt at exegesis. We refer to works and ideas as a means of developing and
elucidating our own concern - an archaeology which respects the humanity of past and
present, which can make a meaningful contribution to the present. We are not con-
cerned with establishing allegiance to one or a group of established philosophical or
sociological positions. Naturally, we share certain approaches with other authors, but
we are not concerned to provide a label for our own work, to claim that it is part of a
'school' or 'paradigm'. Others will be only too ready and willing to do that.
   The chapters in the book have been written and arranged as separate essays, complete
in themselves, and each tackling a number of issues. This means that they can be read
in any order. The chapters are thoroughly cross-linked throughout the book; issues only
briefly referred to in one chapter are taken up and discussed in detail in others. To say
that the chapters are more or less complete in themselves does not imply that their order-
ing in relation to each other is arbitrary. The reader who wishes to get the most out of
the book will follow it through as it is presented, from the beginning to the end. In
organizing the book in this manner we hope that it can be studied on a number of dif-
ferent levels in terms of the individual chapters and their relationship to the whole. The
material relationships of the parts to the whole make it what it is.
   We have adopted a four-part structure. Part I begins with general questions of
ontology and historiography, and an evaluation is made of how archaeologists and his-
torians conceive of the past. Questions oftime, authorship, conservation of the past, and
the justification of archaeology are considered. Chapters 2 and 3 consider in detail the
manner in which the past has been approached in the new archaeology. We set out a
rigorous critique of its epistemology- positivism- and confront a major issue- that of
objectivity and value-freedom. In Chapters 1 and 3 we counter those approaches we
criticize with a radically different conception of the relation between past and present;
we argue for a critical and reflexive archaeology. Ultimately, the issues of the first three
chapters are inseparable from the ideological and political implications of archaeological
research and archaeologists as participants in contemporary capitalism. Accordingly,
Chapter 4 looks at the relation between academic archaeology and presentation to the
public; we present a series of interpretative studies of museums, focussing on the
aesthetics of display, and identify possibilities for a creative and non-ideological relation
between past and present in the museum.
   Part 11 presents a philosophical and conceptual basis for a truly social archaeology,
 Introduction                                                                             3


  following up criticisms and alternatives outlined in Part I. Chapter 5 suggests archae-
  ology should be interpretative practice, and considers the link between theory and data.
  Chapter 6 poses the question of the object of a social archaeology and presents a series
  of concepts to deal with material culture and the social.
     Part Ill consists of two substantial analyses of material culture: change in ceramic
  design of neolithic pottery from southern Sweden; and the design of beer cans in con-
  temporary Britain and Sweden. Both analyses draw on and elucidate some of the dis-
  cussions of previous chapters. It is, however, important to remark that it is not possible
  to judge this book simply by reference to these chapters which work with data. They are
· not an empirical 'test' by means of which the value or otherwise of the rest of the book
  may be assessed. They are simply aspects of a critical encounter with the archaeological
  past and present, as are the other chapters in the book.
     Part IV contains some final remarks.
     Our framework is provisional, frail and flawed, a product of a personal encounter
  with the past and its present. No work can be anything more; there are no final answers.
  We offer our feelings and ideas in the hope that they will stimulate others to think and
  render what we say inadequate and so move on. The past opens up possibility. We must
  live this possibility. It is to this end that we write.
Page Intentionally Left Blank
                                      PART 1


Issues in archaeological theory and practice:
                   critique and development
Page Intentionally Left Blank
1
The present past




Introduction
The past (which others may call the museum, the archive, the library) recedes in an
indefinite, perhaps infinite series of galleries. Archaeologists wander the winding and
seemingly endless corridors, forever unlocking doors which appear new, armed with
different analytical keys, picking over the skeletal remnants of past societies, scrutiniz-
ing shelves of death or gathering 'truths' from self-referencing site reports. The
archaeologist is devoted to the embalmed relics deafeningly silent yet sacred in their
meaninglessness, devoted to the preserved past. The past is a mystery and theories
abound as to its meaning, its construction, its constructors. In their antiquarian amnesia
and isolation (isolation in the midst of all the human debris), some frantically unlock
door after door, compiling an infinite inventory of facts, self-evident truths. Others
seek to map the labyrinthine floor plan, illuminating the corridors with the lengthening
shadows of the present. But are there new doors? new facts? new truths? Is there a way
through the maze of the past? Or has the archaeologist been condemned to eternal
mythical repetition of the present, to forgetfulness? The solution is to demolish the
museum, but destrnktion, not zerstornng; the task is to dismantle the great metaphysical
and rhetorical structure, the architecture of discourse erected in the name of a conserved
past, not in order to smash and discard the contents, but in order to rescue them,
reinscribe their meaning.
   Time is central to archaeology. It constitutes the major problem of interpretation and
yet is the reason for the discipline's existence. By definition the past cannot be present
and yet the traces of the past surround us. The past is both completed and still living.
But in concentrating on the time of the past the time of archaeology tends to be for-
gotten, i.e. archaeology as social practice and personal experience which takes up
people's time in the present.
   In this chapter we consider the nature of time as an abstract concept. Time is not just
something manifested in C-14 chronology or publication dates. We argue that it is not
simply a neutral device with which to analyse the past and discuss the nature of archae-
ology as an active relation with the past. Archaeologists spend their time (the metaphor
is not incidental to what we have to say) producing a past in the present. They survey
and excavate and eventually write for an audience. We examine the nature of what
archaeologists do and produce and how they justify their activities. We attempt to
emphasize archaeology as event and experience in the present, as social practice which
cannot escape the present.
   The intention is not to sacrifice objectivity and replace it with an extreme and dis-

                                                                                         7
Re-Constrncting Archaeology                                                                 8


abling relativism with archaeologists locked into the present. In the works that archae-
ologists write there can be no simple choice between fictional creations and objective
copies of the past. We confront the conventional opposition between subjectivity and
objectivity and argue that there is a need to move beyond it. Our aim is to investigate the
nature of current fissures in archaeological theory and practice and relate them to their
origin in a problematic present.

The problematic past
The present's relation with the past is no longer self-evident. Past and present are
separated by a chasm of misunderstanding. A need has been perceived for a special field
of activity, for a class of experts or professionals, to deal with the problems the traces of
the past pose to the present. The basic problems are:
   (1)   how to observe the traces of the past objectively;
   (2)   how to bridge the distance between the traces in the present and their social
         origin in the past;
   (3)   what to do about the destruction and disappearance of the traces of the past;
   (4)   why these problems are worth posing and considering anyway.
   There is a consensus in archaeology as to how to observe the traces the past has left
behind - by means of survey and excavation, detailed 'scientific' examination. This
aspect of the practice of archaeology aims at producing high-quality information (the
sceptical and practical empiricist would forbid us to term it 'objective'). It aims at filter-
ing out the 'noise' of subjective experience- the rainy days and the wandering cows. The
problems involved at this level are the practical problems of obtaining and managing a
'skilled' workforce, of producing an intelligible site report. The result is the 'objectivity'
of the C-14 date (Binford 1982, pp. 134--5), of the accurately observed and drawn site
plan or section.
   There is much less agreement about the route from present to past and what is there
at the end of the journey, about the interpretation or explanation of the archaeological
record. Argument has raged for at least the past twenty years as to what archaeology
should be - an historical discipline producing a description of what happened in the
past, a science of human behaviour, a science of 'culture process' or a science of the
traces of the past themselves in the archaeological record. Concern has also been
focus sed on ideological distortion of the past for present purposes.
   The traces of the past are disappearing in the present, excavated away in one way or
another at an alarmingly rapid rate. What is to be done? Under a consensus in academia
and among others enlightened by a 'conservation ethic' there is a belief that it is right to
preserve the past. The problem is largely seen as an administrative one involving plan-
ning procedures, legislation and funding. It is also to a certain extent an educational
problem of inculcating and marketing the conservation ethic, respect for the past.
   There has been little concern with justifications for archaeology, little serious ques-
tioning of the basic reasons for doing archaeology. With notable exceptions the concern
has mainly expressed itself as rhetorical gesture, justification after the act, after-
thought.
The present past                                                                             9


  We shall consider each of these problems, beginning first with that of bridging the
distance between the past and present.

Time travel: getting from the present back to the past
Topological thinking
         Topological thinking, which knows the place of every phenomenon and the
         essence of none, is secretly related to the paranoic system of delusions which is
         cut off from experience of the object. With the aid of mechanically functioning
         categories, the world is divided into black and white and thus made ready for
         the very domination against which concepts were once conceived.
                                                                     (Adorno 1967, p. 33)

The past is over, completed, and so much of it is lost in the distance. There are still traces
with us; the problem is how to use these to enable us to see the past, to visit the distant
past. The traces of the past which we find in the present 'belong' to time other than the
present. The problem is how to relate to this otherness. The traces belong to a time in
the distance which we cannot see clearly. In this way time is conceived spatially, as dis-
tance. Spatial time is at the centre of the problematic past. We shall consider its charac-
teristics and its relation to problems of interpreting the past.
   The past is conceived as completed. It is in grammatical terms 'perfect', a present
state resulting from an action or event in the past which is over and done. This 'per-
fected' past is opposed to the flow of the ongoing, incompleted, 'imperfect' present.
Although the past is completed and gone, it is nevertheless physically present with us
in its material traces. But the attribution of the traces to a 'perfect' past, distant from the
present, brings ambiguity, the problem.
   A 'perfect' past does not imply a mode of presence with an investigating archae-
ologist, but one of absence. The past is temporally absent, belonging to another time.
A 'perfect' past is an 'allochronic' past (Fabian 1983). In such a conception the past is
absent not as the contrary of physical presence- the objects of the past are here with us
now- but as the contrary of the continuous 'imperfect' present, which is a process, a
continuing, incomplete state.
   The spatial temporality of objects locked in a 'perfect' past, an evanescent moment of
time, implies a mode of possession. The object belongs to the past; time possesses the
object locked into its present, its moment in the ceaseless flow. 'The object has been, it
has happened': the perfect tense itself hints at this mode of possession. Time reduced to
spatial distance is simply a system of spatial coordinates -literally a fourth dimension-
according to which a potentially infinite number of uneventful data may be recorded.
The time of an object becomes a property possessed, equivalent to mass and dimension.
The object is conceived as an empty container. Its coordinate in time, location in empty
spatial time, is one of its possessed properties, contingent, accidental. In Latin it is
subiectum possessing accidentes (see the discussion in Heidegger 1978, pp. 153ff., and in
Rose 1984, pp. 62-3).
   So the past becomes contingent; our relation to the past becomes accidental and
mysterious. The past is gone, distant, and so a mystery, a problem presenting a chal-
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               10


lenge to penetrate through the dust and debris to find the way back, to see what is hidden
in the distance. But the distance, the other-ness, the absence of the past is postulated as
a condition of the challenge. It is this which obscures. Inquiry becomes topological
thinking, setting the traces of the past in their place, in the distance. The material traces
of the past are ordered, classified, presented with identification papers and locked up.
The past becomes a vast labyrinthine edifice to be inhabited. The archaeologist wanders
the corridors weighed down with keys, administrating, surveilling, dominating.


Commodified time
         The quickest runner can never overtake the slowest, since the pursuer must
         first reach the point from where the pursued started, so that the slowest must
         always hold a lead.                    (Zeno in Aristotle, Physics Z9 239b15)
Zeno's paradox of Achilles and the tortoise depends on an infinitely divisible time; it is
a time composed of an infinity of durationless moments. But the point is not that
Achilles can never overtake the tortoise, but that this is inscribed into the nature of the
race itself and who organized and fixed it - ancestors of the anonymous factory time-
keeper.
    Spatial time is uniform, abstract and commodified time, the time of capitalist pro-
duction, the time of Zeno's race. It is in essence the abstraction of irreversible time, all
of whose segments must prove on the chronometer their merely quantitative equality.
In reality the nature of this time is simply its exchangeable character: measured empty
duration, separate from the content(s) of existence that fill it up, freely exchangeable
with all other time.
   Such abstract clock-time allows the exchange oflabour and its product; commodified
time is the link between the commodity form of goods and commodified labour. 'The
calculation and coordination of exchange values by labour time is a specific feature of the
commodification of economic relations introduced by the convergence of money capital
and the formation of wage labour characteristic of capitalism' (Giddens 1981, p. 119).
Capitalism depends on spatial, commodified time.
   Empty commodified time applies to all events. All events are comparable according
to such time which maintains that a pot and the spread of farming belong to the same
calculus, a calculus which is indifferent to them both (cf Berger 1984, pp. 9-10). The
past disintegrates when the meaning of an object or event lies in its assignation to a point
in time. Such assignation occurs at the cost of the integrity of our experience of the past.
It amounts to a loss of memory, a betrayal of the past which is forgotten. As a sequence
of 'nows' history exists separately from people. It loses its specificity, its coherence and
it becomes a problem; hence the paradox of Zeno's race.
   Yet such a history or conception of the past also forms a continuum, a seemingly
organic whole:
         The exchange of commodities is at once smoothly continuous and an infinity
         of interruption: since each gesture of exchange is an exact repetition of the
         previous one, there can be no connection between them. It is for this reason
The present past                                                                         11


         that the time of the commodity is at once empty and homogeneous: its
         homogeneity is, precisely, the infinite self-identity of a pure recurrence
         which, since it has no power to modify, has no more body than a mirror image.
         What binds history into plenitude is the exact symmetry of its repeated
         absences. It is because its non-happenings always happen in exactly the same
         way that it forms such an organic whole                    (Eagleton 1981, p. 29)

This continuous whole forms the basis of some populist work which claims that archae-
ology is in the process of discovering 'our' history, 'our' past or the past of the whole of
humanity. Such a viewpoint does not take into account the qualitative historical
moment of conflict, rupture or discontinuity. It is unable to comprehend the notion of
qualitatively different archaeologies, archaeologies other than those written by middle-
class white western males (cf. Hodder 1984, pp. 30-1). Individuals, interest groups, and
societies all have different perspectives on the past. There is and can be no monolithic
undifferentiated PAST. Rather, there are multiple and competing pasts made in
accordance with ethnic, cultural and gender political orientations (see Ha111984; Ucko
1983; Conkey and Spector 1984).
   Commodified time entails that our consciousness is itself set in time like any other
phenomenon. It cannot deal with subjective experience. Objective time is separated
from the subjective individual, analogously work is separated from leisure. The work of
the archaeologist cannot be related to his or her subjective experience of doing archae-
ology. Commodified time implies the abolition of that time created by the event of
consciousness - human practice, the flow of actions in and on the world in indi-
vidualized time.
   The archaeologist is an Achilles chasing a past which seems so easy to reach and yet
they never quite get there. Commodified time is the unexamined premise of so much
archaeological work. It lies behind the allochronism of archaeology- the assignation of
the objects and the traces of the past to another and always distant time. This breaks the
relation between past and present, destroying the integrity of experience of the past.
Questions of investigation and preservation of the past become apparently unanswer-
able. Problem orientation or general recovery? What should be recovered and why?
There can be no coherent consideration of these questions, only rhetorical appeals to
accepted values, to pluralism or expert consensus, or a resignation to scepticism.
Commodification of time denies the historicity of archaeological work itself, its place in
contemporary society, the present's production of the past.
   Commodified time forms a premise of traditional typological work involving the
assumption that the temporal classification of an artifact somehow provides a clue to its
meaning, that empty time itself explains (see Chapter 7, pp. 138-9). It also produces an
homogeneous history, permitting the equal treatment of culture at all times and places
- comparative method. It allows general classificatory stages to be developed in which
different societies are shunted into evolutionary sequences. Qualitative substantial time
which recognizes difference is replaced by quantitative classificatory time. All 'tribes'
are considered to be equivalent and hierarchically placed in relation to 'chiefdoms' or
'bands' or 'states'.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              12


The role of the archaeologist
 What is the relation between the archaeologist and the artifact? What is the role of the
archaeologist in reconstituting the past by means of the artifact and other traces of the
 past? What is the role of the archaeologist in the time travel, in overcoming the distance
 between past and present? The answers to these questions, answers implicit in the
 theoretical affiliations of archaeologists, are conditioned by the distance, the gap
 between subject and object, past and present being always-already a problem.
    Science may be asserted as the means of getting back to the past. The archaeologist is
to construct a vehicle which is to get to the past on its own. The vehicle is science. Sub-
 jectivity is to be eliminated; it is to adapt itself to the objective.
    On the other hand the implications of subjectivity may be recognized. Scepticism and
its doctrinal embodiment relativism maintain that subjectivity just has to be accepted;
there can be no completely objective account of the past. The 'truth' of the past can
never be known for certain; objects are locked into their time, archaeologists into theirs.
Archaeologists can draw increasingly close, but never quite get there because of sub-
 jectivity, belonging to the present. (See for example Daniel 1962, p. 165 and Fowler
 1977, p. 138. See also the discussion below on archaeology as ideology.)
   Wheeler (1954, pp. 17-18 and chapter 17), Hawkes (1968) and others have asserted
the positive value of subjectivity, the humanities-trained archaeologist, the imaginative
individual breaking with the ties of the present to feel the way back to the past. So the
role of the archaeologist is one of empathy, breathing life into the dusty relics,
inspiration, imaginative reconstruction, affective affinity. Archaeology becomes a per-
sonal confrontation with the past; ultimately it is based on a longing for a dialogue with
the past, getting beyond the objects to their human creators, being in their presence.
   These two features of the confrontation with subjectivity are frequently found
together. Wheeler (1954) also stresses the limitations of the archaeological record. For
Coles 'archaeology seeks the evidence and experience oflife' (1979, p. 1, our emphasis)
and this aim provides a rationale for experimental archaeology, using empathy and
imitating as closely as possible the ways of the past to find out what it was like, 'to
glimpse some of the constraints and encouragements that influenced the patterns oflife
of ancient man (sic)' (1979, pp. 209-10). Yet clearly 'it is not possible to "live in the
past"' (ibid., p. 210). It is impossible to repeat the past exactly, in the same way that it
is impossible to truly know the past, lost as it is in the distance. That experimental
archaeology 'lacks the clear ring of truth, of absolute certainty, only aligns it with all
other aspects of prehistoric or early historic studies, that archaeologists can do nothing
but deal with opinions, with the possibilities and probabilities of past unrecorded
events' (Coles 1973, p. 168).
   The truth in scientific archaeology's denial of subjectivity is its reflection of the
fetishized position of people in contemporary capitalism: fragmented, isolated con-
sciousness separated from overwhelming objective process.
   Correspondingly, the imaginative and autonomous individual is a myth, an ideo-
logical mystification of contemporary alienation. Yet such a notion makes implicit
criticism of the dominating exchange principle and division of labour whose root in
commodified time we have argued is also the source of the always-already problematical
The present past                                                                         13


relation with the past. The myth is an assertion that society is intrinsically meaningful,
produced by autonomous, creative actors. Society and the past are supposedly open to
understanding by those with the necessary hermeneutic energy or empathy,
imagination or feeling.
   The contradiction is a familiar one. The individual situated in the capitalist market,
supposedly free, confronts an objective reality of truths existing independently of
volition. We are all bound intimately to the capitalist labour process by our participation
in it, and by a chain of consumer goods and values. Yet its objective necessity is shut off
from our knowledge and reflection. In the same way the past is at the same time so near
and so far; it is an intimate part of ourselves and still estranged. There is experienced a
passive conformism before the object world, reverence for hard science, and a simul-
taneous fascination with the mystery, the magic of the past, its aura and wonder: C-14
dates and, ultimately, ley-lines. This contradiction results from a mistaken notion of
historical experience. That the past is produced in concrete practice, is reworked and
reinscribed in the present, has been neglected.

The destination
What is at the end of the trip in time? A Hollywood epic? A television arts programme?
A sociology lecture? It is quite clear that archaeology does not reveal everything that
happened in the past. Traditional 'humanist' archaeology wants a living narrative
history: key events and aspects of the past articulated into human narrative by the pro-
fessional archaeologist (who else can perform this service to the present?). (See Daniel
1962, pp. 164-5, for example.) Key facts are selected and given meaning by the
archaeologist.
   We wish to build on two critiques of traditional 'humanist' archaeology: first, that the
relation between the archaeological record and 'history' is not at all a simple one;
second, that the implications of the present, of subjectivity, need to be taken more
seriously, are more subtle and complex, than the idea of the creative expert.
   A fundamental advance of'new' over 'traditional' archaeology was its recognition that
there is no direct correlation between objects and their relationships and a story of the
past. Clarke argued for a body of theory to deal with archaeological data, an archaeo-
logical systematics which had only an incidental relation to historical or social recon-
struction. 'Archaeological data is not historical data and consequently archaeology is not
history ... we fully appreciate that these (archaeological) entities and processes were
once historical and social entities but the nature of the archaeological record is such that
there is no simple way of equating our archaeological percepta with these lost events'
(1968, pp. 12-13). The serious archaeologist should no longer be writing 'counterfeit'
history books (ibid. p. 12).
   For Binford, the archaeological record is a static record which needs translating into
the dynamics of past cultural systems. What he thinks is needed is a body of middle-
range theory, a rigorous observation language, a system of scientific inference allowing
past cultural systems to be read off the archaeological record (Binford 1982; 1983b;
1983a, chapters 17, 27, 28). Such a concern with the relation of material culture to 'the
past' and to socio-cultural factors in general (see also Schiffer 1976) has provided a
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              14


r.~tionale for ethno-archaeology, for modern material culture studies, and for experi-
mental archaeology. Some have even given up the trip to the past, at least for the time
being.
   What comes at the end? For some (e.g., Fritz and Plog 1970; Schiffer 1976; Watson,
LeBlanc and Redman 1971) laws of culture process or formational process in the
archaeological record, beyond the particulars of historical event, laws by definition
applying to all times and places. In Analytical Archaeology Clarke is more concerned
with making archaeology a respectable social science than with the past and he asserts
the autonomy of the traces of the past. The past as event is over and gone. In general it
is the case that most work is ultimately concerned with linking objects and their relation-
ships to the social conditions of their creation in the past (e.g., Renfrew 1972; Flannery
(ed.) 1976; Renfrew and Wagstaff (eds.) 1982). Discussion continues as to what these
social conditions are (see Chapter 6).
   We agree with the general premise of such work, that there is no simple direct route
from objects and their relationships to conventional narrative history. We also firmly
agree that this means that archaeologists should expand their concern to include
material culture in contemporary societies. However we would strongly criticize the
view that there is a mechanical, albeit indirect, relation between material culture and the
contexts of its production. The aim of a science of material culture, a science of the
archaeological record, is a mistaken one, a futile search for scientific objectivity. As we
hope to show, there can be no objective link between patterning perceived in material
culture and processes which produced that patterning.

It has been argued that the work done by archaeologists is not neutral, self-contained or
objective. Interpretation of the past is affected by present 'ideology' -a point of view
related to present interests (Leone 1973; Trigger 1980, 1981; Meltzer 1981; Kohl1981).
This work represents a valuable elaboration of the common sense realization that there
is a subjective element to archaeological research.
   However, such work has tended to lapse into relativism (Trigger 1984, p. 293). The
present's use of the past has been viewed as just another source of bias with
consciousness-raising or self-reflection allowing the archaeologist to control for this
(Leone 1973). It is essential that the concept of 'ideology' is not reduced to a universal
relativism or considered as just another source of bias. Both these reductions neutralize
the critical value of the concept.
   Referring to the work of Trigger and Meltzer, Leone has remarked that such 'self-
reflection offers no real link to the past and, even though it may impose constraints upon
the archaeologist, it has not offered a different interpretation of prehistory, nor is it
likely to' (1982, p. 753). Such work is mere consciousness-raising which doesn't affect
the way archaeologists go about doing archaeology. Leone argued instead for 'critical
self-reflection or critical-theory' (ibid.). Building on the work of Leone (1978, 1980,
1981a, 1981b, 1982, 1984) and with Hodder (1984) and Rowlands (1984), we wish to
draw out the full critical implications of the realization that archaeology is a practice in
contemporary capitalism.
The present past                                                                       15




So, there is no direct route to the past and we must remember that archaeology is some-
thing done in the present. We will now consider the nature of the relationship between
past and present established in the practice of archaeology. We shall find that the past
'as it was' is not what comes at the end of the trip; we are on a return ticket.

Recreating the past
         It is a revelation to compare Menard's Don Quixote with Cervantes's. The latter
         for example, wrote (part one, chapter nine):
         ... truth whose mother is history, rival of time, depository of deeds, witness
         of the past, exemplar and adviser to the present, and the future's counsellor.
         Written in the seventeenth century, written by the 'lay genius' Cervantes, this
         enumeration is a mere rhetorical praise of history. Menard, on the other hand,
         writes:
         ... truth whose mother is history, rival of time, depository of deeds, witness
         of the past, exemplar and adviser to the present, and the future's counsellor.
         History, the mother of truth: the idea is astounding. Menard, a contemporary
         ofWilliam James, does not define history as an inquiry into reality but as its
         origin. Historical truth, for him, is not what has happened; it is what we judge
         to have happened. The final phrases- exemplar and adviser to the present, and
         the future's counsellor- are brazenly pragmatic.
              (Jorge Luis Borges: 'Pierre Menard, Author ofthe Quixote', 1970, p. 69)
Menard produced a recurrence of the exact words of the seventeenth-century Cervantes
(a few pages of the Quixote) in the twentieth century. Not a copy but a recreation.
Several points relating to our argument can be taken from this mythical achievement.
   Nothing can be said twice because it has already been said before. This is to deny
empty time. Eventful moments cannot be exchanged. Every cultural artifact is
inseparable from the context and conditions of its production and appropriation. Every
cultural artifact is always more than itself.
   The supreme achievement and impossible novelty is to recreate the past without copy-
ing it. Menard 'never contemplated a mechanical transcription of the original; he did
not propose to copy it' (Borges 1970, pp. 65-6). Nor did Menard arrive at his Quixote
through a supreme effort of empathy- reliving Cervantes's life- but via his own route
in his present. 'To be, in the twentieth century, a popular novelist of the seventeenth
seemed to him a diminution. To be, in some way Cervantes and reach the Quixote
seemed less arduous to him- and, consequently, less interesting- than to go on being
Pierre Menard and reach the Quixote through the experiences of Pierre Menard'
(Borges 1970, p. 66). Empathy denies the historical character of present practice,
forgets, despairs of the present, in the longing for a genuine past. Empathy cannot
achieve truly historical creation which relates past and present, holding them together
in their difference, in the instant of the historic present.
Re-Constrncting Archaeology                                                                   I6


   Reliving the past without copying would be an entirely different experience. History
doesn't repeat itself because it has already happened before. Recreating the past necess-
arily involves the present- the conditions and context of the act of creation. Recreating
the past is a practice which reveals the author, the subject in the present. To copy the
past 'as it was', as exactly as possible, is to reflect the past; it is an illusion, a tautology.
To reproduce the past 'as it was', to relive the past as a reflection is to produce an image
which hides the observing present.
   But archaeologists are not often attempting to relive the past 'as it was', to understand
the past through empathy and copying the ways of the past (but note experimental
archaeology, Coles I979, chapter 6). Archaeologists survey, excavate, examine finds
with the aim of producing texts.


Archaeology- history
Text and rhetoric
Archaeologists observe the traces of the past then record and write about them.
Archaeologists produce texts. Archaeology depends on texts. The importance of pub-
lication has long been stressed. Long ago Pin-Rivers argued that a discovery only dates
from the time of its being recorded, that the archaeologist is obliged to publish, and this
is still widely held as a basic principle (e.g., Frere I975; Renfrew I983). However pub-
lication is seen as a technical matter; it is a technical means to an end- the means of
recording, storing and communicating the past to an audience. Its function is archival.
So attention has focussed on the efficiency of the practice of writing and publishing: how
much should be published or circulated, what form publication should take (see in
addition Grinsell, Rahtz and Williams I974; Webster I974; Barker I982). But the
implications of treating publication as a practice of translation of the material traces of
the past, of the transformation of the object past into a linguistic medium- implications
which go beyond the concern with how efficiently the past is preserved- have not been
considered.
   Gardin (1980) has explicitly concerned himself with the intellectual processes 'by
which we move from the apprehension of a set of archaeological materials ... to the
formulation of verbal statements' (p. 7) which he terms 'constructions' - 'any written
text presented as a distinct unit in the archaeological literature' (p. 13). However Gardin
is aiming at efficiently harmonizing means with ends; with the explosion of archaeo-
logical information he wants a more efficient form of storage of basic data than site
reports and suchlike, suggesting 'data-networks' (pp. I48-50); he wants efficient
definition of subject matter and aims in explanatory texts (p. I 5 I).
   We wish to concentrate not on these technical matters but on the nature of archae-
ology as the production of texts, conventional literary and data network included.

The word 'history' covers this practice. History is both the events of history and the
history of events, what has happened and its apprehension. The word contains both a
subjective and an objective genitive. (See Ricoeur I98Ic, p. 288; Rose I984, p. 6I.) The
discourse of history, textual production, is part of the process of history. Apprehension
The present past                                                                          17


is internally related to the process of the past. So history does not take place primarily
as happening, as event, past and gone, that which has happened, evanescent,
ephemeral, locked into a moment of time. There is no abstract concept of 'event' which
exists separately from the practice of apprehending and comprehending the past.
   It is worth contrasting the word 'memory'. The noun 'memory' presumes the active
practice of remembering, incorporating past into present; it is a suspension of the
subject-object distinction. There is however no verb which corresponds to the noun
'history' - a word to express the practice of rendering the past comprehensible (Frisch
1981, p. 17). We wish to explore this absence. Before doing so we will point out another
dimension of archaeology's dependence on texts.

In its dependence on texts archaeology reveals its rhetorical nature which the ideals of
objective method would deny. 'In philosophy, rhetoric represents that which cannot be
thought except in language' (Adorno 1973a, p. 55). Text as language, language as
expression: archaeology is fundamentally expressive; it depends on a relation with an
audience. Without a persuasive, expressive purpose, archaeology as textual production
would have no practical dimension.
   To realize archaeology as textual discourse is to 'attempt a critical rescue of the
rhetorical element, a mutual approximation of thing and expression, to the point where
the difference fades'. It is to 'appropriate for the power of thought what historically
seemed to be a flaw in thinking: its link with language ... It is in the rhetorical quality
that culture, society and tradition animate the thought; a stern hostility to it is leagued
with barbarism, in which bourgeois thinking ends' (Adorno 1973a, p. 56). Rhetorical
does not mean subjective, self-referring; it means, quite simply, written. We shall now
elaborate on archaeology as text, archaeology as rhetoric.

Distance
The materialist notion of archaeology as production of text means there is radical discon-
tinuity or distance at the root of archaeology-history. But this is not the alienating dis-
tance of the problematic, distant past. There is difference between the objects of the past
and their representation in the archaeological text. This is a realization that archaeology
is the object or product of a practice. Similarly, the artifact is a product of someone in
the past; it is not identical with, it goes beyond the subjective intentions of its maker and
the meanings invested in it.
   Such difference, non-identity or distance is emphasized in Ricoeur's use of the con-
cept 'distanciation'. In order to avoid an 'alienating distanciation' (for archaeology the
past being considered to be locked into its own time as an object confronting the
archaeologist) and 'participatory belonging' (attempts at bridging distance through
empathy, affective affinity or imagination) Ricoeur takes the standpoint of 'the text
which reintroduces a positive and ... productive notion of distanciation ... The text
is much more than a particular case of intersubjective communication. As such, it dis-
plays a fundamental characteristic of the very historicity of human experience, namely
that it is communication in and through distance' (Ricoeur 1981a, p. 131). This notion
of distance implies that:
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                  18


   (1)   the event or act of production does not coincide with the object produced;
   (2)   the meaning of what is produced goes beyond what was meant or intended by
         the author;
   (3)   the meaning of what is produced goes beyond the meaning communicated to
         the original audience;
   (4)   the work produced does not just refer to the social conditions of its creation,
         but in its articulation in the present through the process of interpretation the
         work points beyond.

  So to conceive of the past as a problem because it is distant, to attempt to recover the
past, bring it to the present and preserve it, in fact means that the archaeologist is
incapable of realizing the OQject of study as a product of someone in the past, is
incapable of maintaining sufficient distance to experience the past dialectically as non-
identical with its objects and with its representation in a text. It is to treat the past as its
objects and not to realize that archaeology is a practice producing its own objects- texts.

The archaeologist as 'storyteller'
Objective reason dispassionately viewing the march of history emphasizes objective
process, an objective past of data and event, an informational past dependent on empty
chronometric time. Such a past either lacks an integrating basis, threatening to dis-
integrate into a meaningless series of events and facts, or the practice which draws the
past together is forgotten. Such an objective past, abstract happening, abstract event
existing separately from its apprehension, is a quantification of experience. It represents
a proliferation of information or an administrative inventory of 'facts' which becomes
the primary medium for recording experience. For such an inventory meaning is a very
real problem.
   In contrast to such erlebnis (experience as event isolated from meaningful context:
disconnected information) is erfahrnng (experience as event integrated into memory:
conceptual mediation of the event). For Benjamin, erfahrnng is the experience of the
storyteller (1973c). Storytelling is the reflection and creation of a world where experi-
ence exists as continuity and flow, where meaning and time are organically related,
where history or archaeology is an organic series of events saturated with meaning.
   Memory: the noun assumes the practice of calling to mind, of remembering. Story-
telling is a mnemonic practice, a bringing to mind, an incorporation of past into present.
It also addresses an audience and so is performance or rhetoric. Mnemosyne was, after
all, the mother of the Muses.
   The storyteller does not aim to convey a pure abstract essence of the past, in the sense
that those creating a great inventory offacts or information might try to do. In a story,
the past is incorporated into the life or the social praxis of the storyteller in order to bring
it out again. 'Thus traces of the storyteller cling to the story the way the handprints of
the potter cling to the clay vessel' (Benjamin 1973c, p. 92). The story is the product of
an individual but is authorless; like a pot it has a collective dimension. Its truth lies in
its use, the intention behind the creative act. Stories invite retelling or elaborating. The
audience is invited to make a productive response.
The present past                                                                           19


   Benjamin's lament for the disintegration of erfahrung, nostalgia for a mythical past of
an integrated fabric of experience, for community, is regressive; the choice is not a
simple one between community and story, and capitalism and fact (Wolin 1982, pp.
225-6). However, his analysis of the storyteller is a fertile one. Events are meaningful
only in relation to being incorporated into texts which make sense to an audience, being
incorporated into 'stories'.
   Meaning is established by constructing configurations out of successions of events, by
producing constellations of concepts, which cannot avoid an act of narration, of
'storytelling'. This of necessity involves a narrator. We experience archaeology-history
as 'storytellers', as a series of texts, texts which are simultaneously analytical and
expressive.

Archaeology- narrative
We are not defending traditional historical narrative. The narrative we propose is
analytical and retrospective, it views the past from the present. But this does not mean
that opening the book at the end solves anything: history has no end.
  The aim is not to construct a coherent continuity, a complete story of the past. The
past is forever reinterpreted, recycled, ruptured.
         There is no set of maxims more important for an historian than this: that the
         actual causes of a thing's origins and its eventual uses, the manner of its incor-
         poration into a system of purposes, are worlds apart; that everything that
         exists, no matter what its origin, is periodically reinterpreted by those in power
         in terms of fresh intentions; that all processes in the organic world are processes
         of outstripping and overcoming, and that, in turn, all outstripping and over-
         coming means reinterpretation, rearrangement, in the course of which the
         earlier meaning and purpose are necessarily either obscured or lost.
                                                                     (Nietzsche 1956, p. 20)

The aim is to break ideological coherence- historical continuity which denies difference
and ambiguity, fills an empty time of the past with coherent, consoling narrative, ties
the past to an immediate coherence. This is not to deny that real historical continuities
or traditions exist but it is to recognize that archaeology as production of text or narrative
is not identical with the past. The production of history through the practice of archae-
ology is included in the reality expressed. Narrative is not restricted (and cannot be) to
the perspective within which the people of the past viewed themselves. It necessarily
includes the narrator's or the archaeologist's point of view. So all textual production has
the character of a judgement. It follows that the past cannot be tied down to a traditional
form of narrative with a beginning flowing through inexorably to an end. The past is
always already begun and has an infinitely deferred end. It is always being reinscribed
and reinstated in texts but all texts begin and end. In this most basic way all archaeo-
logical narrative is ironic.
   Archaeology attempts to forge a linguistic expression of the past congealed in objects
and their relationships. The words used in the texts remain concepts substituted for the
objects. There is always a gap or difference (a distance) between the words and that to
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                 20


which they refer. This flaw in every concept, its non-identity to what it refers, makes it
necessary to cite others, to construct structures, constellations, narratives or 'stories' in
order to make sense or produce a meaningful representation of the past. However,
material culture in itself has no fixed meaning which can be pinned down forever or
stabilized in the use of words or concepts. The objects and their relationships only
possess meanings under determinate conditions. In other words meanings are always
temporally constituted (cf. Adorno 1973a, pp. 52-7).
   The main problem is one of trying to deconstruct our textual representations of the
past. This book is, in a sense, a protest against the mythology of a fixed and unchanging
past. The archaeologist may textually cement one piece of the past together but almost
before the cement has dried it begins to crack and rot. We suggest that archaeology
should be conceived as the process of the production of a textual heterogeneity which
denies finality and closure; it is a suggestion that archaeologists live a new discursive and
practical relation with the past. This relation is one of ceaseless experiment, dislocation,
refusal and subversion of the notion that the past can ever be 'fixed' or 'tied down' by
archaeologists in the present. It involves an emphasis on the polyvalent qualities of the
past always reinscribed in the here and now.

Truth and archaeology as narrative
The previous discussion might have given the erroneous impression that because
archaeology is a practice in the present involved in constructing texts about the past
objectivity is necessarily sacrificed to subjective whim. In this section we attempt an
initial resolution of this opposition which we have already noted is an artificial one. This
involves considering the nature of what passes for truth:
         What then is truth? A mobile army of metaphors, metonyms and anthropo-
         morphisms - in short a sum of human relations which have been enhanced,
         transposed, and embellished poetically and rhetorically, and which after long
         use seem firm, canonical and obligatory to a people: truths are illusions about
         which one has forgotten that this is what they are; metaphors which are worn
         out and without sensuous power; coins which have lost their images and now
         matter only as metals, no longer as coins.          (Nietzsche 1981, pp. 46--7)

Truth is in a sense metaphor. Metaphor is figurative practice which establishes an
identity between dissimilar things or objects. It is a production of new meanings
through the discovery of similarity in difference. The truth of the past is metaphorical.
It is to be found in the traces of the past, it is present in-itself in the past, present with
us. At the same time the traces of the past point towards an absent truth, a truth outside
the past found in the reception of the traces by the interpreting archaeologist. This
metaphorical truth unites the perfected and imperfected aspects of the past. So we do
not begin with the truth of the past, produced by the people in the past, and end with
that truth revealed by the archaeologist in the archaeological text. We find our affinity
with the past through our difference to it, through practice which links past and present.
Truth is delivered by the interpreting archaeologist on a detour away from the past, a
detour to truth.
The present past                                                                          21



    The interpreting archaeologist fills gaps in the past, but these gaps are always already
 there. They are not simply a feature of preservation or inadequate amounts of survey or
 excavation. Like a metaphor the past requires interpretation. There can be no coherent
 justification for an archaeology which fails to take this into account.
    Truth is a mobile army of metaphors, an 'entire thematics of active interpretations'
 (Spivak 1974, p. xxiii), an incessant deciphering. It is a practice which reveals no
 primary truth of the past, no primary signified beneath the incrustations of interpret-
 ation, metaphor, metonym. Truth does not reside in a presentation of the past in-itself.
The traces of the past need to be articulated through speech or language expressing
 meaning in their translation or transformation, in their presentation to an audience. The
interpretation and presentation of the past via textual conversion does not transport a
truth, a property of the past acquired in the present. Instead it transforms, translates or
reveals.
    Truths are 'coins which have lost their images and now matter only as base metals'.
Coins depend on being stamped, on inscription, to be more than pieces of metal. All
objects depend on being written before they have meaning. But this is more than a sur-
face inscription. Objects depend on being incorporated in texts; they are internally con-
stituted by the changing script of social relations into which they fit (Eagleton 1981,
p. 32). It is vital to remember the same of truth and knowledge.
    This relationship with the past is one of mimesis. This concept as used by Aristotle
refers to a relation between reality and the production of a text. The mimetic text does
not copy or duplicate reality but imitates creatively. It is neither an objective duplicate
nor a subjective fantasy. Theory and the facts are not separate but combined to make a
productive and potentially expansive unity which ties observer and observed together
into a whole which cannot be reduced to either. It involves an active rearrangement of
the elements of observed empirical reality, not taking them as they are immediately
given, but rearranging them until their new relationships reveal their truth. Mimesis is
an ars inveniendi, an art of coming upon something, a practice combining invention and
discovery (Adorno 1973b, pp. 34lff.; Ricoeur 1981b, esp. pp. 179-81, 1981c, pp.
291-3). This knowledge is never certain, it is always provisional and ready to be
re-presented or reinscribed in a fresh framework. It is an act of translation of the
empirical past, simultaneous reception and spontaneous elaboration of an original
(Benjamin 1973a). It is empirical while at the same time denying the validity of
empiricism (see Chapter 5).
   Such a conception emphasizes archaeology as historically situated practice. The pro-
duction of the past is itself time bound. What is implied here is not the quantitative time
of the capitalist labour process, of the factory clock: 'prior to all calculation of time and
independent of such calculation, what is germane to the time-space of true time consists
in the mutual reaching out and opening up offuture, past and present' (Heidegger 1972,
p. 14). Archaeology as practice is a mode of presencing, a practice which unites and yet
holds apart past, present and future. Presencing involves qualitative historical time
(Heidegger's fourth dimension). It is an historic present including everything absent
(perfect) and everything present (imperfect) (Rose 1984, p. 76). Presencing accepts the
presence of the past as imperfect, incomplete, opened up to human agency, creativity
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              22


and development. Such a past is open and not fixed and 'given' in its own realm of
empirical data. The past is imperfect, incomplete, requiring interpretation; it exists as
a project in the present, a concern, the object of theory and practice.
   As we have argued, interpreting the object cannot be reduced to grasping the mean-
ings invested in the object by people in the past. Knowledge is not the agreement of con-
sciousness with an objective past, however this might be achieved, e.g., procedures
modelled on natural science or empathy. Events always become historical posthum-
ously. The truth of the past is located in the present in the sense that 'the true histories
of the past uncover the hidden potentialities of the present' (Ricoeur 198lc, p. 295). So
the culmination of interpretation is not an image of the past in-itself but self-
understanding of the present. Interpretation is an act of appropriation of the past which
renders the past contemporary and yet confronts the difference, the otherness.
Interpretation is not a search for a hidden past to be possessed through empirical infor-
mation and description, nor is it a dialogue with the king behind the gold funeral mask.
The confrontation with difference brings self-understanding in the articulation of past
and present which opens up or discloses possibility. It is encapsulated in the Greek
a/..l'j8Ew - aletheia: a truth, a denial of the condition of forgetting, of latency, of
obscurity, of that which has escaped notice. It is a resurrection of the forgotten, a
remembering. The conventional attitude to the object past is of selecting what seems
important, what seems memorable, and this problem of selection is central to contem-
porary policies of conservation (see below); we are to remember the past. But this is a
passive preservation, not an active calling to mind. It is a selection according to the
values of the present which preserves not the past, but the present. So often it is not a
confrontation with difference. Resurrecting the forgotten requires us to suspend our
values, treat them not as universals but as contingent, historical, open to change. The
authority of archaeology, the knowledge it produces is not to be found in the past but in
the direction of its transformative practice. The truth is not to be found in history;
history is to be found in the truth.

The practice of archaeology
Spectacular archaeology
The production of'facts' about the past still dominates archaeological work. Despite the
relatively recent concern with theory, most archaeological writing consists of factual
description. A survey of the books and journals in any university library would confirm
this and is well worth undertaking, although the results would inevitably be depressing.
Flannery ( 1982) has expressed a wish to get back to the certainties of fieldwork and with-
out doubt others are similarly disenchanted with theorizing and speculation. Yet the
split between data acquisition and explanation remains, and fieldwork is by no means a
technical and neutral practice.
   Archaeological fieldwork is based on a visual metaphor of knowledge; the traces of the
past are observed and recorded. But an observed past is a problematic past. It is based
on commodified spatial time; archaeology is conceived as observation of objects of the
past separate from the viewer, a past locked into its own time. Hence the objectivity of
fieldwork- the objectivity of conceptual detachment, non-involvement. However there
The present past                                                                          23


is an obvious paradox: excavation does involve 'the past'; it destroys it. This link
between destruction and observation is just accepted, sometimes mitigated through
planning and sampling, but often it is forgotten.
   Observing the past imports illusions of simultaneity, first into the elements of the
observed past- for example, the idea of 'heritage', a palimpsest of unspecific 'history'
all around us - but especially it introduces simultaneity between the object and the act
of contemplation. No account is taken of the time of the act of 'observation'. This again
involves a disregard for the active and productive (or destructive) nature of fieldwork
and excavation, for its roots in contemporary historical contexts. What is historic in
thought - the practice of archaeology, our experience of digging - is equated with
irrelevance.
   Despite the fact that it involves physically interfering with the past fieldwork as obser-
vation and recording remains essentially passive. It is a spectacular archaeology. In the
society of the spectacle (Debord 1983) that which is lived directly (the past itself and the
practice of archaeology) is shunted off into the realm of the spectacular. The past
becomes a series of objects and events, a parade before the archaeologist who merely
reviews. The practice of archaeology becomes the observation of a separate past and its
representation as 'image'. Scientistic 'objectivity' requires this to be a mirror image. In
effect archaeology becomes a voyeurism. The realm of the spectacular escapes the
involvement of individuals.
   Archaeological method and theory have no way of dealing with the subjective experi-
ence of doing archaeology- Flannery's fun (1982, p. 278). Yet this is a major feature
which attracts people to archaeology: the moment of personal discovery, personal con-
tact with the past; it dominates the popular image of the archaeologist- romantic adven-
ture and discovery. Flannery's (1976 and 1982) and Binford's (1972) excursions into
their personal experiences are entertaining and diverting; they have no necessary relation
to archaeological method and theory. The same applies to the personal reminiscences in
Antiquity- the 'Archaeological Retrospectives', and indeed the editorials.
   The importance of individual experience is devalued, becoming meaningful only
when reduced to the status of entertaining anecdote or as the spectacular excesses of an
Indiana Jones. However, the archaeological object is constituted in practice: sites are
excavated and pots scrutinized. Objects come to possess meaning in the work of the
archaeologist. Such practice requires time. Time is an aspect of archaeological work,
but not as an independent variable, a device for applying to the past, to classify and sup-
posedly understand. That which is analysed becomes part of the archaeologist's life, his
or her experiences of doing archaeology. In the aridity of the informational report all this
is forgotten. The past experiences of the archaeologist, such as working out the sequence
of deposits in a section of trench, are claimed not to be subjective but objective, facts and
not fictions. So the presence of the past as objects and their relationships in the present
is based on the archaeologist's experiences, its origin is autobiographic. This auto-
biographic origin ties the archaeological object to the present because it is always
produced. So the archaeologist is not leading knowledge from the present gropingly
towards the firm ground of the past but rather the reverse, from the archaeologist's past
into the object's present. Flannery (1982) asserts the primacy of the experience of doing
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              24


good archaeological work. In a very different sense we would agree. The experience of
archaeology is not irrelevant and it is essential to consider those who experience the pro-
duction of the past. Archaeology is not a neutral instrument for exploring the past but
its theatre. What is required is a critical sociology of archaeology.

Conservation and heritage
The past, its preservation, and the work of archaeology are in the hands of professional
archaeologists, academics, state employees and local government workers. In this work
the conservation issue is paramount: planning, managing and rescuing the past is a vital
concern.
   In the literature of cultural resource management (see Schiffer and Gummerman
(eds.) 1977; Green (ed.) 1984 and articlesinAmericanAntiquity) the traces of the past are
defined as of value to the present (Lipe 1984). Their utilization and disappearance
requires management; they are, after all, a non-renewable resource. Central to the
management of the past is the assessment of individual items in the resource base and
this is seen as a problem of significance: is this site or burial mound worth digging or
preserving rather than another? In effect this is a pricing of a past turned into a com-
modity. Decisions are taken by 'accountable' professionals, knowledgeable, auton-
omous, trusted, acting for the clientele. The professional body has self-written rules
(Society of Professional Archaeologists Code of Ethics; Davis 1982; Green (ed.) 1984),
is concerned with integrity and its responsibilities (King 1983) and business efficiency
(Cunningham 1979; Walka 1979). Justification for the profession is seen as being essen-
tial: 'if people aren't educated they won't want to adopt a conservationist stance towards
the past as a whole' (Cleere 1984, p. 61; cf. Lipe 1977, p. 21). The past and its study are
thus marketed.
   In Britain the problem of significance has been solved by recourse to inventory -
listed buildings and scheduled monuments - although there are problems with the
system. Although the body of archaeologists and other workers concerned with the past
is different from that in the United States (employed almost entirely by the state, local
government and educational institutions), they are considered no less 'professionals'-
'professional guardians of the cultural heritage' (Cleere 1984, p. 129), with credentials
authenticated by government and professional bodie~ (academic qualifications,
Museums Association, Institute of Field Archaeologists)- J:loking after and presenting
the past to the public.
   The language of cultural resource management might be termed the language of
cultural capitalism. It is a practice in which a series of individuals assert a hegemonic
claim to the past and organize the temporal passage of this cultural capital from its his-
torical context to the present of spectacular preservation, display, study and interpret-
ation. The professional body decides on the basis of its claimed knowledge what is worth
either preserving or excavating. After subsequent interpretation or conservation the
public, or non-professionals, are informed that this is their past, their heritage, and that
it should be meaningful to them.
   The language used and the strident advocacy of professionalism does not make the
past produced any less alien from the public (or the 'client') but only more so. All that
The present past                                                                         25


is required of the non-professional is to consume the past presented at a distance and in
leisure-time. The past, history or archaeology becomes an other, an alien factor passing
before people. For the public the commodified past has the contradictory relation to the
buyer of any commodity: available to purchase while mysterious in its origin, in the
technology of its production. The production of the past remains a mystery isolated
from the present in the hands of the professional elite or the authoritative planner.
Reaction against the sense of alienation created may take the form of pot hunting, metal
detecting or unauthorized excavation.
   What is needed is not the promotion and protection of a commodified past but its
active reworking in the present by archaeologists who do not assert themselves as
managers of some unspecified general heritage, a mythical landscape worn with time.
What is at stake is not the preservation or non-preservation of the past but the practice
of archaeology. This practice has come to lie increasingly in the power of a professional
self-appointed minority and it tends to have the effect of denying people their active
participation in history, in the practice of making history and coming to an understand-
ing of the present past. Instead what is all too often presented by the 'managers' is a
petrified past which is constantly in need of preservation, a decaying corpse in need of
embalming before the smell becomes too strong.

Justifications
A concern with the justification of the work of the profession has expressed itself
recently primarily in the literature of cultural resource management. Indeed the ques-
tion of justifications for what archaeologists do has become critical: the treasure hunting
public are plundering the past, financial stringency requires archaeology to specify its
value and relevance and scientific archaeology seems so irrelevant. Of course, there have
always been archaeologists who expressed a concern with the purpose of the discipline
but the literature dealing with justifications for archaeology is comparatively sparse.
The main aspects are summarized in Fig. 1.1. The justifications focus on:
   (1)   the actual practice of archaeology and related fields (e.g., fieldwork, planning
         or conservation);
   (2)   the objects and monuments produced and preserved;
   (3)   the images associated with the objects and monuments (scientific explanation,
         descriptive narrative, etc.).
The question of justifications itself implies a contemporary society born free of a con-
nection with a slowly unfolding and never-changing past. What may lie behind these
justifications and the perceived need to supply them is a critical contradiction in the his-
torical consciousness upon which they are based. It resides in the disconnection between
past and present which does not fully take into account the active production of the past
and that the archaeologist and the past are inextricably linked. The justifications also
have their basis in a disjunction created between professionals producing the past and a
public passively consuming: isolated professionals lonely in the crowd of contemporary
society and unable to cope with the subjective, experiential, practical and transforma-
tive aspects of their historical work.
                        Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                                      26


                           Why do archaeology? Because it entertains or educates 'us' with the achievements of
                        humanity, 'our' common roots, 'our' symbolic unity, 'our' heritage. It is 'our' past and
                        'we' need it. Why archaeology? Because it's natural, everybody wants to know about
                        'their' past. Why? Because we know and we're telling you.
                           Whose past is it? Who are the 'we' of 'our' past? Who is speaking and writing? The
                        justifications, of course, come from those involved in producing the past and supplying
                        it to others. It involves a persuasion to accept the past being supplied and the practice
                        of those who supply it, a persuasion to accept the authority of those who pass judgement
                        on the past. In fact the question of justifications is posed and answered by those with a
                        guilty conscience. Most, if not all, archaeologists realize this. Many of the justifications
                        given at present reveal real need for history, for the past. They do not embody the
                        realization that people, everyone, not just professionals, make history, produce it now
                        in the present, actively tying together past, present and future: the realization that
                        history is not the consumption of a supplied image.
                           There have been encouraging and positive responses to the problem of justifications,


                                         Conservation ethic: it is good,
                                           a social duty, to preserve
                                                     the past
                                     ( Lipe 1977; Lowenthal and Binney
                                        (eds.) 1981;Cieere (ed.) 1984)




                                            Aesthetic value
                                          beauty, inspiration
                                 (Lipe 1984, p.7; Clark 1972, p.254;
                         Oaniel1962, pp.169-70; Lowenthal1981, p.14)




                                                                                                           'We' can learn from the past
                                                                                                             and control the present
                                                                                                   (Fritz 1973, pp.75-82; Ford 1973, pp.90-3;
                                                                                                                 Lipe 1977, p.23)




               Nationalism                                           lt is 'our' past
        an authentic tangible past                        'we' have a common human identity
        brings communal identity                       ( Lipe 1984, p.10; Clark 1972, pp.261-4;
           -our country's past                     Clark 1970, pp.47-52; Daniel 1962; pp.165-70;
(Ciark 1972, pp.256-61; Ford 1973 pp.85f.;             Trigger 1978, p.35; Ford 1973, pp.89f.)
   Fowler 1977, p.32; cf. Lipe 1984, p.7;
      Ford 1973, pp.87f.; Horne 1984;
              Rowlands 1984)




                        Fig. 1.1 Some justifications for archaeology.
The present past                                                                         27


reactions to self-contained scientific objectivity, and suggestions that we understand the
present's use of the past which go beyond expression of a simple sceptical doubt about
objectivity (see above, pp. 14--15). In particular, Hodder has argued (1984) that
archaeology is not neutral knowledge but plays an active social role in the culture in
which it is produced. It is an active product of the present and its relationship to non-
archaeologists must be considered. This provides a rationale for much-needed surveys
to find out what the non-professional thinks and feels about the past and its study. For
Hodder, archaeology can show the historical contextuality of rationality while exca-
vation becomes interpretative experience rather than a technique. This argument
clearly accords with ours.

Conclusions
The word history finds one of its deepest roots in the Greek l:m:wg (isti5r or histi5r)- one
who knows law and right, a judge. The features of the court of contemporary archaeo-
logical reason and the archaeological judgement are familiar. The past has been arrested
and presents a problem, a mystery brought before the archaeologist who sits as judge.
He or she observes and questions the accused and witnesses, extracting information
through instruments of torture, confessions of what happened and why (though he or
she is often, if not always, over-enthusiastic and kills the witness). The archaeologist
employs accusations, 'lW'tl]yog(m, 'categories', to partition and dominate, to reveal
order in the mystery, in the chaos of evidence. The accusations are made according to
the Law, the law of timeless reason. The archaeologist as judge reflects on the mystery,
separating, distancing reality from its representation by accused and witness. Eventu-
ally they pass sentence - sententia - the act of penal speech which defines and domi-
nates. The verdict is made public, published. The accused is never found innocent;
sentence is always passed; the archaeologist is a hanging judge. What right has the judge
to sit in judgement? What claim, what justific~ation, what legitimation? It is the judge's
institutional relationship with the accused, the possession of power, power justified by
the Law, abstract and impersonal. Such a Law is mythical; it has no history and knows
no history.
   An alternative: the judgement of the Homeric is tor- arbitrators to whom a dispute is
brought. Giving opinions for disputants to accept or disregard, they judge and are in
turn judged. There is no exclusive judge, no exclusive accused, no separate conscious-
ness and object, subject and object, no pure subjectivity or pure objectivity. The event
of the dispute maintains the ambiguity, clarifying and connecting. Both judge and dis-
putants are subjects of the law and act according to its prescriptions while recreating,
reaffirming the law in the act of arbitration (they are the true subjects of the law). The
law is not formal abstracted law, timeless and remote, possessed by an independent sub-
jectivity distant from the dispute, the object of concern. The law is the pre-Olympian
LlLXlJ (Dike)- justice, one of the Horai, the seasons. Dike is the stream and current of
lived duration, the way oflife, ofliving, of doing, of practice: the law of substantial not
empty time, eventful, communal, mortal time, lived time, history (Rose 1984). It is Dike
who in Parmenides holds the bolts to the gates of time through which is found truth -
aletheia.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              28


   The truth or practical knowledge of the present-past, borne and transmitted through
the actions of individuals is suspended and frail; it flits by to be snatched at the instant
when it can be recognized and is never seen again. Knowledge of the past is precarious,
destroyed by the archaeologist's trowel. There is another aspect to this most basic
feature of archaeology, that it destroys the very past it investigates: it is that we must do
without the consolation that the truth of the past cannot be lost. But there is no eternal
image of the past to be rescued in its material traces. Knowledge of the past does not con-
sist in some eternal heritage or in empiricist/positivist science. The past is never safe,
never divorced from the present. Even the dead aren't safe, stacked on the shelves in the
archive, or displayed in the hermetically sealed museum case. The past is colonized
and appropriated by a narcissistic present. Breaking down the barriers, moving beyond
subjectivity and objectivity, realizing that theory is critical practice, allows us to
reinscribe and transform the void of past/present to a productive present-past and create
an archaeology which has social and political relevance to the society in which it
operates.
   The shadows of the present crisis loom over us- educational cut-backs, the philistine
assaults of the new right, populist imagery of a conflict-free heritage, visions of
solidarity cloaked in mythical images (or of conflict defused by 'scientific' understand-
ing- subsystem disequilibrium?). It is necessary to forge a practice in keeping with this,
facing the contradictions of our contemporary relation with the past, unravelling but not
resolving. Such archaeological theory and practice must express itself as an under-
cutting of authoritarian impulses to pin down the past and will entail a radical pluralism,
an unceasing reworking of the past. This archaeology is not a calm and isolated act
according to a vision of timeless reason, merely a glimpse of bygone times. The
archaeologist stands vulnerable and exposed, strategist in the conceptual struggle for a
meaningful past.
2
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'




         'Recipes for the Good Society used to run, in caricature, something like this-
         (l) Take about 2,000 horn. sap., dissect each into essence and accidents and discard
             the accidents.
         (2) Place essences in a large casserole, add socialising syrup and stew until conflict
             disappears.
         (3) Servewithapinchofsalt.'                                           (Hollis 1977,p. 1)
         'The wish to establish a natural science of society ... probably remains, in the English
         speaking world at least, the dominant standpoint today ... But those who still wait for
         a Newton are not only waiting for a train that won't arrive, they're in the wrong station
         altogether.'                                                         (Giddens 1976, p. 13)



Introduction
How should archaeologists come to have knowledge of the past? What does this knowl-
edge involve? What constitutes an explanation of what archaeologists find? This chapter
considers the answer to these questions accepted by the 'new' archaeology; it considers
epistemological issues raised by a study of the past in the archaeological literature post-
dating 1960. New archaeology has embraced explicitly and implicitly a positivist model
of how to explain the past and we examine the treatment of the social world as an exten-
sion of the natural, the reduction of practice to behaviour, the separation of 'reality', the
facts, from concepts and theories. We criticize testing, validation and the refutation of
theory as a way of connecting theory and the facts, emphasizing all observation as
theory-laden. The new archaeology polemically opposed itself to traditional 'normative'
archaeology as a social science and we begin the chapter with a consideration of this
change and why it took place. The tone of this chapter is again critical. We argue that
existing positions in the archaeological literature are inadequate at an epistemological
level and fail to offer much insight for a study of either past or present social processes
and their relationship to material culture.

The new paradigm - or traditional archaeology resurrected?
In the early 1960s what subsequently became known as the 'new archaeology' was born.
Initially this was an American development originating with the work of Binford and a
famous paper 'Archaeology as anthropology' (Binford 1962) and followed by a series of
influential articles (Binford 1972). The British expression of the new framework was
soon articulated in the works of Clarke ( 1968) and Renfrew (1972). It is difficult to
assign any precise dates but by around 1972 a new hegemony had been established in

                                                                                                29
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               30


archaeology and new archaeology which had once been unorthodox became accepted by
many. Naturally there were some who dissented (Bayard 1969; Hawkes 1968; Trigger
1968, 1970) but these failed to offer any clearly articulated or acceptable alternatives, at
least to those inspired with the revolutionary fervour of the new archaeology.
   Probably all archaeologists would now agree that there have been major changes
within the discipline but whether these amount to a revolution or anything really sub-
stantively new is a matter of personal belief or conviction and it is unlikely whether it can
be established in any conclusive manner. Although profound disagreement is registered
in this chapter and in the book as a whole with virtually every major tenet forming the
'project' of the new archaeology we wish to state that we do believe it to be a very signifi-
cant development and to be of paramount importance. This has nothing to do with
content, with what archaeologists have either said or done in specific detail. It rather
concerns the act of saying itself.
   Renfrew (1982a) has aptly described the period from 1900 to 1960 as the 'long sleep'
of archaeology, a period in which the aims, procedures and nature of archaeology as a
form of intellectual inquiry into the past were not explicitly discussed except in the work
of a few scholars, most notably Childe and Taylor, and certainly did not promote many
major debates. The significant feature of the new archaeology and one that remains of
abiding importance is that a debate and discussion began, not among one or two, but
within a whole community of scholars of what archaeology might be, what it could and
could not do, how the past might be conceptualized and whether an objective knowl-
edge of it was possible and in what way. In short it not only became respectable to
theorize but this was seen as being essential for any development to take place. A large
literature on theory developed, entire books being devoted to the subject, whereas few
had existed before. To theorize was no longer regarded by many as an unusual activity,
an adjunct to the real business of doing archaeology, but an integral component of
archaeological work. If anything can be said to be truly different or revolutionary about
the new archaeology it is this. However, the content of what was said is another matter.
   Kuhn's influential work (1970) on scientific revolutions has been used by archae-
ologists to promote the view that a paradigm change has taken place and citation
analyses have been used to lend empirical support and legitimate these claims (Sterud
1978; Zubrow 1972, 1980). To specify exactly what has changed and why it has changed
has proved difficult in practice (Meltzer 1979). A whole host of specifics can be named
such as the use of quantitative techniques, the notion of systemness or a deductive
emphasis in research but these can all be either traced back to the archaeology which
went before or can only be assigned 'newness' as a result of confused reasoning. For
example, an emphasis on deduction in research has been opposed to a former inductive
procedure (Hill1972). However, this supposes that one could do one without the other.
   Naturally all scholars like to think that advances are being made, and have been
made, in their field, but it seems to have been crucially necessary to new archaeologists
to mark out their work as being radically different from what had gone before and
legitimate it as (i) actually being new (ii) as representing progress. Clarke (1973)
identified the emergence of disciplinary consciousness as being the most promising
feature of the new archaeology, the 'prize' being the possibility of radically expanding
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                      31


disciplinary horizons, developing alternatives to existing practices, and in so doing con-
 trolling the 'direction and destiny' of the discipline (ibid., p. 7). To Clarke this implied
 that the 'innocence' of traditional archaeology had been finally dispelled. The reasons
for the change in archaeology have been related to a crisis in archaeological thinking,
 but what exactly did this crisis consist in and why should it occur in the 1960s? Was the
perceived crisis merely a chance development? Hill (1972, p. 61) suggested that the
crisis resulted from the failure of traditional theories and methods to solve archaeo-
logical problems. Precisely the opposite view was taken by Leone (1972, p. 21) who
related the problem to the very success of traditional archaeology. Leone took the major
goal of traditional archaeology as being to provide an outline of what had happened in
 the past. As this outline was now available what were archaeologists to spend their time
doing? Trigger (1981) has attributed changes in archaeological thinking to wider social
changes and attitudes over which archaeologists themselves have no control. On this
account changes in archaeological theory and practice merely mirror the wider social
context. Most recently, according to Trigger, the idea that technical progress would
solve all social problems has been replaced with a profound pessimism and despair more
or less directly expressed in Renfrew's use of catastrophe theory to explain social change
(Renfrew 1978a). Whether or not Renfrew's outlook on life is indeed despairingly
pessimistic is not for us to say but Trigger's formulation is hardly adequate. It relies on
a conception of society as being a normative consensus between individuals and thus the
theories of archaeologists, perforce, reflect the general outlook on life held at any one
time. Taken to its logical extreme Trigger's position credits archaeologists with a non-
active intelligence in which they are only capable of reflecting the social conditions of
their existence rather than challenging them or attempting to change them.
   The contradictory views of Hill and Leone with regard to the reasons for the crisis in
archaeology might, of course, be resolved by simply stating that some archaeologists
believed that they had accomplished all they could by utilizing traditional theories and
methodologies while to others there was a feeling that nothing of interest or importance
could be established. We would suggest that perhaps a more plausible reason for the
development of the new archaeology is fundamentally to do with a drive for prestige and
power, but on a disciplinary basis rather than in terms of individuals per se. During the
last two decades archaeologists have distanced their work from history, conceived as
being particularistic and ideographic in character, and have characterized it as a
nomothetic generalizing 'hard' science. Science, with a capital S, is the key word for
understanding recent developments in archaeology. Why did the majority of archae-
ologists want to don the antiseptic white coat? This would seem to involve the accept-
ance of the myth of the supremacy of science as the ultimate mode of human understand-
ing, the scientist as an heroic figure dispelling myths with incisive rationality. Given the
increasing dominance of science and technology in contemporary society, to be cast in
this image was to gain intellectual respectability and power, the power to be gained by
producing or purporting to produce objective knowledge relevant to the modern world
(Fritz and Plog 1970, p. 412), relevance being conceived in terms of both ethical and
political neutrality and thus inherently conservative (Tilley 1985; Chapter 3 this
volume). The new archaeology began optimistically; archaeology, it was asserted, could
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             32


be anthropology but the limitations of traditional archaeology with respect to being able
to achieve a penetrating understanding of the past were recreated as a result of the
advocacy of positivist science. Drunk on Hempelian whisky and functionalist cognac
the new archaeology has regressed to being able to say little more about the symbolic and
social other than that which can be reduced to the effects of the technological and the
economic, the initial rungs of Hawkes's ladder (1954) beyond which traditional
archaeologists did not care to venture, except in rare moments of secondary speculation.
It is towards a critique of the nature of the epistemology and methodology adopted in the
new archaeology that the remainder of this chapter is devoted.

Grounding knowledge claims: positivism
New archaeologists not only opposed scientific aspirations to an historical understand-
ing, but deduction to induction, positivism to empiricism. Appeals were made to the
positivist philosophy of science as the royal road to success. The goal was no longer to
describe the past but to explain it and explanatory structure became a central concern.
Almost immediately a split developed between those archaeologists who considered
their task to be the formulation and testing oflaws and those who favoured functionalist
explanations in systemic terms (for a critique of the latter see Hodder 1982a). This
schism was first explicitly identified by Flannery who made a derisive attack on the 'law
and order' archaeologists. Since the 1970s the two lines of approach have continued to
be taken but the general failure to formulate any laws going beyond the trivial has
resulted in a situation in which few archaeologists are now willing to commit themselves
to such an approach. Common to both groups is an emphasis on the need to make
generalizations and the belief that deductive testing against the archaeological record is
the only way to ensure the objectivity and validity of statements made about the past.
   Both those who advocated the use and formulation of laws and the functionalist sys-
temic theorists singularly confused positivism and empiricism. Ironically they replaced
empiricism with positivism, one of the most stringently empiricist philosophies to exist,
and such was the general confusion that this was not recognized. A commonly accepted
philosophical description of positivism is that it is systematic empiricism. Furthermore,
those archaeologists who considered themselves to have totally rejected empiricist
positions based their work on a very narrow reading of the philosophical literature.
First, they only referred to the philosophy of science (understandable in that they
wanted to become scientists), secondly, it was more or less assumed that a general con-
sensus existed in the philosophy of science and the work of a few positivist philosophers
of science, especially that of Hempel, was transferred wholesale with little or no critical
consideration. Positivist doctrines were transferred to archaeology at a time when many
philosophers were rejecting virtually every major tenet on which positivism was based.
The unfortunate spectacle is one of archaeology embracing thoroughly discredited and
outmoded ideas as the framework for its own advance. Curiously enough this trend has
continued and the papers presented at the recent Southampton conference (Renfrew,
Rowlands and Segraves (eds.) 1982) by those professional philosophers called in to
'advise' archaeologists, with the exception of Gellner's paper (Gellner 1982), all took a
positivist, if diluted positivist line. Similarly the only semi-professional philosopher to
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                     33


 have written a book with relation to archaeology (Salmon 1982) has retained a positivist
 position. This does not mean that positivism is alive and well as a viable philosophy but
 rather illustrates the adage that old traditions die hard. This is particularly unfortunate
 if it really is the case that archaeologists will believe anything told to them by a
 philosopher (Flannery 1982, p. 277). A current frustration with philosophy, and theory
 more generally, is represented by Flannery's recent paper (ibid.) and remarks made by
 Schiffer (1981). Flannery recommends a return to the common-sense real business of
 archaeology, i.e. a solid empirical culture history, while Schiffer suggests that archae-
 ologists distance themselves from philosophical concerns which have no direct practical
 (i.e. methodological) implications for carrying out research.
    Precisely the converse viewpoint is taken here. Ignoring philosophical and theoretical
concerns is no way out. Such an approach, urging us simply to press on with the study
 of data without worrying about the niceties of theory, presumably inviting us to respond
 directly to that data, assumes that the lack of any systematic approach or procedure is
somehow a miraculous guarantee of objectivity. Such a common-sense approach sys-
tematically evades any confrontation with its own premises, safeguards any method-
ology which is currently available and, in this manner, produces the very opposite of
objective problem-free research. Empirical research presented as the obvious stuff of
common sense is never called upon to guarantee its consistency, silences and contra-
dictions and hence is entirely unsatisfactory. If philosophy has been of little use to
archaeology this is because of the systematic abuses archaeologists have made of it and
as a result of dabbling on the fringes of the philosophical literature. If philosophy is to
be of value this will not result from calling in philosophers to tell us what to do or how
to proceed. Archaeologists must themselves confront the literature, enter debates and
establish positions. These will, of necessity, be philosophical positions which transcend
the pragmatic concerns of the discipline but will be relevant to it. The only alternative
would seem to be a blind unsystematic groping towards a study of the past, or for
archaeologists to continue to find themselves subject to the comments made, quite
correctly, by M organ (1973) in relation to Explanation in Archaeology (Watson, LeBlanc
and Redman 1971) (EA): 'In short EA seems in places reminiscent of a religious
revivalist, appealing to scripture to establish his points, while surrounding his doctrine
with flowery phrases and redefinitions to make that doctrine more palatable' (Morgan
1973, p. 273).
    Even if it could be established- which it cannot- that philosophical issues are entirely
irrelevant to archaeology, the difference between a philosophically and theoretically
informed statement, and one not so arrived at, is that in the former case we do, in fact,
have at least some reason to believe that we have a sound basis for what we are saying.
Divorcing theory from practice is one of the fundamental features of positivism and, in
itself, can only be defended or refuted on an informed philosophical basis.
    We will now turn to a precise delimitation of what positivism may be taken to be, and
the grounds on which it can be rejected. In constructing this critique we have found the
following sources of particular use (Benton 1977; Giddens 1977; Ham~ and Madden
1975; Hindess 1977; Keat and Urry 1975). Two ways of proceeding are possible. The
first is to consider the work of those philosophers who have actually been prepared to
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               34


label their work 'positivist'. There are increasingly few of these since positivism is now
more or less a term of abuse rather than a living philosophical tradition. The other, taken
here, is to identify specific propositions as being positivist. We will be considering for
the most part the philosophical arguments themselves rather than their direct archaeo-
logical adaptations since any use to be made of positivism in archaeology depends on
whether these positions are, themselves, sound.

Naturalism
The thesis of naturalism depends on four interrelated beliefs:
    (i) human beings are principally physical and biological entities. Concomitantly,
        what people do and produce is, in essence, no different from the processes in
        the physical world in which natural scientists have their interest;
   (ii) all science forms a unity so that the principles relevant to the formulation and
        evaluation of statements are isomorphic in both the social and the natural
        sciences;
  (iii) the natural sciences provide the social sciences with a model for their
        procedure;
  (iv) the most certain knowledge is mathematical and deterministic in conception.
    Archaeologists have explicitly or implicitly subscribed to all four of these doctrines.
In fact the entire 'project' of the new archaeology is based on them and there is no need
to go quotation mongering to establish this. The eighteenth-century sociologist, Charles
Fourier, was so dazzled by Newton's achievements in physics, which to him consisted
in the discovery of a single universal principle, that of gravitation, that he imitated
Newton by proposing that social life was governed by a principle of passionate attrac-
tion. Most archaeologists would dismiss Fourier's proposition as ridiculous but, in
essentials, it is no different and no more fantastic than to insist that to have any validity
as a serious type of inquiry archaeology must ape the natural sciences (read physics)
rather than consider social theories and model itself on the social sciences.
   The thesis of naturalism can be attacked on a number of related grounds. First, as
indicated above, there is no logical reason to accept thesis (iii) but, equally, it cannot be
rejected on purely rational grounds and, therefore, the statement is vacuous. Theses (i),
(ii) and (iv) are more crucial and will be considered together. Naturalism denies that
human beings are in any way unique and claims that their actions can be explained in
precisely the same manner as physical regularities in the natural world. Now it might
appear open to debate whether or not a person or a society is a natural entity. After all
people do possess physical bodies and are subject to the same physical forces in the
world as, say, a boulder, a tree, or to use a favoured palaeoeconomic example,
songbirds. There is undoubtedly a kernel of truth in such a position but it does not take
us very far. People are not natural entities if we accept the primacy of sentience, inten-
tionality, linguistic and symbolic communication. We clearly need to distinguish
between physical bodily movement which can be accommodated in terms of a naturalist
thesis and human actions which cannot be readily assimilated as they involve intentions,
choices, dispositions and motivations. The social world is not a mirror of the natural
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                    35


world but a world that 1s always already structured and constitutes a totality which
derives its nature and fo~m from the interpretative procedures of its members. Natural
phenomena, unlike social phenomena, have no inherent meaning or cognitive structure
which needs to be taken account of in explanation.
   Wittgenstein asks: 'What is left over if you subtract the fact that my arm goes up from
the fact that I raise my arm?' (Wittgenstein 1953, I sec. 621). The implication of this
question is that there is something far more important in the action of raising an arm than
mere bodily movement, e.g. a reflex action. We subsume action not in terms of physical
processes but in terms of the meanings to which it is directed. Meaning here is a crucial
term. A reflex action is meaningless in that no human purpose or intentionality has
caused, or can be related to the movement, but there are clear reasons why someone
might raise his or her arm, e.g. to make a signal to someone. Meanings are necessarily
and not contingently connected to human actions and their products. Social action, as
opposed to movement, goes beyond itself. Intentionality is a crucial concept which dis-
tinguishes mental from physical phenomena. It involves a conception of people who can
make distinctions, understand and follow rules, impose normative constraints on their
conduct, judge reflexively or monitor their actions and be capable of deliberation or
choice. This is a very different perspective from the usual view of behaviour espoused
in much of the archaeological literature where actions are deemed to be propelled by
various external stimuli, needs and role expectations (e.g., Plog 1974, pp. 49-53;
Schiffer 1976; Jarman et al. (eds.) 1982). People possess the ability to act in and on the
natural world and to systematically transform it and create their own world or social
construction of reality. The superficial resemblances set up, in particular, by the palaeo-
economic school (Higgs (ed.) 1972, 1975; Jarman et al. (eds.) 1982) and in forms ofneo-
evolutionary theory (Dunnell 1978a, 1980; Wenke 1981) between human and animal
behaviour, conceals fundamental and non-reducible differences such that there is a
categorical distinction between concepts such as production and foraging, ethnicity and
ecological niche, property and territorality. One set of concepts does nothing to eluci-
date the other since they belong to fundamentally different frames of reference. Human
culture is not a part of nature but a transformation of it.
   Mathematization is usually an irrelevant diversion in an attempt to understand the
social world. Little has been achieved in archaeology beyond the questioning of earlier
work on the basis of its alleged quantitative inferiority: 'it is as if one had to board
an atomic submarine for a new discovery of America, a discovery which has to be
verified simply because Columbus's "Santa Maria" was technically imperfect' (Wiatr
1969, p. 23). Cooke and Renfrew (1979) develop a model to simulate the emergence of
civilization. Societies are treated as systems with human beings as their 'components'.
The model is operationalized by using the six subsystems Renfrew (1972) defines for the
Aegean and, at this stage, the human 'components' fall irrevocably out of view. A
further step is to eliminate the subsystems in favour of numerical variables between 0
and 1. Now it is only possible to ascribe a numerical variable, as in all mathematical
approaches, on the basis of very clear definitions which are provided. For example the
projective subsystem becomes 'either the number of abstract concepts in use in the
society relating to measure or the number of man-hours per head per year spent in
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               36


religious observance or in facilitating them (e.g. building temples)' (Cooke and Renfrew
1979, p. 331). The authors explicitly state that the model was only a crude and prelimi-
nary attempt but the specification of mathematical numerical variables can never be
profitable. An analogous situation might be to ask someone to place a precise numerical
variable (or even a value range), as to whether they would prefer their nose or right leg
to be amputated. In essence the thesis of naturalism collapses with the counter thesis of
the irreducibility of the social. Concomitantly, if the social is irreducible the statements
made about the physical and natural world must take a different form and there is no
need to model social processes in terms of natural processes.

Phenomenalism and the demarcation of science/non-science
The doctrine of phenomenalism and what can be taken to constitute scientific as
opposed to non-scientific work remain crucial to any understanding of positivism, prob-
ably more so than the thesis of naturalism. This is so because it is possible to reject
naturalism while retaining a phenomenalist thesis and separating science/non-science
on the basis of various criteria. In this section we will consider issues involved in
explanatory structure alluded to above but not explicitly discussed.
   Phenomenalism is the thesis that the only feature that can be known for certain about
either the natural or the social world is what is given to human beings, as subject-
observers, in the senses. Anything that goes beyond sense-perception is non-
observable and therefore unknowable. It is the empiricist belief par excellence and
remains at the heart of positivism. Associated with this thesis is the belief that it is
possible to perform objective tests against a solid bedrock of fact and to confirm or refute
statements in this manner. In an archaeological context Renfrew (1982a, p. 143) has
reaffirmed the crucial importance of this 'old relationship' between theory and data: 'the
hypothetico-deductive approach rightly lays stress on the passage from theory to data,
by means of deduced hypotheses and of hypothesis testing'. Since the advent of the new
archaeology testing statements against the archaeological record has remained the key-
note of what is regarded as an objective and, therefore, truly worthy scientific enter-
prise. Put very simply anything, i.e. any statement which cannot be tested, must remain
a meaningless statement because there is no way of evaluating it.
   No particular stress or importance is placed on where the statements come from, or
the theories. They could be the result of a careful consideration of the data or previous
work or, quite equally, arise from dreams or hallucinations. The first point to note,
then, is that the process of arriving at these theories or statements to be tested is totally
denigrated. This is of no importance and there is a one-sided stress on the testing process
wherein the essence of truth is thought to arise. Secondly, it is assumed that there
actually is a hard bedrock of facts or data to test against, independent of an act of subjec-
tive definition. This is the proposition that all archaeologists would be able to reach
agreement, in any particular case, as to what the hard facts to be tested against actually
are and this will now be examined.
   First, are the empirical facts non-subjectively defined? Consider the diagram below
(Fig. 2.1). This is a rather famous example from gestalt psychology. Is it a young or old
woman? Can we perceive what it is irrespective of an act of interpretation? The answer
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                       37


is no: we can either perceive it as an old or a young woman. We cannot perceive what it
is supposed to be apart from a subjective interpretation of the observed evidence before
us, i.e. the lines that make up the diagram. The manner in which this diagram is
described is vitally crucial to the act of seeing what it is. The reality is not independent
of a description of that reality. Hanson (1958) has argued, on the basis of such
examples, that the idea of a theory-neutral observation language is untenable. What
scientists see is essentially related to their theories and beliefs about the way the world
is. What we observe depends on these background assumptions so there can be no
objective testing without circularity. Furthermore it is not possible in a positivist frame-
work to judge between competing theories or statements, because different observers
cannot agree on what they actually see as a result of the theory-laden nature of obserc
vational statements. Kuhn ( 1970) has widened this position to a discussion of paradigm
change within science so that at different stages of scientific activity individuals literally
see things in different ways. They may generally agree on what they are seeing but this
is a consensus position which has little to do with a non-subjectively defined reality.
Priestley 'saw' dephlogisticated air while Lavoisier, adopting quite different assump-
tions, 'saw' oxygen.
   Now it could be claimed that examples such as this or the young-old woman diagram
are unfair. The diagram is deliberately designed to trick or deceive. It runs counter to
our general intuitions and the real world of archaeological data is simply not like that.
We can agree on what we see, or what the facts are supposed to be, and make our tests
against them. This is a common-sense and well-established procedure. Well, the
archaeologist advocating positivist science will be hoist with his or her own petard.
First, the claim as to whether theories actually are independent of observations can only




Fig. 2 .I Appearance and interpretation.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              38


be grounded on a subjective claim- a statement of belief that things really are like that.
There is no reason to accept this. Secondly, science has nothing to do with common
sense. It is precisely the opposite- science calls into question common-sense notions.
   Consider the concept of explanation. Passmore (1962) has demonstrated how, under
a variety of circumstances, a piece of information can be offered as an explanation. He
adopts the pragmatic standpoint that ultimately what constitutes an adequate expla-
nation depends on 'what I know and what I want to know'. Above all an explanation
must be intuitively satisfying depending on criteria of clarity, soundness, intelligibility
and precision, criteria which it is almost impossible to realistically define. According to
Passmore historians use almost as liberal criteria as, to use that old cliche, the man or
woman in the street. On the basis of the manner in which positivist philosophers of
science have characterized their activities, natural scientists adopt an extremely
specialized procedure, the deductive-nomological model of explanation: A ifB (law: an
atemporal, aspatial statement). Empirical case: B happened (antecedent condition).
Therefore A occurred (explanadum event) (Hempell965). A variant on this model is
the inductive-statistical mode in which laws are replaced by probability statements to
the effect that if A then usually B with, ideally, a specified probability of how many times
B is likely to occur if A. As discussed above some new archaeologists set out to find laws
in order to make their work conform to the deductive nomological model but discovered
none which were neither tautologies nor of the utmost triviality. No doubt this has
promoted some of the current disillusion with the value of philosophy to the discipline.
The failure to find laws has led to an emphasis on generalization as a substitute. Renfrew
(1982b, p. 10) has stated that laws have always been his bete noir. However, in common
with most archaeologists, he has retained the wish to make generalizations and for
archaeology to be a generalizing science. It remains unspecified and unclear what status
these generalizations are actually supposed to have and how general a statement must be
before it counts as a generalization: two cases? three? fifty?. If the generalizations made
are not laws they cannot be expected to be applicable in any one particular case so why
are these generalizations of use to us? Why must the business of doing science necess-
arily be equated with the ability, or the will to generalize? This appears to be a
procedural rule founded on the basis that generalizing, rather than considering all the
particularity ofthe individual case, is a superior kind of activity. There seems to be no
compelling reason why we should accept this.
   We will now return to problems of testing theory or hypotheses against the data from
a slightly different angle within positivism. So far, the only specific criticism we have
made in relation to deductive nomological or inductive statistical explanation is that, in
practice, archaeologists have been unable to make their work conform to these rigid self-
imposed models. This may be a sufficient reason for rejecting them but it is not a
necessary condition.
   Historically, there has been a very strong link between the positivist tradition of
philosophizing and, in particular, the logical positivism of the Vienna circle espoused in
the work of Carnap, Feigl, Frank, Godel, Neurath and Reichenbach, and the British
empiricist tradition represented by Locke and Hume (Hempel belonged to a Berlin
group of philosophers while Popper was never a member of the Vienna circle and has
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                         39


always distanced his views from theirs). Hempel's explication of the nature of expla-
natory structure is founded on the Humean 'regularity' view of causation according to
which two events, C and E are related as cause and effect, if, and only if, they are mem-
bers, respectively, of classes C and E of observable events. Thus each member of entity
E regularly follows and is contiguous with a particular member of entity C. An observer
experiencing E will, then, be led to expect the presence of C (Sayre 1976, p. 65).
Causation, in such a perspective, is identified with regular succession coupled with
psychological association. It is the psychological association made by the observer
between C and E that constitutes, to Hume, the 'cement of the universe' (see Mackie
1974 for a detailed discussion). Put crudely it is the philosopher's job to provide the
logical cement that links C and E. Hempel's work is one way of applying the cement.
However, that this cement is required in the first place is purely a product of the
empiricist's radical scepticism as to the manner in which knowledge claims can be
made. It depends on a theory of perception in which the observer experiences the world
as a series of independent and unconnected sense impressions and must connect these
back together in terms of a logical cement between perceived regularities. This logical
cement is a deductive syllogism, in the form presented by Hempel, but to Hume it was
a process of induction. Real structural relationships are denied and exchanged for
logical relations. We will return to this point in Chapter 5. It will suffice to state here that
if we deny the belief that we experience the world solely in terms of disconnected
atomistic particularities, but that real relations of structural necessity exist, there is no
requirement for us to lay on thick layers oflogical cement.
   The logical positivists of the Vienna circle codified a distinction between analytic and
synthetic statements. Synthetic statements refer to relationships existing between
entities of which we acquire simple sense-perception, subject to the view criticized
above, that we see the world independent of theories about it. Analytic statements are
purely products oflogic and only tautologies as they rest on definitional clauses, e.g. a
bachelor is an unmarried man because to be unmarried and to be a man is to be a
bachelor. Such statements are only correct in terms of formal logic and tell us nothing
about the world. Analytic terms relate to entities which cannot be perceived, e.g.
volume, mass, force, atoms. A scientific theory almost always involves reference to such
terms. To have validity, according to positivists, it must be subject to axiomatizations.
Axiomatizations of a theory must include various explicit definitions for the theoretical
terms of the sort Tx = Ox where T is a theoretical term and 0 is an observation term and
the link between them is provided by correspondence rules.
   Braithwaite (1968, p. 51) likened these rules to a zip which pulled together theoretical
and observation statements but, true to the empiricist tradition, the theoretical
language, unless it was purely tautologous and thus useless, was entirely dependent or
parasitic on the observation language. The two are not on an equal footing and, further-
more, if it is conceded as even members of the Vienna circle now admit, that observation
statements are not theory-free (e.g., Feigl 1970) the corollary is that theoretical and
observational statements cannot at all be clearly separated. Concomitantly the latter pro-
vide, on positivist grounds, neither a conclusive affirmation or refutation of the former.
Additionally W. V. 0. Quine's (1961) paper 'Two dogmas of empiricism' has
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              40


demolished even the difference held to exist between analytic and synthetic statements
by calling into question the very concept of meaning itself construed as some kind of
mystical mental property held to exist independently of the will of a speaker to assent or
dissent from sentences in natural language. Quine (1960) describes science as being
analogous to a force field whose boundaries (i.e. the boundary conditions) are radically
underdetermined by experience, such that there is a considerable latitude of choice as
to exactly which statements should be re-evaluated in the light of any single contrary
experience. Thus any formal criteria for theory choice - verification, confirmation,
falsification- become discredited. Positivist science is no more, no less, than a form of
controlled subjectivity, the controls being that there is some sort of logic or rationality
involved, but exactly where this resides except on an intra-community subjective basis
is rather difficult to specify. At this point it should be noted that this kind of criterion
for evaluating knowledge claims was precisely that which new archaeologists objected
to in the traditional archaeology - the more famous, and inevitably the older, the
archaeologist, the more reason there was to accept his or her knowledge claims as being
valid, as providing a reasonable accommodation to the 'facts'.
   We will return to the theory/data relationship in another and less abstract way. We
have a theory and wish to test it against the data. Further, we make the assumption that
the data is in some way independent of our theorization. The test is negative: is our
theory falsified? Alternatively the test is positive. Do we then have any more confidence
in the theory? This depends on whether we adopt a verificationist or a falsificationist
strategy for hypothesis confirmation. In the early work of the Vienna circle the verifi-
cation principle was upheld, i.e., statements made about the world must be empirically
verifiable in relation to sense-perception data in order to have any meaning. A logical
extension of this was that only scientific procedures framed in this manner could be
granted meaning. Any other statements made about the world by poets, for example, or
in aesthetics lacked any meaning. Concomitantly the rest of philosophy, apart from
logical positivism, was also written off as meaningless activity. A concession was that
statements made by others might be granted emotive meaning but little more. An
immediate problem arose: a fundamental logical inconsistency. The verificationist prin-
ciple itself could not be tested nor could it be granted the status of an analytic truth.
Consequently, on the very grounds of logical positivism it was itself meaningless. In
other words logical positivism rested on precisely the kinds of metaphysical claims
about the world it shrugged off as being invalid.
   The phenomenalist thesis commits positivism to the idea that there is an objective
world to test or verify an hypothesis against (but see the Popper variant below). Unfor-
tunately for archaeology, or any other area of human inquiry, the content of what is
supposed to be given to the senses of the subject -observer is not independent of an oper-
ation of mind and can hardly be relied upon to point to itself. The similarities or differ-
ences between two 'given' objects of experience must necessarily be described but it is
impossible to ever give a complete description. In other words every act of dealing with
'givens' in experience is dependent on a whole set of procedures not themselves given
to experience and therefore not subject to meaningful discourse. If all observation is to
a certain extent theoretical- objects of experience are constituted by an act of knowledge
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                         41


on the part of a 'knowing' subject (in our case the archaeologist) who decides what the
givens are - it is illogical to maintain that theories can be independently tested against
observations.
   Popper (1959, 1963, 197 4) has persistently claimed that he is not a positivist. Indeed,
he has regarded his work as a critique of positivism. However, he asserts the naturalist
thesis of the unity of science and maintains there is a clear demarcation between scien-
tific and non-scientific activity and that science provides the most reliable and signifi-
cant knowledge to which human beings could hope to aspire. As with the positivists of
the Vienna circle, Popper's criterion of scientific activity is that statements should be
subject to testing. In all these respects Popper's work remains part of the same tradition.
The major points of contrast are:
    (i)   the substitution of a doctrine of falsification for one of verifiability. Nothing for
          certain can be known about the world. All we can hope to do is to disprove
          statements by setting out to falsify them by empirical testing;
   (ii)   observation statements are in no way certain, they are theory-laden;
  (iii)   he has defended metaphysics and openly acknowledges that his philosophy is
          based on metaphysical arguments.
   Surprisingly, archaeologists have not made much explicit reference to Popper's work
(but see Salmon 1975; Tringham 1978) but it may accord more with their actual prac-
tices than strict logical positivism or the Hempelian position. Popper stresses an asym-
metry between verification and falsification. We can never verify a law because the next
test may prove it to be wrong. Scientists deal more with verisimilitude than truth
(Popper 1959, p. 135). Science is carried out by a process of deduction, by testing uni-
versal statements (laws) against singular statements: 'to give a causal explanation of an
event means to deduce a statement which describes it, using as premises of the deduc-
tion one or more universal laws, together with certain singular statements, the initial
conditions' (ibid., p. 59). As in Hempel's work explanation is of the particular by the
general and a symmetry is held to exist between explanation and prediction. Now, on
Popper's account there is no compelling reason to believe there are, in fact, laws. The
argument rests on the assumption that laws exist because the world can be described in
terms of essential uniformities- a metaphysical assertion. Science to Popper is descrip-
tive and divorced from language so that the 'logic of discovery' does not require corre-
spondence rules linking theoretical and observational terms. Truth is considered to be
a non-empirical concept and timeless. Corroboration is different from truth and we
accept some hypothesis or statement as being provisionally 'true' in that it has not been
proved to be false (ibid., p. 275). One single contrary observation falsities a hypothesis
in a falsificationist strategy. To Popper scientific knowledge is built on the shifting
sandbanks of theory-impregnated observations but empirical refutations provide the
basis on which knowledge is based and is supposedly a progressive advance towards
more and more certainty in what we say. This idea of a progressing, but nevertheless
uncertain knowledge is, in fact, only possible to defend if there were a limit to the
number of conjectures and refutations to be made of a theory, but as these are infinite-
there is no logical end point at which the testing procedure can stop- what basis is there
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                  42


to believe that any number of tests would lead us nearer to the truth? In the actual prac-
tice of testing, falsification remains unreliable. A cherished theory can always be 'saved'
precisely because observation is theory-laden and Popper admits that it is. The state-
ment that all swans are white is falsified by the discovery of a single black swan, in
theory, but then, of course, we must decide whether the black swan is to count as a swan
or can be defined as such. Furthermore any statement about the world or a series of
statements, i.e. a theory, cannot be falsified in any simple manner since a falsifying test
may not impugn the whole theory but, perhaps, an unexamined auxiliary statement. In
this case we more or less have to make a choice whether to reject the statement or theory
or not. In the black swan case we have to decide whether the empirical example refuting
our statement is a swan. If we want to defend a theory we can simply reject the test as
inadequate in some way.
   Popper's response to strategies designed to save a theory from refutation, in the
manner discussed above, is to claim that this is contrary to the ideals of scientists: 'we
decide that if our system is threatened we will never save it by any kind of conven-
tionalist stratagem ... it must be left to the investigator to constantly guard against this
temptation' (ibid., p. 82). So, to be a scientist, in effect, has nothing whatsoever to do
with testing: to be a scientist is to accept some type of behavioural norm as to how to act.
Popper asserts ( 1966) that Marxists accept no such norm and always save their theories
(see Cornforth 1968 for a rejoinder). For Popper, then, it is the behaviour of Marxists
that is at issue, not the conceptual structures they employ. What is observed and tested
depends on the scientist's training (Popper 1959, pp. 99-104). Concomitantly, the
results of tests and what then counts as knowledge depends on how scientists are trained
at any one time. They can then more or less agree on basic statements about the world,
but if someone doesn't agree they can be dismissed as a pseudo-scientist or a fool: 'when
all else fails the danger of an infinite regression in the testing and retesting of basic state-
ments by the scientific community may be averted by the elementary rule that might is
right' (Hindess 1977, p. 175).
   To maintain, as Popper does, that observation is theory-laden but that science still
progresses by testing against empirical data is entirely contradictory. The basic state-
ments, i.e. the observations made on the world, are a function of training and are theory-
laden. Furthermore, a choice is always involved as to whether a test has really falsified
a theory. We test our hypotheses not against any solid bedrock of fact, as the strict logical
positivists of the Vienna circle once claimed, but in terms of basic theory-laden terms
and observations we have supposedly been trained to know. But if theory is involved in
the very act of observation then testing cannot be a rational procedure. Even if after the
test we have not falsified our theory there is no reason to believe that confidence has been
increased since there are an infinite number of tests which could be made. If we just
single out a few 'key' hypotheses to test then, in effect, our tests only serve to reproduce
the knowledge 'given' to us in our conceptual system.
   In positivist philosophy, then, there are no coherent grounds for the belief that we can
test against an independent non-subjectively defined reality. The testing process
provides no more certainty than if we had not tested a proposition. The grounds for dis-
tinguishing scientific from non-scientific activity are far from clear and there is no
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                    43


reason to believe that science provides more objective or more certain knowledge than
other modes of human understanding of the social world. The beliefs held by archae-
ologists that they can perform objective tests of their theories and choose between these
theories in the framework of positivist science are undermined, likewise the belief that
their activities are of a radically different nature from those engaged in by historians.
Some of the arguments that have been made might well be accepted (Binford and Sabloff
(1983) concur that knowledge is not to be attained by testing procedures) but with the
residual retention of a phenomenalist thesis which we consider further below.
   We have noted that a commitment to phenomenalism or the belief that we can only
gain knowledge through sense-perception is a metaphysical statement so that there is no
automatic reason to accept it. The question is: can a more plausible counter-claim be
made, and on what basis? The delimitation of such a claim will be left until Chapter 5
and attention here will be concentrated on why phenomenalism provides an inadequate
basis for founding knowledge claims. To use an Althusserian turn of phrase, positivism
is the empiricism of the object, thought to be present to the senses, capable of isolation
as such, and constituting the correct unit of study. Knowledge consists in both a radical
distinction between concepts and phenomena (see the discussion of causation above),
subject and object, and yet at the same time depends on a correspondence between
them. There is a realm of knowledge acquired by a 'knowing' subject and this knowl-
edge consists in propositions and concepts about the world. The realm of knowledge is
opposed to the object world of phenomena passing to the subject -observer as sense data.
Distinctions are set up between concepts and reality and may be linked up by corre-
spondence rules, for example. But in positivism there can be no real difference between
an object constituted in knowledge and the phenomena of experience. They become
more or less isomorphic. This might be termed a form of'subjective idealism' (Hindess
1977, p. 114) in that the investigator, as 'knower', on a priori grounds already formu-
lates and constitutes that which is to be known. Whatever is not physically present in
space or time, and whatever is general, can only be reached through inference and there-
fore remains uncertain. However, given that observation is dependent on theory,
objects of knowledge become constituted prior to the process of knowing them. Con-
comitantly, knowledge is not discovered or produced from a reality but already given to
that reality prior to any application of method. Knowledge consists of little more than
the description of that which has already been theoretically constituted. In other words,
what positivist science attempts to produce via the application of a scientific method-
ology has already been constituted prior to the operation of the methodology through an
operation of the mind. There can be no 'logic of scientific discovery' since it has already
been decided what there is to discover (see Chapter 3).

Conclusion
The fortunes of a positivist archaeology naturally depend on the philosophical tradition
on which it draws, but positivism provides no coherent epistemology, no adequate
ontology of the world, no means of conceptualizing the theory/data relationship which
is acceptable, no convincing account of explanatory structure, asserts a crude view of the
unity of science, and the spectre of science which it presents simply does not accord with
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              44


actual practice, providing no basis (itself irrevocably value-laden) for claims that science
is a superior mode of activity - the only really meaningful activity a scholar could
indulge in. It is a tragedy that most archaeologists feel a commitment to carry on this
completely discredited tradition of research in one form or another. In fact, if
positivism was actually taken to its logical extreme we would have to deny the possibility
of any knowledge of the past beyond pure subjectivism. Positivism would return archae-
ology to exactly those 'normative' traditions and that radical scepticism displayed in
Hawkes's ladder of inference from which it sought to escape (Hawkes 1954). To a
certain extent this has already happened.
   The failure of archaeologists to discover laws reduces the explanations archaeologists
make, in the positivist dogma, to mere 'explanation sketches' (Hempel1959). Accord-
ing to Hempel this is because of empirical complexity more than anything else but it still
seems to make archaeology a poor thinker's science vis-a-vis natural science if archae-
ologists are to accept this imperialism. Binford (1977) introduced the term 'middle
range theory' into archaeology, at the same time confessing that 'in the absence of
progress toward usable theory, there is no new archaeology, only an antitraditional
archaeology at best' (Binford 1977, p. 9). Binford's solution to the lack of usable theory
is to build it and his subsequent work (1978, 1981, 1983a section IV, 1983b) has been
devoted to doing just this, but the theories are being built from the bottom up, to arrive
at empirical 'facts' which are subsequently employed to invalidate the work of others.
This so-called middle range theorizing is enthusiastically advocated by some (e.g., Raab
and Goodyear 1984; Willey and Sabloff 1980, pp. 249ff.) and appears to be rapidly
developing to the status of a new panacea for archaeological ills. Middle range theory is
little more than middle range empiricism, and what is supposedly 'middle' about it is
far from clear. According to Raab and Good year:
         One outcome of middle-range theorising can be the creation of a logical struc-
         ture in which low-order working-hypotheses tend to confirm or negate
         propositions in a middle stratum and the latter in turn reflect upon the validity
         of yet more generalized theories ... On the other hand a series of testable
         propositions can be derived from existing theories in ways suggested by
         Hempel (1965), Popper (1959) and others.
                                       (Raab and Goodyear 1984, p. 257, our emphasis)
Given the criticisms of positivist science presented above such a statement requires no
comment other than to note that the term 'middle range theorizing' is virtually redun-
dant as a means of differentiating the type of research that Raab and Goodyear propose
from that which has been carried out without the use of it. The concept is, rather, a new
fancy icing on the old empiricist cake.
   In some recent discussions the terms 'objective' and 'science' take on an almost
magical significance. They are so vitally important to Binford, for example, that he con-
stantly repeats .them in his publications as a means of legitimating the worth of his
research programme. The commitment to phenomenalism, stridently displayed in his
work in which the subject-observer must take his or her 'premises to experience and per-
mit experience to pass judgment on their accuracy' (1983a, p. 421) results in the creation
Positivism and the 'new archaeology'                                                  45


of a pseudo-science or a subjective idealism as we have argued above. This is coupled
with a naturalism in which the archaeological record is considered to be purely a product
of a 'complex mechanical system of causation' (ibid., p. 417), a view which is repro-
duced in considerations of human agency. Social action is reduced to the logistics of
adaptation and maximization of resources - 'labour accommodations to incongruent
distributions of critical resources or conditions' (ibid., p. 344). As will be argued in
Chapter 3, such a viewpoint owes much to the value-system of the capitalist west and
indirectly serves its reproduction. The adoption of positivism results in a view of the
past dangerously close to Hollis's caricature. It is high time we changed stations.
3
Facts and values in archaeology




         'Those who desert the world and those who sell out to it have something in common.
         Neither group can adopt an openly critical stance to society.' (Gouldner 1973, p. 13)


 Introduction
 Chapter 2 considered archaeology's pretensions to being science through a critique of
 positivist doctrines accepted by many since the 1960s. In this chapter we concentrate on
archaeology's pretensions to objectivity which may or may not be associated with the
advocacy of a scientific archaeology. Is it possible for archaeology to be value-free? Is
 this a reasonable or a valid aim? Most sceptical empirical archaeologists would probably
deny that archaeology can ever be an entirely objective account of the past and yet most
archaeologists are undoubtedly aiming at objectivity even if it isn't thought possible to
quite achieve this ideal; it is accepted that the archaeologist should aim at eliminating
subjective 'bias'. But what exactly are the implications of this aim? We wish to progress
beyond slippery scepticism and examine objectivity in archaeology, focussing on the
relation between facts and values. Archaeologists have remained surprisingly reluctant
to discuss this issue in spite of claims made over a decade ago for a dawning of critical
self-consciousness (Clarke 1973). As several (Kohl1981; Hall1984; Miller 1982a; Ucko
 1983) have noted, this self-consciousness within archaeology has largely been limited to
the search for method to secure objective knowledge of other cultures. It has been
methodological introspection, a concern to find an objective means of access to the past
rather than reflective inquiry into the contemporary roots of knowledge in the past. We
wish to examine this search for method, to look further into this discrepancy in the form
and meaning of archaeology's self-consciousness of itself as investigation of the past, a
discipline and practice largely untroubled by doubts and questionings with regard to
social, political and moral issues which have brought about an awareness in other fields
of knowledge of the manifest shortcomings of dominant patterns of thought. We argue
that the notion of value-freedom, of objectivity, imports a whole series of usually
unrecognized values into archaeology and contend that the separation of facts and
values, an opposition lying at the heart of a complex of related theoretical standpoints,
is a disabling ideology which fails to deal adequately with the past and, in however
minor a way, helps to sustain and justify the values of a capitalist present.

An objective and scientific archaeology: rational method and therapy
Setting aside its more unsavoury aspects as a struggle for power in the discipline which
we discuss in Chapter 2, the 'new' archaeology began as ideology critique. It aimed to

46
Facts and values in archaeology                                                          47


dispel and discredit the fact collection and humanist narrative of traditional archae-
ology, to rationally reassess archaeological work and to call into question the validity of
interpretations not open to such assessment and this was conceived primarily in terms
of testing and quantification. Much of the introspection in archaeology during the past
fifteen years is part of such a process of rationalization.
   A premise of this process is that systematic observation and rational method, a term
which we employ throughout this chapter as a short-hand term when referring to
positivist/empiricist discourse, would provide an objective means of access to the past.
The process of acquiring knowledge is viewed as being a resolution of contradiction
between knowledge, located subjectively, and the objective facts:
         Knowledge starts from the tension between knowledge and ignorance. Thus
         we might say not only, no problems without knowledge; but also, no problems
         without ignorance. For each problem arises from the discovery that something
         is not in order with our supposed knowledge; or, viewed logically, from the
         discovery of an inner contradiction between our supposed knowledge and the
         facts.                                                   (Popper 1976, p. 88)

But the contradiction lies in the subjective side of the relation; it is a deficiency of
supposed knowledge on the part of the impartial observer (Adorno 1976a). In the search
for rules of method which will guarantee objectivity, reason becomes identified with the
correct method, with operational rules rather than with cognitive acts. Thus the process
of acquiring knowledge, of doing archaeology, is a therapeutic process. It aims to bring
thought and expression, the archaeologist, into accordance with the object of archaeo-
logical investigation. It aims to cure pathological thinking, contradiction within the
process of knowledge.
   According to rational method, reality is reasonable and the observed immediate
appearance of the object is taken as being real, something existing independently of its
investigation. The archaeologically observable past, the object of archaeological investi-
gation is accorded epistemological and ontological priority. The basis of true expla-
nation becomes an abstract conception of the fact, abstract because it does not matter
which fact it is as long as it has been systematically observed, measured and recorded-
processed by rational method. Objectivity is in-itself, abstracted from its context.
Objectivity, which is the quality of an object, is conceived abstractly- quantitatively.
Objectivity is uniform and neutral because it exists separately from the observing sub-
ject. So it is objective facts which count; knowledge depends on them; they are, after all,
considered to be hard physical reality. The neutrality of facts from this perspective
means that they cannot be criticized; the precision and consistency with which facts are
observed may be criticized, but not the abstract concept of objectivity. The fact's name,
its immediate classification, exhausts its concept, describing without passing
judgement.
   'Value' refers to a relationship; it is a meaning, a significance for an other, for some-
one. It unites, for example, an object and a person or two people. But according to
rational method, values are to be separated from facts; they exist not for another but
in-themselves; values are substantial, monetary. What is and what ought to be are
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               48


entirely separate. Thus in affirming the primacy of the object, archaeology must
positively affirm immediate appearance. Ideology comes to mean violation of objectivity
or of value-freedom; it refers to the intrusion of the subjective at the level of method. So
misunderstanding of the data, even systematic misrepresentation and distortion in the
data must be due to the pathologically thinking analyst. Immediate reality of fact can
never, after all, be unreasonable.
   This is compounded by scientism - the belief that whatever is defined as scientific
rationality should be the basis of archaeology. Scientism is most obviously seen in the
neo-positivist law-searching new archaeology but certainly does not depend on a
positivist conception of natural science. We would contend that it implicitly lies within
a great deal of theoretical archaeology. If archaeology as science of the archaeological
object is only contingently related to value judgements and there can be no other objec-
tive basis to a study of the archaeological past than through observation of the object, the
primacy of the object leads to the identification of what is and what ought to be; the latter
is reduced to the former. The way things appear immediately in fact is the way it should
be.

Reification and empirical regularity
         The exchange principle, the reduction of human labour to the abstract univer-
         sal concept of average labour time, is fundamentally related to the principle of
         identification. Exchange is the social model of the principle, and without the
         principle there would be no exchange; it is through exchange that non-identical
         individuals and performances become commensurable and identical. The
         spread of the principle imposes on the whole world an obligation to become
         identical, to become total.      (Adorno 1973a, p. 146- modified translation)

Pre-defined rational method produces its object in advance. The particular structure of
the object in the past is neglected in favour of a general method which guarantees objec-
tivity- abstract objectivity. So the object past is not represented in, by and through
archaeology but rather its representation is exchanged for universal interchangeability-
a principle of identification. Objects have meaning primarily as objectivity. This means
that fundamentally unlike phenomena can be equated. In particular social phenomena
are reified, conceived as a set of physical processes; social phenomena as objects of
rational method are part of the object world; society becomes a second nature.
   This process of reification and identification is related to the capitalist mode of com-
modity exchange. It is through the commodification oflabour and its product, through
the reduction of labour to abstract labour time that non-identical individuals and prac-
tices become commensurable and identical. All practice, concrete and particular is
reduced to behaviour - physical movement. Everything is identical and comparable
according to the commodity form. 'Values', our subjective reaction to and appropri-
ation of the object, are reduced to this single value of commensurability, monetary com-
parability. The only value allowed is that of objectivity, facts not judgements about what
ought to be, explanations not 'paradigms'.
   In the commodity exchange of the capitalist market we seem to be and are treated as
Facts and values in archaeology                                                           49


empirical regularities governed by a natural necessity. We must adapt ourselves to the
quasi-autonomous processes of the capitalist market. However, in making objective and
universal this particular relationship between the individual and society, positivist/
empiricist rational method distorts society through its duplication, through the dupli-
cation of a reified consciousness. The conception of meaningful practice as physical
behaviour and the symmetry held to exist between prediction and explanation has the
effect of making this contemporary relationship between the individual and society
seem natural:
         Predictability ... does not lead to truth. Rather it highlights the extent to
         which social relations are relations of unfreedom. The more society takes the
         form of, and is perceived in, the categories of a second nature, the more it is
         shaped by the outcome of individual actions locked in relations of economic
         necessity, the more human agency is subjugated to 'laws' of development, the
         easier it is to predict social outcomes.
                                        (Held 1980, pp. 171-2, quoting Horkheimer 1968)

Thus in archaeology the widespread attempts made to predict data sets (e.g., Hodder
(ed.) 1978; Hamond 1981; Sabloff(ed.) 1981) and then to think one has explained any-
thing as a result of the outcomes of these predictions can be conceived as the imposition
of a reified consciousness of the present, attesting to social relations of unfreedom, onto
the past. The past is thereby recreated as the present which then becomes, in turn,
naturalized by the past. Although prediction-as-explanation is logically connected with
a view of explanation as subsumption of the particular beneath generalization (see Chap-
ter 2, pp. 38-40), the former is often held without explicitly connecting it with the latter.
Clarke (1972, p. 2) has claimed that 'explanation in archaeology ... is viewed merely
as a form of redescription which allows predictions to be made'. The rationale behind
such redescription or model-building is that a working model- a model that works- is
viewed as a successful explanation. The relationship between theory and reality
becomes one of utility. The theory must work, and the reality it serves to define is a
useful reality. Fritz (1973) and Ford (1973) have explicitly emphasized archaeology's
utilitarian value, archaeology producing universal principles of human behaviour
applicable to the present: archaeological theory can 'help engineers, applied scientists,
government managers to control and even direct' social processes (Fritz 1973, p. 81).
Past, present and future are deemed to be equivalent objects of instrumental control.

Manipulating the past as image of the present: economic archaeology
We argue that archaeology is a technology, that it is not a neutral quest for knowledge
but that it systematically structures its questioning and the object it questions. It adapts
the past to the exigencies of an archaeology in a capitalist present concerned with estab-
lishing the rules of a rational method to secure objective knowledge of the past, pinning
it down. Such method operates on a pre-defined objectivity, a unified and abstract
nature and society. This absolute reality is reduced through reification- separation of
subject from object- to a quantified object of manipulation. Such knowledge aims to
eliminate contradiction between subject and object, to eliminate disturbances in inter-
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            50


action with objective nature, to adapt the individual to nature, to produce successful
expectations. As part of feedback-monitored practice the principles of knowledge
become the principles of self-preservation. Immediate living - the principles of self-
preservation are the principles of a free-market economy. Individuals classified as
producer-consumers act 'rationally', adapting themselves to the quasi autonomous pro-
cesses of the omni-historical market, satisfying need, minimizing cost and maximizing
profit. But this universal market is a capitalist market within which

         The domination of men over men is realised through the reduction of men to
         agents and bearers of commodity exchange. The concrete form of the total
         system requires everyone to respect the law of exchange if he does not wish to
         be destroyed, irrespectivE uf whether profit is his subjective motivation or not.
                                                                    (Adorno 1976b, p. 14)

   An explicit adherence to the primacy of instrumental reason is to be found in a great
deal of economic archaeology. The relation between the archaeologically observed
society and its natural environment mirrors the epistemological subject-object relation
of the present - a technical relation. Economic archaeology asserts the historical
primacy of technologically rational behaviour. Rationality refers only to behaving in
accordance with the technical recommendations of economy and efficiency - those
values internal to rationality. Other value systems are non-rational and so arbitrary.
History becomes the unfolding of reason, the Enlightenment dream, the curing of
irrationality, of mal-adaptive behaviour. History becomes a therapeutic process.
   That archaeology is to a large extent a reconciliation between the capitalist present
and the prehistoric past can be seen most nakedly in the application of decision theory,
game theory, linear and dynamic programming models (Jochim 1976; Keene 1979,
1981; Earle 1980; Christenson 1980). These theories represent, quite clearly, a
mathematized logic of self-preservation. Such work has been hailed by Whallon as good
examples of explanation and modelling and as an effective approach to theory-building
of universal applicability (Whallon 1982). Underlying all this work is the notion of
rationality writ large: 'the major assumption underlying all theories of choice is that of
the rational decision maker' (Jochim 1976, p. 4). This rationality, we are led to under-
stand, involves concepts such as risk and cost whether or not they were recognized by
the prehistoric actors. Keene notes two assumptions on which his application oflinear
programming to hunter-gatherer economy rests:

         The primary goal among hunter-gatherers is to provide the basic nutritive and
         other raw materials necessary for the survival of the population

and
        when faced with a choice between two resources of equal utility, the one of
        lower cost will be chosen ... economic behaviour is both satisfying and
        optimising.                                             (Keene 1979, p. 370)

Virtually identical remarks are made by Earle:
Facts and values in archaeology                                                                  51


         Other factors being equal, a community, viewed here as functionally equiv-
         alent to a diversified firm, should allocate its labour such that the requirements
         of the community's population are met at the lowest possible cost.
                                                                         (Earle 1980, p. 14)

Some remarks ofChristenson may be added:

          There is no universal tendency toward profit maximization in the unrestricted
          sense. However, maximization when referring to efficiency can be considered
          a restricted kind of profit maximization where output (consumption) is fixed.
          This kind of maximization is quite relevant to understanding early human
          subsistence behaviour.                              (Christenson 1980, p. 33)

These statements rather than being of great relevance for understanding the past
appear, rather, as prime examples of the value system of contemporary capitalist
economics projected onto the past. Optimization is a key term in all these models -
maximum profit for minimum risk and cost. Torrence (1983) has applied the quantified
time of the factory clock to hunter-gatherer societies, attempting to relate technology-
tool kit composition - to effective use of time, optimization of time- scheduling and
budgeting of time. This is claimed to provide increased reproductive fitness. This is the
value system of technocratic reason, of the company executive. As optimization has, in
such accounts, always been a fundamental feature of social life from the dawn of prehis-
tory, such a perspective bolsters up the contemporary capitalist system by naturalizing
contemporary economic practices as the only possible ones. Mathematized decision
making is very much to be related to a capitalist rationalization of the labour process, a
rationalization which aims, of course, to benefit capital. It is no coincidence that
decision theory plays a significant part in management science.
   Rationality, in these perspectives, is not a relative concept but instead is a term that
is confined to social action in so far as it is 'satisfying', i.e. technically efficient. In effect,
rationality becomes a value in itself by means of which all other actions and values are
judged and labelled irrational. This is because the technical rationality of efficiency and
cost minimization is designated as what rationality is and all human beings are deemed
to be rational in just this one sense so that other 'non-rational' values not relevant to
economic maximization are reduced to dependent rather than independent, and equally
important, variables. Hence the non-economic can be reduced to the status of a random
or dependent variable (magic). The means-ends relationship from this perspective,
becomes considered in a manner which militates against the consideration of ends at all
in the last analysis. Such work is no more than a rationalization for, and assertion of the
Homo oeconomicus of capitalist theory- 'human nature' - against the timeless standards
of which all can be measured and explained. We know of little significant criticism of
this fiction in archaeology. A recent substantive criticism of optimization (Jochim
1983a) was concerned not with the assumptions of maximizing rational economic
behaviour, but with the application of the ideal model to 'reality', fitting homo
oeconomicus to the real world, making her work.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              52


Systems theory, the status quo and pathology
 Systems theory has become the dominant 'analogue model' within archaeology used to
explain social change and social process, providing a theoretical structure, a set of
modelling techniques, a source of concepts and testable propositions and a model for
explanation according to one reviewer (Plog 1975). We wish to argue that it is funda-
mentally implicated in the search for rational method we have been outlining, in the pro-
cess of rationalization within archaeology. The major theoretical exposition of systems
theory in the archaeological literature remains that of Clarke (1968) and the most
detailed substantive applications those of Renfrew (1972) and Plog (1974) while there
are a host of other studies adopting the same general framework (e.g., Flannery 1968,
 1972; Flannery and Marc us 1976; Hill (ed.) 1977) and Binford made some early
programmatic remarks (1962, 1964, 1965).
   Systems theory can be viewed as an updated version of the holism of Durkheimian
sociology (Durkheim 1915) in which the whole, society, is greater than the sum of its
parts. That is, it is not in principle reducible to the sum of the individuals which make
it up. Generally, the definition used of society is of a system which functions as a whole
by virtue of the interdependence of its parts. The whole system is usually divided into
subsystems, the precise characterization of which varies according to the analyst.
Renfrew, for example, chooses subsistence, metallurgy, craft specialization, social, pro-
jective, and trade-communication subsystems in his considerotion of the emergence of
civilization in the Aegean (Renfrew 1972, p. 486). The basic components of society as
system are empirically defined and regularly organized behaviours of individuals. Sys-
tems analysis is based on the description of empirically given regularities. The system
is to affirm, agree with immediate fact, which is pre-defined as having primacy. The
concept 'system' is equivalent to pattern; it is a descriptive device. But the concept of
'system' is not part of the object of study; it is proposed in advance and cannot be
empirically confirmed or refuted.
   Systems theory involves analysis of the object in terms of its functional relation to the
reproduction of the whole. This whole is pre-defined as an organic unit whose natural
state is stability or equilibrium. Clarke (1968, pp. 48-52) defines seven different
equilibrium states, in essence, different states of systems stability. Stability rather than
change is the norm presupposed in systems theory and systems only change, in effect,
in order to remain stable. Systems search out and converge upon desirable states. Clarke
(1968, p. 52) terms this goal-seeking or homeostasis. The main explanatory concept is
function (Hodder 1982a; Tilley 1981a, 1982a, p. 28).
   Systems analysis as universal recipe stipulates in advance what is to be discovered.
Any component of the system functions to maintain a desired state of affairs - social
stability, a condition postulated in advance of any particular society. The system and its
components adapt to the objective given- usually the external environment. Conserva-
tive values of persistence and stability become the norm. Change is always a contingent
state of affairs while harmony is universal. Contradiction within the system is an unfor-
tunate 'pathology' (Flannery 1972), its very abnormality revealed by the term itself. Sys-
tems theory, as pre-defined method based on immediate objective appearance, is a
theory of conservative politics, conservative in that it will lend support to anything that
Facts and values in archaeology                                                           53


is, the immediate 'reality' of any social form. In this sense, systems theory is not only
conservative, it is immoral in its acceptance of any empirical state as a state for the good.
For the sake of an abstract value of equilibrium, systems theory implicitly justifies
oppression. In identifying what is with what should be, it creates a tidy, ordered and
timeless world. The message of systems theory is that 'goodness' is to be found in social
stability while social unrest is an unfortunate 'pathology': 'the ideal is for man to act
without dislocation because this . . . communicates a set of contradictory values -
capable of causing confusion, loss of cohesion and ultimately social anarchy' (Clarke
1968, p. 97). Naturally so-called 'social anarchy' is not in the interests of the ruling
classes.

Cultural evolution, the politicization of time
The adoption of a systemic perspective by the 'new' archaeology involved a fresh under-
standing of cultural change and permitted the development and blending of cultural
evolutionary theory with a functionalist equilibrium analysis. The 'new' archaeology
has generally been considered to mark a revival of interest in evolutionary theory and,
in effect, the evolutionary perspective served to put the static, functionalist, adaptive,
systemic perspective into operation.
   Binford (1972) followed White (1959) in viewing culture as an extra-somatic means
of adaptation but he was unhappy with the association of evolution with progress and
instead suggested that evolutionary change was change occurring within maximizing
systems which included the adaptation of the system to its environment, the more
efficient use of resources and energy flux. Concomitantly, 'evolutionary processes are
one form of ecological dynamics' (Binford 1972, p. 106). In addition to this ecological
perspective, many archaeologists, following Sahlins and Service (1960) and Service
(1975), have adopted a stadial framework according to which societies are arranged in
a typological sequence of increasing complexity: bands or egalitarian societies, tribes or
stratified societies, chiefdoms and states. Development is seen as the factor to be
explained and most interest has focussed on the development of the state and 'civiliz-
ation'. This typology has had extensive influence on social archaeology. But descriptive
typology defined in advance of the object of study and 'adaptation'- the central features
of cultural evolution - has a close relationship with the reductive and ultimately
ideological conception of society and rational method we have been outlining.
   Adaptation to socio-environmental stresses provides for Flannery (1972), as for
Binford, the overall meaning and direction for evolutionary change. It provides the
rationale for processes of 'segregation' and 'centralization'. The result is an increasing
degree of efficiency and control over the environmental field. If any particular social sys-
tem is unable to adapt through segregation it is no longer able to maximize its environ-
mental control and resultant energy yield. In the long run it must be extinguished. The
successful state is indeed a predator (Saxe and Gall1977) in this perspective. Societies,
or those that survive, attain new and higher levels of adaptive efficiency and are enabled
to compete more successfully with their neighbours. Even if we do not know which
socio-environmental pressures operated in any particular case, as Flannery evidently
does not in the example he gives of ritual promotion and social stratification in Mexico
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            54


(Flannery 1972, pp. 414-16), these stresses 'must have been there ... their role was to
provide the selection pressures, while the actual instrument of change was ritual' (ibid.,
p. 416). This is not only a fundamental methodological assumption, but a metaphysical
presupposition, an act of faith, for without adaptation there can be no reason for the
segregation and centralization processes.
   Sanders and Webster (1978) broadly align themselves with Steward's (1955) multi-
lineal approach to evolution and, unlike Binford and Flannery, see an inherent paradox
in trying to explain variability in culture by factors which are of their very nature non-
varying. Accordingly, they state that environmental stimuli are 'basic causes of cultural
evolution' (Sanders and Webster 1978, p. 251). The model they use outlines various
possible evolutionary trajectories from egalitarian societies to states conditioned by the
permutation of environmental variables and assumes that population growth occurs,
that rates of growth remain constant, and that this is a necessary precondition for evol-
ution: 'all processes of complex cultural evolution are processes of growth as well'
(ibid., p. 297, emphasis in original). Adaptation accommodates people to their environ-
ment and permits the development of societal growth and higher-order social
structures.
   In the cultural evolutionary perspective adopted by the new archaeology the term
progress is no longer used, as in earlier work; given the emphasis on scientism it is no
longer acceptable. However, it has not been completely exorcized but has become con-
ceptually shifted in relation to earlier accounts of evolutionism. It is now the more
muted matter of adaptive efficiency and the ability to integrate and accommodate
increasing numbers of people within the system by means of social differentiation,
increasing stratification, and the emergence of higher order social regulators. The
assumed need of societies to adapt to externally induced socio-environmental stresses or
internally developing 'pathologies' is a differential measure of success. Societal
adaptation may be efficient or inefficient, effective or ineffective, and some societies
develop to become civilizations while others fall by the wayside: they never develop to
the status of civilizations. Societies are like football teams with numbers on their backs
and compete in the adaptive stakes - ground rules for the game which are laid out a
priori before any analyses start. Some reach the top of the league and become civiliz-
ations while others are relegated to the lower divisions of bands and chiefdoms.
Adaptation is the teleological cause, consequence, and measure of social development.
Social change itself becomes rationalized. But societies exist in history, they are not
interchangeable. However, all forms of cultural evolutionary theory treat the time of the
past as homogeneous and abstract which allows the comparison of different societies,
attaching labels to societies according to a pre-defined typological sequence. This is not
a neutral process. It is the politicization oftime. In measuring (evaluating), comparing
and ordering sequences of societies according to definite criteria, we pass judgement on
the past (see the discussion oftime in Chapter 1).

Evolution: biology and behaviour
The only evolutionary position which does not seem to necessarily embody an explicit
or implicit concept of progress is the modern theory of biological evolution combining
Facts and values in archaeology                                                              ss

Darwin's theory of natural selection with Mendel's work on the nature of inheritance.
The evolution of all forms of life is thought to be the result of at least five processes
including inheritance, mutation, drift, gene flow and natural selection and of these
natural selection is the most important. The essence of Darwinian evolutionary theory
is non-directional variability on which natural selection operates in a particular environ-
mental milieu, on individuals rather than groups. The theory provides a general and
abstract conception of the mechanisms by means of which changes occur in individual
organisms and remains valid whatever the concrete succession of forms actually is.
Quite crucially the theory specifies no necessary direction stipulating the manner in
which processes of variation and selection take place. It is an explanatory theory and is
not a descriptive set of generalizations, unlike most cultural evolutionary theories. The
ultimate origin of variability on which natural selection acts is mutation. This vari-
ability is transmitted genetically through either sexual or asexual reproduction. Evol-
utionary change is a selectional rather than a transformational process, a consequence of
differential reproductive success in relation to a determinate natural environment at a
specific time and place. A considerable stochastic element may be involved as regards
the initial source of the variability and the types of genetic recombinations taking place
through reproduction. Organisms that survive changes in an environmental milieu are
not the most aggressive, fastest or largest members of a species, but forms which are
biologically variant. The 'survival of the fittest' only makes any sense in relation to a
specific environment. Different forms have definite relations of descent and these are
always contingent as no arbitrary principles of a predetermined hierarchy of species are
involved and may be explained in terms of selective processes. Sociobiologists (e.g.,
Wilson 197S, 1978; contributions in Chagnon and Irons (eds.) 1979) have attempted to
apply this evolutionary perspective to human social behaviour while Dunnell (1978a,
1980) and Wenke (1981, pp. 111-19) have indicated it may be of value in archaeology
as an alternative and more satisfactory position to cultural evolutionism.
   It is by the very means of the concepts of the theory of modern evolutionary biology
that we know that it simply cannot be applied to the development of human social
organization except in such a problematic fashion as to completely undermine any value
the attempt might have. Social relationships are not in any primary sense biological
relationships and may not be explained except in the most reductionist scenario by the
physical attributes of human beings in relation to different adaptive situations. Socio-
biologists, and for that matter a large number of archaeologists (for example Plog 197 4,
pp. 49-S3, 1977, pp. 16-17; Price 1982, p. 719; Schiffer 1976) write of human social
behaviour. As argued above and in Chapter 2, 'behaviour' is the reduction of meaningful
practice to physical movement, immediate and commensurable. The reduction of prac-
tice to behaviour is a central feature of capitalist social relations, of the alienation experi-
enced on the factory floor. But we would argue that people do not behave in the sense
that animals behave (see Chapter 6), they act and the difference between behaviour and
practice or action is of fundamental significance. Humans must be conceived as sentient
social beings living in a symbolically structured reality which is, essentially, of their own
creation. Behaviour is to action as the immanent to the actual, as the precondition for
what actually is. To reduce action to behaviour rather than leading to valid explanations
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              56


in fact directly eschews anything which might be properly termed explanatory. We are
left with the imagery of a plastic, malleable cultural dope incapable of altering the
conditions of his or her existence and always subject to the vagaries of external non-
social forces beyond mediation or any realistic form of active intervention. Sahlins
(1976) has discussed at length the political and theoretical implications of sociobiology
and subjected it to a lengthy critique and these arguments will not be repeated here. The
 'threat' from sociobiology, especially as evinced in the work ofWilson (1975, 1978), the
most widely read but least satisfactory discussions, comes from the line of argument
that human social behaviour is determined by a combination of genes and environment;
concomitantly the only political action which could alter social life as it is today would
be eugenic. Rather than stress this aspect of the debate we will suggest that a biological
evolutionary perspective, when transferred to the activities of human beings, collapses
with the redundancy argument, i.e. that what people spend most of their time doing is
completely redundant in terms of conferring any possible selective benefit. The sheer
complexities of human social activities go substantially beyond the basic necessities of
survival. Palaeolithic cave art is in no way explained by reference to cultural adaptation
to climatic change (Jochim 1983b). Human social action is the product of the symbolic
praxis of people in and on the world, it is inherently meaningful and 99% of this action
has no direct survival value in terms of conveying any definite selective advantage. The
archaeological record is, primarily, a record of style, i.e. ways of acting or accomplishing
ends according to varying orientations to the world and with reference to individual and
group social strategies and power relationships, which may not be assimilated or
reduced to functional or adaptive necessity. The biological evolutionary thesis cannot
even begin to accommodate or explain why people should produce elaborately decor-
ated ceramics, create ceremonial structures, make thousands of different types of tool
forms; the list can be almost infinitely extended. The perspective leaves us with such
statements as 'In a cultural frame, many specific trait forms may lack adaptive value,
but a reservoir of variability, some of which may ultimately acquire adaptive
value with changing condition~, has a clear selective value.' (Dunnell 1978, p. 199).
What is supposed to be adaptive is left on one side. In what circumstances, for instance,
would a pottery vessel decorated with curvilinear lines have a selective value over one
with scalene triangles? This question is not trivial or extreme or even 'suitably chosen'
since similar questions can be raised in relation to the entire gamut of human culture,
material or non-material. In order to work at all, the sociobiological evolutionary
perspective must reduce the almost limitless variety of human action and material pro-
duction to self-sameness and, in doing so, destroys that which it purports to explain. In
this restrictive sense the theory is dehumanizing.

Statistics, mathematics and objectivity
The enormous increase in the utilization of statistical and mathematical analysis is a
characteristic feature of much of archaeology since the 1960s. It is often justified as
merely being a formalization of what archaeologists have always done. Naturally,
according epistemological and ontological primacy to the 'facts', the objects of
archaeological knowledge, provides a powerful rationale for the use of mathematics and
Facts and values in archaeology                                                          57


statistics which have become part of the rationalization of archaeological practice aimed
at expelling the subjective. Statistical practice is conceived as a technical and therefore
neutral practice including the collection, processing, assessment and presentation of
facts. It meets the need for generalization based on objective data, controlling for subjec-
tive bias, and meets the requirement for practical rules for deciding when generalization
is justified or when data are inadequate. These needs accompany the conception of
reality as the observable, of theory being brought into agreement with and affirming
reality, of the facts being theory-neutral and intersubjectively acceptable. Above all else
the use of statistics is related to the requirement for theory to be value-free.
   Statistical practice is rooted in quantification, providing value-free methods of
drawing conclusions from quantified data. But quantification also results in the dis-
qualification of the object and its redefinition in terms of the primary qualities of
number, extension and motion, which are readily treated mathematically. This relates
to objectivity being abstractly conceived, as universal and ruled by equivalence.
Quantification thus presents data - that which is 'given' - in standardized and com-
parable form. Adorno and Horkheimer comment that 'mathematical formalism, whose
medium is number, the most abstract form of the immediate ... holds thinking firmly
to mere immediacy. Factuality wins the day; cognition is restricted to its repetition; and
thought becomes mere tautology' (Adorno and Horkheimer 1979, p. 27).
   Standardized and comparable data facilitate calculation. Disqualification, precision,
calculability, prediction ultimately mean control. In this way quantification is dis-
solution of mythology - 'anthropomorphism, the projection onto nature of the sub-
jective' (Adorno and Horkheimer 1979, p. 6). Nature is realized as universal objectivity,
stuff of control; and society is second nature.
   In quantified archaeology categories of analysis are necessarily designed to enable cer-
tain calculations to be made; they are methodological. In the very process of production
facts are pre-censored according to the norm of the understanding which later governs
their apprehension. Again the structure of the object is neglected in favour of a general
methodology.
   Of course statistics have long been recognized as requiring careful interpretation and
being open to misuse. But the problem is seen as one of social responsibility, misuse
arising from technical ineptitude or deliberate mis-manipulation. Statistical theory
remains neutral, tied to objectivity. The solution is seen as being more knowledge of
statistics and social responsibility in their utilization (Huff 1973; see Griffiths, Irvine
and Miles 1979, pp. 347ff.).

Mathematical archaeology
Quantification, motivated by a belief in the objectivity of exactness and calculability,
leads eventually to mathematization - the conception of the archaeological record in
terms of neutral patterns and relations capable of precise definition and expression
in terms offormulae.
   The classic expression of mathematization is the volume Transformations (Renfrew
and Cooke (eds.) 1979). Explanation is represented as the subsumption of the particular
beneath generalities:
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                58


         Most of the contributors to this book would agree that the appropriate path to
         understanding is generalisation, that is, the formulation of general relation-
         ships between events and between processes, of which specific individual
         occurrences and phenomena can be seen as concrete expressions or mani-
         festations.                                              (Renfrew 1979a, p. 5)
Mathematics provides the generalities, abstract and precise definitions of relationships.
Abstract in that it is purely formal, mathematics unifies scientific fields of studies and
overcomes the problem of scale. History becomes the unfolding of universal relations:
         We may therefore, if we wish, think of different societies, at different periods
         and localities, as being transformations of one another, with the individuals of
         society S transferred into those of society S'.                     (ibid., p. 38)
Renfrew stresses that this is not to deny the importance of the individual, of the human.
But the human element is strangely regarded as idiosyncrasy (ibid., p. 37) and circum-
stantial detail (ibid., p. 5). 'No threat is offered to the magic of human experience, to the
authentic force and irrationality of the passions' (ibid., p. 4, our emphasis). In the end
we are left with the impression that idiosyncratic and irrational human subjectivity
opposes regular, precise and predictable objectivity. It is only in so far as humans can
be transformed into regular and predictable objects that they are important. Neander-
thal man appears in modern dress (ibid., p. 38) and you wouldn't recognize him in the
street. We are all mathematically human and have been so for as long as matters. The
rest is magic and in Renfrew's light-hearted finale from Osbert Lancaster's Draynflete
Revealed the present becomes magically unveiled as the past, its transformation. We
rediscover our essentially mathematical selves, and in our obsession with immediacy
and factuality discover the inevitability of the present being as it is; it becomes objec-
tively necessary.
   Transformations marks the end of the programme of the new archaeology, its logical
conclusion. Mathematical calculability has become substituted for archaeological
knowledge. This is seen most vividly in Renfrew's application of catastrophe theory
(Renfrew 1979b). It depends on the use of a purely mathematical theory, formal sym-
bolic logic, which is true in itself. The theory can only be applied to archaeological data.
It cannot be tested in any way. The archaeological data are fitted to the theorem. This
forces Renfrew into a position with which we would agree, that knowledge of the
archaeological record cannot be reduced to the outcomes of testing processes. However,
within the framework of the new archaeology this is heresy. On the other hand, the new
archaeology has always looked to the construction of formal symbolic logic as an ulti-
mate goal (e.g., Clarke 1968, p. 62). This goal, when reached, destroys archaeology
because it is not ultimately the data that matter any more but the internal coherence of
the statistics to which they are fitted. It is the development of the statistics that provides
the key to future work, not the conceptualization of the data. At least, the latter is placed
in very much a subsidiary and peripheral role. Mathematical coherence replaces
archaeological knowledge. Mathematization results in the dissolving of the physicality
of the objects of archaeological knowledge in terms of the logical or mathematical
relations. The very notion of objective substance opposed to subjectivity disappears.
Facts and values in archaeology                                                         59


   In the quest for a unified and objective past a mathematical past becomes an
ideational, subjective past. Reality is approached in an instrumentalist framework.
Orton views mathematics as a cognitive instrument and a universal tool. It is not con-
fined merely to being a technique to be used in data analysis (Orton 1980, p. 216) but
'mathematics can be used as a tool for organising one's thoughts and data, and as such
is of value to any archaeologist, whatever his philosophy, and whether he works in the
field, laboratory, study or armchair' (ibid., p. 13). Here reason is explicitly reduced to
instrumentalism. It is an organ of calculation, of coordination, of planning. Reason
becomes detached from decision as mathematical reason itself decides the means of
approach to the past. The purpose, the aims of a study of the past are attributed to the
calculating subject. Reason is detached from the decision to apply reason, the electronic
calculator or computer from the creative impulse behind model building, from
justifications. The latter can only be circumstantial detail, subjective and arbitrary. As
mathematics is purely formal, it can only become meaningful when meaning itself has
been discarded. Objective substance, the past, is 'the mere stuff of control ... instru-
mentality which lends itself to all purposes and ends- instrumentality per se, "in-itself''
(Marcuse 1964, p. 156). In effect, this results in a suspension of judgement on what
reality is, its meaning. For mathematization meaning is a meaning-less question. This
is the inevitable conclusion to a belief in the objectivity of precision and calculability.
   Yet the self-contained formalism of mathematical explanation is related to its
opposite, totally and equally meaningless empiricism, the attempt to merely record all
the facts without any subjective content or bias. Both arise as part of a seemingly
unbridgeable gap between the theoretical and the empirical, between knowledge arising
from within and from without; symptoms of reification: 'the abstract categorising and,
as it were, administrative thinking of the former corresponds in the latter to the fetish-
ism of an object blind to its genesis' (Adorno 1967, p. 33). In analysis subject is split
from object. What in actuality must arise from the dialectical relationship of subject to
object (subject-object), is instead regarded as subjectiveless objectivity (Marcuse 1978,
p. 475).

Reason as method: a logistical archaeology
Reason is identified with method and as such does not decide aims or purpose but refers
instead to the implementation of techniques and strategies. It excludes choice of value
systems which determine ends. Thought thus becomes a form oflogistics in which ends
are separate from means, values from method. Reason regulates the relationship
between method and pre-given aims, ends, purposes, behind the study of the past.
Logistical archaeology is a radical contradiction between technique and method, and
understanding, viewpoint and aim.
   If reason is accepted as rational method, how are we to decide between different aims,
different attitudes towards the past, different models, within the framework of rational
method? Three positions can be taken on such a decision.

( 1) The decision to adopt a particular approach may be attributed to irrational intuition,
subjective decision. Reason as method has no way of judging between differing con-
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             60


ceptions of humanity and society. Palaeoeconomy is thus just as valid as a structural-
Marxist approach, providing it adheres to rational method (adherence to immediate
fact, etc.). It just assumes a different model of humanity and whether or not this model
of humanity is correct is a matter not open to rational argument (Jarman, Bailey and
Jarman (eds.) 1982, p. 3); such argumentation is beyond science.
   The result is a passive, disabling and repressive pluralism. The question of different
approaches is not just a question of differently tinted spectacles through which are seen
the same facts, the same past. Some have valued such a pluralism as a strength of
archaeology, stressing the final consensus (Clarke 1968, p. 21). But the colour of the
spectacles matters as does who made them and who is wearing them. Pluralism cannot
be indiscriminate, similarly tolerant of any approach, abstracted from society and his-
tory, passive, tolerating damaging attitudes and ideas. As such, it neutralizes any
opposition to the tyranny of the majority, dismissing it as just another pair of glasses.
   In Chapter 1 we argued instead for a radical, active pluralism, a pluralism which
recognizes that object and interpretation are never identical and that all interpretation
is time-bound, determinately related to the moment of its event, historically, socially.
Such a pluralism takes sides and doesn't protect that falsity which would contradict and
counteract the possibility of a liberated humanity; it is a pluralism directed towards a
definite end. We argue for true discussion of alternative approaches, realizing the root
of 'discussion' in the Latin discutio- to cut apart, smash to pieces; not consensus then,
but distinguishing and cutting away false approaches, breaking neutral consensus,
asserting disagreement.

(2) A different form of rationality may form the basis of the subjective decision to adopt
a particular approach. One approach may be judged superior to another through an
ethical argument seen as objective and perhaps given transcendental justification. This
would seem to be the basis of the sort of criticism of the 'new' archaeology given by,
among others, Hawkes (1968), that it is fundamentally dehumanizing. Also Winter
(1984) has acknowledged that value systems apply to the practice of investigating the
past. But such values, 'human frailty', are separate from the scientific, rational study of
the past; 'most of our research decisions are based at least in part on value statements.
It is only after these decisions have been made on ethical grounds that a scientific
approach can be used to understand human behaviour' (Winter 1984, p. 47, our
emphasis). So ethical ends are separate from scientific method, and the objectivity of the
latter can be protected from consciousness-raising: 'once we have recognised the
presence of value-statements in archaeology it should be possible to separate them from
the scientific approach' (ibid., p. 42).

(3) The choice between different approaches may be made according to technicist
recommendations of utility, efficiency, economy and comprehensiveness (technique)
and objectivity (agreement with immediate empirical reality). These values, which are
internal to technical reason, are permitted in that they are not recognized as values. So
different approaches are evaluated through reference to the degree of accordance with
rational method. According to Binford and Sabloff (Binford 1982; Binford and Sabloff
Facts and values in archaeology                                                        61


1983), scientific explanation is separate from 'paradigmatic understanding' - beliefs
about the way the world is, 'everyday cultural bias' (Binford 1982, p. 126). They argue
for a rational choice of paradigm, putting points of view to the test; paradigms can be
rationally assessed according to their utility.


Any explanation produced by rational scientific method operating on neutral objectivity
supposedly stands on its own; it is self-grounded. Conclusions must follow from initial
assumptions and require no additional contradictory assumptions. Contradiction
within this process of knowledge, as we have argued, refers to pathological thinking,
defective subjectivity requiring therapy. So explanation can be divorced from the social
context of its production and associated value systems. The validity of any approach can
be determined independently of personal commitment, without reference to moral or
political position. As Gouldner puts it, such rationalism
         entails silence about the speaker, about his interests and his desires, and how
         these are socially situated and structurally maintained. Such a rationality does
         not understand itself as an historically produced discourse but as suprahis-
         torical and supracultural, as the sacred, disembodied word: Logos.
                                                                             (1976, p. 50)

  The objectivity of scientific method is stressed as opposed to the 'psychological'
objectivity of the ideal observer who eliminates bias through conscious will (Binford and
Sabloff 1983, p. 395).
        The accuracy of our knowledge of the past can be measured ... The yardstick
        of measurement is the degree to which propositions about the past can be
        confirmed or refuted through hypothesis testing - not by passing judgement
        on the personal qualifications of the person putting forth the propositions.
                                                                  (Binford 1972, p. 90)

Quantification then, and not qualification. Objectivity - a measure of value of any
approach rests 'with the design characteristics of a methodology and the procedures of
its implementation rather than with the characteristics of a particular observer' (Binford
1982, pp. 126-8). Rational method, empiricist science, will cure the pathology of all
thought which might retain 'subjective' links with the context of its event.
   But crucially, these moral decisions behind archaeology as science, which define the
process and object of knowledge, subvert the apparent subjective freedom in choosing
different approaches.
        Any prior guidelines relieve us of moral decisions; following one means
        surrendering both reason and freedom, for 'binding moral directives do not
        exist'. On the one hand, the currently dominant form of reason serves as such
        a guideline which suspends the freedom of autonomous judgement; on the
        other, its particular form makes value decisions a private matter- which lets
        its use appear as the voluntary choice of individuals whose decision-making
        ability it has just suspended.                         (Gebhardt 1978, p. 392)
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                   62


Justifications and the meaning of archaeology
Habermas has written of an end to epistemology:
          Positivism marks the end of the theory of knowledge. In its place emerges the
          philosophy of science. Transcendental-logical inquiry into the conditions of
          possible knowledge aimed as well at explicating the meaning of knowledge as
          such. Positivism cuts off this enquiry, which it conceives as having become
          meaningless in virtue of the fact of the modern sciences. Hence transcendental
          inquiry into the conditions of possible knowledge can be meaningfully pursued
          only in the form of methodological inquiry into the rules for the construction
          and corroboration of scientific theories.                          (1972, p. 67)

In concentrating on rules of procedure, those who apply the rules are irrelevant.
Rational method is independent of the archaeologist; formal logic, mathematics and
statistics have universal validity. There is no questioning of the subjective constitution
of objectivity; 'the meaning of knowledge itself becomes irrational - in the name of
rigorous knowledge' (ibid., p. 69). In this framework, the only acceptable justification
for archaeology is that archaeology is part of the 'human' quest for knowledge and truth.
There is no attempt to question the meaning or function of the object of archaeology
because there is no source of knowledge outside the object. Archaeology is consequently
not reflexive; it is not conscious of itself as practice in a capitalist civilization. Instead it
becomes a tool, an instrument, probing the past in the service of the present.
   The identification of rational method with truth together with ideas of value-freedom
and objectivity justify the archaeological project but as we have argued, these ideas have
no meaning in a scientific sense. They are value judgements, prior guidelines. The
methodological or syntactical criterion of meaning is spiritual. The origin of this
spiritual meaning, the impulse to the acceptance of a commitment to rational method,
was and is the success of scientific capitalism. So any justification for archaeology, any
definition of the meaning of archaeological practice is, within this framework, irrational
-separate from the practice it claims to justify. There is an unbridgeable chasm between
the social practice of archaeology and any reason given for engaging in this practice. (See
also Chapter 1, pp. 25-6.)

Facts and values, ideology and criticism
Our claim is that a great deal of archaeology is ideological practice, practice which
sustains and justifies a capitalist present. Objectivity, rational scientific method, facts as
opposed to subjective values and attitudes -this is an historically specific rational dis-
course which tends towards an argument for capitalism through appeal to the facts.
There has been some criticism already of the ideology, its supportive relation to contem-
porary society, work which we discuss in Chapters 1 and 4. Here we emphasize the need
to avoid reducing the critique of ideology to an assertion of relativism: the contention
that every social group has its own equally valid way of looking at and explaining the
past. It is also important to avoid making ideology critique simply a form of
consciousness-raising: pointing out the inclusion of values derived from contemporary
society into research that they might be the more easily isolated and excluded.
Facts and values in archaeology                                                          63


   Value-freedom, as the attempt to eradicate values, precludes the very possibility of
taking a critical stance on society and is consequently supportive of the status quo. The
notion of value-freedom is, of course, itself a value which is by no means normatively
neutral. Value-freedom commits those who wish to retain it to a rejection of a critique
of the existing social order and therefore forces them to political conservatism, and so,
the abandonment in and through practice of the claims for neutrality made. Consider
the following statements made by those who advocate archaeology in a very explicit
manner as a 'hard' positivist law-seeking science.

         A lesson which can be drawn from the study of prehistory is that wars, star-
         vation, exploitation and conservation are not simply moral, ethical or political
         issues. There is an important, indeed a primary biological component to these
         phenomena, without recognition of which no really effective consideration of them
         can be made ... The possible demonstration that there are laws which govern
         human behaviour in the long term ought to have an effect on the way in which
         we view our behaviour today.
                  (Jarman, Bailey and Jarman (eds.) 1982, p. 12, emphasis in original)

Now, this 'lesson', even in terms of the rationalist discourse in which it is situated, is
hardly unequivocably established from the 'facts'. In reality the lesson is given to palaeo-
economists in 'knowledge' since prehistory is, at the outset, viewed from a biological
perspective, so that what is 'discovered' is already there in theory prior to any investi-
gation having taken place. We can scarcely believe that those responsible for this state-
ment would want to support it, for it has definite social and political implications which
are very far from being value-free. It can be used to defend any indefensible action and
results in an abrogation of moral responsibility for anything that happens. To return to
the present, if the world is plunged into nuclear war this can be justified as inevitable.
If a primary biological factor is claimed to be involved then the entire political process
is pre-empted.


The lament of High Culture
Clark (1979, 1983) has made a claim for a radical criticism of the present from an
archaeological standpoint. Archaeologists, according to Clark, are able to objectively
pronounce on the past, its message to the present, its relevance, its value. The objective
message, established by archaeologist Grahame Clark, is that the index of our humanity
is cultural complexity and diversity which is invariably associated with social hierarchy
and inequality. Egalitarian societies dominated by the illiterate peasant lower classes are
dull and boring, lacking in cultural achievement. The present, increasingly subject to
the 'complacent doctrines ofliberal humanism' (1979, p. 5) and with an economic sys-
tem based on science and technology is reverting to cultural homogeneity. What is
needed is a reassertion of hierarchy and inequality.
   There is nothing new in this right-wing nostalgic longing for a pre-industrial order of
cultured elite and contented commons and it has nothing to do with critical reflection.
It is a variation of the familiar lament for the decline of high culture in mass society.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                64


Avoiding disputes over empirical detail, we make the following comments (cf.
Swingewood 1977).
(1) Clark presents a simple empirical correlation between ranking and objects judged to
represent cultural diversity and achievement. This is a static and reified concept of cul-
ture, a rejection of culture as praxis, as concrete production; it is an elimination of the
historical roots of cultural production in that a universal aesthetic value judgement is
applied uniformly across history. Cultural practice is reduced to 'cultural' artifacts.
This notion of cultural value is not related to any concept of the social; the only social
variable is ranking. We argue that all cultural production must be understood in relation
to specific conditions of production.
(2) Clark's archaeological past is a romanticized and dehistoricized past, a myth of cul-
turally rich and inegalitarian societies benefiting from the creative inspiration of elites.
But what about poverty and the oppression of the majority? Justifiable for the sake of a
high culture as defined by the Clarks of this and other societies who would attempt to
shore up their crumbling political edifices with ideological props?
(3) Clark's conception of modern 'mass' society is unsophisticated in the extreme, an
abhorrent affirmation of superior minorities and coarse, sub-human majorities.
   Clark's is an argument for the acceptance of inequality through the assertion of the
necessity of high culture, an assertion that this is represented by the immediate appear-
ance of 'cultural diversity', an empirical observation that this is correlated with
inequality and social hierarchy, and an application of this to modern society claimed to
be reverting to the 'intraspecies homogeneity of a prehuman situation' (1979, p. 13). In
his final years Clark has produced a statement of anti-democratic ideological commit-
ment unparalleled in recent archaeology. But the concept of objective cultural value is
not at all uncommon. Many, particularly those writing for a non-archaeological audi-
ence, would apply a universal standard of cultural value to the past, whether this is seen
as cultural diversity, aesthetic quality or whatever; they would appreciate the cultural
achievements of an abstract, unhistorical 'humanity'. Such value is attached to artifacts
creating a cultural capital, discovered, understood, conceptually owned by an
enlightened expert minority, archaeologists and others who teach us of the value of the
past, who know about and therefore should make the decisions about the past, its study,
its preservation and its presentation (see Chapter 1, pp. 24--6 and Chapter4, pp. 91-3).

The valuable past
Cultural Resource Management and Rescue are openly concerned with a valuable past.
The central feature of each is a 'conservation ethic' (Lipe 1977); the dominant moral
issue facing archaeology is that it 'employs a non-renewable phenomenon' (Dunnell
1984, p. 64) which requires management and conservation. So an overriding concern of
those planning and executing the destruction of the past is with the value of the 'resource
base', the significance of particular features of the past. It is the question of how much
money and effort should be spent on particular features. A primary conflict is between
different types of value attached to the traces of the past: for example, 'scientific' import-
ance and value to particular research programmes, as opposed to 'symbolic' value to a
community.
Facts and values in archaeology                                                           65


  The past is defined as valuable and must be protected from unscrupulous dealers in
antiques, from detector-wielding treasure hunters and from incompetent work by
inexperienced amateurs. What are needed, it is claimed, are
   (1)   general educative measures, inculcation of the conservation ethic- people
         must value the past (Lipe 1977, 1984; Cleere 1984; Fagan 1984);
   (2)   international agreements (UNESCO Convention);
   (3)   protective legislation (1906 Federal Antiquities Act and the 1979 Archaeo-
         logical Resources Protection Act in the USA, and the Ancient Monuments and
         Archaeological Areas Act 1979 in the UK; see McGimsey and Davis 1984 and
         Cleere 1984);
   (4)   professional accreditation and professional codes of ethics- it must be clear
         who the real archaeologists are, who truly value the past (the Society of
         Professional Archaeologists (1984a and 1984b) in the USA, the Museums
         Association and the Institute of Field Archaeologists in the UK).

At the heart of these codes of ethics and values and protective measures are traditional
academic values of scholarship, objectivity, responsibility to and respect for colleagues
and public, supplemented by business values of efficient management of the 'resource
base'.
  So value (objectified value) is attached to the objects of the past and accepted values
protect the professional expert status of those who apply rational method to the past,
who exert control over the past. The message conveyed by the past and revealed by the
expert and the system of values associated with rational method are further legitimated
in this recognition of value. The sins of archaeology (dependence on values) are
confessed to salve the guilty conscience of the origins of its values in contemporary
capitalism.

Conclusions: notes towards a critical archaeology
         The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking is
         not a question of theory but is a practical question. Man must prove the truth,
         i.e. the reality and power, the this-sidedness of his thinking in practice. The
         dispute over the reality or non-reality of thinking that is isolated from practice
         is a purely scholastic question.
                                       (Second Thesis on Feuerbach, Marx 1970, p. 121)

   We cannot cut ourselves off from questions of value, retreating into a supposedly
untainted realm of objectivity, nor can we disconnect 'value' and shunt it off into a
separate field of aesthetics, political or social relevance, or whatever. By attempting to
ignore values we are cutting ourselves off from our work and are unwittingly denying
our essential integrity as social persons living in social worlds. The distinction between
fact and value arises from a fundamental error. It is a denial of the essentially active role
of the subject in research. A value-free approach sets up a view of the subject as renegade
or treacherous. The subject observer must deny self in order to adequately deal with the
facticity of the object. This radical scepticism of the self is both impossible to achieve
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              66


and, if carried through, would prevent any research at all: no values amounts to no
meanings and without meanings no investigation. Because prehistoric people are dead
and gone it is only too easy to treat them as mere objects to be shoved around at will, sub-
ject to the whims of technocratic reason. But in betraying their humanity we betray our
own. In the instrumental attempt to create an objective past we are cutting ourselves off
from sources of meaning and so ultimately destroying that which we seek to understand.
Prehistoric settlement sites, for example, when transformed into spatial nodes respond-
ing to the dictates of an abstract rationality are deformed. The intentional structures of
the people who lived in them and imbued them with meanings and significance are
considered unimportant. Social meaning has been taken away and pure calculus substi-
tuted. We destroy the richness we want to investigate and create a world purged and
divested of meaning, an unreal alienated world. This is the world of physicalism, of
extension, of geometric form, of number, which has been declared as real, while every-
thing else has been condemned as fictional magic. This is the world in which people do
not matter. It is the world of capitalism.
   Archaeology embraces a programme which makes of artifacts, people and their
relationships objects and objective process. Subject is split from object, archaeologists
from their data, past from present. Formal methods stipulate in advance what is to be
discovered; the structure of the past is neglected in favour of general objective method.
The abandonment of a pretence of value-freedom is vital to overcoming these problems.
   To abandon objectivity based on value-freedom is to accept that meaning is not con-
tained within the facts but arises from interaction between archaeologist and data. We
have already argued in Chapter 2 that observation is dependent on theory. We
emphasize here that theory is value-laden and values form an integral part of the object
of study. To define or describe an artifact according to immediately given attributes is
not enough because an object always has a surplus of meaning over and above any
definition or description. A definition or description can never be identical with or
sufficiently summarize the complexity of the overlapping relational aspects of an
object. Any single definition or description applies only to a particular frame of refer-
ence which is necessarily value-laden. The particular perspective from which an object
or event is viewed is an integral part of the object of study. Concepts and categories of
analysis are internal to, they constitute the object of study; they are not separate from
what they are categories of. So there can be no formal and general method separate from
the structure of the object of study; 'methods do not rest upon methodological ideals but
rather upon reality' (Adorno 1976a, p. 109).
   Archaeology must become reflexive: archaeology needs to consider itself as much as
the past. To recognize that meaning does not just reside in the objects of the past but
in the study of the past is to recognize that archaeology is a practice today. Knowledge is
not produced by passively receiving individuals acting somehow as mirrors to the world
but by interacting social groups evaluating what is to count as knowledge communally.
The generation of knowledge does not just arise from individual psychology but from
definite social conditions. The maintenance of knowledge is not just to be explained in
the manner in which it measures up to 'objective' reality. So, as we argued in Chapter 1,
archaeology is a rhetorical practice, historically situated, part of contemporary society
Facts and values in archaeology                                                           67


and inherently political. The social function and meaning of a theory or explanation
forms part of its validity. As rhetoric, archaeology cannot be separated from its audi-
ence. There is a practical dimension to validity which is not to be correlated with the
'objective' elimination of temporal and spatial variables. It is not only what we term
'data' which constitutes evidence; practical questions must also enter into archaeo-
logical explanations. We should concern ourselves not so much with the 'truth' or
'falsity' of various statements. Rather we should ask: who are these statements relevant
to and why? what kind of archaeology do they serve to produce? Truth is a practical
matter not an absolute. So we may legitimately distinguish those archaeologies which
give support to the existing social order, reifying people and their relationships, treating
them instrumentally. These are not matters external to theory.
    Values cannot be eradicated from archaeology. They are built into the very termin-
ology and language we use and into the act of using them. We should attempt to make
the values we bring to research explicit and subject the values to critical scrutiny. This
will not only produce a more realistic view of the past, as history, irrevocably linked with
and mediated by the present; it will also be a more honest view of what we are doing. The
ideology of contemporary archaeology cannot be 'cured' by detaching an ideological
dimension, by correcting cognitive failure or by making increased attempts to purge
ourselves of our values. Accepting archaeology as practice, truth as constituted in prac-
tice, is to accept truth as precarious, written into political relations. It is to accept the
necessity of a radical and anarchic undercutting of all those theories in search of a time-
less and objective truth which would justify the present, the necessity of ideology
critique. The kind of reflexive and critical archaeology we propose is not just another
approach. To argue that a critical archaeology merely asks different questions and
supplements already established approaches is to treat critical archaeology as another
formal body of principles, a method outside history; it is to slot it on the shelf in the
academic supermarket, neatly packaged next to behavioural archaeology, for anyone to
take down and consume at will. A critical archaeology is not merely a way of working,
it is a way of living.
4
Presenting the past: towards a redemptive
aesthetic for the museum


         'The task to be accomplished is not the conservation ofthe past, but the redemption of
         the hopes of the past. Today, however, the past is preserved as the destruction of the
         past.'                                           (Adorno and Horkheimer 1979, p. xv)

Introduction
Chapter 3 argued for a critically reflexive archaeology which of necessity includes an
assessment of the relation of the archaeologist and his or her work to contemporary
capitalism, while Chapter 1 argued the necessity of taking archaeology's presentation to
an audience into account, that archaeology is a rhetoric. Archaeologists present them-
selves and their work to a non-archaeological public through the media, publishing
media, actual physical confrontation (archaeological sites, education), and the museum.
This chapter considers the presentation of archaeological work, the interpreted artifact,
in the museum which is probably the main institutional connection between archae-
ology as a profession and discipline, and wider society.
   This chapter is intended as an ideology critique, a critique of the museum as an
ideological institution. The museum may directly misrepresent the past, distorting it
through selection and classification, creating a particular historical narrative. The
museum may also restructure the past through its code of historical representation, the
way it tells its 'story', the way the artifact is presented (cf Berger et al. 1972; Bann 1978).
   There are several effective critiques of the way museums directly distort the past as a
means oflegitimating present sectional interests (Leone 1981b, 1984; Wallace 1981; see
also Home 1984). We shall concentrate more on the museum's aesthetic. In presenting
artifacts to be viewed by a visiting public, museums make a statement about the relation
of the viewing visitor to the object world. The artifacts are assembled and presented,
ordered to make a particular sense to the viewing visitor. Artifacts are mobilized in an
aesthetic system (a system of presentation and viewing) to create meanings. We shall be
considering this statement, this aesthetic system.
   The main part of the chapter is a presentation of a series of interpretations of particu-
lar museums and displays. They are not interpretations of a random sample, but neither
were the particular museums chosen to make criticism easier. We simply visited a few
museums we knew. The series of interpretations builds up a critique of the presentation
of the artifact in various forms of museum display. Drawing on the discussion of time
in Chapter 1 we argue that the artifact is turned into a commodity and in effect removed
from history. This confirms the present's relation with the object world. It is the present
which is preserved, not the past.
   We then move on to consider further aspects of the relation between past and present

68
Presenting the past                                                                      69


in the museum, the relationship between professional study of the artifact and its sub-
sequent 'public' presentation. Continuing the argument of Chapter 1, we argue against
the possibility of a neutral presentation of an objective past by professional archaeologist
or curator. All presentation of the artifactual past is rhetorical performance, an active
project of persuasion, an active mobilization of particular modes of presentation which,
in the museums we considered, argue for the world as it immediately appears to us, con-
cealing the underlying reality of past and present.
   We end by drawing out ideas for a more fertile relation between past artifact and
presentation, one which recognizes and assumes that the study of the past artifact and
its present-ation are inseparable. We reassert that a non-ideological and critically
reflexive archaeology cannot be separated from its presentation to a wider social world
of people who are not archaeologists.


PART ONE: THE MUSEUMS

The artifact transformed into an object in commodified time
The Museum of Antiquities of the University and Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon
Tyne: a small museum with two galleries. The first contains a selection of Roman
inscribed and sculptured stones, mainly altars and tombstones, from the North-East.
There are also models of a Roman milecastle, fort, turret, vallum, and the wall itself.
Some cases are used for temporary displays. The second gallery consists of a sequence
of cases presenting artifacts from the North-East in chronological order. The artifacts
are sometimes juxtaposed with no implied connection other than chronological, are
sometimes placed together according to similar type or site of discovery.

The format of the guidebook, a series of photographed exhibits with accompanying
notes and references, clearly expresses the organizing metaphor of the museum: the
artifact as chronological object, object of academic study, the artifact as specimen. In a
mechanical relation of metonymy the artifacts stand for archaeological system.
   In the second gallery the cases locate a collection of local artifacts in their archaeo-
logical period - prehistoric to medieval. The logical principle uniting the sequence of
cases is abstract time, time as a flow divided into conventional lengths- early, middle
and late Bronze Age, Iron Age, Roman, Anglo-Saxon. The only appreciable narrative
behind the sequence of cases is a story of technological change. This is change abstracted
from the social; it is a story of the production of variety.
   The artifacts are conceptually packaged with labels indicating provenance, type and
museum accession number. Any further packaging is limited to the descriptive
background: some text and some small models. The artifacts stand in the cases with
their academic price-tags. Price indicated by price-tag is the abstract exchange-value of
goods in a shop window; the abstract exchange-value of the artifacts is their being
objects for academic study, their antiquarian interest, their academic objectivity.
   The objects stand solitarily. The people who made them are irretrievably out of sight
and out of mind. (There are figures of Roman soldiers in cases offset from the main
sequence, but significantly their armour is replica armour.) The historical subjectivity
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             70


which constituted the objects is denied in their formal identity proclaimed by the labels
uniting the objects according to academic exchange-principle. The objects are formally
equivalent; like commodities in a supermarket their ultimate meaning lies in their
formal identity, commodities to be bought, 'historical' objectivity to be decoded by the
initiate, manipulated by detached academic subjectivity. The objects are before the
visitor in certainty and presence, subjected to archaeological analysis.
   The objects form a spatial figure rather than a temporal process; they are cartographi-
cally located according to an ontologically and temporally depthless system of archaeo-
logical referents. The past is seen, the visitor is distanced, dis-interested, 'observer of
the ultimately familiar or autonomous picture in which temporality- its threats and its
possibilities- has been annulled' (Spanos 1977, p. 427).
   The objects are familiar: the immediate significance of the exhibited objects lies in
their relation to contemporary objects, an unremarkable relation of resemblance and
difference usually focussing on recognition of function (they had axes in the bronze
age!), and appreciation of technical and artistic skill. But in the absence of their deter-
minate social context the meaning of the artifacts lies in their abstract objectivity. The
artifacts are objects. Archaeological history stands before the visitor as fetishized
objectivity, a detached objectivity mysterious to the visitor, truly fetishistic. A typical
label reads:
                        BELL- DERIVATIVE BEAKER
                    BOREWELL FARM, SCREMERSTON, N'D
                        Clarke 706   Class W/MR-
                    N/MR Hybrid                 1948.7
As a coded set the objects are raw data, objective substance, ready to be worked up into
descriptive archaeological narrative. This narrative is implied but almost totally absent
from the exhibition. Only the models attest to its possibility.
   As we have said, in the second gallery the objects are located by the cases in time, in
their archaeological period. The cases themselves represent empty time, time as a con-
tainer, formal and devoid of social content, but nevertheless filled with the content of
archaeology- objects; objects in cases; objects in time. The cases are the content-less
temporal form in which the objects are brought to exist.
   But time is not a non-relational container of the reality of the past. The reduction of
temporality to measured duration separated from the 'content' of the past is an objectifi-
cation, a commodification of time. So History becomes rooted in empty measured
duration, a rigid continuum of ephemerality, a sequence of empty instants. The past
exists only in these moments, only in its present. It is over and done with, complete, an
'autonomous picture'. The past thus appears fleeting and distant from the present.
   And commodified time is capitalism's factory time (Thompson 1963, 1967; Giddens
1981; Lowe 1982). As John Berger puts it: 'the factory which works all night is a sign
of the victory of a ceaseless, uniform and remorseless time. The factory continues even
during the time of dreams' (Berger and Mohr 1982, p. 107).
   Remorseless commodified time is the mythical time of the always the same, empty,
homogeneous time (Wolin 1982, p. 48; Benjamin 1973e, esp. Theses XIII and XIV).
Presenting the past                                                                       71


The visitor is presented with mythical Fate incessantly piling ruin upon shattered ruin,
object upon object in an inescapable and rigid continuum of empty moments. Beakers
and axe-heads appear in rows; tombstones and altars stand lined up, worn with time.
 Commodification brings a vision of mythical compulsion to repeat, a failure of memory,
a Great Myth, 'the reproduction of the always-the-same under the semblance of the
perpetually new' - commodity production (Wolin 1982, p. 174). History appears as
commodity production; the objects in the cases are ultimately familiar because things
have always been the same. Commodified time denies remembrance, memory of differ-
ence. In this sense the reification which the objectification of the artifact represents is a
forgetting (Adorno and Horkheimer 1979, p. 230). 'History no longer pays its respects
to the dead; the dead are simply what it has passed through' (Berger and Mohr 1982,
p. 107). People are the objects, the debris of such a history, forgotten. This is the injus-
tice of the empty cases of objects.
   'The factory continues even during the time of dreams': commodified time
marginalizes subjective experience of time - individual memory and other forms of
experience which have the capacity to undo, unify and deny the ceaseless passing of
empty moments (see Berger and Mohr 1982, pp. 105-6). In proclaiming chronometric
history's monopoly of time the museum bypasses the question of other forms of
objective as well as subjective temporality (see Chapter 1) and the historical roots of
commodified time.
   The objects have been 'discovered'. The labels indicate provenance and information
is given about circumstances of discovery of hoards and valuable objects, but not as a
means of adding a geographical dimension to the understanding of the visitor- no maps
are provided which indicate either distribution of exhibits or of artifacts of similar type
and date. The reference to provenance communicates the idea of space as a non-
relational container, an abstract existent analogous to the representation of time within
which the substantive object is located. The inclusion of provenance on the labels com-
municates mere abstract 'discovery'. Subjectivity stands coolly apart from the objec-
tivity of the artifact, seemingly passive yet with an instrumental relation to History, an
empty screen of chronometric time onto which it projects the empirical.
   But 'discovery' is fascinating. It is part of the romance of archaeology. 'Discovery'
links past and present, reaching out from incessant passing of the momentary present,
bridging the chasm between past and present opened up by the conception of time as an
empty spatial dimension filled with artifacts locked into their respective presents, their
archaeological periods.
   But this resolution of the tension between past and present is a spurious harmony.
The past is not merely discovered. 'Discovery' is not an abstract instant of capturing the
past. The shock of the moment of discovery shatters the continuity of abstract, corn-
modified time; it is a shock of discontinuity which reveals the present's practical relation
to the past object.

The aesthetic artifact
The British Museum: Greek antiquities: we refer in this section to the typical form of
presentation found in the great international museums - free-standing sculpture,
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                72


ceramics in cases, presented with minimum supporting information, e.g. the Parthenon
sculptures.
           In the Russian ikon neither space nor time exists. It addresses the eye, but the
           eye which then shuts in prayer so that the image- now in the mind's eye- is
           isolated and entirely spiritualised. Yet the images are not introspective- that
           would already make them too personal; nor are they ... mystical; their calm
           expressions suggest no exceptional experience. They are images of holy figures
           seen in the light of a heaven in which the people believe so as to make the visible
           world around them credible.                               (Berger 1969, pp. 20-1)

   Parallel to the homogeneous spatial figure of the past found in the Museum of
Antiquities, Newcastle, is the encapsulation ofthe past in the self-bounded, sealed-off,
inclusive image- the artifact as ikon (Spanos 1977, p. 427). This aestheticization of the
artifact is a romantic reaction to the commodification of the past. The lifeless, inert
objectivity of analytical study is replaced (or supplemented) by the aesthetic pro-
ductivity of Homo Artifex.




Fig. 4.1 The aesthetic artifact.
Presenting the past                                                                        73


   The artifact is displayed in splendid remoteness from the prosaic, from the exigencies
of day-to-day life. The concrete and historically variable practice of production and con-
sumption is collapsed into the 'aesthetic', an isolatable and universal human experience.
Instead of abstract objectivity, the abstract experience of the aesthetic becomes the
exchange-value of the artifact which is again raised to the status of a solitary fetish, a
fetish of immanent 'humanity'. Now the formal identity of artifacts in terms of
objectivity becomes a formal identity according to spiritual truth, universal values
expressed in the exceptional artifact. History is again unified. History freezes in the
ideological light of the aesthetic artifact, celebrated and exalted, elevated above every-
day life.
   Display of the artifact conveys the timeless ability of Man (sic) as toolmaker-artist. As
such the visitor need only approach the artifact with finely tuned sensibilities; the
artifact's universal truth is communicated via direct intuition. But whose sensibilities,
whose intuition, whose 'humanity'? As the aesthetic qualities of the artifact are
supposedly immediately perceptible, context and critical analysis become relegated to
optional supplements. ·
   History is differentiated only according to the unifying principle of the technical and
artistic triumph of Man. It is divested of the 'trivia' of oppression, of conflict (other than
inwardly spiritual), of everything social. The aesthetic artifact is an escape from the
nightmare of history. But all culture shares the guilt of society. The aesthetic artifact
'ekes out its existence only by virtue of injustice already perpetrated in the sphere of
production' (Adorno 1967, p. 26).
   A constituting subjectivity is now recognized; Man as Homo Artifex is recognized as
mastering objectivity, objective substance, investing it with a universal message. But
where does he belong, where did he come from? Of course Homo Artifex is an abstract
conception, detached from history, concealing its origins in the cultural values of
particular social groups within history.

Bringing the past alive
The anti-rationalism of aestheticized objectivity is related to the secret worrying
antinomies at the heart of bourgeois rationality; the success of the analytics of scientific,
instrumental rationality, bringing nature and the past to order under a concealed subjec-
tivity, foregrounds the problem of subjectivity. If science, instrumental analytics
(exclusive of subjectivity), is the only firm (objective) basis for archaeological recon-
struction, then what about human experience, emotion, imagination?
   One answer, as we have shown, is to canonize the 'aesthetic' artifact as Art, as
repository of the 'human', detached now from the analytics of archaeology, transcend-
ing history.
   Another answer to this chasm in conventional approaches to the past is the humaniz-
ing narrative- setting the artifacts into their concrete 'human' context. In the museum
this is represented by the narrative display which provides contextual information
(usually text, diagrams, maps) and the situational display which sets the artifact in a con-
text of contemporary artifacts and features (e.g. the period room).
   From another point of view, it has been widely recognized that every visit to a
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             74


museum is a hermeneutic venture and if museums are to cater for a clientele wider than
an initiated elite, the artifacts cannot stand on their own. The visitor faces a slippery
indeterminacy in the museum- what do the objects mean? The two forms of display
which have so far been discussed implicitly propose their own answers to this question
-the meaning of the object lies in its objectivity or in the aesthetic. Narrative and situ-
ational types of display approach the semiotic indeterminacy of the artifact more directly
through contextual information for the visitor.

Narrative display and the artifact as information
The Museum of London: case displays, free-standing artifacts, room interiors, shop
reconstructions, paintings, photographs and much written material are skilfully and
efficiently combined to tell the story of London from prehistoric times to the present.

In the Museum of London artifacts are essentially used to authenticate the social
description written around them. 'Written', because the museum is in many ways a
book around which the visitor may wander. This makes the ultimate message of the past
as descriptive information encoded in objects all the more palatable.
   The narrative which was implied but absent from the sequence of cases in the
Museum of Antiquities is foregrounded in the Museum of London, but again an authen-
tic transcendence of the superficial fact is missed.
   The displays convey factual information about the past of London. The Museum of
London condenses past social practice and experience into information, information
tied to the chronological narrative. Information- the fact- is presented as the dominant
form in which social practice is stored- news. But as news belongs to a precise point in
time, 'the value of information does not survive the moment it was new. It lives only in
that moment; it has to surrender to it completely and explain itself to it without losing
any time' (Benjamin 1973c, p. 90). Information lives only in the moment of its novelty.
'In the form of information, experience no longer has anything to teach us; it has simply
become another fungible aspect of modern life, an item of momentary interest which
will soon cease to be topical and then be promptly discarded' (Wolin 1982, p. 222). The
visitor passes from display to display presumably absorbing 'information' and nothing
more.
   Indeed, 'you have to be buried alive in order to survive' (Dorfman and Mattelart
1975, p. 85). Archaeology is precisely the means to a 'living' past. The past has to be
buried alive, experience killed off, stultified, pinned down to the moment of its novelty
in order to be meaningful in the present as information, a permanent commodity,
property, heritage, all preserved, pickled for the future.

Presence, absence, and the authenticating quote
                               wv
         iJmxgxovv, ~ xfV'Y]<J'Y]   ngoawnov      eo
                                                axfJ!la cf]£ awgyf]£
          excfvwv nou ALYO<Jcc'tj!av coao naga~cva flE£ mij ~w~ !la£ ...

         f\ fl~JtW£ oxL 6£v aJtOflEVEL cfnocc naga 116vo eo ~ago£
         ~ voacaA.yfa   wv ~agov£ flL<ls unag~'Y]£ ~wvmvf]£
Presenting the past                                                                         75


         does there exist the movement of the face, shape of the tenderness
         of those who've shrunk so strangely in our lives ...
         or perhaps no, nothing is left but the weight
         the nostalgia for the weight of a living existence
                                                (from George Seferis 'The King of Asine',
                                    translated by Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard)

The Museum of London quotes with objects. It draws on a quality of aura found in the
artifact of the past, its authenticity, genuineness, authority, its unique phenomenon of
romantic distance however close it might be physically, a distance located in its
testimony to the past it has witnessed (Benjamin 1973d, p. 223). The aura of the
artifacts, their three-dimensional reality, their facticity, all authenticate the narrative of
the Museum of London. This is their purpose.
   There is a subtle play of difference at work here:

                                 Presence          Absence
                                 Present               Past
                                 Here now           Distant
                                 Signifier         Signified
                                 Trace            Substance

The objects are immediate and real before us, present to our consciousness and sight. As
the concrete past, they confirm the meaning of the presentation. But the objects only
represent or indicate the past. The past is the referent signified by the object. The object
signifies an absent presence: of course the past is not present here and now, but absent,
distant. So the objects are signs in our present. They are not the past immediately
present before us but signifiers of the past (the signified), traces of the past (the absent
referent). 'When we use signs, the being present of the referent and signified, incarnated
in the self-present signifier, appears to us immediately, but it is delusion, misper-
ception, dream. There is neither substance nor presence in the sign, but only the play
of differences' - difference between signifier and signified, between signified and
referent, between presence and absence (Leitch 1983, p. 44). The objects embody this
play of difference which is tied down by the rhetorical agency of interpretation - the
Museum of London producing a substantial past before us in the present, presenting a
past. And it is by means of the reduction of difference that the Museum of London con-
firms its message.
   The notion of presence is at the heart of the 'romance' of archaeology. It forms the
basis of much of archaeology's appeal and popularity. The objects on view in the
museum bring us face to face with the past. The objects have presence, human presence
-the features of the burial mask, the thumb-print on the pot. This presence constitutes
the object's authority, its authenticity. The presence of the past- the past endures and
reaches out to touch us.
   The authenticating, romantic presence of the museum object is a restricted, one-
dimensional notion of presence which reduces the dialectic of presence and absence. It
suggests that the time of the artifact can be localized, that the artifact belongs to the past,
Re-Constntcting Archaeology                                                             76


to a moment in time when someone made and used it. This is the romance of the object.
Time is thus ultimately abstracted and reduced to a derivative of space; time comes to
be composed of ultimately timeless moments on a continuum, its essence lying in the
measurable 'distance' between moments. The ambiguity of the artifact - the play of
semiotic difference encompassing past and present, its nature as sign in the present to
and for a past- is stabilized in the name of a fixed and closed-down History.
   George Seferis expresses the disturbing tension between presence and absence, the
void behind the burial mask, the presence in the human features; the past is both present
and absent. We must grasp the full implications of the opposition presence-absence.
The makers of the artifact are absent. It is our rhetorical insistence which requires their
presence.
   The absent creator of the artifact is longed for - if only it were possible to meet and
talk with the people of the past, have them present before us. But they are absent and
what is left? According to some, the archaeologist is confined to describing the tangible
(cf. C. Hawkes 1954), doomed to discover only the trivial (Leach 1973). But for the pub-
lic there is the inspired popularizer, a Michael Wood ( 1985), a John Romer ( 1984), who
can invoke absent humanity, bring the past alive, make it live, make the people of the
past present. The presence of this past is our present.
   As Eagleton has pointed out (1983, pp. 120-1), structuralism has exposed this
humanist fallacy - for archaeology the notion that the artifactual past is a kind of
transcript of the living presence of real people who are disturbingly absent. Such a
notion actually dematerializes the artifact, reducing it to a mediating element in the
present's spiritual encounter with the humanity of the past. Rather, meaning arises
through the chronic reciprocity of presence and absence, being and non-being. Mean-
ing is not simply present in the artifact but is in a sense also absent. Meaning is not
identical with itself; the artifactual past exhibits a surplus over exact meaning. Meaning
is produced in the material practice of reasoning in the present, which is, of course, in
no way identical with the past.

The exhibited past
A period room in the Castle Museum, York: moorland cottage
         Typical ofthe North-East of Yorkshire ... home-spun and spartan ... The
         hearth was the centre of family life, providing not only warmth and comfort,
         but a place for the old cooking pot to simmer above the glowing peat. Bread
         was baked here: the dough was mixed in the wooden trough beneath the
         window. In front of the fire is a home-made rag or 'clip' rug ... The country
         made furniture reflects a tradition of unsophisticated craftsmanship, which
         was about to pass away. Already, on the mantelpiece, there are factory-made
         trinkets and ornaments- the pair of Staffordshire pottery dogs, the fancy glass
         rolling pin and walking sticks, and a cheap but cheerful German clock. In the
         window hangs a 'witch-ball'. Its glass surface was popularly supposed to reflect
         from the room the stare of any witch or evil eye.          (Official Guidebook)

  In situational display artifacts are brought together in an association which will
Presenting the past                                                                        77


supposedly enable the visitor to decode a meaning through experience of context. Such
associations commonly take the form of period rooms. Figures may inhabit the rooms;
they may be the intended focus of attention (e.g. costume). Situational display involves
lesser or greater degrees of reconstruction to provide a window to the past.
   In traditional case display the artifact demands concentrated attention according to
the ritual analytics of archaeology. What matters is not so much the artifact being on
view as the significance of its existence, its authenticity. Its exhibition to the public is a
concession (the Museum of Antiquities, Newcastle, is a university museum). Hence the
need for the visitor to be sufficiently initiated to be able to decode the objects.
   The aesthetic artifact of the British Museum requires contemplation. Labelling is
hardly needed. When exhibited, the aesthetic artifact is to communicate the ritual
values of the cult of Homo Artifex. Hallowed and venerable achievement, it is the cult-
image of Homo Artifex, ultimately unapproachable. 'The closeness which one may gain
from its subject matter does not impair the distance which it retains in its appearance'
(Benjamin 1973d, p. 245). It is, after all, the product of Man.
   The period room focusses on the communicative-value, the exhibition-value of the
artifact as opposed to cult-value (Benjamin 1973d, pp. 226-7). Situational display
attempts to overcome the distance of the past. Artifacts are reassembled into 'realistic'
association and no longer stand on their own. The distance between past and present is
suspended in an arrested synchronism. Time is suspended and the objects are viewed
through the spatial relations of the display, through their present codification (almost
always in terms of function).
   The visitor is drawn into the space created by the artifacts to discover their 'meaning'.
The visitor herself fills the absence within the period room, the absence of a living con-
stituting agent. The visitor merges with the other because of her absence, but this
absence means that the absent living agent of the past artifact is all the more like the
visitor. The visitor becomes the figure in a mirror of her present (see Williamson 1978,
pp. 77ff.). But it is not so much the past individual who is absent as the present author.
   In the period room cult-value is replaced by exhibition-value- the artifact requires
display; it necessarily includes a communicative function. The artifacts in the period
room do not of necessity require concentrated attention or contemplation. The visitor
may examine the past, but absent-mindedly.
   The semiotic character of artifacts is recognized. They are used as vehicles to a story
of the past, as signs in the present carrying information to the visitor. They are given an
explicit communicative function. They are a translucent window onto the past 'as it
was', immediate, un-mediated vehicles to a 'realistic' picture of the past, a photograph
of the past (cf. McLuhan et al. 1969, on the pictorial visual form of museum display).
   The model of reality behind this notion of the 'realistic' is that of the photograph. The
period room is set before the gaze of the omnipresent camera, the clock for making
images, for capturing and fixing instants. The period room is 'reality' ready to be photo-
graphed, a still life, tableau. But the period room is not so much a 'realist' as a
'naturalist' re-presentation of the past (Berger 1969, pp. SOff.; cf. Lukics 1963, 1980a).
The naturalistic display aims to present the immediacy of the past with maximum
credibility. It aims at preserving an exact copy of 'the way things were', a replica. There
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             78


is no other basis for the selection of artifacts to be included in the period room. In this
sense naturalism is unselective. The period room shows what there was; it presents an
inventory to the visitor and the more complete the inventory the better (Sontag 1979,
p. 22). Nor is inventory a simple listing: 'inventory is never a neutral idea; to catalogue
is not merely to ascertain but also to appropriate' (Barthes 1982, p. 222). Inventory frag-
ments, lists the items the present owns. Naturalist display diverts attention away from
the meaning of its inventory, from its constructed nature, from the practical use of
artifacts as a medium to a past, a historical medium, by emphasizing immediate appear-
ance, by appearing immediately understandable. Indeed attention is diverted from the
artifacts to the empty space between them.
   Knowledge of the past is presented as being informational, bureaucratic. In such a
conception selection is feared. Recovery and preservation must be as complete and
unselective as is inhumanly possible. The past becomes a target for surveillance.
Artifacts are preserved and exhibited for scrutiny. The visitor is given the privilege of
being in on the act of surveillance. The empirical detail of the past is fed into an
interminable dossier (Sontag 1979, p. 156). The past is atomized, pinned down,
defined, controlled.




Fig. 4.2 The period room rediscovered.
Presenting the past                                                                        79


   The visitor is drawn into the period room to fill the human absence and in this
aesthetic awareness of and proximity to the artifacts the visitor discovers the familiar. So
the past seems closer, understandable, manageable. But this is a tautology. Through the
period room's transparent window we recognize the familiar- the fire to relax around,
old cooking pot simmering away, china dogs on the mantelpiece. In seeking such a past
we must have already discovered it, hence the recognition of the familiar. The past is not
explained but acknowledged.
   At the same time the period room is attractively mysterious (the 'witch ball' in the
window). It invites speculation about its narrative; it begs the question of the link
between the artifacts other than their juxtaposition. The more complete the inventory
of the period room, the more the period room tells the visitors, the less they know. The
period room is a static instant, a disconnected moment. This disconnected temporality
and discontinuity with the present creates the mystery. The transparency of the period
room is an illusion. Atomistic, manageable, manipulated 'reality' is opaque.
   In this world of commodities there is no space for experience, no space for the social
constitutive function of subjectivity. There is no space for subjective experience. This
also creates a problem of meaning- where is the human narrative? It must be supplied
by contemporary experience of the commodity. The visitor lends the objects an
experiential context. In the museum department store, the only form of subjective
experience allowed is the consumer dream of acquisition and consumption, of alterna-
tive lifestyles. The visitor sees, is attracted, desires. The visitor becomes a customer of
the past, a tourist of the 'reality' of the past. The past is displayed. Exhibition-value has
replaced cult-value.
   The arrested temporality of the period room proposes that meaning is instantaneous,
located in the disconnected moment, that visible facts convey the truth. The certainty
of the existence, the facticity, the 'reality' of the artifacts, the 'look' of the period room
confirm this proposal. But it is precisely 'certainty' which is instantaneous. Understand-
ing is temporal and must involve the possibility of denying immediate appearance. (See
Berger and Mohr 1982, p. 89; Sontag 1979, p. 23.) This is denied in the period room.
The significance of the period room is its naturalism, its pretension to immediacy. The
period room is not a replica but a simulacrum, an exact copy of an original which never
existed. The past is transformed into its own image (Jameson 1984, p. 66).

The erotics of the museum
The relation with the past based on the look of objects is an amorous one (Son tag 1979,
pp. 23-4). It is a voyeuristic appreciation and celebration and a simultaneous violation
of the body of the past. It is a pornography. Artifacts are promoted to virginal purity (the
aesthetic artifact) or prostituted as objects for possession and consumption (the past is
subject to immediate consumption in voyeuristic detail).
   So the past is revealed to the visitor, exposed and uncovered to be appreciated. In this
sense discovery, revelation, includes 'an idea ofappropriative enjoyment' (see above).
Aktaion discovers Artemis, surprises her at her bath and as voyeur enjoys her nudity,
her purity and virginity, just as the visitor views the aesthetic artifact. But the sight of
Artemis is her violation. What is seen is possessed; to view is to rape (Sartre 1958,
Re-Constrncting Archaeology                                                              80


 pp. 578-9). So the period room invites violation. It invokes subjective emotional
 detachment and consumption. The visitor stands back detached (no matter how close
and familiar the past may seem) and views- there is no space or time, past or present,
for drawing close, for subjective experience, for finding out what lies beneath the
surface. There is only the pleasure of immediate voyeuristic consumption. 'Knowledge'
becomes located in appearance, in instantaneous appropriation, instantaneous con-
sumption, rape.
   Artifacts are defined as objects for scrutiny, for display, for exhibition. The past is
displayed. Like the pornographic photograph, detail and clarity of reproduction bring
fascination, a sense of being in on the act. The desire for certainty of being in on the act
rather than understanding leads to the emphasis on explicitness, on empirical
mechanical immediacy. The certainty of the 'medium', photography or artifact, con-
firms the 'reality' of the displayed sexual act, of the displayed past. The pornographic
model is displayed, 'available', asking to be taken, to be consumed, a sexual com-
modity, emotionally detached.
   Just as in pornography women are all equivalent as sexual commodities- reduced to
sameness in relation to their display and possession in stylized, sterile sex, endlessly
repeatable, so too the period room is endlessly repeatable. History is ultimately all the
same, abstract temporal sequence, object of display and possession. It is a homogeneous
history.
   The partner of the eternal virgin Artemis is the whore of the period room brothel,
instantly available, open, easily penetrated. But 'the openness of homogeneous history
is both seductive invitation and frustrating refusal, since in entering its gaping void you
are entering precisely nothing' (Eagleton 1981, pp. 45-6). The ease of penetration is
here a sign of the sterility of the relationship.
   Sex in pornography is stylized as a system of fetishistic objects -clothing, parts of
body, physical acts. Sexuality is bound and immobilized, spectacular. So too with the
commodified past. The visitor looks upon 'the past' in the period room. History is
appreciated. For this to happen history is stylized, 'history must be complete and fully
accomplished. As a process which is fully accomplished, history, with all its promise of
future change and development is closed down and confined entirely to what can be
exhibited as "the historical past"' (Bommes and Wright 1982, p. 291).

The George ]oicey Museum, Newcastle upon Tyne: Converted seventeenth-century
almshouses. The top floor of eleven inmates' cells form a sequence of period rooms in
chronological order, from sixteenth to twentieth centuries.
         Is it true, do you think, thatiftheymove us from here they will not let us keep
         our own furniture? I do hope they will because ... because, well, it's home,
         you know.        (Inmate quoted just before the almshouses were closed in 1935:
                                                                    Brown 1934, p. 122)
         The bourgeoisie have taken possession of an appartment which they pre-leased
         from the moment humanity appeared on earth.
                                                  (Dorfman and Mattelart 1975, p. 86)
Presenting the past                                                                       81


   In the Joicey Museum narrative is tied to situational display. Ideological distortion
accompanies the formal elimination of history. The narrative is one of change in furni-
ture. It is a chronology of antiques, the archetypal bourgeois collector's item, uniting the
aesthetic and the commodity.
   Temporality is again absent. It is the social practice which is utterly excluded from the
sequence of rooms. This is disguised by the linear row of cells, units of homogeneous
time. The cells are antique showrooms. The informational text reads like a showroom
catalogue:
         In the Regency Period British prosperity grew in combination with naval
         supremacy and expansion of the Empire, and this is reflected in the style of
         furniture and the use of new woods. The mahogany table with tip-up top is
         flanked by a pair of dining chairs, with bowed top and reeded sabre legs.
         Similar in style is the armchair. The satinwood cabinet in the Sheraton tra-
         dition has a bowed central section with a panel painted in the manner of
         Angelica Kaufmann ...

Time is utterly consumable. Pop round the corner after the visit and buy a piece of his-
tory - if you can afford it.
   The furniture is presented in the form of period rooms, theatres without actors again.
Presenting the past; the stage is set, but where are the actors? They are the audience.
The actors supplied by the visitor again belong to the present. The rooms represent the
nuclear family through the centuries in its living room. The past is a sequence of interior
design, redecoration occurring every century or so. Change is the consumerist change
of contemporary capitalism; everything changes and stays the same. This is the ideo-
logical distortion. What of the constituting reality of social practice- structures of family
life, gender, patriarchy? What of the social reality of the almshouses? The past has been
evicted together with all her furniture.

Shop-front commodification
The Castle Museum, York: two converted eighteenth-century prisons house a series of
'folk' collections, 'everyday' objects- agricultural implements to toys to truncheons-
dating from the eighteenth century onwards. Many were collected by a local country
doctor, John Kirk, at the turn ofthe century. There are two reconstructed streets con-
taining shops, pub, garage, fire-station; a water-mill, many period rooms; prison cells
partly converted into traditional workshops; conventional case displays.

The overwhelming metaphor of the Castle Museum is the shop front, the shop display
presenting the consumable variety of capitalist society. 'Kirkgate', the older recon-
structed street of the museum, consists predominantly of shop fronts displaying com-
modities, simply that. The objects simply evoke recognition of empirical similarity and
difference to the present, and it isn't all that different (cf. Museum of Antiquities). The
artifacts are quite literally commodified. The museum case has literally become the shop
front. The museum visit has become a confrontation with empirical commodity change.
(Commodification again!)
Re-Constrncting Archaeology                                                                82


   The shop front has become museum case; the shops and galleries bear the imprint of
 the 'collector'. Shopfronts display collections of gold, silver, Sheffield plate, dinner
services. The guidebook proclaims: 'to many people the Castle Museum is "the museum
with the street". Kirkgate is a spectacular re-creation that has caught the atmosphere of
 the nineteenth-century ... It is in constant demand as a "set". But Kirkgate is not, of
 course, a stage-setting. It is a collection of real buildings and shop-fronts.' Kirkgate is a
series of collections, not a street. The 'vivid picture of the everyday life of the past',
which a plaque records as the founder of the museum's aim, is a collection of everyday
objects.
   The Chapel Gallery, which presents the miscellany of the museum, includes cases of
horse brasses, weights and measures, model steam engines, lace, knitting, embroidery,
drinking vessels, police truncheons; farm implements lie on the floor. Clock pointers,
watch-keys and clock-faces: Kirk's collections of what he termed 'bygones' are the indi-
vidual units of commodified time. They represent the hysterical compulsion to repeat,
the failing of memory, reproduction of the always the same under the appearance of the
new, the hysterical compulsion to collect and consume.
   But this commodification is the reality of developing capitalism. The rhythm of the
'variety' of the objects reveals their abstract identity. The objects lose their empirical
distinctions. The meaning of case after case, shop after shop of everyday objects slides
into one of repetition. Meaning is no longer present in the object. This is disguised by
the frequent adoption of 'realistic' situational displays; the lack of labelling and
supportive material implies that the objects explain themselves.
   Yet the 'realistic' display is repeatedly undermined by deconstructing details.
Kirkgate's fire-station contains cases of objects; the carriage in the street is surrounded
by a fence; the street is in perfect order and repair, spotlessly clean; informational text
appears on walls. In the costume galleries empty suits of armour stand in a cased mock-
up 'realistic' landscape. Further on, in a dark gallery with shored-up 'trench' walls,
clean freshly-pressed uniforms on shop mannikins fight again in reconstructed Flanders
mud. Haute couture dresses revolve in pastel pastoral landscape setting, richly
furnished shop window sets.
   The prisons play deconstructing counterpoint to the exhibits and displays. Peer
through a slit in a door in Kirkgate (locked again) and inside is a padded cell: the
hysterical historical? Just as the hysterical, delirious maniac incorporates what he or she
sees and hears into his or her self-absorbed fantasizing, so too the museum seizes on
manifestations of the past in order to possess them and unfeelingly incorporate them
into its myth. We are in the prison of capitalist commodification. Remains of the prisons
are frequently encountered: barred windows, iron-grill doors. The cells of one prison,
interiors and corridors whitewashed, house workshop collections of blackened tools of
Victorian pipemaker, wheelwright, blacksmith, printer. The rooms are obviously cells,
some even retain grill doors; they are hardly neutral setting for 'period workshops'. The
juxtaposition of blackened tools and whitewashed cells draws further attention to the
stark contrast between present artificial setting and display, original carcereal use of the
settings and the craftsmen's tools. The Castle Museum dismantles its own pretensions
to pictorial re-presentation.
Presenting the past                                                                            83


Heritage: visiting a mythical past
The North ofEngland Open Air Museum, Beamish, County Durham: 200 acres of country-
side are the setting for reconstructed and refurbished buildings, some in situ, most
transferred from around the North-East, which are meant to represent late-Victorian
north-east England. There is a railway layout, colliery, pit cottages, a farm and a town
area with terraced houses, pub and co-op. A large hall houses collections and archives.
Sounds of traditional fairground and brass band, the rattle of trams, the smell of engine
oil and steam add considerably to the nostalgic atmosphere; the museum is animated
with brass band concerts, engines in steam, passenger trams, summer fairs, whippet
racing, pitmen's wives baking bread and scones, and a co-op grocer weighing sugar bags
filled with sand.
          We left Gateshead to get away from houses like this.               (Visitor's comment)
    'Geordie's Heyday': the declared aim ofBeamish, the 'Great Northern Experience',
is to preserve the North-East's heritage, the northern way oflife 'about a century ago ...
when the North-East was in the forefront of British Industrial development' (Official
Guidebook). Local heritage is the focus of the visit to Beamish, a visit into a mythical
past. Beamish is a commemoration of a mythical past; objects never intended to com-
memorate anything are transformed into monuments of mythical meaning.




Fig. 4.3 Beamish valley. A. The Hall; B. The Town; C. The Railway Station; D. The Home Farm;
E. The Steam Navvy; F. The Colliery; G. Geordie (after Carmichael c. 1830).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               84


    Although the museum houses a reference library and photographic and sound
archives, the heritage Beamish outwardly presents is property and artifacts, the
property of a utopian community with all classes harmoniously in their place in Hall or
terraced house, collecting mounts from stable block or working the colliery steam
winder. All the dehistoricized elements of an anaesthetized past have been miraculously
transported from Consett, Gateshead, Alnwick to a picturesque rural setting. It is hard
to believe that this valley bottom is only a few miles from Newcastle; at Beamish history
is isolated from the present.
   History, objectified in property, industrial capital and the object, is the existent (as
long as it is carefully preserved) and at Beamish it is eminently visitable and consumable
in leisure time. Objects and buildings from the past are extracted from their present con-
text and displayed at Beamish. History is staged as 'historical' sights, images and events.
In this way 'history is abstracted from the historical and becomes an object of
generalised social attention' (Bommes and Wright 1982, p. 290). History is extracted
from the present.
   We have noted the working of the exchange principle in relation to objects. It applies
also to historical sites and to museums themselves. Beamish is eminently visitable, a
place for the family to visit on August Bank Holiday. As such it is equivalent to other
such places of 'historical' interest: castles, stately homes, cathedrals. The places have
meaning overwhelming in relation to one another. History again becomes an 'abstract
system of equivalences'. Its relation to everyday life is one of consumption in leisure
time. Where should we go this weekend?
   But to locate history in sites, monuments, museums, uninhabited places isolatable
from the present 'suppresses at one stroke the reality of the land and that of its people,
it accounts for nothing of the present, that is nothing historical, and as a consequence
the monuments themselves become undecipherable, therefore senseless. What is to be
seen is thus constantly in the process of vanishing' (Barthes 1973a, p. 76). Beamish does
not provide a window on the past. Beamish is an agent of blindness. The past is trans-
formed into its image, a spectacle.
   The past can be visited at Beamish, but this past is another world, a fantasy, a myth,
a nostalgia. It is another time; 'as in other aggressive fantasies and the dream of primal
bliss, it exists in allegory rather than actual time. It is a reverse image of the weaknesses
of the present, a measure of our fall' (Samuell983, p. ii). As theatrical spectacle replaces
life so nostalgia replaces history.
   Beamish nourishes a 'soft focus nostalgia' (ibid.) for times more congenial when pit-
men, 'prodigious gardeners, breeders of animals, and often gamblers' (guidebook) grew
leeks (the gardens are set) and raced whippets (there has been whippet racing at
Beamish) and yes, took baths in front of the open fire. It must have been this way really,
mustn't it, because people lived in the terraced cottages untill976 and provided 'infor-
mation about how their cottages were furnished' (guidebook, our emphasis). Jo, from
number 26, died after being rehoused when his cottage was given to Beamish by the
National Coal Board, but with the help of his family his cottage has been recreated. He
lives on doesn't he?
   Beamish capitalizes (sic) on the indeterminacy, the ambiguity of artifacts and through
Presenting the past                                                                       85


selection and relocation at Beamish presents a sentimental experience of an imprecise
time and place, a utopian gratification, a euchronia. This movement from the concrete
naturalism of the exhibits to imaginary make-believe 'Geordieland' is a neo-tribal
gesture, an assertion of 'roots' in the face of the anonymity of everyday life in contem-
porary capitalism. The transformation from real artifacts to imaginary past occurs
through and for the initiate, the Geordie of today. The past is pre-recognized before
arrival at Beamish. Beamish confirms recognition of the myth of the past. Older people
recognize objects similar to those they lived with but now anaesthetized in the terms
imposed by Beamish. Younger visitors listen to their mams and dads, grandmas and
gran dads.
   This recognition and remembrance is not wholly conditioned: 'we left Gateshead to
get away from houses like this'. Positive energies of past hopes and dissatisfactions,
senses of tradition and freedom are aroused. However these energies emerge in an
isolated realm of leisure, that 'removed and anodyne realm in which gratification is
offered for dissatisfaction in relation to work' (Bommes and Wright 1982, p. 296). As an
'experience' encountered in leisure time, the past is over, finished, relevant only in
terms of a visit on Saturday or Sunday or a holiday, a day out with the kids. So why not
just remember the good times- the steam engines and trams, leek shows and ... ? Let's
have a good day out at Beamish. We hope to show that such concepts of diversion and
amusement- here applied to the presentation of Beamish's nostalgic mythology- are as
appropriate in ideology critique as more conventional analysis which would assign
Beamish's displayed past to particular sectional interests, criticizing a story mistold (see
Adorno 1967, p. 30).
   History is timeless through the logic of abstract equivalence. The objects and build-
ings also have a timeless quality because they have endured. They have defeated his-
tory's process of decay. Historical time is experienced as degeneration. We nostalgically
look back from the edge of an abyss to a time of community and human dignity. This
backwards look, and prospect of only further decay, is hindering: we must stop, rescue
and preserve. 'Under the entropic view of history, supported as it is by High Cultural
paradigms, "the past" is revalued and reconstructed as an irreplaceable heritage- a trust
which is bestowed upon the present and must be serviced and passed on to posterity'
(Bommes and Wright 1982, p. 291). We must preserve the past; it needs servicing,
mending, fixing. But fixing is immobilizing.
   The rusting items of industrial machinery scattered around Beamish are testaments
to history as decay. They proclaim the need to service the past, preserve it, rescue it.
They also proclaim its endurance. Together with the work in progress reconstructing
buildings, these objects declare Beamish is incomplete.
   However this is not a declaration that history is forever incomplete, or that history is
open to human agency. It means Beamish is incomplete, a marketing ploy that Beamish
will always be open for the visitor to return again and again to view the most recently
fixed bit of the past. It means the past is still hanging on, it has endured, it is enduring,
just like Jo in his cottage. It means our freedom, our agency, is restricted to being
mechanics for a broken-down Gateshead tram.
   The past endures, clinging to the present, weighing down the present. A sticky,
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               86


slimy past sucks the present into its mire. An unfinished past of domination, unfree-
dom and suffering seeps into the present and drags us into a mire of compulsive
repetition, unresolved conflicts, because the past is forgotten (Schapiro 1977, p. 147).
The past endures with the help of the present but in being preserved in this way the past
is forgotten. The truth of the past is suffocated beneath a pile of preserved objects which
only proclaim a self-evident but deadened 'truth'.

Labour and discovery: the archaeologist as hero
Jorvik Viking Centre, York: an underground 'interpretation centre' beneath a shopping
centre. Yisitors make a 'journey in time' on talking 'time cars' to a street and alleyway
in Viking Jorvik, complete with sounds, smells and models of people. A guide to
archaeological excavation is followed by conventional case displays and a museum shop.

 'A revolutionary concept in museum design': so claims 'Jorvik Times', an official 'news-
paper' produced by the York Archaeological Trust. It is apparently so revolutionary
that the label 'museum' cannot be applied to the Jorvik Viking Centre. The centre is a
project of the York Archaeological Trust and aims to 'remind people of a forgotten but
important and exciting piece of English history, and at the same time explain how
archaeologists go about their task' (official guidebook). A visit to the centre is again an
experience, the 'Jorvik Experience', a 'journey in time' to Viking Age York, Jorvik
brought back to life (J orvik Times). The experience is of discovery of the past and the
labour involved in revivification.
   The experience begins with a 'trip back in time', an impressionistic audio-visual
presentation, after which 'time stops, history is frozen, this is Jorvik' (time car com-
mentary). The visitor proceeds to view the reconstructed street and alleyway. The past
has been discovered and reconstructed through immense archaeological labour, the
scientific processing of' 15,000 (or is it 30,000) objects! a quarter of a million pots! four
and a half tons of bones!' (commentary). In the supporting literature and commentary,
stress is repeatedly placed on the detail and accuracy of the reconstructed street, its basis
in enormous amounts of factual evidence. Indeed the reconstruction is said to be so
accurate, so real, that 'if the Vikings themselves were to return they would feel com-
pletely at home' (Jorvik Times). Yet the objects are made to carry meanings which
would have mystified their makers: empirical detail, representational accuracy,
inanimate display for educational purposes. Stress is placed on authenticity achieved
through science and technology and the sophistication of the audio-visual presentation
(see Wishart 1984). The stress is on the identification of empirical accuracy and 'life',
the life of Jorvik. But life doesn't live.
   After the street comes a jump forward to 1980 and the discovery of what lay buried.
The archaeological site is preserved half excavated, a work site, labour in process, finds
in a tray, wheelbarrows full. 'Archaeologists from the York Archaeological Trust are
revealing the remains of the loos and wells, warehouses, workshops and homes we have
just visited ... they peel offlayer after layer of soil, labelling, measuring, photographing
and planning everything as they go' (guidebook).
   More labour is revealed: the evidence, having been discovered, is processed. The
Presenting the past                                                                                        87


visitor arrives at the real detective work; 'digging is only the start of the archaeologist's
detective work' (commentary). The visitor passes by a desk with work obviously in pro-
cess and then is presented with a reconstructed conservation laboratory complete with
white-coated expert looking down a microscope. Another white-coated figure (a
member of an environmental archaeology unit, we are told) sieves biological finds. On
the opposite wall life-sized photographs attest to scientific industry. The commentary




Fig. 4. 4 The past brought back to life. Reproduced with permission of Cultural Resource Management Ltd.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                  88


enlightens the visitor: this is biological detective work, which together with detective
work on other material evidence, shows the archaeologist what life was like in the past,
what conditions were like, when the enormous three-dimensional jigsaw puzzle is
pieced together.
   The labour of discovery and reconstructing the past: so great is the stress on authen-
ticity that 'scientific' technique must be shown to the visitor. And science excludes the
visitor- the white-coated dummy looks down the microscope, but not the visitor. We
are to understand that scientific discovery guarantees the authenticity of the trip, a
tourist trip into history. 'You are HERE, and you are THERE, both at the same time'
(Magnus Magnusson in guidebook). Time has after all been arrested. The past is
present. We are present in the past. This is the actual site of the street. These are the
actual timbers. The detective work draws the visitor closer to the past. Accordingly it is
appropriate that the visitor should be allowed to actually touch the past; panels of
potsherds and other objects are attached to a wall.
   Between the two white-coated experts is a reminder of the conceptual associate of
'labour'- 'discovery'. A marble slab in the floor records the discovery by two construc-
tion workers of the 'Coppergate Helmet' (Anglo-Saxon in date).
   'Now come and see the objects'. The penultimate element in the Jorvik Experience
is a conventional gallery of 500 case-displayed objects. With the supporting text they
form a descriptive account of subsistence and crafts. Finally comes the museum shop
where you can 'take your pick from a host of beautifully crafted mementoes of the city
the Vikings called Jorvik' (Magnus Magnusson in guidebook).
   Jorvik is described as an experience and like any experience it just happens, as does
the thrill of discovery, discovery of treasure, of the aesthetic artifact, of the artifact laden
with information. The visitor passively experiences, locked for half of the visit in a
moving 'time car'. We are guided by the anonymous cultural policeman (but isn't it
that kindly Magnus Magnusson?) whose precise rehearsed sentences are truly sentences
- sententiae- acts of penal speech (Barthes 1977a, p. 191), telling us what we see, tying
down the meaning of the artifacts, tying the artifact to the 'realistic'. The 'journey in
time' and visit to reconstructed Jorvik is a sentence against polysemy. There is no turn-
ing back; the visitor cannot leave the 'time car'. Museum shop follows object gallery
follows object laboratory follows what is presented as the life-world of the artifact. The
fixed sequence culminates in the revelation of the meaning of the Jorvik Experience.
Object gallery and museum shop are the commodified object of archaeological labour
and the reality of commodity purchase, reified object on display followed by an oppor-
tunity to buy a memento of the purchased experience, to buy the past (1,000-year-old
pieces of timber@ £1 a square inch).

         facilis descensus Averno ...
         sed revocare gradum superasque evadere ad auras
         hie opus, hie labor est.
         (The descent to Avernus is easy ... but to retrace your steps and escape
         back to upper airs- this is the labour, this is the toil)
                                                                  (Virgil Aeneid VI: 126-9)
Presenting the past                                                                          89


         The present ... is the bull whose blood must fill the pit if the shades of the
         departed are to appear at its edge.                   (Benjamin 1955, p. 314)


   Aeneas, Trojan hero, visited Cumae where the Sibyl prophesied his destiny and
guided him into Avernus, the underworld, where he encountered Rome's destiny.
Beamish is a visit to a mythical past. Jorvik is a mythical journey in the steps of the
archaeologist as hero.
   Like Aeneas, the archaeologist (and later the privileged visitor) is guided on a ritual
journey to 'knowledge'. For Aeneas it is a fixed and irresistible destiny and future. For
the archaeologist it is 'the past', finally isolated in realistic photographic detail, fixed and
certain.
   For Aeneas, the irresistibility, the veracity of his destiny and Rome's future is con-
firmed respectively by his guide, the prophetess Sibyl and her inspiration from the god
Apollo, and by the supreme effort and labour required of the hero to gain access to the
underworld and there discover knowledge. For the visitor the 'truth' of Jorvik is con-
firmed by the guides - Magnus Magnusson and other commentators - stressing the
'divine' origins of the reconstruction in scientific endeavour, and also by the supreme
effort and labour required of the archaeologist -hero to discover and reconstruct the past.
   But there is a striking absence. The Aeneid is Virgil's epic. Virgil, the author, is
absent from Aeneas's journey. The Sibyl's and Aeneas's prophetic visions of things to
come are Virgil's present, his offering to his patron Augustus. So too with Jorvik; the
reconstructed street, the result of the labour of the archaeologist hero, and the guiding
commentary are self-fulfilled prophecies. They too are irresistible and unavoidable
because of the absent author. This is why Jorvik is described as an experience. Like any
true experience, it happens, is irresistable, author-less. The Sibyl's certainty and the
certainty of Aeneas's experiences belong to Virgil because Virgil is projecting his
present into a mythical past. The truth of the Jorvik reconstruction belongs not in the
objects, in the 'past', but in the present, in present archaeological practice, uncovering,
unconcealing the fragments of Viking Jorvik.
   We may take the classical analogy further. Waiter Benjamin also writes: 'The sooth-
sayers who found out from time what it had in store did not experience time as either
homogeneous or empty. Anyone who keeps this in mind will perhaps get an idea of how
past times were experienced in remembrance- namely in just the same way' (1973e,
Thesis XVIIIB, p. 266). The ancient prophet interpreted phenomena as signs (e.g.
flights of birds, hysterical ramblings of a priestess). Uncertainty and doubt existed over
the status of phenomena as prophetic signs, over the meaning of the signs and the reality
to which they might refer. To perform an interpretation was to arrest the present in
grasping the momentary connection of the signs with the future and reduce the doubt
over meaning in a prophetic reading. Reservation was repressed, meaning assigned and
then asserted- interpretation was open to criticism and debate within the community.
So the prophet's experience of time is not empty duration XQOVO£ but XaLQO£ - the
critical moment, conjunction of present and future (Kermode 1967, pp. 46ff.; cf. Leitch
1983, pp. 3-6). To interpret the past is also to play the prophet. Jorvik, or rather its
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              90


creators, read the fragments of the past and tie them to a particular un-mediated mean-
ing, descriptive, empty, its connection with the present forgotten but not absent.


PART TWO: PAST AND PRESENT IN THE MUSEUM

The museum's aesthetic eliminates the concrete author of history; it suppresses the
concrete authorship of the past in the present. And this is in spite of the museum's fre-
quent use of a linear 'book' format- using artifacts to carry or support a story line. In
presenting the archaeological and/or historical process of acquiring knowledge as one of
passive discovery and subsequent description of the past, history is presented as being
written by the white-coated expert, a faceless author, a universal author, god or science.
The present's implication in the past is one of objective contingency.
   On another level, the present is accepted as being implicated in the museum as an
institution. First, the museum is an active intervention in the past as it conserves and
preserves artifacts which originated in the past. Secondly, it presents these to the public
-the objects are exhibited. Authorship refers to the creativity of interpreting the past for
the public- the exhibition is designed. The present's implication in the past is here one
of subjective contingency.
   At both levels the link between past and present is contingent. The past is fixed and
complete; the present turns to the past according to its own subjective decision. The
decision is made to turn to the past because it is conceived as valuable to the present, as
value-laden. But this is an abstract monetary value: it doesn't really matter what the past
was like in its details. The decision is to turn to a past pre-conceived as fixed, complete,
in-itself.
   This contingent relation between past and present determines the themes open to
discussion concerning the museum as an institution.

   (1)   Does the museum materially preserve the past with efficiency? The manage-
         ment and conservation of collections. Research and collections.
   (2)   The museum and the commodity. Services for the community- information
         services, object identification. The relation of museums to other institutions
         and bodies (such as local government, planning departments, English
         Heritage, government departments, local societies, adult education). The
         museum's contribution to tourism.
   (3)   Education and the museum- museums and educational institutions (schools,
         universities), loan services. The museum and its message- educational theory
         and museum applications; traditional knowledge areas (art, history, natural
         history) and the museum.
   (4)   Is the museum effectively getting across its message? Communicative effective-
         ness and 'interpretation' in the museum. ('Interpretation': 'an educational
         activity which aims to reveal meanings and relationships through the use of
         original objects, by first hand experience and by illustrative media rather than
         simply to communicate factual information' (Tilden 1957, p. 8).) Exhibition
         design and layout- use of supportive 'interpretive' material (labels, models,
Presenting the past                                                                     91


         text, diagrams, maps); static and interactive display; object -based and concept-
         based display. Formal and technical matters.

  The majority of work and discussion on museums is confined to these themes (see the
comprehensive bibliographies produced by the Department of Museum Studies, Uni-
versity of Leicester).
  As a means of critique, we will now consider two particular debates concerning
archaeology's relation with the present.

 Entertaining the public: 'real' and 'popular' archaeology
 The display which aims at the uninitiated visitor and sets out to stimulate, entertain,
 divert, but ultimately to educate, is the shadow of a 'real' archaeology which is isolated
 from its determinate context, an autonomous archaeology which searches desperately
among the debris of the past for the immediacy and meaning it has overlooked in the
 present. The popular exhibition is the social bad conscience of 'real', serious archae-
 ology (Adorno and Horkheimer 1979, p. 135). Archaeologists dig up the past, lodge
 their finds in the museum and may speculate according to their theoretical models as to
the meaning and significance of what they have found. Presenting any of this to a public
-those who do not belong to the community of archaeologists- is entirely contingent,
a separate matter from 'real' archaeology. Popular presentation is split from the real
work of archaeology. The link between archaeology/artifact and public becomes
 'interpretation' of archaeology/artifact/history. Interpretation is the function of the
museum. The museum becomes a service manned by professionals.
    So the museum presents for the public, the uninitiated ('knowledge', 'concepts',
'ideas', artifacts - it doesn't matter in this purely technical relation). Experts supply
cultural goods, cultural capital for the visitor, manufacturer for customer. The
supermarket-museum is simply the physical locus for this transaction.
    Archaeology 'is in the end reduced to mere communication. Its alienation from
human affairs terminates in its absolute docility before a humanity which has been
enchanted and transformed into clientele by the suppliers' (Adorno 1967, pp. 25-6).
Reduction to communication, reduction to broadcast: the only form of creativity and
agency within this technical relation is the 'creativity' of the curator-entrepreneur,
supplying his inventiveness to the marketing of the past, the design of displays. All that
can be said to the visitor concerning her agency is 'you too could be an expert'.
    Those museums and commentators who draw on progressive educational theory and
advocate interactive displays- displays which involve the visitor in some active way,
which centre themselves on the visitor- do not alter this relation. They merely comment
on the presumed efficiency of the communication, that an interactive display will con-
vey more of its 'message' to the visitor. They are equally manipulative of the visitor (cf.
critiques of progressive educative techniques, e.g. Elshtain 1976, Entwistle 1979).
    To entertain, inform, educate the present, the past must be presented in an accessible
way. Hawkes (1968) has voiced the conscience of humanist as opposed to scientific
archaeology. Decrying the inhuman works of scientific archaeologists shored up
'behind ramparts of jargon and other specialist defences' (p. 260), Hawkes wants an
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                 92


 accessible humanist archaeology, 'historical (i.e. descriptive-narrative) writing of the
 quality and humanity of the work of the young Gordon Childe, Mortimer Wheeler,
 Christopher Hawkes, Stuart Piggott, or even, in his more austere way, Grahame Clark'
 (p. 256). Hawkes wants historical synthesis, extraction of 'historical' meaning from
 disparate facts.
    For Hawkes, a return to, or re-emphasis of humanist writing would overcome the
 split she perceived between inaccessible scientific archaeology and traditional archae-
ology. The link between the archaeological artifact and popular accessible writings is the
imaginative personality trained in the humanities (p. 261). There is still a split between
 real archaeology concerned with the past and popular archaeology for the present. The
 link is the imaginative personality instilling human values into dusty dry artifacts,
writing historical synthesis. Clarke also acknowledges the split between real and popu-
lar archaeology. For Clarke, vulgarizing archaeology is the last refuge ofthe humanities-
trained archaeologist unable to deal with real analytical archaeology and seeking
material gain (1968, p. 22).
    Both of these positions rely on a conception of an autonomous archaeology. For
Hawkes, archaeology's autonomy from contemporary society is its basis in eternal
human values; archaeology is a pursuit of the cultured (Childe read Pindar after dinner?
Hawkes 1968, p. 261). For Clarke, archaeology is archaeology is archaeology. Analyti-
cal archaeology is autonomous in that it is a scientific discipline in quest of knowledge
coming to its maturity. Archaeology as culture, archaeology as analytical discipline:
both oppose the notion of archaeology fundamentally being for-something-else. Pri-
marily archaeology exists in-itself.
    In these conceptions archaeology has no necessary link with the public, with a
clientele, with its social context. The links that are established between archaeological
artifact and the public are due to the social responsibility and sense of social duty of the
archaeologist or curator, the personality of the archaeologist or curator.
    All the discussion of the reasons behind the archaeologist's quest for the artifact and
its eventual residence in the museum is a vacuous rhetoric, a marketing ploy to justify
the ideological work done in the name of culture, science or whatever other reified and
alienated realm. Why dig up and preserve the past? Because of natural curiosity, the
human will to knowledge and understanding; as an aesthetic quest to secure beauty and
variety; to establish symbolic links with the past, a sense of national or human identity;
because humans need a past, a communal memory, a sense of the past; because of a
sense of social duty- the past is being destroyed; for personal satisfaction; to entertain
and divert; for nostalgic reasons- a search for more congenial times; to learn from the
past and educate the present; to find a model for inspiration; to reconcile East and West
and solve the world's problems (see also the discussion in Chapter 1, pp. 25-7).
    The answer lies in the split between real archaeology and its presentation and/or
justification to a public. The error is in posing the question after the act of separating real
and popular archaeology. Discussing and considering the presentation of archaeology,
or its relevance to the present, or justifying archaeology to the present with entertaining
or diverting popular works and exhibitions presupposes the gap which such rhetoric is
to bridge. The relation between archaeology and the present remains arbitrary because
Presenting the past                                                                        93


archaeology is absolutized as though grounded in the inner nature of knowledge; it is
justified in an ahistorical way by reference to eternal human qualities or values.
Archaeology is reified, separated from the present (Horkheimer 1976, p. 212).
   Archaeology is reified, rooted in the antinomies of a fragmented capitalist society.
This brings a secret source of comfort in the split between real and popular archaeology.
That the fatal fragmentation might some day end is a fatal destiny, nemesis- retribution
for archaeology's pretension to autonomy, its hubris (see Adorno 1967, p. 24).
Reification, involving those eternal values of humanity and objectivity must not end.
Archaeology must not be contaminated by society's materialism, the mob armed now
with metal detectors, wrecking the past in search of material gain. Archaeology must
counter this growing barbarism with educative measures, popular works and exhibits
accessible to the mob, to justify its civilized alternative, to appease the mob.

Archaeologists as creatures of their times
         Was fallt, das sollt Ihr stossen                                        (Nietzsche)
         (If it's falling down, give it a shove)

    The autonomy of archaeology is potentially violated by the archaeologist and curator
who address the public with justifying and entertaining works. The archaeologist and
curator are, of course, members of society, but what is the significance of this? Is the
autonomy of archaeology compromised?
    Fowler writes: 'as a factor in our use of archaeological evidence, the meaning we give
to it, the fashion of the times remains potent ... The archaeologist is a creature of his
own time ... There is no ultimate, finite truth to be revealed by archaeological evi-
dence ... all interpretation of it is relative' (1977, p. 136). Fowler separates the artifact,
the evidence, from its interpretation by the fallible archaeologist, a creature of his (sic)
times.
   Clarke's controlling models locate the archaeologist in society determining his or her
confrontation with, his or her interpretation of the past (1972, pp. 5-10).
   Daniel expresses scepticism regarding 'new' archaeologists- they will realize that the
past is something to be recorded, described and appreciated. Their deviations from this
empiricist truth are due to their (defective?) personalities, their subjective experience
and disposition (1981, p. 192).
    So from these points of view archaeology's autonomy lies in its object. Archaeology
is further abstracted from its determination in the present in the assertion that its prac-
titioners belong to the present. Archaeology is judged according to its practitioners who
are subsumed, assimilated in an administrative manner into the prevailing constel-
lations of power which the intellect ought to expose (Adorno 1967, p. 30). The 'artifact'
retains its purity and integrity in spite of the potential violation. The present though is
absolved from guilt in this absolutization of an immediate relativity.
   But the present is not absolved from its duty to the past. Archaeology's autonomy, its
truth, lies in the artifact, patiently enduring time and subjective interpretation. The past
is objectified as property. The obvious conclusion is that the object past must be pre-
served, protected. Property is sacred. In the devaluation of the practical confrontation
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                 94


of archaeologist and the past to a universal relativism, the artifactual past is the historical
constant, our Heritage to be preserved for interpretation in the future. Every present
needs a past to be interpreted. We must preserve the sacred past for the future (Fowler
1977, p. 192). Museums preserve the future's sacred heritage, its private property.
Objectivity is sacred fetishized property. Whose property? The property of Man?
   'Disputing the decay of works in history serves a reactionary purpose; the ideology of
culture as class privilege will not tolerate the fact that its lofty goods might ever decay,
those goods whose eternity is supposed to guarantee the eternity of the classes' own
existence' (Adorno 1964, p. 62, translation by Susan Buck-Morss). We remain hidden
in the labyrinth of a commodified past, a labyrinth of deadened and preserved objects.
De-struction is necessary to create openings to get out, for the sake ofliberation. A way
out must be uncovered. In this sense truth is the Greek af.:{]8na, a practice ofuncon-
cealing. The way out has been forgotten (reification is a forgetting), it is hidden behind
a heap of decaying objects (see the discussion in Chapter 1).
   What is the nature of the relation between curator and his or her society? In an
analysis of the National Air and Space Museum, Washington D.C., Meltzer makes use
of a concept of 'ideology', which he claims to derive from Althusser, 'to view our
society's manner of reinforcing and reproducing its economic structure' in the museum.
'The Museum is about air and space, but only on a superficial level; it is more properly
about us' (1981, p. 125). Meltzer utterly neutralizes the concept of ideology in what he
recognizes as an apolitical analysis (ibid. p. 125). For Meltzer, the museum as ideo-
logical institution means that it tells 'us' about 'our' economic structure. 'Our' use of
artifacts of the past tells 'us' about 'ourselves'. 'We', presumably, are citizens of the
democratic U.S.A., good American capitalists.

Mediating past and present
It is necessary to mediate these two related poles, to mediate a metaphysics of history
where history is identified as the past, and a relativization of history where history is a
reflex of present social and material reality, present social conditions.

Leone suggests one form of mediation. Drawing on Bloch's proposal (1977a, 1977b)
that discussions of the past among most peoples have little or nothing to do with the facts
or processes described but are entirely about the present, being models of how society
ought to work, Leone claims that the scientist's social structure is replicated when his
or her work is presented to the public, in the ritual of public performance. The archaeol-
ogist is concerned in his or her professional work with giving the objects accurate mean-
ing (1981a, p. 12). This search for objective accuracy produces boredom when pre-
sented to the public because it ignores the link between past and present. The way out
is to 'allow the past to be the image of the present it must be by its very nature in a ritual
setting' (p. 13). The professional and private work of archaeology is separate from its
ritual and public performance. A bored reception indicates lack of meaning in the
original work, an unrealized connection with the present. The solution is to credit the
public performances with their private-professional authors. Let the public settings
Presenting the past                                                                      95


based on interpretations change, 'show them changing and teach how they are changed
and what they change in response to' (p. 13; cf. Schlereth 1978).
  Leone locates the determinate link between archaeology and the present in its public
presentation. The professional-private work of the archaeologist must respect the
present's creation of the past if the ritual of presentation, of performance is to be
meaningful.
  However we would argue that there is no homogeneous present creating the past- the
present is fragmented and contradictory. Secondly, professional archaeology and its
public presentation are both forms of performance.

Presentation as perfonnance
There can be no 'realistic' objective representation of the past. We have argued that
actual past history is not identical to its representation in archaeological reason. There
is no genuine past to be brought into harmony with archaeological thought and neutrally
re-presented to the public. Archaeology does not provide a mirror to the past nor does
it provide an abstract system which expresses the 'reality' of the past. This is to identify
reason with the past and does not do justice to the material practice and suffering of
human subjects in the past. Such an identification justifies the tyranny of thought over
individual human existence, 'it is the triumphant tyranny of the concept, the relentless
sublation of discrete particulars to a system radically closed in its very dreary infinity'
(Eagleton 1981, p. 120). The qualitative meaning of the past is lost in the universal
authors' quest for the objective past. Reified, commodified objectivity, empty
quantified detail, communicating universal 'truths' of history as progress, decay, or
simple objectivity yielding to present reason, destroys the historical meaning of the
artifact, its temporality.
   The past is not a three-dimensional jigsaw puzzle buried beneath the archaeologist,
or a palimpsest. All such conceptions reduce the past to a monolithic structure, a syn-
chronic structure of spatial relationships. Artifacts are not neutral elements with a
frozen meaning ready for defrosting, but fields of contention and contradiction with
constantly shifting significance and connotation, shifting according to their inscription
in past and present social practice.
   The past is not a tangle of factual details to be decoded, presented to and appreciated
by those with an educated 'sense of the past' (Fowler 1981), 'but consists rather of the
numbered group of threads that represent the weft of the past as it feeds into the warp
of the present ... The subject matter of history, once released from pure facti city, needs
no appreciation. For it offers not vague analogies to the present, but constitutes the
precise dialectical problem that the present is called upon to resolve (Benjamin 1979,
p. 362).
   So the museum exhibition is not so much representational or referential as figural and
rhetorical. It is the rhetorical performance of the museum, its act of interpretation and
persuasive intention which opens up meaning.

There are several implications of the notion of presentation as rhetorical performance.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              96


Archaeology and its presentation in the museum cannot begin with an abstractly defined
objectivity or a priori method but must begin in medias res with the artifact in its present
historical circumstance, riddled with error, contradiction, doxa (Benjamin 1973b,
p. 103). The primary question is not ontological or methodological but strategic, politi-
cal. Not what is the past and how should we approach it, but what do we want to do with
the past and why? (cf. Eagleton 1983, pp. 210-11).
   Archaeology does not receive its meaning from the artifact. The artifact surrenders
and receives meaning in the practice of archaeology and presentation in text or in the
museum. This does not sacrifice truth in a relativism whereby it is impossible to decide
between rival explanations and presentations if each springs rationally from a particular
way of life, from particular social conditions in the present. Such a relativism is only a
problem if the concern is with the relation of an abstract consciousness or subjectivity in
general, formulating explanations and creating presentations, and an abstract object of
study. The abstract subject's explanation and presentation of the abstract object is rela-
tive to present social context. This problem 'disappears in the concrete process in which
subject and object mutually determine and alter each other' (Adorno, quoted by Buck-
Morss 1977, p. 51). Objectivity itself is heterogeneous, not abstract. The artifact cannot
be completely defined in terms of abstract, ahistorical, objective qualities such as form,
dimension and all related categories of type. It is the insistence and agency of the act of
interpretation, explanation, presentation which restricts the ambiguity of the artifact to
meaning and understanding. Artifacts have endured and are authentic materially, but
they are vulnerable. Their truth is precarious and in constant need of re-articulation.
Truth is time-bound, temporal, historical.
   The material reality of the artifact is not mythically permanent. The artifactual past
is not eternal abstracted objectivity to be appropriated by archaeological reason. The
artifact is time-bound, transitory. Non-chronometric time enters into the meaning of
the artifact. Material reality is in a permanent state of historical becoming. The past is
irreversible, discontinuous, particular and thoroughly mediated objectivity. The past is
not a systematic array of objects and their relationships, a fixed reality of commodified
objectivity towards which archaeologists are groping and which may be represented in
museum display. Such a conception is a denial of temporality; the past is here presented
as an eternal image or myth. The past instead must be realized as the 'subject of a con-
struction whose locus is not empty time but the particular epoch, the particular work'
(Benjamin 1979, p. 352). The artifacts must be broken from historical continuity.
   We must renounce all abstract closedness and totality in definitions and
re-presentations of artifacts. There is no unified identity behind all artifacts. As such
there can be no universal method, no formal principles of interpretation and display.

The contradictory present
Why go to a museum? To see the past because it exists, to be educated? The answers to
the question offered by the museum exhibition are inadequate in their masking of
aporias, contradictory relations lodged in contemporary social experience. We have
tried to show how these contradictory relations lie within the museum's aesthetic, its
presentation of the artifact:
Presenting the past                                                                   97


                  spatial                                    temporal
          closed, completed past                      open, unfinished history
                  eternity                                     history
                  reified                                     relational
                  repetition                              particularity
                  identity                                   difference
                  presence                                      absence
                  homogeneous                           heterogeneous
                  coercive                                  explorative
                  passive                                         active
                  monologic                                     dialogic
                  forgetting                            remembrance
                  conservation                             redemption

   The museum manipulates these relations, suppressing contradiction, fixing the past
as a reflection of the appearance of the present. The present recognizes itself and is
justified. The museum as ideological institution suppresses difference and
heterogeneity in advertisements for the world through its duplication in the artifactual
past. The museum suppresses temporality and agency. In the museum the past becomes
the death mask of the present.


Conclusion: towards a redemptive aesthetic
Some implications can be drawn from our argument:

(1) We must retain heterogeneity and difference, the fragmentary and discontinuous
reality of the past as a means of overcoming the ideological effects of a reified object
world, past and present. The presented artifact is a reified object in the museums we
studied. Social relations which provide meaning to the artifact are transformed into an
appearance of relationships between objects. The exhibited object's pretence of trans-
parent naturalism is a rendering of society as opaque, of history as homogeneous,
always-the-same. Opaque homogeneity, running in a continuous flow through history,
conceals the antagonistic and contradictory class-structured present and imposes an
image of the present on the past. We must resist the power of reification, shatter the
homogeneous past, reveal the social relationship of past and present in a true realism, a
social physiognomy which embodies objective social contradiction, which embraces
contradiction, discontinuity and conflict in a dynamic totality (Adorno 1967; Jameson
1977).

(2) We must oppose professional preservative History with its archaeologist-curator
speaking for a monolithic and murdered past. We should democratize and personalize
authorship in an attempt at avoiding the absorption of author-archaeologist and visitor
into the product (display, book) (see CCCS Popular Memory Group 1982, p. 215). This
involves an active reconciliation of production and reception of the past, a renunciation
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             98


of the conventional relationship of professional producing the past for a consuming
public, of experts presenting an elitist high culture.

(3) We must recognize the full implications of authorship and fully embrace reflexivity.
So all presentations are to be understood as being precisely that- intimately tied to the
present. Their truth is to be found in the present's specific encounter with particular
aspects of the past. We must present a specific and unique engagement with the past, an
engagement original to every new present (Benjamin 1979, p. 352). We must present
specific acts of construction, work in progress, varied forms of relationship with the
artifactual past instead of a fixed relation of representation of a completed past. The
museum can allow the visitor to construct a past along with the archaeologist-curator:
participation not as a means to a pre-given, pre-discovered end, but as an open process
of constructing different pasts.

(4) The artifact must not be reduced to uniform abstract objectivity. The artifact is not
reducible to a one-dimensional representational sign of the past. The past is not fixed,
to be represented, but changes according to its specific engagement with the present. So
we must detach the artifact from its 'self-evident' meaning as object of scientific study,
reveal the artifact as non-identical with its apparent meaning, strip the object of its
pretension to being-in-itself, strip the object of its immediacy in order that it might be
released from the sterile continuum of the homogeneous history of the always-the-same
(Wolin 1982, p. 125). This may involve enabling the artifact to gesture to its own
material inscription in social practice, its own material existence, at the same time as it
conveys a meaning in the context of a museum display. It certainly requires considering
recent work on the symbolic meaning and use of artifacts- the style of function (see
Chapter 7).

Techniques for achieving these ends:

(1) Introduce political content into conventional displays- show how the past may be
manipulated and misrepresented for present purposes.

(2) Break artifacts from fixed chronological narrative and from their original contexts
and reassemble them with contemporary artifacts similarly decontextualized: juxta-
position, montage (a) as a means of drawing attention to and engaging with official cul-
tural meanings of the artifact and effecting an ideological critique of commodification,
and (b) as a means of illustrating alternative (non-commodified) meanings.

(3) Supplement 'objective third person narrative' with exaggeration, irony, humour,
absurdity, as a means of stripping the self-evident meaning of the artifact of its power.

(4) Avoid permanent displays, emphasize authorship and changing perceptions of the
artifactual past.
Presenting the past                                                               99


(5) Encourage the use of artifacts of the past outside the institutional space of the
museum. Allow community use of museum artifacts, people constructing and present-
ing their own pasts in the museum.
Page Intentionally Left Blank
                             PART If


Perspectives for a social archaeology
Page Intentionally Left Blank
5
Hermeneutics, dialectics and archaeology




         'Above the subject, beyond the immediate object, modern science is founded on the
         project.'                                                    (Bachelard, 1978, p. 11)


Archaeology as interpretation
In this chapter we attempt to provide some preliminary groundwork for a revitalized
philosophy of archaeology which moves beyond traditional notions of a split between
archaeologist and data, between subject and object, subjectivity and objectivity. These
opposed and dichotomous terms and others related to them (e.g. intuitive-deductive;
theory-data; idea-fact; abstract-concrete; theory-practice; present-past) pose a
primary epistemological obstacle to understanding past and present and the connection
between the two. Any philosophy which sets up and maintains a radical disjunction
between such polarized terms is a philosophy of NO (Bachelard 1975), which con-
strains, sets limits, attempts to legitimate the notion of fundamental foundations to
thought beyond which we must not stray. It is a rigid framework which were it to be
actually adopted by scientists in their practice would stultify thought. Virtually all exist-
ing epistemologies or theories of the grounds for making knowledge-claims are
philosophies of NO. Their correlative is the archaeology or archaeologies ofNO which
aim to constrain research and lay down a priori frameworks of that which can or cannot
be legitimately said. Such are the archaeologies which have been discussed and
criticized in the previous four chapters of this book, archaeologies rooted in closed
philosophies. Positivist/empiricist discourse is a closed philosophy. By this is meant that
it supposes that there is only one correct and proper manner of approaching, describing
and explaining reality - by granting primacy to the empirical object of study through
sense-perception, elevating the general over the particular and putting faith in testing
strategies leading to verification or falsification (see Chapter 2). We have challenged
these suppositions and here argue instead for an open philosophy of archaeology - a
philosophy which does not set limits, create areas beyond which research should not
stray.
   Archaeology, we contend, is an interpretative practice, an active intervention
engaging in a critical process of theoretical labour relating past and present. It is entirely
misleading to pose the problem of understanding and explaining the past in terms of
either a purely factual representation tied to the past and purged of subjective 'bias', or
a presentist quest for liberation from the dogmatic burden of the archaeological record
through unrestrained fictionalizing and mythologizing. Interpretation is an act that can-
not be reduced to the merely subjective. Any archaeological account involves the

                                                                                          103
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              104


creation of a past in a present and its understanding. Archaeology in this sense is a per-
formative and transformative endeavour, a transformation of the past in terms of the
present. This process is not free or creative in a fictional sense but involves the trans-
lation of the past in a delimited and specific manner. The facts of the case become facts
only in relation to convictions, ideas and values. However, archaeology would amount
to an exercise in narcissistic infatuation if it only amounted to a deliberate projection of
present concerns onto the past. The archaeological record itself may challenge what we
say as being inadequate in one manner or another. In other words, data represents a net-
work of resistances to theoretical appropriation. We are involved in a discourse mediating
past and present and this is a two-way affair.

The hermeneutic circle
The hermeneutic circle may be described as consisting of
         a laborious construction of the totality oflife, which is simultaneously
         unknown and not available to direct insight, out of the odds and bits oflife
         which are sentiently accessible, but yet incomprehensible. The circle starts
         from the divination of the totality to which the confronted element belongs; if
         the guess is correct, the element in question reveals part of its meaning, which
         in turn gives us the lead toward a better, fuller, more specific reconstruction of
         the totality. The process goes on, in ever wider circles, until we are satisfied
         that the residue of opacity still left in our object does not bar us from appropri-
         ating its meaning.                                             (Bauman 1978, p. 31;
                               cf. Heidegger 1962, pp. 150ff.; Gadamer 1975, pp. 235ff.)

   We can suggest that any interpretative account of the past moves within a circle,
perhaps more accurately, a widening spiral, and involves changing or working
theoretically upon that which is to be interpreted. One cannot understand anything
about the meaning of material culture-patterning in the past (or the present) unless one
is willing to make conceptualized interventions by means of using social, ethnographic
or other starting points about the manner in which the past social totality was consti-
tuted. If these conceptualized interventions are more or less correct we will gain insight
and understanding. If not we will be left with an uninterpretable mass of observations.
Additionally we cannot obtain a grasp of that totality which we seek to investigate until
we have some understanding of the contextualized matrices of social life into which the
material culture-patterning fitted and acted. Interpretation thus seeks to understand the
particular in the light of the whole and the whole in the light of the particular. To make
sense of the interconnections between diverse areas of material culture-patterning -
burial, artifact use and disposal, ceramic designs, faunal remains, architectural direc-
tional placement, etc. -requires some prior or anticipatory understanding of the social
totality in which the material culture acted as symbol, code, or structure. What makes
the archaeological data speak to us, when we can interpret it, when it makes sense, is the
act of placing it in a specific context or set of contexts, and the project of making sense
of the data involves the intrinsic variability apparent, and the full use of this variability
in an examination of possible meaning-structures. The concepts of a correct or an
H enneneutics, dialectics and archaeology                                               105


incorrect understanding do not rely upon a preconceived set of methodologies
(hermeneutics is not an alternative methodology) but make sense only in terms of the
past context being investigated. The fullest understanding is irrevocably context-
dependent and context-confined. This means that the nature of archaeological
understanding is relational to the context being investigated and involves a dialectical
movement back and forth between the parts and the totality. This means that the nature
of archaeological understanding is inextricably linked to the determinate context being
investigated and stands diametrically opposed to an urge for a technical control of the
past using laws or generalizations which are not context-dependent.
   The notion that an interpretative account of the past moves within a contextually
dependent circle, or spiral, removes the very possibility, the myth, that simplistic
falsificationist or verificationist testing approaches can be applied to break out of the
circle and establish whether or not the interpretations are correct at some stage or other
of inquiry. Corrections take place by a dialectical process within the circle itself. The
data has no 'pure', bedrock-like refuting essence but is itself indelibly part of the circle
(see Chapter 2, pp. 36-43, and further discussion of this point below). However, it
should not be too simply concluded that the circle is in some way self-referencing and
this leads us on to consider the role of the interpreter.

The role of the interpreter
In Chapter 3 it was argued that a value-free archaeology was an impossible enterprise
and we attempted to demonstrate that contemporary archaeology can hardly be claimed
to be devoid of social and political values. Here we wish to link in that discussion with
the role of the interpreting subject, discussing the hermeneutics of Gadamer.
   Gadamer (1975, pp. 235-6) quotes the following passage from Heidegger's Being and
Time (1962, p. 153), in which he refers to the hermeneutic circle:
         It is not to be reduced to the level of a vicious circle, or even a circle which is
         merely tolerated. In the circle is hidden a positive possibility of the most
         primordial kind of knowing. To be sure, we genuinely take hold of this possi-
         bility only when, in our interpretation, we have understood that our first, last
         and constant task is never to allow our fore-having, fore-sight, and fore-
         conception to be presented to us by fancies and popular conceptions, but
         rather to make the scientific theme secure by working out these fore-structures
         in terms of the things themselves.
A number of important implications can be drawn out from this passage (cf. Gadamer
1975, pp. 236ff., 1979, pp. 148ff.; Bernstein 1983, pp. 136ff.):
   (1)   Interpretation is not an optional choice such that 'objective method' can ever
         be regarded as a substitute for it in the manner, for example, that empiricist
         discourses might claim. Interpretation resides in our Being or existence in the
         world. There is no way in which we can escape interpretation. This is an
         ontological and not a methodological point. The circle or spiral of interpret-
         ations is not something which should be regretted and therein resides a posi-
         tivity, i.e. possibilities are opened out for us.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                106


   (2)   Fore-having, fore-sight and fore-conception or presuppositions provide the
         foundations for any understanding, truth, or knowledge-claims. In this context
         it is worth noting with Sellars (1963, p. 169) that 'in characterizing an episode
         or a state as that of knowing, we are not giving an empirical description of that
         episode or state; we are placing it in the logical space of reasons, of justifying
         and being able to justify what one says'.
   (3)   'The things themselves' (i.e. the data on which we work) exist only in so far as
         they are conceptualized. To move back to an earlier statement made in this
         chapter, reality is human, objects are not.
   (4)   In the attempt to understand the past we have to open ourselves up to it and the
         claims to truth that reside in that which we study, truth claims which only we,
         the interpreters, can bring out and emphasize. This is not the 'truth' of empiri-
         cism nor does it imply an act of empathy (see the critique of empathy in Chapter
         1). What it does mean is that we situate our opinions, ideas, presuppositions,
         fore-knowledge, our presentism, in relation to the past. We cannot purge
         ourselves of values but these can be productively mediated by that which we
         study. It is impossible to radically bracket off the self. Equally, that studied is
         not a subjective creation. Interpretation is what Gadamer refers to as 'fusion of
         horizons' (1975, p. 273) involving an active conjunction of past and present,
         object and subject.

   This conjunction of subject and object or interpreter and data requires further
amplification. As we have seen, in the hermeneutic circle the interpreter approaches a
set of materials in the fullness of their contextuality, and presuppositions permit an
initial understanding of the meanings of these materials. In a sense they anticipate their
form and nature. In the light of contact with that studied, these preconceptions are
inevitably modified in a progressive way to eventually permit a satisfactory understand-
ing. Gadamer (ibid., p. 238) suggests that

         meanings cannot be understood in an arbitrary way. Just as we cannot continu-
         ally misunderstand the use of a word without its affecting the meaning of the
         whole, so we cannot hold blindly to our own fore-meaning of the thing if we
         would understand the meaning of another ... All that is asked is that we
         remain open to the meaning of the other ... this openness always includes our
         placing the other meaning in a relation with the whole of our own meanings or
         ourselves in relation to it. Now it is the case that meanings represent a fluid
         variety of possibilities ... but it is still not the case that within this variety of
         what can be thought, i.e. of what a reader can find meaningful and expect to
         find, everything is possible ... The hermeneutical task becomes automatically
         a questioning of things and is always in part determined by this.

Now this notion of 'a questioning of things' is of essential importance. We are not
attempting to mirror the past but to probe into it, to move beyond surface appearances
to underlying structures beneath the data we empirically 'see'. A satisfactory under-
standing is, as the words suggest, never a complete understanding but is itself
H enneneutics, dialectics and archaeology                                                107


embedded in our praxis as interpreters. It involves our mediation of the data. It does not
claim to be the reflection of the past. Understanding both reproduces and produces. It is
not a recovery confined to original meaning. The meaning comes into being through
understanding. The corollary to this philosophical hermeneutics is that knowledge is
practical and in part depends upon what we do and what we want to do, a corollary that
will be discussed below. Before initiating that discussion it is, perhaps, worth emphasiz-
ing the difficulty of archaeology as a hermeneutic enterprise because this leads us to
understand fully the importance of theory construction as the key towards disciplinary
development.


Archaeology as fourfold hermeneutic
Giddens (1982, 1984, p. 374) has written of a double hermeneutic as being involved in
social science, through a contrast with natural science:
         The hermeneutics of natural science has to do only with the theories and
         discourse of scientists, analysing an object world which does not answer back,
         and which does not construct and interpret the meanings of its activities ...
         But social theory cannot be insulated from its 'object-world', which is a subject-
         world.                                                (Giddens 1982, pp. 12-13)
         The social scientist studies a world, the social world, which is constituted as
         meaningful by those who produce and reproduce it in their activities- human
         subjects. To describe human behaviour in a valid way is in principle to be able
         to participate in the forms oflife which constitute, and are constituted by, that
         behaviour. This is already a hermeneutic task. But social science is itself a
         'form oflife', with its own technical concepts. Hermeneutics hence enters into
         the social sciences on two, related levels.                            (ibid., p. 7)

It has been argued that interpretation in archaeology is a process of overcoming the dis-
tance between one frame of reference (the present) and another (the past) and that this
distance is productive of discourse (on the notion of distance see Chapter 1, esp. pp. 17-
18). The process of coming to understand the past is an extremely complicated one and
not susceptible to being simply boiled down to a single procedure or set of procedures
which can be reproduced by others in the manner of a rote formula or recipe. Archae-
ology, and history, we wish to suggest, are the most difficult of all disciplines because
the process of acquiring a historical understanding involves a quadruple act of interpret-
ative endeavour. Natural scientists are only involved in a single hermeneutic, since they
deal with inanimate objects and processes such as chemical reactions which in them-
selves have no human meaning, but to which meaning may be ascribed. Any theoretical
scheme which gives meaning to these objects and processes is itself a form oflife involv-
ing sets of concepts and procedures and experimentation which have to be mastered,
and a mode of practical activity generating specific types of descriptions. Sociologists are
involved in a double hermeneutic in that they both live and work within a form oflife,
a set of contemporary practices from which they cannot escape, and a world of pre-
interpreted meanings. The sociologist both shares a form oflife and through theory con-
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             108


struction and language use or extension attempts to throw light on the participatory
meaning frames in which he or she is imbricated. Anthropological work involves a
treble hermeneutic in that the anthropologist lives within a pre-interpreted universe in
the light of which his or her problematic and outlook is framed and yet attempts to
understand alien cultures inhabiting other meaning frames. The archaeologist and the
historian are involved also in this treble anthropological hermeneutic, with the
additional intersection of the past, a form of life not directly accessible, but one which
must be reconstructed. So, archaeological work involves:
    (i)    the hermeneutic of working within the contemporary discipline ofarchaeology;
   (ii)    the hermeneutic ofliving within contemporary society as an active participant,
           put broadly, gaining knowledge of that which is to be human, to interact and
           participate with others and to be involved in struggles about beliefs and social
           and political values;
   (iii)   the hermeneutic of trying to understand an alien culture involving meaning
           frames radically different from his or her own;
   (iv)    the hermeneutic involved in transcending past and present.
The difficulty involved in archaeology as fourfold hermeneutic is what makes the disci-
pline potentially so exciting and worthwhile. It undoubtedly goes some way to explain
the public fascination with archaeology. However, it is worth underlining once more
that the difficulties involved should not lead to any romanticism or nostalgia for the past,
to think by some transcendental human effort we can get back inside it. This was the
major failing of the hermeneutics of the late-nineteenth century, especially as expressed
in the work ofDilthey and more recently by Collingwood (1946). Equally, the apparent
ease with which contemporary scientistic archaeology claims stringent objectivity, via a
restricted set of simplistic methodologies, has to be rejected. It can, in fact, only claim
to do this at all by a remarkable set of reductions in which human beings are virtually
exorcized from the project. The fourfold hermeneutic involved in any and all forms of
archaeology undermines any attempt to fix for once and all the manner in which the past
should be understood in terms of methodological rules for procedure. It rather requires
the use of a multivalent plurality of approaches. A concomitant of the intellectual diffi-
culty involved in understanding the past should be that archaeology must have a highly
developed theoretical structure. Arguably, it should be the social science with the most
sophisticated and highly developed set of theories. In actual fact archaeology remains
the most weakly theoretically developed of all the social sciences. A curious inversion
appears to have occurred- the discipline most in need of theory by and large appears to
think that it can get along quite nicely without it.

Thought as embedded in historical process
Archaeological interpretations of the past are not secondary to the physical reality of the
past, the objects in the archaeological record. Understanding the past is a dialectical pro-
cess occasioned by continual adjustments of ideas, concepts and representations and is
not something that could be fixed by a single method such as the hypothetico-deductive
method. In essence, this is a method which is designed to leave us, as interpreters of the
H ermeneutics, dialectics and archaeology                                               109


past, speechless and powerless because it attempts to take away the responsibility for
choice between competing ideas and concepts in a purely mechanical manner. It
embodies a hope that the burden of choice, of evaluation, will pass away from us. The
notion of the hermeneutic circle allows us to realize that we can never shed this burden
of choice. Any interpretation of the past is multiple and constantly open to change, to
re-evaluation. In essence the attempt to privilege a way of reducing all possible descrip-
tions of the past to one methodology is an attempt to escape from humanity, from the fact
that the past is produced in the here and now, in the present, by men and women. To
suggest procedures could be developed leading to a totally objective view of the past
(e.g. Binford 1982) is, as Sartre suggests (1982, p. 37), to place oneself in the image of
God. Rorty nicely develops the point:
         Such a being does not confront something alien which makes it necessary for
         him to choose an attitude toward, or a description of, it. He would have no
         need and no ability to choose actions or descriptions. He can be called 'God' if
         we think of the advantages of this situation, or a 'mere machine' if we think of
         the disadvantages.                                          (Rorty 1980, p. 376)

Now, as all archaeologists know, or should know, there are a multitude of possible com-
peting descriptions of an artifact, an assemblage, or any set of remains encountered in
the archaeological record. The choice involved in the description of these remains is
related to the theories used to understand them.
   The result of the archaeological project is that a vision of the past is produced and
presented through publication. Archaeological work is historical in at least three ways:
the archaeologist is concerned with the past, the archaeologist creates a past, in turn the
past once created itself becomes historical. The implication of this 'historicism' (for the
want of a better term) is that a critical attitude must be maintained in relation to
archaeological practice. As we argued in Chapter 3, archaeological practice is, in part,
political practice. To refuse to treat past social actors as mere 'objects' resulting from
analysis to name just one area, does have political and social implications for the present.
The manner in which the past is conceptualized, the data interpreted, and the analyses
performed all provide meanings for the present. The kinds of explanations
archaeologists give provide messages to other archaeologists and the non-archaeological
public as to what archaeology is- the essence of its practical transformative activity on
the past. Archaeology does not simply provide a conception or view of the past. It is also
a discipline which should inform us of the nature of the human condition and the possi-
bility of social transformation. In this sense we can agree firmly with Bernstein that what
is required is 'to learn to think and act more like the fox than the hedgehog- to seize
upon those experiences and struggles in which there are still the glimmerings of soli-
darity and the promise of dialogical communities in which there can be genuine mutual
participation' (Bernstein 1983, p. 228). For the archaeologist to think like the fox rather
than the hedgehog (perhaps slug would provide a better dramatic referent) is to realize
that his or her work does have social and political implications and to act in conformity
with this, i.e. to think clear-headedly about the nature of contemporary society in which
he or she is inevitably embroiled and to ask whether the presuppositions he or she
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                  llO


employs in trying to come to terms with an essentially alien past will either challenge or
help to sustain the contemporary social order. No political position is neutral on this
issue and there can be no neutral archaeology. We cannot and must not just describe
dominance, power, hierarchy, inequality, exploitation and oppression but must engage
in a critical perspective on the past. Archaeology is not, then, just some kind of
resuscitation of the past in the present, but must involve a critique on the particular past
that leads to our concrete present. For this critique to be successful, to have force, we
cannot afford the essential irrationality of subjectivism or relativism as this would be
cutting the very ground away from under our feet. What is needed is a transcendence
of these through our practical work as archaeologists, through our own historicity. The
guiding light which Gadamer's reconstruction of hermeneutics provides is that as far
as archaeology or any other social science is concerned there is no simple choice to be
made between a subjective or an objective account of reality unless one is to abandon
science altogether and write novels instead. The post-empiricist philosophy of science
seems to be arriving at a similar conclusion (see, for example, Hesse 1978; Bhaskar
1978; Ham~ 1979; Putnam 1978; Harn! and Madden 1975; Papineau 1979).

Beyond hermeneutics, towards dialectics
Up to this point we have stressed the nature of archaeology as an interpretative her-
meneutic exercise. However, this is not sufficient. There are certain well-known
problems with hermeneutics- the lack of a notion of structure and of adequate consider-
ation of power and ideology amongst others. While archaeology is inevitably an
hermeneutic exercise and should be hermeneutically informed, it is not simply
reducible to hermeneutics. In discussing the hermeneutic circle, we have already
referred to a dialectical process of the interpretation of data binding it to theory. In the
following section we wish to draw out the implications of this more fully.
   A dialectical approach to the past involves at least three conceptions of the use of the
term 'dialectic' and the language associated with it, terms such as 'moment',
'mediation', 'contradiction':
    (i)   a mode of theoretical appropriation of data;
   (ii)   a method of analysis and criticism transcending subject/object divisions;
  (iii)   a theory of social reality as a set of internally connected relations in a process of
          flux.
Here we focus on points (i) and (ii). In Chapter 6 we consider point (iii).
  In an investigation of the past we are necessarily involved in making the elementary
presupposition that there is an objective reality which exists beyond the realm of
experience of any individual human subject. A real past exists but the pure essence of
the objectivity of that past, i.e. how it really was, eludes us in that to begin to deal with
the past involves us in decisions or choices as to how we might conceive of it. This is
simply an extension of saying that we are inevitably involved in a process of selection and
subsumption under some description. There are real past 'facts' but the facts that the
archaeologist deals in are not these. The facts employed in any study of the past are not
independent of their theorization. They are in no sense given to us but a product of the
H ermeneutics, dialectics and archaeology                                                   111


 process of knowledge acquisition. Ideas, or the means for the factual constitution of the
 past, do not fall from heaven, but like all cultural products of human activity are formed
 in given circumstances. The facts of the archaeological case are 'real' as opposed to
 'ideal' constructions in that they involve a transformation of aspects of data. The facts
 are thus theory-laden constructions constrained by resistances in the data. To under-
stand any past object of study, be it a tomb or a potsherd, we need to ascribe meaning
 and significance because the data studied is a product of meaningful and symbolic
 human action. The meaning of an object is not given to it for us to directly perceive, nor
is it solely constituted by a knowing subject. The meaning resides in, and is internal to,
the dialectical relationship between the two. The interpreter conceptualizes the object
of interpretation (that which has been created by subjects), and in turn, the object affects
that conceptualization. Subject mediates object and object mediates subject in a
reflexive process resulting in knowledge of object by subject. Following from this we
must reject any naive distinction between the object conceived as concrete hard fact and
theories or ideas about it conceived as abstract. Theory works on empirical objects
which are theorized, brought into the account, through the subject-object reflexive
relationship. Theory does not, then, work on a completely independent real object but
on a theoretical object. The theoretical object on which theory works pertains to the real,
to the data available in sense-perception, i.e. it takes or develops some aspect of it and
is empirically constrained, but the theoretical and the real object are not one and the
same thing but have a relative autonomy from each other. The data thus becomes a
theoretical appropriation of the real, and theory works on this data through its further
conceptualization. There can be no question, then, of testing in terms of either a
verificationist or a falsificationist strategy. This is because there is literally nothing inde-
pendent of theory or propositions to test against. Any test could only result in a tautology.
At this point it is worth noting that such a position does not call into question the use of
statistics and what are incorrectly termed statistical tests (e.g. chi-square, rank scales
and other standard procedures). What we are saying is that these and any other statistics
do not confirm, refute or falsify propositions. All they can be used to do (and this is the
manner in which they are used in Chapters 7 and 8) is to redescribe data patterning. We
still have to make sense of the redescription or grant it meaning and significance. The
redescription provided by the use of statistics may be more or less useful to us in our
attempts to conceptualize the past. They may help conceptualization as aids to descrip-
tion and redescription, interpretation and reinterpretation.
    If one rejects an account of archaeological knowledge grounded in processes of test-
ing, in a confrontation between subject and object, the question arises as to how great
is the distinction between a data-based account of the past and a fictionalized account.
It would be common to differentiate archaeology from literature on the grounds that
archaeology deals, at least nominally, in a realm of fact while literature moves in the
realm of fiction. It is true that the archaeologist may not invent facts at will while the
literary writer may and has a much greater freedom in exploring relationships. On
another level the distinction between archaeology and literature breaks down in that
archaeologists construct what may be termed facts and all archaeologists use heuristic
fictions or models to organize and orientate the archaeological record and make it
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              112


meaningful, to sort out that which appears most pertinent to understanding. The idea
of a purely factual archaeology, a totally objective account of the past, is itself an ideal
type or a heuristic fiction. Even if some archaeologist were to achieve this impossibility
it would remain unrecognized by either the investigator or others. The paradox is that
to appreciate an objective mirror image of the past for what it is we would already have
to know what the past was really like. The alternative, the way out of this paradox, is as
argued in Chapter 1, to accept the presence of the past and that in the present and the
future new pasts will be created.

Explanation
Explanation can only take place at the level of the theoretical object because it is only
here that meaning is conferred. As the theoretical object is inextricably related to the real
object, this is also explained, but only through its theoretical mediation. Explanation
and understanding of the archaeological record consists in:
   (1)   Making conceptual links between the theoretical objects such that they can be
         shown to be related to each other in a coherent fashion. This is a process of
         conceptual extension and translation between the theoretical objects;
   (2)   Showing the manner in which the interlinked theoretical objects can be gener-
         ated by underlying principles related to the life-world of the past. These prin-
         ciples are formulated by the analyst as a result of his or her knowledge, a
         knowledge dialectically produced through conceptual labour working on
         theoretical objects, and the conceptual links made between them. It represents
         a third and final level of theoretical appropriation of the real. The plausibility
         or conditional truth of the account, resides in the logical links established
         through the stages of the theoretical appropriation of the past and has nothing
         to do with a correspondence in any direct or simple manner with external facts.
         The entire process of analysis and explanation of the real moves in a dialectical
         process in which theoretical analysis results in the formulation or understand-
         ing of structuring principles of social life which are then referred back in order
         to explain data via conceptual links (Fig. 5 .1).

         Archaeologist    :--- Data
                          1
                Theoretical objects

                          1
                 Conceptual links

                         l
              Structuring principles

         Fig. 5.1 Stages in theoretical appropriation.


  We support the realist point (Bhaskar 1978, 1979) that the observable is generated,
and thus at least in part explained, through unobservable processes or relationships.
H ermeneutics, dialectics and archaeology                                               113


This is the single most important realist proposition which sets it up in direct opposition
to positivism/empiricism and it involves the rejection of the Humean conception of
causation discussed in Chapter 2, in which the world is presupposed to consist of
atomistic particulars or cause-effect regularities known through sense-perception by the
subject who then applies a thick layer of logical cement (inductive or deductive reason-
ing) to link together cause and effect which, at the outset, have been separated. A realist
position, by contrast, asserts that regularities which are observable through sense data
are the result of unobservable generative mechanisms which link them together. These
mechanisms are real, that is they possess ontological status, but exist independent of
thought:

         The realist view of explanation can be conveniently summarised in the claim
         that answers to why-questions (that is requests for causal explanations) require
         answers to how- and what-questions. Thus if asked why something occurs, we
         must show how some event or change brings about a new state of affairs, by
         describing the way in which the structures and mechanisms that are present
         respond to the initial change. To do this, it is necessary to discover what the
         entities involved are: to discover their natures or essences.
                                                              (Keat and Urry 1975, p. 31)

This means that we need to pay attention to the underlying logic governing the apparent
visible logic. We are involved in a search for structures underlying the real. Now, social
structures differ from natural structures in a number of important ways. Social struc-
tures are relations of production and reproduction which are both constraining and
enabling (see Chapter 6). Social structures, unlike natural structures (i) do not exist
independently of the activities they govern; (ii) do not exist independently of the agent's
conceptions of what activities they are carrying out; (iii) are in a chronic state of struc-
turation and are only relatively enduring (Bhaskar 1979, pp. 48-9; Giddens 1984, 1979,
chapter 2). The notion of structure is taken up further in the next chapter and all we wish
to note here is that these structures are composed or constituted by structuring prin-
ciples. These structuring principles are to be related to theoretical objects and are par-
tially explanatory in so far as they can be shown to generate them. The data is thus
explained by a necessary step of shifting away from it and the dialectical interplay of
theorized data takes place within the hermeneutic circle.


Knowledge
Knowledge is propositional; it resides in making statements about the world and being
able to justify these statements. Standard epistemologies rely on either (i) making a
transcendental claim or a metaphysical statement which we can either accept or reject,
or (ii) are forced to move backwards in an infinite regress (see Rorty 1980, for an
excellent exposition). We do not reject the concept or notion of knowledge but wish to
take some of the unjustified 'glamour' away from the term by adopting the position that
knowledge arises from the practical activities or praxis of men and women in the world
(cf. the consideration of truth on pp. 20-2). This is not a roundabout way of
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                 114


suggesting 'all knowledge is relative' since a relativist claim of the latter sort is contra-
dicted by the universality of the clause employed to argue for it.
   Theory is not something which can be merely 'applied' to empirical data. Statements
and interpretations or propositions about the past result from practical actions or
theoretical labours linking subject and object and going beyond both. Hence theory is
practice and knowledge is a production. This conception of knowledge as a production
has a number of distinct advantages and we owe it in one form to the work of Althusser
(1977). Viewing theoretical work as social practice sharing features with other social
practices (e.g. economic, political, technical, ideological) characterized by a distinctive
means and mode of production and type of human labour working on raw materials to
create a product, removes the untenable notion of knowledge being reducible to a
product of pure flights of genius- we just need a few archaeological Einsteins to tell us
how the past was or how to set about research! The raw materials from which
knowledge is created are concepts, notions and facts (theoretical objects) which for
archaeology are either the work of prior discourse inside or outside the discipline or are
themselves produced and then further reworked. Returning to the notion of the his-
toricity of thinking discussed above, the idea of knowledge as production leads us to
understand that this production always takes place at a particular time and place in a
field of power relations and politics. Involved in the production of knowledge is concep-
tual struggle and concepts, more broadly conceptions of the past, may have effects as
interventions today in the present. In this sense the past is real and not dead and gone:
through archaeological and historical production it is an active part of the present.

Conclusions
We have argued that archaeology is a hermeneutics, an interpretative practice, and have
outlined a conception of archaeological research as dialectical and knowledge as prac-
tical. These conceptions were supported by an emphasis on historicity and critique. A
critical archaeology is both reflexive (critical of itself) and critical of the past. It aims to
explain meanings and ideologies by disclosing the social conditions, social relations,
interests and structures from which they arise. This permits the possibility of being able
to disclose the manner in which meanings may be constructed and imposed by domi-
nant groups. A task of a critical archaeology providing a critical explanation of the past
is to study the manner in which material culture may be employed to foster 'distorted'
communication and used in power strategies (see Chapters 6-8).
   In this chapter we have made a brief set of philosophical remarks which are only
intended as possible guides towards the fully fledged development of a hermeneutic,
reflexive, dialectical and critical non-empiricist philosophy of archaeology. There can
be no final answers to the problems we have discussed; as with the book as a whole, the
end of this chapter is arbitrary: it signals a beginning. We finish with some summary
points.
    ( 1) The task of a philosophy of archaeology should be to offer potentialities rather
          than to foreclose them.
    (2) Archaeology is characterized by a fourfold hermeneutic and, as a hermeneutic
          process, is an attempt to make sense of the past in its contextual embeddedness.
H ermeneutics, dialectics and archaeology                                               115


   (3)   We need to escape from the notion of 'hard' facts and 'weak' theories and put
         both on an equal and dialectical footing.
   (4)   It is necessary to go beyond surface appearances in understanding the past.
   (5)   It is important to distance being empirical- considering data in all its potential
         fullness and complexity- from being empiricist- granting primacy to that
         data.
   (6)   Archaeology is neither subjective or objective; it transcends this dualism.
   (7)   We should see the gap between past and present as productive of discourse and
         dialogue rather than as a troublesome barrier.
   (8)   Archaeology is historically and socially situated- a political practice.
   (9)   An archaeology which is involved in an active interpretation of the past reveals
         the potential of the notion of critique in relation to past and present.
6

Social archaeology: the object of study




         'A little formalism turns one away from History ... a lot brings one back to it.'
                                                                        (Barthes 1973b, p. 112)


Introduction
In previous chapters we have considered archaeology as a practice in the present, a
writing and production of texts about the past. We have argued that the past is not
identical to its representation; reality is irreducible to facts, is not information to be
objectively, quantitatively defined, but is a field of polysemy, is informed by values, is
constituted in practice. We have emphasized archaeology as being indelibly her-
meneutically informed, as dialectic, and as itself embedded in historicity. We have also
criticized the reduction of meaningful practice to behaviour- the descriptive treatment
of meaningful and historical practice as bodily movement. We have emphasized instead
individual agency, that archaeology as practice is a rhetoric produced in definite social
conditions and social circumstances. In our criticism of various positions adopted in the
archaeological literature we have elaborated how they may be construed as ideological
-related to contemporary structures of inequality. Archaeology has in so many ways
become not a reawakening or remembering of the past, but an apology for the present.
   In this chapter we build on this conception of practice and ideology in considering the
object of archaeology. In accordance with previous chapters, we reject the possibility of
making a methodological prescription of what we are to find in theory, but instead con-
centrate on a series of ideas and concepts which we consider can overcome the disabling
fissures running through conventional approaches.
   Archaeology is unavoidably social not only in the sense that it is produced by men and
women in and outside institutions but because its data are the products of social prac-
tices. Such practices are structured and structures have a dual nature: they are the
medium and outcome of practices which constitute social systems in a reflexive manner.
This separates structure from its practical constitution - system - and emphasizes the
spatiality and temporality of practices. We stress that practice, in its structuring,
spatiality and temporality, is political and historical, and social systems are contradic-
tory, not homogeneous entities, but characterized by political relations of dominance
and subordination. Individuals are competent and knowledgeable while at the same
time their action is situated within unacknowledged conditions and has unintended
consequences.
   The concepts presented in this chapter have been outlined elsewhere (Tilley 1982a;
Miller and Tilley 1984b; Shanks and Tilley 1982; Hodder 1982a; Rowlands 1982; see

116
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                 117


also Bhaskar 1979; Bourdieu 1977, 1979, 1984; Giddens 1976, 1979, 1981, 1984: we
have also found stimulating Oilman 1971; Hindess and Hirst 1977; Cutler et al. 1978;
Gregory 1982a, 1982b; and Laclau and Mouffe 1985). Our aim here is notto provide an
exhaustive treatment of the conceptual apparatus (which would require a considerable
work now in preparation; Shanks and Tilley (in press)); to avoid undue repetition we
present instead more of a resume.

Artifact, culture, system
 Focus on artifacts and the labour of typology and classification as an end in itself is a
long-discredited antiquarianism. 'The archaeologist is digging up, not things, but
people', claimed Wheeler (1954, p. 13), arguing for a 'seasoning of humanity', that the
dry and dusty remains be brought to life by the archaeological imagination. For most
of this century the concept of culture has provided the link between artifacts and peoples.
Developed by Childe to mean regularly associated material culture traits in the same
time and place (Childe 1956, p. 33), 'cultures' were assumed to represent peoples or
societies and have been the basic object of study for prehistoric archaeologists. Once
classified, prehistory could then be described in terms of the interaction of such entities
-diffusion of ideas, migration, invasion or internal innovation.
    Much criticism has been made of the correlation between cultures and peoples.
Clarke (1968) emphasized that cultures were archaeological rather than ethnic entities,
polythetically rather than monothetically defined. Renfrew (1978b) has questioned the
existence of homogeneous assemblages, arguing that cultures are arbitrary taxonomic
categories imposed on a continuum of change, and Shennan (1978) has skilfully
elaborated the spatial variability which makes the Beaker phenomenon meaningless as
a coherent cultural tradition.
   Binford (1972) has criticized the definition of artifacts as expressions of social norms
specific to distinct groups. Instead of distinct cultures and their particular interactions,
the object of archaeology was to become culture systems, behavioural and adaptive, in
terms of which variability in the archaeological record could be explained. In contrast
to the pessimism of traditional 'normative' archaeology which despaired of being able to
specify supposedly non-material aspects of society (religion, beliefs, politics), a fully
social archaeology became accessible according to a framework permitting a mechan-
istic relationship between society and environment with material culture mediating as
an extrasomatic means of adaptation.
   The optimism of new archaeology with regard to the object of archaeology has led to
an extensive interest in reconstructing past societies and with schemes of social evol-
ution, even if some of the claims have been discarded or never been accepted (e.g.
formulation of laws of culture process, rigid hypothetico-deductive procedures).
   However, the concept of social or cultural system within the ecological functionalism
of the new archaeology has been effectively challenged (Hodder 1982b; Tilley 1981a,
1981 b). The idea of a social system as developed by Renfrew (1972), Clarke (1968), Plog
(197 4) and others, is based on a biological analogy, either explicitly or implicitly, that
society can be conceived in some sense as an organism in homeostatic equilibrium
within its environment. Much archaeology has thus been concerned with defining and
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              118


investigating relations between social system and environment or ecosystem in relation
to technology and population levels. But with the natural system state being defined as
stability and absence of change and with a radical separation of what is internal and
external to the system, change has usually been viewed as deriving from outside the
system parameters, and there is a separation of statics and dynamics, synchrony and
diachrony, the latter being associated with change. As a reified whole, the social system
has no place for individual action. The major problem is the dependence on function as
the explanatory concept - that any social element can be explained by reference to the
part it plays in maintaining the survival of the social whole. Things said to have func-
tions are attributable to an enormous variety of categories, e.g. pencil sharpeners,
record players, cars, parts of organisms, social institutions, specific events or relation-
ships. Questions of the form 'What is X for?' almost demand a functional answer in
everyday discourse. For example a reply to the question 'What are shopping bags for?'
might be 'for holding articles purchased while out shopping'. Now this is fairly
innocuous and we might think it a fairly reasonable reply. The crux of the problem is
that when such answers are given to explain social relationships they become manifestly
inadequate, and the more complex the practices which are to be explained, the more
inadequate the answer. The subsystems of a society are claimed to function together via
negative and positive feedback mechanisms in much the same way as the parts of an
organism, such as the heart or the kidneys, function to keep it alive. When certain prac-
tices or institutions are present in a social system these are explained as part of its func-
tioning. For example, Rappaport (1967, pp. 224-42; 1971a) proposes that ritual is an
information exchange device communicating cultural, ecological and demographic
data across the boundaries of social groups. On his account, other rituals regulate the
dispersal of human populations, preserve a balance between farmed and fallowed land,
and keep domestic animals within an adaptive goal range (Rappaport 1971b). In
archaeology such ideas have been used by Thomas (1972) and Flannery and Marcus
(1976) among others. However, such a functional explanation for the presence of rituals
in all these cases tells us nothing whatsoever about their form and content - all it
purports to explain is why these rituals occurred at all. We are left with an empty shell
of an explanation in which content is reduced in favour of instrumental logic. Moreover,
we have no glimmering of an account of why one particular type of ritual should occur
rather than another. The reference made to practical interest, utilitarian value, adaptive
expedience (adaptation to the environment) in such a framework entails a radical
separation of function and culture, objective expedience and style, function and style
(cf. Dunnel11978b; Schiffer 1979). What functional value can the style of a pot possess?
- little can be said of particular meaning, of the specific way things are made and done,
that is style, which is so much of what archaeologists are concerned with (see Chapter
7). When what matters is simply the 'objective' and 'adaptive' aspects of what is done,
meaningful social practice is reduced to behaviour - bodily movement.
   For systems analysis in archaeology, the system, environment and subsystems are
essentially descriptive categories, patterns of empirical regularities tied together
through functional links. Much effort has gone into investigating pattern in the archaeo-
logical record (settlement distributions, distributions of exchanged items, resource dis-
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                119


tribution, artifact distributions and distributions of features within sites). Once the
patterns are depicted then they are presumed to fit into a behavioural functional whole.
A functional explanation always presupposes some needs, wants, interests or goals. In
other words it is teleological in form. Something occurs as the result of reaching towards
or pertaining to a desirable state. Individuals may be very well said to have needs.
Indeed this is an essential characteristic of humanity: to have aspirations and desires. By
contrast social systems themselves have no needs, they have no need to function, to
survive, to attain a goal range or to seek out homeostatic states. The needs of the social
system cannot be independent of the actors which make it up, so the notion of system
function or the function of rituals or other institutionalized practices is entirely
irrelevant and misplaced. Feedback processes cannot be conceptualized except in terms
of some goal unless they are just random, but to anthropomorphize such processes is an
invalid procedure.
   It is a misconception to conceive of the object of archaeology as artifacts in them-
selves, the archaeological culture concept, or as a functionally defined social system. An
alternative proposed by some (e.g. Schiffer 1976, 1981, 1983a) is that archaeology
should be a science of material culture, its object being the remains and artifacts, their
relationships and processes of the formation of the archaeological record. But the ulti-
mate aim is to specify links (usually mechanical) between material culture patterning
and 'society'; the aim is to reach a description of society, either defined in terms of a
functionally adaptive system or in terms of a generalized, atemporal, aspatial 'culture
process'.
   Some archaeologists, through a reading of Marxist work, especially Marxist
anthropology, have drawn on the concept of the mode of production, looking at the
archaeological record in terms of social relations of production, involving especially
considerations of ranking, kinship structures and ideology within social formations
characterized by contradiction and conflict rather than homeostatic mechanisms (e.g.
Bender 1978; Friedman and Rowlands 1978; Gledhill 1981; Gledhill and Rowlands
1982; Frankenstein and Rowlands 1978; Kristiansen 1984; Gilman 1984). While fully
supporting the aims of this work to overcome the inadequacies of systemic approaches
with a valuable emphasis on contradiction, reproduction and change, we wish to
question the adequacy of the concept of mode of production and social relations of pro-
duction as predetermined objects of archaeological analysis.

Against essentialism: social system as relational whole
We have argued in previous chapters that the artifact cannot be isolated from its
relational context in both present and past. We would thus agree with Lukacs's (1971
[1923]) programmatic proclamation made in the early days of Western Marxism, of the
centrality of the category of totality (see Jay 1984 for an excellent review of historical
changes in the use of the concept). Any archaeology which argued for the existence in
the past of entities larger than the individual or interactions between individuals and
their artifacts, would seem to, at least nominally, conform to this position: culture,
society, social system or mode of production are all holistic units differing mainly
according to the definition of constituent parts and the characterization of their inter-
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              120


relations. Rowlands, in particular (1982), has reaffirmed that the idea of totality is a
strength of archaeology, concerned as it has been for so long with aggregate units, but
does point to problems with the idea of 'society' - that bounded units within the
archaeological record which might be equivalent to society don't exist (referring to
Shennan's work, 1978), that the unitary notion of 'society' is historically derived, part
of the emergence of nation-states in Western Europe (Rowlands 1982, pp. 163-4). We
wish to build on this position and contend that there is no underlying principle or prin-
ciples unifying the concept of'society' good for all times and all places, principles which
would remove the category of society from history. The category of totality cannot be
pre-defined. We wish to argue against the object of archaeology being any particular
and abstract object, society or system, sometimes defined in theory, sometimes distilled
from the empirical, essentially existing beyond history. We argue that there can be no
general structuring of society or of the social world with pre-defined subsystems, with
one or several principles or 'essences' (the economic, environment, technology, popu-
lation, social relations of production) producing effects (as in, for example, the Marxist
base-superstructure formula). Such essentialism is mechanically deterministic,
reductionist- reducing empirical detail to the effect of a principle- and naturalizes and
legitimates a particular and historical conception of the structuring of social reality which
has the effect of removing it from the historical process. Neither individuals nor the
theoretical systems they construct can miraculously escape from the historicity of
human existence (see Chapter 5).
   Nor is there an essence 'human nature', such an entity as homo oeconomicus (Chap-
ter 3) or homo artifex (Chapter 4). We do not criticize such objectifying values with
reference to another set of absolute 'human' values (deemed to be superior in some way),
but rather wish to emphasize the ambiguity and fragility of human values, their per-
version through association with other values and their restriction to particular sections
of the population often held to be enlightened and especially perceptive (see the dis-
cussion in Chapters 1 and 3 of Cultural Resource Management's conservation ethic
which must, it is claimed, be transmitted to the general population; and see the dis-
cussion in Chapter 3 of Clark's assertion (1979, 1983) that human cultural value !s
dependent on the presence of elites).
   Such essentialism also reproduces a whole series of disabling dualisms, aporias,
conceptual dead-ends which it is vital to avoid:

                              essence          appearance
                              necessity        contingency
                              interior         exterior
                              abstract         concrete
                              concept          fact
                              object           properties
                              subiectum        accidentes
                              substance    -   attributes
                              society          individual
                              reality          consciousness
                              body             mind
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                  121


The terms of each pair are radically separated and often, explicitly or implicitly, the first
 term is privileged, made to have primacy over the second. The whole complex forms a
labyrinth of contradiction encompassing archaeological explanations.
    The specification of a principle or essence unifying, underlying and explaining data
depends on the idea that it is possible to radically separate that which is primary and con-
stituting from that which is secondary and contingent on a priori grounds. Many con-
ventional approaches to the archaeological past specify an underlying principle or
essence (adaptation to environment, systemic homoeostasis, economic necessity, social
relations, function) which can be separated from the contingent, which produces
effects, effects which are determined by the underlying principle (it may be empirical
detail, 'superstructures', 'style', social change, artifact variability). Archaeology
becomes the viewing of the transcendental signified through its expressions or signifiers
(social structures through burial practices, through material culture patterning). The
essential is viewed through its appearances.
   The search for an underlying principle implies a definitional obsession: marking the
boundaries of the essential, defining 'real' entities, evolutionary stages, 'cultures',
'subsystems', according to which the past might be explained. Such definition (often
disguised as neutral classification) depends on a separation of interior and exterior- that
which is internal to the transcendental signified and that which is external, separating
the essence from the appearance.
   A redefinition of necessity is required. It does not refer to an underlying and
externally defined determinant principle but refers to the nature of structural relations.
So in a total system with each element specified and related within the whole, all
relations are necessary, all elements and relations depending on each other. Such a total
system of synchronous necessity is a political project, a totalitarian project of a perfectly
defined and administered society, timeless, lasting a thousand years. This is the project
implied in the separation of synchrony and diachrony. It is considered possible to make
a slice through time and read the social structure of the moment, the static essence of its
empirical development- the events of history. As Althusser (1977, pp. 94-6) points out,
this essence-development duality is based on a conception of time as a continuity of
present (synchronous) moments, homogeneous measurable duration, empty, a concep-
tion we have criticized in Chapters 1 and 4. Such a conception makes history a problem;
the 'essential section' of the social, the synchronic as contemporaneity itself, timeless
presence, has primacy over practice and history.
   For Althusser, the totality, the social whole is overdetennined. So the totality is not
some external structure or some essence, reference to which explains surface
phenomena, concrete effects; structure is neither internally nor externally separate but
is present in its effects. There is no barrier between abstract concept and the empirical-
concrete (Althusser 1977, pp. 188ff.). Laclau and Mouffe (1985) emphasize the poten-
tial significance of this contention; the social is a symbolic order. So there is no ultimate
and primary substance represented in a separate realm of (contingent) signification; the
social is always already a symbolic order. In such a symbolic order meaning is realized
through the system of differences; meaning does not reside within any element in-itself
but each element means or exists only in so far as it relates to other elements, differing,
deferring or delaying absent elements. There can be no self-sufficient or self-identical
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               122


element. In supporting the idea of the social being overdetermined in this way we reject
the search for an ultimate object of archaeology which can be defined literally and its
secondary effects or properties read off.
    This involves a rejection of the concept of an object being separated into underlying
materiality (subiectum) and properties or attributes attached or possessed (accidentes)
(see Chapter 1, pp. 9-10). This idea of discrete objects of analysis with definable and
quantifiable attributes is obviously encouraged in archaeology by the character of
remains of the past - many apparently discrete units: pots, tools - and also by the
applicability and 'success' of mathematical and statistical procedures. Time is not a
dependent variable or attribute: empty measured duration according to which the
substance of the past can be plotted. The social does not exist within time so it is not
possible to separate synchrony from diachrony, static definition from temporal develop-
ment, as we have just pointed out in another context.
    This viewpoint entails a rejection of conceptions of middle-range theory (see Chapter
2), the idea that a set of mechanical and universal principles can be defined, and accord-
ing to which dynamic culture process can be read-off the static archaeological record
which, in effect, becomes contingent, unnecessary, accidental. Equally inadequate are
structuralist attempts to reduce all explanation to the structure behind the appearance,
essences of that which is empirically observable. Structure and its realization cannot be
radically separated out in so far as structure exists only in its realization in space-time-
is present in, through and by its effects (see below).
    Instead of discrete objects defined according to attributes, a flux of internal relations:
it is to this relational complex that the category of totality refers. The relations between
elements are internal (Oilman 1971); it is not a case of discrete elements joined by
external relations. There is no totally internal element, a fully constituted identity,
in-itself, identical with itself; any part of a social order is always subverted by internal
relations with other elements in a system of differences. The presence or trace of some
elements in others prevents identity being fixed; there is always a surplus of meaning
which cannot be pinned down. So it is not possible to separate environment from
society, external from internal; each defines the other. The economic cannot be
separated from the political, from ritual; there can be no literal differentiation. Each is
subverted by a polysemy which prevents stable, self-contained definition. The
economic is both present and absent in the political and ritual, is structured as political
and ritual space. In addition to rejecting a base-superstructure conception we reject any
simple a priori separation of economy, politics, ideology.
    The object of archaeological study is always partial and incomplete, pierced by con-
tingency; a total system would be a system of total necessity and regularity with all
meaning fixed, all action predictable, all intentions fulfilled. Necessity in a relational
sense refers to the fixation of meaning, the establishment of regularity in difference, in
the contingent; necessity and contingency define each other.

Agency and social practices
What place is there for human agency in a conceptualization of the social totality as con-
sisting of a flux of internal relations? Of all the dualisms mentioned above one of the
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                  123


 most damaging and disabling is the individual/society; subject/structure couplet in
 which the two sets of terms are radically opposed to each other. It is no exaggeration to
 state that the problem of how to conceptualize the relationship between individual or
 group agency and wider social processes has been a primary problem of both the
 philosopher and the social theorist since the Enlightenment and beyond. Conceptualiz-
 ation of the relationship may amount to little more than 'taking sides': either the indi-
 vidual and social practices or society and social structures become effectively annulled.
 In part this is a debate about free will and determinism. Is society determined by the
 will of individuals or individuals by society? It is also a debate between idealism and
 materialism, between preconceived categories of a human essence and a view of subjects
 being constructed in the social.
    One extreme is to assert individualistic voluntarism in which individuals are regarded
 as creating societies. The latter becomes more or less a residual term: the sum of the
individuals who through their actions make it up, a doctrine sometimes termed
methodological individualism (Brodbeck 1966; Watkins 1970; Weber 1964, p. 101).
 Subjectivist sociology (phenomenological sociology, e.g. Phillipson 1972; and ethno-
 methodological perspectives, Garfinkel 1967; Johnson et al. 1984, chapter 3) bears a
family resemblance to the same general approach in which human actions are thought
to depend solely upon how subjects interpret and account for the social conditions in
which they are situated, the meanings such situations have for them as agents and the
languages and symbolic forms of discourse they use and construct to explain these
states. Human actions flow from subjective intentions, and social structures become
subjectively inhabited or based. Such a view also finds expression in much historical
narrative in which history is effectively boiled down to the doings of great men and
women. The fact that Caesar crossed the Rubicon becomes an essential historical detail
distinguished from the crossing of the Rubicon by anyone else.
    On the other hand, functionalism, structuralism and post-structuralist approaches
effectively eliminate the individual from the analysis in various ways. Individuals
become statistical detail (Redman 1978b, p. 330), props for the structure (Althusser and
Balibar 1977, p. 180) or bourgeois illusions which require decentring (Coward and
Ellis 1977, p. 94). Foucault (1979, 1981) is always much happier when referring to
'bodies' rather than 'people'.
   In the position taken here we wish to refuse this dualism, to acknowledge that without
individuals and the social practices of individuals societies would not exist but that at the
same time the individual human subject requires a thorough decentring from the stage.
We can agree both that 'man is a myth ofbourgeois ideology' (Althusser 1976, p. 52) and
that 'it is only from the face-to-face relationship, from the common lived experience ...
that the intersubjective world can be constituted' (Schutz 1972, p. 166). This requires
a materialist dialectical conception of the relationship between subject and structure,
the agent and society. Considering the agent as an active decentered subject enables a
position transcending mechanistic reduction and voluntaristic idealism. All subjects are
positioned in relation to other subjects, groups and institutions or collectivities, power,
ideology and social structures. To state that the subject is positioned does not require
that he or she becomes a mere component or a prop.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                124


  The following points may be made about agency:
    (1)   All action is social action.
   (2)    The primary characteristic of such action is a realization of teleological
          positing.
   (3)    All social actions are determined actions because (i) some actions may be
          forced by violence or its threat; (ii) most actions have a habitual basis; (iii) some
          actions are influenced and promoted via ideology; (iv) actions which seem to
          be free in the sense that they involve a choice on the part of the subject, involve
          interests and values. However, these interests and values are themselves
          situated in a socially constructed field so that the choices are not free-floating.
          No child born in Britain makes a choice of whether or not to speak English if
          the act of speaking has a communicative intent in relation to other English
          speakers.

   To regard all action as social action is to recognize the constitution of action in
sociability and in socialization processes. A child brought up in complete isolation could
hmrdly be subsequently regarded as being a competent member of society. There is no
principle of action which can be regarded as being a distinctive property of an individual
if by this is meant some intention, purpose or quality originating entirely outside social
life. Actions make sense in relation to the social context in which they are situated as
does language. Robinson Crusoe may have been alone on his desert island but in another
sense he took his entire society with him. The practices of individual subjects and their
relational effects in the social totality take place both in language and in the materiality
of Being. The individual is both constructed through language use and the materiality
of his or her social being but also has a certain reflexive efficacy in that construction pro-
cess. When an agent makes a statement about a situation or produces or uses an object
the statement made or the particular type or form of production or usage is a product of
past experiences, intentions for the future and the particular language or material
object involved. Through agency, praxis, language and consciousness become con-
joined and there can be no sharp division between language and the manner in which
social reality is constructed. Reality is conceived through language and through acting
on that reality such that language, thought, reality and action all become contextually
interbedded. The role of language and action is less to reflect or picture or operate in
reality but to actively shape that reality, reproduce it or transform it.
   The distinctive quality of action and agency is that it is purposive. Societies as a whole
are not purposive and neither are animals, birds or plants. The latter may be held to be
characterized as being 'purposive without a purpose' (Kant). Lukacs underlines the
point that 'only in labour, in the positing of a goal and its means, consciousness rises
with a self-governed act, the teleological positing, above mere adaptation to the environ-
ment - a stage retained by those animal activities that alter nature objectively but not
deliberately - and begins to effect changes in nature itself ... Since realization thus
becomes a transforming and new-forming principle of nature, consciousness, which has
provided the impulse and direction for this, can no longer be simply an ontological
epiphenomenon' (Lukacs 1980b, pp. 22-3).
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                   125


   When we speak of agency, the vocabulary used to consider actions and their results
involves terms such as wishes, desires, interests, intentions, purposes, dispositions,
motives, principles, irrespective of whether or not these wishes, etc. ever actually were
effected. Reasons may be regarded as causes of actions but not in a limited cause and
effect type sense. Von Wright (1971, p. 107) puts forward the following scheme, in
tenseless form, for understanding action:
         From now on A intends to bring about pat timet.
         From now on A considers that, unless he does a no later than at time t', he
           cannot bring aboutp at timet.
         Therefore, no later than when he thinks timet' has arrived, A sets himself to
           do a, unless he forgets about the time, or is prevented.
This is a scheme of practical inference or reasoning capturing notions of time, place,
consciousness and teleological positing, emphasizing that intentions, goals for action,
knowledge of the circumstances in which the agent finds him or herself and the means
by which action is effected or done are all interdependent and changing or, in other
words, relational. Such a formal scheme has a fairly limited area of application in the
sense that it is an 'ideal type' and in most practical situations in the ongoing stream of
daily life agents do not formally reason in such a manner. Wittgenstein notes that the
'game of giving the reason why one acts in one particular way does not involve finding
the causes of one's actions' (Wittgenstein 1969, p. 110). To make sense ofthis statement
requires a consideration of the relationship between action and consciousness.

A stratified model of agency
Faced with a choice between alternative goals and modes of conduct an agent may
undertake a process of reasoning in some sense equivalent to the model of practical
inference discussed above. Similarly, apparently spontaneous actions may be rational-
ized afterwards in such a manner. The ability to be able to talk about action or provide
reasons for conduct involves discursive consciousness of the event. The game consists
of being able to make the action intelligible in terms of the stream of other actions in
daily life, forms of conduct implicitly or explicitly known to all social actors in any par-
ticular socio-historical context, knowledge which may readily be drawn upon for justify-
ing or explaining actions. Discursive consciousness is thus a rationalization of and for
action.
   Characteristics attributable to agents always go under some sort of description.
Typical terms include selfishness, greed, laziness, altruism, caring, industriousness,
etc. Such attributes do not so much originate in the actor but are only possible or
intelligible in terms of the particular social totality under consideration and in other situ-
ations the same actions might be described or understood in another fashion. In other
words, there are no basic existential characteristics of'humanity' such as these, good for
all times and places. Actions have to be understood in terms of the context(s) in which
they take place. The vast majority of social action is not normally open to discursive dis-
cussion but takes place on a level of practical consciousness or knowing how 'to go on'
or proceed in a certain situation. Driving a car while not thinking about traffic rules,
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            126


speaking while being unaware of the grammatical basis for language, eating dishes in a
certain order are all examples of the same general phenomenon and practical conscious-
ness pervades all practice from bodily hexis to the types of material goods found in an
individual's home to the type of drink he or she chooses to take and the manner in which
it may be consumed. Actions are performed in one manner rather than another because
the social world is fundamentally a symbolically structured reality and inherently mean-
ingful. The knowledge of the world on which agents draw in their day to day encounters
and labour is largely implicit or taken for granted knowledge, and social life involves the
constitution and transformation of meaning-frames through which agents orientate
their conduct to others and the social and natural environment in which they are situated
or positioned. Practical consciousness forms, typically, the primary basis for under-
standing that most action is overdetermined in that a host of unacknowledged
conditions may underline any action or set of actions. Similarly actions, more often than
not, may have unintended consequences. For example: A approaches B to greet her
while holding a knife in his hand (because at the time he was gutting a fish). The inten-
tion of A was to greet B but at the last moment A trips over an unobserved boulder and
stabs B: an unintended consequence of action. To make matters even more complicated
another scenario might be: A actually intends to stab Band moves towards her with this
end in view but trips over the boulder. Was the knife entering B's body an intentional
act or not? Had A not tripped over the boulder might he not have changed his mind at
the last moment? The latter example is introduced to emphasize that the outcome of any
action is always uncertain until it has been effected and that actions take place in an
infinite variety of different circumstances which influence their outcome and result.
Bourdieu (1977) and Giddens ( 1979, 1984) both emphasize that action sequences are
typically monitored and that actors are not in any sense motivated cultural dopes but
aware of their conditions of existence, although for the most part this is an intuitive,
practical awareness. The boundary between discursive and practical consciousness is
constantly shifting and sliding according to the time, the place, and the actors involved.
The division between practical and discursive consciousness 'can be altered by many
aspects of the agent's socialization and learning experiences. Between discursive and
practical consciousness there is no bar; there are only the differences between what can
be said and what is characteristically simply done. However, there are barriers, centred
principally upon repression, between discursive consciousness and the unconscious'
(Giddens 1984, p. 7).
   To assert that action is determined is not to propose any mechanical determinancy but
to acknowledge that actors find themselves in a life-world not of their own choosing and
operate in that life-world and may reproduce or transform it through their activity.
However, the motivations (unconscious desires, or formulated or unformulated
reasons) for actions are contextually created in a determinate sociohistorical situation.

Structures, structuring principles
So far we have emphasized the notion of active agency but, given the rejection of any
position which attributes the properties of social totalities as being derived solely from
the activities of agents as individuals or in groups, institutions and collectivities, the
Social archaeology: the object of study                                               127


position that we wish to adopt here is that the social totality as a network of internal
relations embraces the concepts of system and structure. By the former is meant the net-
working of relations between individuals and groups in a field of existence embracing
the categories of the economic, the political, the ideological and the symbolic which
together constitute conditions of existence for the social strategies of individuals and
groups situated in time-space. The social totality as a system networking of internal
strategies and relations between individual groups is also a structured totality. Action
and meaning becomes orientated or fixed at specific spatia-temporal conjunctures in
that economic, social, political and ideological/symbolic relations are ordered by struc-
tures which constitute and are constituted in and through social practice and social
strategies deriving from that practice (Fig. 6.1).


                                          Social totality
                         (network of internal system-structural relations)




                  Social strategies
                (economic, political,
               ideological, symbolic)



                                          Social practices
                                    (conditions of existence for
                                       system and structure)


                                Fig. 6.1 Model of the social totality.


  The conception of structure employed here may be summarized by the following
points:
   (1)   Structures are atemporal, aspatial entities yet chronically subject to change in
         time and space. They are present only through their effects, at their points of
         constitution via human agency and the social practices and social strategies
         which arise as a result of this agency.
   (2)   Structures are constituted by principles and resources orientating social prac-
         tices and which are, in turn, orientated by those practices. These resources for
         conduct may involve sets of operations for ordering the social world such as
         left/right, back/front, inside/outside, pollution/purity; oppositions as rules or
         norms for conduct. At the most abstract level the principles involved which
         structure structures (structuring principles) are basic grounding oppositions
         such as that between socialized production and private appropriation in the
         capitalist state.
   (3)   Structures as dynamic entities embrace contradictions and non-
         correspondences. There are no structures common to any society but only
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              128


         particular structures located determinately at specific moments in time-space.
         Internal contradictions in structures are a necessary potentiality for change and
         such contradictions can only be dissipated through change.

 Structuration
 The practice of individuals is both structured and structuring, articulating meaning and
 conduct in a system of difference, creating meanings for action and conduct and
conditions for the interpretation of those meanings and reproducing of transforming
 structures. Structured practice is produced according to the form or modality of the
articulation of the structuring or generative principles and resources composing struc-
 ture. The mediation of social practice via structure and the constitution, transformation
or reproduction of structure via the medium of practice is embodied in the concept of
 structuration (Giddens 1979, pp. 69-73; 1984, pp. 1-40) which is akin in some respects
 to Bourdieu's use of the term 'habitus' (Bourdieu 1977, pp. 72-94; 1984, pp. 101-2,
 169ff.). Both concepts play a similar role in linking social practices and social structures
in a dialectical fashion.
    The concept of structuration usefully encapsulates the chronically incomplete and
'imperfect' (see Chapter 1, pp. 9-10) nature of the social as lived, that structures are
not hermetic and permanently fixed entities but are in a constant process of repro-
duction and transformation in practice. Structures form a medium for practice enabling
and constraining it and, at the same time, are the outcome of practice and are repro-
duced or transformed by that practice. The process of structuration is both a temporal
and spatial process. Time is not empty duration and space is not a vacant container, but
both serve to constitute the form and nature of social practices and are relative to particu-
lar practices. So there is no objective measure (such as annular chronology) according
to which all variation may be referred and classified and there is no way of distinguishing
long and short-term change on an a priori basis (as palaeoeconomy, for example,
assumes in its separation of the biological-evolutionary from the social-historical, the
former being identified with long-term, underlying change).
   The concept of structuration and the notion of habitus defined by Bourdieu as: 'the
durably installed generative principle of regulated improvisations ... [which produces]
practices which tend to reproduce the regularities immanent in the objective conditions
of the production of their generative principle [i.e. structure]' (Bourdieu 1977, p. 78)
overcomes the duality of individual and society: the atomism of an individualism, a
voluntaristic idealism which specifies motivations as the determinant factors in social
practice, facing the reified and mechanical change of a holism in the face of which the
individual is powerless (although, according to the apparently collective nature of
archaeology's data, atomistic individualism has hardly appeared in archaeology, it is
present as the absent opposite of mechanical holism). From the perspectives that all
action is social action and that individual actions are mediated by structure which is in
turn actively reformulated and reconstructed through individual agency, people do not
consciously produce society; the social always already exists as social structures which
enable and constrain action but do not determine it mechanistically. People act knowl-
edgeably in terms of intentions and choices upon which social structures or unintended
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                129


 consequences of action depend. People are knowledgeable with the capacity to define
 themselves, and practice is open to discursive and practical consciousness; knowing that
 and knowing how to act. The social is a negotiable field and practice is inherently
political with actors pursuing particular sociopolitical strategies.
   That the social is overdetermined - always preconstituted as a symbolic field - and
that structure has a duality enabling rather than determining in a mechanistic sense the
practice of knowledgeable actors, means that there is an internal relation between
activity and consciousness, body and mind. There is no primary substance- the object-
world, reality- or behaviour, which produces effects in consciousness, determining a
field of ideal signification. Action always goes beyond itself; it cannot be treated as
movement, i.e. as behaviour. To explain an action, reference must be made to the social
positioning of agency and to the context of practice. The object world and social world
are always already symbolically constituted as part oflanguage, symbolic systems, con-
sciousness. This is not opposed to objects (and social structures) existing external to
thought or language or consciousness; it is rather to assert that objects cannot produce
themselves as objects (social structures as structures) outside language and conscious-
ness. So categories, concepts, signification, representation are internal to, constitutive
of the objects to which they refer. Products of labour, including material culture,
embody mental operations, just as ideas have a material existence. Another important
point is that symbolization, metaphor, metonymy, paradox, rhetoric are not aspects of
thought and discourse which add additional sense to a primary literal meaning of the
social or object world- there is none. They are part of the chronic process of negotiating
meaning, of subverting the necessary character of positioned social relations.

Contradiction, power, ideology, change
The seeds of change need no sowing. Structures, dynamic and partial, are a unity of
oppositions, a fixation of difference, chronically subject to change in their reproduction
in practice. Actions may also have unintended consequences which react on the gener-
ating structures. The social is open, incomplete; the identity of any element in the social
order can never be fully defined or found in a particular case, but exists as a field of
relations. This system of difference is domesticated and arrested in structures. But
structures do not fix meanings in a haphazard manner. We have pointed out the
thoroughly political nature of social practices; structures enable and are produced in
practices which are organized around political relations of dominance and subordi-
nation, power and control.
   Productive power, power as the capacity to act in and on the world is an integral
element of social life, a component of all social practice. Such power to can be dis-
tinguished from power over, social control and domination. So power is both productive,
a positive force intimately involved in the reproduction and transformation of the social
order and reality, and power may be a repressive and negative element, supporting
social inequalities. Productive power draws upon and creates resources, material and
non-material (forms of knowledge). Repressive power works within institutions and
mechanisms which ensure subservience to the social order (forms of legitimate auth-
ority) and ultimately rests on a sanction of violence, direct physical coercion. Power
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                130


then has no unitary form, no essence which can be possessed by individuals or groups,
but is lived, is an aspect of practice and structure.
   Social structures embody contradiction; structures are never total, never fully
articulated with each other, never fixed and reified, but in a state of constant repro-
duction and change which may result in contradiction within and or between structures.
This is particularly the case with a disjunction between intended and unintended conse-
quences of action. Contradiction between structures results in antagonistic beliefs and
meanings regarding practice and clearly relates to social relations of inequality. Contra-
diction translated into antagonistic interests and open social conflict generates social
change.
   But this translation into conflict between social groups, political struggle, is not
automatic. Particular contradictions may not appear in the know-how and knowledge of
a particular social group - they may not be aware of the context, meaning and conse-
quences of a particular practice. We have already noted that repressive power may be
used to exert control and forcibly prevent political struggle. However, such direct
physical repression is rarely fully effective and is usually supplemented by ideology.
   Ideology does not refer to a body of ideas, views, beliefs, held by a group of people,
but is an aspect of a limited practice, an aspect of relations of inequality. Ideological
practice misrepresents contradiction in the interests of the dominant group and may
exhibit the following properties:
   (1)   it represents as universal that which is partial;
   (2)   it represents as coherent that which is contradictory;
   (3)   it represents as permanent that which may be in flux;
   (4)   it represents as natural and necessary that which is cultural and contingent.
Above all, ideology serves in the reproduction rather than the transformation of the
social order: a strategy of containment and social closure.
   Social totality, social practice, social strategies, structure, structuration, contra-
diction, power, ideology, conflict: this constellation of concepts provides a means of
understanding and explaining reproduction and change within a field of sociopolitical
relations of knowledgeable social agents.

Material culture: objectification and social strategies
         The objectification of man places a seal on the inert. He comes to know himself
         in the inert and is therefore a victim of his reified image, even prior to all
         alienation.                                              (Sartre 1982, p. 72, n. 32)
   Material culture is an objectification of social being, a literal reification of that social
being in the eo-presences and absences embodied in the material form. Inert matter is
transformed by social practices or productive labour into a cultural object, be it a
product for immediate consumption, a tool or a work of art. Objectification- the serial
transformation of matter into a cultural object- is the inevitable consequence attached
to and flowing from labour. The image of humanity inscribed in material culture is, of
course, not a phenomenal image of the self but of the powers involved in transformative
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                 131


social practice. The practice of individuals is 'written' and imprinted in the world
leaving traces of varying degrees of solidity, opacity or permanence - material culture.
Every act of social production is always one involving an interconnection between inert
materiality, consciousness, action and thought. If there were no teleological positing on
the part of agents there would be no material culture. Material culture results from a
productive process and as a production it is the result of purposeful activity: it bears the
indelible stamp of the positioned subject, positioned in relation to social structures and
social strategies.
   The social labour congealed in the object is inherently meaningful labour, labour
which takes place in relation to a symbolically constructed social field. Just as the prac-
tice of agents is both structured and structuring so material culture is structured by
agency and once the labour becomes objectified in material form it acts back to structure
practices. Obvious examples are buildings which channel movement, both enabling
certain patterns and constraining others - exerting influence. The objectification of
practice in objects binds the two spheres together inextricably and the link is conceptual
and internal to the objectification process. Structured patterns of action and conscious-
ness become retained in objects as significations of the practice that produced them. A
dialectical movement is involved in objectification in which activity transforms matter
and negates its original form in the process of that transformation while at the same time
the objectified object is a stabilization or negation of the action which produced it (see
Sartre 1982, pp. 159ff.). Material culture retains the significations involved in its pro-
duction as inscriptions intertwined into its nature and form. This gives these signifi-
cations their efficacy in the ongoing stream of social conduct. The objectification of
practice results in the creation of a form which confronts future practice yet is subject
to future transformative activity at a material or interpretative level. The positioned
agent or subject is always a social subject and in precisely the same way material culture
is a social and socialized production even if the work of a single individual.
   Material culture as an objectification of social practice and social structure does not
directly reflect these practices and structures, but it may serve to mediate them via the
logic of its own form. Material culture may operate simultaneously in a number of
social fields. It may
   (1)   facilitate interventions in the natural and social world as technology;
   (2)   provide a communicative medium of symbolic significance in a structure of
         difference and signification;
   (3)   provide a medium for social domination as an expression of power and
         ideology.


Meaning in material culture
The major challenge confronting archaeologists is that of being able to confer meaning
and significance to a world of otherwise meaningless and non-significant objects in
terms of the social. The traces ofthe past are meaningless in the present and they require
decoding (see Chapters 1, 5, and the discussion above and in Chapters 7-8). We argued
above that social practice engraves meaning in material culture and structures it and that
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            132


material culture is active (it affects practice) and may operate three-dimensionally. In
this section we wish to build further on this conception.
    Material culture as a social objectification is charged with meaning and structured in
relation to social strategies. People symbolically construct and organize their activities
in a pre-constituted social field and simultaneously effect an ordering of the represen-
tation of those activities in language and in material objects as a symbolic scheme or
modality for action in the world; activities can neither be understood nor explained
apart from these. Meanings are not simply ethereal essences or reflections of the extant
material conditions of existence and the social relations necessary for social repro-
duction and/or transformation, but are embedded in the materiality of day to day
existence. The ability to use, meaningfully constitute, and manipulate systems of
signification is a distinctively human quality which makes ideation and consciousness
possible, the basis for all social interaction.
    Material culture, as a structured and structuring resource, as an integral element
actively and recursively involved in social life, plays an important role in the consti-
tution and transformation of meaning frames. Any determinate social totality is charac-
terized by distinctive practices, strategies and structures which are temporally, spatially
and socially situated and articulated. Material culture is part of this articulation. This
means that material culture can only be realistically interpreted once it is contextually
situated in a double moment. First, explanations must be related to the field of internal
relations of individual social totalities, and this invalidates cross-cultural approaches.
Secondly, they must be contextually situated in the spatio-temporal moments of the
totality. There is no point in attempting to formulate a highly specific general model of
the significance of particular aspects of material culture-patterning such as types of
burial practices, good for all time and all places. Material culture only has significance
within the context of a particular social totality and the structures, structuring prin-
ciples, conditions for social action and the nature of social practices which will differ
from one particular case to another. People in particular situations operate in a form of
life which needs and requires no justification other than that it has been tacitly agreed
upon, and play different kinds of material culture games:
         I was asked in Cambridge whether I think that mathematics concerns ink
         marks on paper. I reply: in just the same sense in which chess concerns wooden
         figures. Chess, I mean, does not consist in my pushing wooden figures around
         a board. If I say 'Now I will make myself a queen with frightening eyes, she
         will drive everyone off the board' you will laugh. It does not matter what a
         pawn looks like. What is much rather the case is that the totality of the rules of
         the game determines the logical place of a pawn.
                                                (Wittgenstein in Kenny 1973, pp. 160-1)

The agreement in 'game rules' is not, in essentials, a decision open to any individual
agent and neither is the form, content and nature of material culture and the signifi-
cations it embodies. These are pre-given but may be transformed in a field of political
and social strategies. The rules, then, of the material culture game are not fixed like
those of chess but mutable and continuously subject to the possibility of change even
Social archaeology: the object of study                                                    133


 though for the most part they may tend to be reproduced. Meaning is not a matter of an
 immutable relationship between signifier and signified but the spatia-temporal fixation
 of a chain of signifiers to produce an interpretable meaning.
   Material culture can be considered to be a mode of non-verbal communication, at one
 and the same time both simpler and more complex than written or spoken language.
 The syntactic links are likely to be more explicit and fewer in number, and differences
 between right and wrong more clearly defined than in speech acts. At the same time
 material culture is more complex because it is polyvalent and can act in multidimen-
sional channels. Material culture as a sign system serves power in social strategies as a
producer and organizer of consensus and thus takes on an ideological dimension. The
domination effected through ideology does not consist in the control of ideas by a ruling
social class or group with particular sectional interests. It rather is effected as a result of
the positioning established by agents in various social strategies in relation to meaning.
A materialist theory of material culture as an embodiment of power and ideology
involves an analysis of the processes by which fixed relations of meaning are produced
in a symbolic field for, in and by positioned subjects. Material culture, as a structured and
structuring sign system may be particularly productive in serving power strategies at a
practical or non-discursive level of consciousness. That which is contingent may appear
to be natural. Social actors may not realize in many instances that they are employing a
series of embedded codes and in this case the sign system will use them rather than vice
versa. Concomitantly, consensus may seem not only to be natural but actually spon-
taneous. Hence contrasts and relationships can be exploited as part of a semiotic code
to structure, restructure and reproduce specific sets of social practices and relations.
   What is present to the senses in the symbolization of material culture has to be actively
produced by agents and therefore the conditions, context and form of its production and
subsequent use will relate strongly to phenomenal form. So, material culture should not
be conceived of as something passive merely reflecting social relations but as dialecti-
cally related to these social relations. Once created, produced, material culture forms a
powerful medium for acting back and restructuring social practices. Material culture
may be a particularly effective medium through which to legitimate the social order
precisely because of its materiality, its fixation of the practice embodied in it allowing a
relative permanence and efficacy in the structuring of subsequent practice.
   As material culture is polyvalent acting in multidimensional channels any simplistic
interpretation of it (e.g. as an extrasomatic means of adaptation) is bound to be
inadequate. Material culture can neither be taken to be a direct mirror of society, nor are
different aspects of material culture-patterning necessarily compatible with each other
in terms of what they represent. We need to deal, ideally, with a wide range of different
types of evidence in order to work out in precisely what manner they operate together
or contradict each other in a field of social, economic, political and ideological relations.
Differing representations may, as often as not, relate to contradictory ways of structur-
ing social reality in relation to power strategies. In some contexts, as opposed to others,
material culture may be used to create on an imaginary plane a universe whose content
and form differs entirely from social reality, but whose components are akin, recogniz-
able and therefore acceptable.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               134


Conclusions
 It is important to realize that in this chapter we have not been concerned simply to pro-
vide an alternative conception of the social and of material culture. We are instead
asserting a social field which is thoroughly historical in the sense that definition of
'society' must be particular, related to particular historical conditions and events. There
can be no universal definition of society (or any other object of archaeology) which
would apply across history and across geography. Any such definition is the equivalent
in theory of an absolute state fixing the place of every phenomenon in a totalitarian
order, to a hegemonic paternalism, a repressive pluralism, an incorporative conserva-
tism which effects a closure of the social in a monumental formalism. Through the
denial of the search for essence we open up meaning and the question of the particular
object of archaeological theory and practice. Through the notion of structuration and an
active conception of situated or positioned practice we affirm the social negotiation of
meaning in a destabilization of the supposedly concrete and solidly stable positivity of
the world, affirm the permanence of the potentiality for social change, and the agency
of individuals and that it is stability which requires explanation and understanding as
much as the trajectories of any particular social transformation.
    Material culture is the result of productive activity; it is an objectification. As such it
is always actively implicated in the structuring of social practices. It is not a simple
reflection of the totality or extant social relations but forms a set of resources, a symbolic
order within practice, drawn upon in political relations, activated and manipulated in
ideology. Chapters 7 and 8 further examine the role of material culture and situate it
within both past and present social practice and structural relations.
    The object of study of a fully social archaeology is, then, on the basis of the framework
advanced above, the relation of material culture-patterning to social practices, social
strategies and social structures in determinate social totalities in the past and in the
present.
                            PART Ill


Material culture and social practices
Page Intentionally Left Blank
7
Style and Ideology




         'The first principle of a materialist analysis would be ... productions must not be
         studied from the standpoint of their unity which is illusory and false, but from their
         material disparity. One must not look for unifying effects but for signs of the contra-
         dictions (historically determined) which produced them and which appear as unevenly
         resolved conflicts.'                                 (Balibar and Macherey 1981, p. 87)
         'Like private property, the [work] thus appears as a "natural" object, typically denying
         the determinants of its productive process. The function of criticism is to refuse the
         spontaneous presence of the work- to deny that "naturalness" in order to make its real
         determinants appear.'                                            (Eagleton 1976, p. 101)



Introduction
Questions concerned with stylistic and functional attributes of material culture-
patterning lie at the heart of much archaeological theory and practice. Pots and broken
pots constitute a major type of archaeological data. But once they are recovered from the
ground, what are we to do with them? Put them in a glass case and admire their aesthetic
qualities, comment on their crudities? Speculate as to their function? Or simply treat
them as another 'type fossil'- signifiers of chronological location, degree of social con-
tact, diffusion or migration? The designs on pots vary in an almost infinite number of
forms and this chapter sets out to tackle this most basic problem, the problem of the style
of ceramics and stylistic variability. We first consider how archaeologists have treated
the style of pots, discussing among other things, the traditional use of pots as a means
of dating sites, as supposed signifier of groups of people, the notion of the separation of
style and function involving the assertion of the primacy of function and the relegation
of style to an irrelevant or mute peripheral feature, the idea of style being adaptive and
as reflecting social relations. We argue that conventional theories are inadequate in
accounting for many aspects of stylistic variability either because of their limited scope
and scale of application or because they rely on a reductive form of functionalist analysis
which either subsumes or fails to account for the variability of designs. Our criticisms
rest on the argument that pots are made and decorated by knowledgeable social actors.
In accordance with previous chapters we stress that the production of material culture
is a social practice, a signifying practice situated within social, political and economic
structures, structures which enable action. The style of ceramics may ultimately be
ideological- an imaginary solution to social contradiction. This alternative contention is
investigated in an analysis of70 middle neolithic funnel neck beakers from the entrance
to a megalithic tomb in southern Sweden.

                                                                                            137
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             138


How archaeologists have dealt with style
Seven accounts of stylistic variation will be discussed and their implications
examined:
    (i)    the 'normative' theory characterizing the majority of archaeological research
           until the 1960s;
    (ii)   stylistic drift;
   (iii)   theories of regional adaptation and vessel form;
   (iv)    social interaction hypotheses;
    (v)    motor habit variation;
   (vi)    information exchange;
  (vii)    isochrestic variation.


N onnative theory
Since the birth of archaeology as a serious and distinctive field of academic inquiry the
primary concern has been, and still is in many studies, to analyse ceramic design vari-
ability not specifically to infer aspects of past social organization but as a means to date
sites and as a signifier of groups of people. That some aspects of design change through
time is axiomatic but there is no reason to assume a priori, as many archaeologists have
done in the past, that all or most of the variation discernible in ceramic design within and
between sites has a primary temporal dimension or that time is merely an abstract refer-
ence dimension. Spatial commodified time (see the discussion in Chapter 1, pp. 10-11)
provides the background to a great deal of the treatment of ceramics both in 'normative
theory' and the theories of the new archaeology. In archaeological studies pre-dating
1960, aspects of ceramic design were primarily used as 'index fossils' to date sites in a
relational series. Concomitantly, the meaning and explanation of changes in ceramic
design attributes was almost entirely circumvented. An unremitting flow of spatial time
provided the background determinative variable. Dating the site or the sites was
deemed to be an end in itself and so stylistic variation became relegated as the means to
establish the passage of time rather than something which could provide information
about past societies. Such studies are so ubiquitous in the older literature it hardly seems
worthwhile citing specific instances (Piggott 1954; Krieger 1944 and Malmer 1962 pro-
vide a few 'classics' of this genre). The problem of why changes in stylistic attributes
might occur was never directly addressed and was simply assumed to be the result of
fashion, innovation, or a form of drift in which small deviations from the norms govern-
ing ideation and action gave societies a form of stochastic in-built dynamic more or less
directly reflected in a continuous fluctuation in ceramic design attributes and in which
pots or other artifacts were virtually ascribed properties such that they could generate
other series of pots or artifacts without reference to human agency.
   Discontinuities were assumed to result from specific historical events such as
invasions, migrations, the diffusion of religious or other ideas or as a result of an exten-
sion of exchange networks. Such accounts assumed a statics/dynamics model of cultural
process in which change was assumed to be either non-directional or accretional
(stability) or short and sharp. The implicity or explicitly inferred reasons for change
Style and ideology                                                                        139


were all essentially non-explanatory in that they failed to account for the processes
underlying the event, e.g., why a migration should take place and, more specifically,
why this should result in the occurrence of one design configuration rather than
another. Ceramics were held to signify people, and the spread of ceramic designs into a
region directly represented a group of people or a particular set of ideas moving
with them. As the meaning of style was supposedly self-evident it was never really
investigated.

Stylistic drift
Binford (1963) adopting the position that changes in sociocultural systems should be
understood in terms of the demographic structure of the human group and the
integrative stresses which enable it to adapt to a particular environmental milieu,
suggests (a) that in any given social unit variation exists in the execution of stylistic
norms, and (b) that this is a pool of variability subject to sampling error analogous to the
gene pool of small isolated populations or those undergoing demographic change or
segmentation leading, according to him, to the following expectations:
    (i)   with demographic increases daughter populations are likely to bud off from
          parent communities with the result that random sampling error may arise in
          relation to some attribute classes, consequently covariation relationships
          should overlap in regular spatial patterns discernible in radiating or linear
          distributions;
   (ii)   in stable demographic situations sampling error or drift might result because
          of discontinuity between generations in learning and enculturative behaviour
          in a region. Sub-regional social segments would, therefore, be characterized by
          vagaries in the execution of any given design attribute state and each attribute
          subject to drift would tend to have a non-complementary distribution in
          relation to others. Such changes could either remain statistical permutations or
          under selection for maximizing group identification be objectified and
          elaborated with the result that real formal differences would arise between
          sub-regional units.
   A further suggestion made by Binford is that cultural content alone would be subject
to such a process or series of processes and that this would not affect the overall nature
of the sociocultural system, i.e., the particular form of environmental adaptation and
the particular functional tasks carried out. The entire thesis assumes that the execution
of stylistic attributes (and style in general) is of no particular importance to social groups
simply because it has no adaptive importance or functional significance. Style is con-
sidered to be peripheral, opposed to an asserted primacy of function, and therefore
unlike functional traits of material culture, is subject to the vagaries of random permu-
tations which lack meaning but might be statistically registered in the process of
research. A style/function dichotomy is assumed (cf. Dunnell1978a, 1980; Jelinek 1976
and see Chapter 3, pp. 55-6) and material culture is relegated to a passive role in the
change process. If, on the other hand, style is considered to be an active element of social
relations, drift, in the manner in which Binford envisages it, either will not take place
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                140


at all or will account for such minor modifications in stylistic form that they are unlikely
to be modified or seized upon by social groups to play a role in group differentiation.

Regional adaptation and vessel form
In this perspective (Martin and F. Plog 1973; Cohen 1977; S. Plog 1978, 1980) popu-
lations are viewed as adapting to specific regions so that sites will vary formally and
spatially with regard to the nature of the functional tasks carried out and the social com-
position of the units performing these tasks. Different decorative fields of a single vessel
or a series of different vessels may have different designs and the choice of where designs
are placed on the vessel surface are assumed to be contingently related to vessel form,
so that form is the independent variable and decoration the dependent variable. Primary
characteristics of vessel form are governed by vessel function. So if different functional
activities are carried out at different sites or in different areas of the same site or if more
tasks of a particular type are carried out on some sites as compared to other sites this will
affect the nature of design similarities and differences both in different areas of one site
and between sites (S. Plog 1978, p. 155; 1980, pp. 18-19). Changes in ceramic design
are then related to an assumed need to adapt through time to different environmental
conditions (Martin and Plog 1973, p. 256). Sherratt (1981, p. 280) relates the wide-
spread similarity of certain vessel forms in the later European neolithic to the broaden-
ing of the resource base in the form of a 'secondary products revolution' and the use of
vessels in the processing and storage of these secondary products, primarily milk and
cheese.
   However it is problematic to what extent primary characteristics of vessel form are to
be related to their function. In practice, function is a vacuous category for analysis. For
example, storage vessels may perform the 'function' of storage equally adequately
irrespective of whether they are large or small or have a curved, angular, rounded,
regular or irregular profile. The functional argument is entirely mute because it is quite
incapable of specifying why one form rather than another should be adopted. Vessel
shape may very well constrain where certain types of designs may reasonably be placed
but shape itself is primarily a stylistic rather than a functional feature. The only func-
tional parameter that can reasonably be ascribed to shape is that if vessels are to contain
anything then they must envelop and contain a volume of space. This specifies virtually
nothing about the form of that envelopment of space. Even if we were to accept the argu-
ment linking environment to adaptation to vessel function to vessel shape to vessel
design, we would be left with the realization that we were still incapable of specifying
why one design rather than another might be chosen.

Social interaction
From the interaction perspective (Deetz 1965; Engelbrecht 1978; Frankel 1978; Hill
1970; Longacre 1970; S. Plog 1976; Redman 1978a; Whallon 1968, amongst others)
stylistic attributes are viewed as being more or less directly related to the degree of inter-
action between social units, and this proposition has been used to infer aspects of prehis-
toric social organization either on the basis of the degree of stylistic similarity within
and/or between sites. The essential premise is that if more interaction takes place
Style and ideology                                                                       141


between residential units then the higher will be the degree of stylistic similarity
between them and, concomitantly, the lower the degree of homogeneity within sites.
Individuals produce similar designs in accordance with the degree to which they
interact. Various spheres of interaction are themselves determined by the type of resi-
dence unit and thus degrees of stylistic similarity are reflected at varying spatial scales.
Through time, changes in inter-site and intra-site design variability reflect changes in
the types of organizational units or changes in marital rules such as village endogamy or
exogamy, matrilocal or patrilocal residence patterns.
   S. Plog (1978, 1980) has examined several sets of archaeological data which purport
to support the social interaction hypothesis, and has shown that in almost all cases there
is no empirical evidence to suggest that similarity either within or between sites actually
does decrease with distance. More conclusively Hodder's ethnoarchaeological studies
(Hodder 1977, 1981, 1982a) have demonstrated that the degree of social interaction
between individuals and groups has no necessary or direct correlation with the amount
of stylistic similarity. It is possible to have distinctive social groups with distinctive
stylistic forms in situations in which between-group interaction is very frequent. There
is no reason whatsoever to assume that stylistic similarity falls off in any clear or regular
manner with distance. It is simply not possible to set up predictive models of this sort.

Motor habit variation
Hill (1977, 1978) and others (papers in Hill and Gunn (eds.) 1977) have suggested that
differences in the motor habits or motor performances of individuals are always slightly
divergent and this will result in small stylistic variations in the manufacture and/or use-
wear patterns of particular items of material culture. As much of this variation is sub-
conscious it cannot be taught or transmitted, and this makes it possible to identify the
work of individual artisans. Hill has attempted to demonstrate that these motor habits
or performances do not vary significantly during the life of an individual. He specifically
suggests that the most sensitive variables by means of which we can identify individuals
are such features as the angles at which parts of a design come together, distance
measures such as line thickness, distances between lines, relative heights or lengths of
a portion of design (Hill1977, p. 100). While we do not deny the importance or interest
of this work, it obviously only accounts for very minor aspects of stylistic variation and
it is questionable to what extent the approach would be able to lead us to insights into
long term change or the form and meaning of stylistic variation in ceramic design as
regards within and between-group social strategies and social practices.

I nforrnation exchange
Information exchange theory as put forward by Wobst (1977) and applied, in part, by
Hantman and Plog (1982), Braun and Plog (1982) and Weissner (1983), views style as
having considerable adaptive importance directly contributing to human survival.
According to Wobst, stylistic messaging is adaptive because it makes social interaction
more predictable and less stressful by serving to summarize the economic and social
situation of an individual (cf. Weissner 1983, p. 258) broadcasting the potential advan-
tages or disadvantages to be realized from an encounter between individuals who may
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              142


not know each other intimately before such an encounter has taken place (Wobst 1977,
p. 327; Weissner 1983, p. 258). Wobst and Weissner suggest that style becomes of par-
ticular importance when sending messages to socially distant receivers, i.e., those
beyond the immediate kin group or residence unit. Concomitantly, the utility of stylistic
messages is deemed to decrease the more closely the emitter and potential receiver are
acquainted, but also with increasing social distance beyond a certain point the ability for
other individuals to either encounter or be able to decode a message cannot be ensured.
Stylistic messaging is, therefore, only an efficient mode of information exchange with
relation to a target group of socially distant members of a social unit and as social net-
works increase in size and complexity the need for stylistic messaging becomes more
and more important. Those artifacts seen by most individuals are the most appropriate
for transmitting stylistic messages since they are the most accessible (Wobst 1977,
p. 350). The messages most likely to be signalled, according to this framework, are those
of group and individual identity and affiliation, status, wealth, religious beliefs and
political ideas, because the cost of decoding and signalling messages via the medium of
stylistic attributes would be too great to transmit a wide variety of information.
   This approach, although in many respects considerably more sophisticated than
other theories of stylistic variability, fails to provide an adequate framework for under-
standing style, first because material culture is assumed to passively reflect individual
or ethnic identities. It is quite possible that precisely the contrary situation may take
place, in which style is actively manipulated to invert, disguise and misrepresent social
practices. Furthermore, style cannot be held to simply mirror social strategies and prac-
tices but can also mediate and therefore serve to actively reorientate those strategies. Sec-
ondly, the theory tells us little or nothing with regard to why particular messages should
be signalled with one set of stylistic features rather than another- both form and content
are overlooked. Thirdly, there is no reason to believe that ethnic or other identities
should be signalled by the highly visible, the overt, the obvious, as Wobst claims.
Hodder (1982b, pp. 54-6) has shown how even intimate and everyday aspects of
material culture such as hearth position may play an active part in stressing social
relationships and group identities.

Style as isochrestic variation
Sackett (1982, 1985) has developed a particularly interesting and provocative frame-
work for understanding the nature of style in material culture variation. He addresses
three central questions fundamental to any consideration of style:
    (i)   where does style reside?
   (ii)   are stylistic objects or attributes anything else but stylistic?
  (iii)   what is the style/function relationship?
He argues that once the effects of post-depositional alteration have been accounted for,
style and function 'share equal responsibility for all formal variation observable in arti-
facts' (Sackett 1982, p. 68). Style and function are so thoroughly embedded that neither
can be understood except in relation to the other. Artifacts may play either a utilitarian
(e.g. technological or extractive) role or a non-utilitarian role in the social or symbolic
Style and ideology                                                                      143


realm. Most if not all artifacts simultaneously operate in both, and their purpose is func-
tional in a broad sense in that they either enable populations to obtain or utilize
resources or signal social relationships and ethnic identities. Cross-cutting utilitarian or
non-utilitarian objects or attributes is what Sackett refers to as 'adjunct form'. The
paradigm is pottery decoration which displays no obvious advantage in most cases in
procuring or processing resources at least from the archaeologist's outsider point of
view. By contrast, stone tools, with which Sackett is primarily concerned, possess no
obvious adjunct form comparable to that found on decorated ceramics. He goes on to
argue that there exists a great range of alternative forms of tools which may function in
an equivalent manner for achieving a certain set of ends whether these concern the
design of a weapon to kill a reindeer or the execution of a design on a pot to symbolize
ethnic identity (ibid., p. 72). This is isochrestic form. Isochrestic form is to be found
embedded in all artifacts and resides in all their attributes from overall morphology
down to features such as retouch on lithics. Isochrestic variation requires no expla-
nation: 'it neither suggests nor requires an explanation of why any given kind of attribute
does or does not have stylistic significance in any given situation' (Sackett 1985, p. 157).
   That isochrestic form requires no explanation depends on the argument that it is
habitual. Any one society tends to 'choose' only one or a few of the potentially infinite
ways in which to produce, for example, a projectile point and chance dictates those
forms which actually are utilized. The same specific shape, technique of retouch, etc.,
is unlikely to be chosen by people not ethnically related in some manner and chance
alone dictates if two unrelated societies employ exactly the same isochrestic form(s) for
accomplishing the same ends. This is because material culture and its fashioning is a
product of learned behaviours, i.e., socialization (Sackett 1982, pp. 73-5). So
isochrestic variation occurs across time and space and the formal variation of artifacts
reflects ethnic identity:
         choices must be made with regard to every functional end served by material
         objects. It follows in turn therefore that style is no more than function writ
         small, that is, function as it happens to be expressed within a culture-
         historically specific, ethnically meaningful segment of the archaeological
         record ... Formal variation in short is an inherently dualistic province of
         which function and style constitute fully complementary aspects. The func-
         tional aspect resides in the manner in which form serves given ends, while the
         stylistic aspect resides in the specific context -determined ethnic variant of
         isochrestic 'choice' which this form happens to assume. (Sackett 1982, p. 75)

  Sackett's position in relation to the understanding of 'adjunct' form or that which can
be clearly delimited as decoration is not all that clear. On the one hand, his argument
seems to suggest that whether one pot design rather than another is chosen depends on
socialization and, therefore, represents isochrestic form or time-space variation. On the
other hand he seems to accept that such variation may be used to actively mark out and
symbolize sets of social relationships (whether at a conscious or subconscious level) and
that what he terms an 'iconological' approach to style is appropriate (ibid., p. 81).
  The position we wish to take in relation to Sackett's argument is as follows: We agree
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                 144


that style is to be found throughout the entire gamut of morphological variation in
material culture from the macro to the micro level. In other words, style is not to be con-
ceived of as a residue left over when functional parameters have been taken into account.
Variability which could be termed 'isochrestic' does exist and may have a habituated
basis in the structuring of material culture-patterning in relation to the social construc-
tion of reality by any particular social or ethnic formation (cf. the discussion of practical
consciousness in Chapter 6). However, the meaning of this variation cannot be side-
stepped and shifted to some unspecified expression of ethnicity which just happens.
Style is made to happen in different social and historical circumstances in relation to
social, political and ideological relations and in order to understand style - more
broadly, the meaning of material culture-patterning- we have to understand the social
conditions of its production. Claiming that ethnicity provides a necessary and sufficient
explanation for style is inadequate because it is a non-explanation which completely
evades the question of meaning and is clearly meant to do so in Sackett's framework,
which is founded on an essential scepticism: 'No doubt iconology also structured ...
life. But it seems to lie beyond our grasp, at least in the realm of stone tools and at least
if its search is to entail reasonable canons of procedure and evidence. This is to be
regretted, as is the loss of any part of the fabric of prehistoric life' (Sackett 1982, p. 105).
Sackett's view of isochrestic variation as compared with iconological variation (the pro-
duction of specific designs) depends on a distinction between style which occurs because
it is embedded in the consciousness of artisans at an essentially non-discursive level, and
style with intended effects in terms of specific social strategies or iconological variation.
The latter is regarded as purposive and therefore amenable to explanation, the former
as non-purposive and non-intentional in the sense of being actively used to produce a
result, and not amenable to or requiring explanation. This distinction might be
re-framed in terms of practical and discursive consciousness discussed in Chapter 6. We
pointed out that there can be no rigid division posited between the two and that actions
have unacknowledged conditions and unintended consequences. Both practical and
discursive consciousness are intimately linked in the production, reproduction and
transformation of social life and the boundaries are shifting and sliding: outcomes of a
specific form of life and sets of social relations and social strategies. If we are to under-
stand style of whatever form and at whatever level it must be related to the social matrix
from which it arises. Even if certain aspects of style are not produced at a level of dis-
cursive consciousness the corollary that they are not actively implicated in the structur-
ing of social life does not follow- style, any kind of style, produces effects, symbolically
meaningful effects, forming part of the social conditions for life and structured and
restructured, negotiated and renegotiated.
    While Sackett usefully stresses the embeddedness of style and function, it certainly
does not follow, as he claims, that 'style is function writ small' but rather the reverse-
function is style writ small. Given that artifacts may take an almost infinite number of
forms while fulfilling the same task, the world of material culture is primarily a world
of style and not function- function adheres to or is embedded in the style. A couple of
examples may be given to underline this argument: pot shape and projectile point form,
the latter being an example Sackett himself gives. A primary function of pottery vessels
Style and ideology                                                                      145


in an everyday domestic context could be said to be for holding either liquids such as
water or wine, or solids such as grain or berries. So long as the pot possesses a bottom
and walls, it can perform these tasks irrespective of the particular shape of the bottom
or the walls (see the discussion above). In other words, the function of the vessel as a
container explains virtually nothing with relation to its form. The style of construction
is primary and the function inheres in this style. All that is presumably required of a
projectile point in terms of its functional operation is to pierce and enter the flesh of an
animal and wound or kill it, or allow poison to enter the bloodstream. In order to fulfill
this task, projectile points need to be both pointed and sharp and 'pointedness' and
'sharpness' may be created in a very large number of different ways. As Sackett suggests
(1982, p. 73), attempting to measure degrees of efficiency in terms of Western techno-
logical, social or ideological standards is a dubious exercise at best. Again, the function
would seem to be secondary in relation to style (although both aspects cross-cut and
enmesh each other); possibly more so than in the pot shape example.
   What Sackett refers to as 'adjunct style' (e.g., pot decoration) is no more nor less
active in social strategies than morphological form (pot shape). In terms of morpho-
logical form or the production of designs we need to know how to distinguish between
individual motor habit variation and isochrestic variation. This is basically a question of
suitable forms of analysis. We do not consider isochrestic variation to be 'passive' in
some manner as opposed to a more 'active' area of iconological style signalling social
relationships. Such an arbitrary distinction lies at the heart of the debate between
Sackett (1985) and Weissner (1983, 1985) in relation to Weissner's data on San arrow-
head morphology.
   Weissner (1983) was able to demonstrate that arrowheads exhibit clear stylistic differ-
ences at the level of the language group among the San, distinguishing the !Kung, !Xo
and G/wi who speak mutually unintelligible tongues and occupy distinct territories
(ibid., p. 268) but share similar material culture inventories. No clear-cut stylistic vari-
ation was apparent at the level of the band, but dialect groups could be distinguished
amongst the !Kung and band clusters among the !Xo at a low level of resolution.
Weissner could find no coherent principles lying behind the choice of attributes for
differentiation which widely vary (e.g. point size or variations in tip and body shape).
She suggests that 'the choice of attributes in which to invest style appeared to be the
result of historical events, rather than following coherent principles' (ibid., p. 273).
That style is not clear-cut at the band level is explained as the result of actively
suppressing it, since bands do not have a coherent and unchanging membership but are
characterized by social fusion and flux. The development of distinct styles symbolizing
band membership would contradict this process. Sackett (1985) suggests that
Weissner's data are more parsimoniously explained in terms of passive isochrestic vari-
ation which signals ethnic identity but is not actively manipulated to do so. At the band
level he argues that style is 'simply inhibited in expression by the very fact that [people]
... do come together' (ibid., p. 159). In relation to the band level of social organization,
we would suggest that the reason why there is no distinctive stylistic differentiation is
quite simple. Bushman bands have no coherent social basis in terms of individual
membership and therefore as bands have no ongoing basis but are characterized by a
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               146


fusion and flux of social relations there is no distinctive identity to symbolize or repress:
the point made by Sackett. At the level of the linguistic group, stylistic attributes would
seem to be implicated in the structuring of social relations as W eissner insists. Whether
or not this is at a level of practical or discursive consciousness is not an issue which, if it
could be settled on the side of the former, would make style any less active in terms of
those social relations- the implication of Sackett's argument.

In this brief review of some theories of stylistic variation with reference to ceramics (see
S. Plog 1983 for further discussion of some related issues) a number of individual
criticisms of different perspectives have been made. To summarize, the major criticisms
that can be made of these approaches are:
   (1)   Material culture in general and stylistic variation in particular are considered
         to play a purely passive role in the social world reflecting, alternatively, types
         of adaptation to the natural environment, ethnic groupings or degrees of social
         interaction.
   (2)   The theories advanced are dependent on a functional type of argument in
         which, as in the case of stylistic drift theory, stylistic attributes are assumed to
         be of peripheral importance because they are thought to have no adaptive
         significance or, as in information exchange theory, are viewed as being of
         adaptive significance, specific stylistic forms being related to different social
         identities. In neither case do we have even the beginnings of an account or
         explanation of why some stylistic elements rather than others should permutate
         randomly or signal ethnic identity. The notion of isochrestic variation specifi-
         cally denies the question of meaning altogether and style is relegated to an
         expression offunction. In the frameworks advocated, content tends to be
         overlooked and, in practice, the arguments advanced become little more than
         tautologies, e.g. a certain set of stylistic traits or design configurations are
         'explained' as relating to the need for an exchange of information in an efficient
         manner between or within groups, therefore the existence of these traits is
         explained.
   (3)   There is no adequate account of stylistic change except in terms of adaptive
         expediency which in itself cannot specify why changes in stylistic attributes
         should take one form or another. The statics/dynamics split implicit or explicit
         in all these theories has the effect of identifying time with change rather than
         seeing it as being imbricated in both stability and change.
   (4)   There is no adequate conception of the social production of style and active
         human involvement in its form and use, in the negotiation of structures of
         meaning within the context of definite social practices and social strategies.


An alternative perspective
Style is such an elusive term that attempts to define it are always likely to remain partial
and inadequate. As Muller (1979) points out, the manner in which, historically, style
has been conceptualized and defined, redefined and reconceptualized, is virtually
Style and ideology                                                                       147


identical to the multitudes of attempts to come to grips with the word 'culture'. It is
almost as if to try and think about 'style' or 'culture' is to try and think a category which
refuses to be categorized, to be tied down to any single essence. While recognizing that
the word 'art' refers frequently in contemporary society to the production of 'works of
art' which is considered by many a distinctive social practice, in the following discussion
the terms 'style' and 'art' are used, to a certain extent, interchangeably. One cannot con-
sider style without considering the nature of art and vice versa. It does not seem to be
useful to maintain a radical separation between the two terms. Art mediates style just as
style inheres in art. The question of where art and style 'begin' and/or 'end' is not one
which we wish to address, since it always involves a dubious line-drawing exercise
between various cultural products which cannot but be founded on practical interest
and cultural preference. Style or the production of form in the most general sense
inheres in all products arising from human activity. Style is, in a very real sense, every-
where and whether one wishes to term any particular product 'art' is open to consider-
able debate. Our primary interest is in what manner style or art relate to the social as
meaningful modes of expression and as ideology.


De-centring the individual: style as a social production

         To all those who still wish to talk about man, about his reign or his liberation,
         to all those who still ask themselves questions about what man is in his essence,
         to all those who wish to take him as their starting-point in their attempts to
         reach the truth ... we can answer only with a philosophical laugh.
                                                              (Foucault 1974, pp. 342-3)

         A text's unity lies not in its origin but in its destination ... The birth of the
         reader must be at the cost of the death of the Author.      (Barthes 1977b, p. 148)

Foucault's 'philosophical laugh' at the announcement by Barthes of the death of the
author are part of an important trend in post-structuralist thought to de-centre or
challenge the notion of the individual as mystical and transcendent creator of culture, a
position which as we noted in Chapter 6 (pp. 122-6) is not necessarily at odds with a
notion of active and knowledgeable human agency. The view of the artist as somehow
transcending society to produce an autonomous comment on it can be traced back to the
rise of the myth of individual freedom associated with the development of industrial
capitalism which through the progressive division of labour has tended to marginalize
artists, giving them an aura of being removed from the social in some sense. To
de-centre the individual is to view artistic production as a social and material rather than
an individual and psychological process and to explain the work of art with reference to
its location and reception in society, to the institutional sites of its production and
consumption. Traditionally the study of style in art history has been dominated by a
study of individual artists, just as in literary criticism the study of texts has been
dominated by consideration of their relationship to the individuals who signed them.
   It is not realistic to regard the artist as a supreme creator or free founder of the work
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              148


he or she produces. The opposed 'structural' account of the artist as a virtually
expendable medium through which a work reveals social and economic determinants is
equally unsatisfactory. De-centring the individual does not require abolishing him or
her from the analysis. Viewing the artist as cultural producer rather than cultural creator
(Macherey 1978; Eagleton 1976; Bennett 1979; Wolff 1981) requires that artistic pro-
duction, rather than being conceived of as a form of practice radically different from
other cultural practices, deriving from a unique creative impulse, should be regarded as
being in principle a form of production in essentials no different from others. The artist
is a material agent acting in a particular time and place under social conditions and con-
straints he or she has not created, and located in relation to social contradictions which,
by definition, cannot be individually controlled. Art works are not something deriving
from divine inspiration or explicable in terms oftheir producer's individual psychology.
This view fails to take into account the manner in which subjects are themselves consti-
tuted in society and, in part, mediate it.
   Art is primarily an historical rather than an aesthetic form (Wolff 1984). This means
that to consider art is to consider a particular practice oflabour structured by and in turn
structuring particular sets of material, economic, political and ideological relationships.
As argued in Chapter 6, all production is located in and affected by social structures,
such that all productive activity must be viewed as social labour arising in conjunction
with multifarious structural conditions and constraints which do not just post limits but
are also enabling. Even individuality is constructed in socialization and the artist is
always subject to societal preferences, ideas, values and aesthetic codes. Audiences or
consumers play an active or participatory role in creating the finished product, in that
they 'read', interpret and so transform it. Whether or not these readings or interpret-
ations correspond to the producer's stated or actual intentions is irrelevant. Works of art
are not, then, self-contained and transcendent entities but products of specific historical
practices on the part of specific social groups or individuals in given conditions. There-
fore they embody the imprint of the ideas and values and the social conditions of
existence of these groups.
   The ideas, beliefs and values expressed in artistic production may be considered as
being ideological in the sense that they are always likely to be related in a systematic way
to the social, political and economic structures in which the artist is situated. The world
view of any individual is not only, or even most importantly, to be related to his or her
personal biographical development but is also a mediation of group consciousness.
What is stated in a work of art is the manner in which particular social groups actively
construct social reality. Styles, genres, rules of design and aesthetic codes are always
already established and confront the artist and so delimit and constrain the modes in
which ideas can be expressed in any particular material form. Hence artistic practice is
situated practice - the mediation of aesthetic codes, values and ideologies. The artist
forms the locus of the mediation of the ideational into the material, and so facilitates a
particular way of expressing the nature of social constructs. In other words, art is a
practice which gives rise to a definite type of cognitive appropriation of reality. It can be
viewed as a practice of transformation working upon and transforming pre-given modes
Style and ideology                                                                         149


of representation giving rise to distinctive social effects which can be subject to political
manipulation.
   To summarize, art (or style) operates on a number oflevels to create a tripartite vision
of the social. First, art can be held to present a vision of the habituated stocks of knowl-
edge present in society and on which artists draw. This reflection is never immediate but
transformative. The collective social character of artistic production derives from the
fact that social structures are, in part, homologous with the mental structures of indi-
viduals and groups, or that at the very least these are intelligible in relation to each other.
The individual work of art is a transformative reflection of social consciousness but is
active in that it can help to constitute and structure social consciousness. The reflection
is never direct. The idea that art merely reflects social reality is inadequate as it suggests
a purely passive mechanistic relationship between art and society as though the art work
merely registers inertly what is going on in the external world. If the image were to
correspond wholly to reality it would cease to be an image at all. No one-to-one relation-
ship can therefore be held to exist between art and the social. The relationship is always
transformative and analagous to the manner in which a dramatic production
'reproduces' a written text. While formally linked to the text, the dramatic production
nevertheless creates something new which is not reducible to that text but transcends it.
   Secondly, art, by the transformative process which it creates, tends to restructure
reality away from normal terms of reference which condition access to the social and is
thus capable of producing new and unexpected visions of the social reality to which it
relates. In this sense art can challenge existing and habituated social forms.
   Thirdly, artists are located in relation to social contradictions which, by definition,
are not subject to individual control. As ideology, art, by virtue of its own formal
internal operations, can effect a further transformation and produce an imaginary
solution to implacable social contradictions and through its materiality bolster up
strategies by means of which the dominance of individuals and groups over others is
achieved. Ideas are not independent of the social and material conditions to which they
relate and this relationship is not haphazard but structured and systematic. The relative
uniformity of ideas in any given society rests on a successful claim to the universality and
naturalness of what is, in fact, a partial perspective structured by those in positions of
authority who possess the power to define what is real. Similarly, the relative uniformity
of works of art may derive their content by virtue of producing an illusion of a recon-
ciliation of the irreconcilable. Art as a sign system and a signifying practice produces
definite effects delimiting the manner in which people come to think about and
approach social reality, actively playing a role in shaping social consciousness. Art may
thus speak for certain interest groups in society and towards the end of maintaining
existing systems of power. The ideological element in art provides a link or nexus
between the social practices of which the art speaks and the maintenance of power
through denying the existence of contradictory social practices.
   In order to arrive at a more specific and concrete consideration of the three levels in
art which we have referred to above, we will consider some discussions of the social
nature of art in the anthropological literature.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            150


Level]: Art as a mediation of habituated forms of social consciousness
The majority of anthropological work on art styles has conceived of them as being pri-
marily modes of expression at either an individual level or in terms of collectivities, but
there has been much less concern than among archaeologists to tie style into a reductive
adaptational and functional model of culture process. Art styles are sometimes viewed
as being simply beyond the realm of social practices, a medium through which the limits
of everyday experience can be transcended and external values and truths expressed:
'visual art, like music is a form of communication and is concerned especially with com-
municating the ineffable, that is truths, values, feelings, etc., for which the normal
channels of communication such as speech are unavailable or inadequate' (Fagg 1973,
p. 155). This view has been criticized above and will not be considered further. Munn
(1966, p. 936) regards art as a mechanism for ordering experience of the world and seg-
menting it into manageable categories. Because this is the case, visual representations
are culturally standardized and may serve to organize social experience in the fields of
knowledge, the emotions, and the activities of the social group. So, art helps to orientate
people in relation to their social world and to come to terms with that world, often at an
unconscious level. Conkey (1978), following Gombrich (1960), regards style as the
projection of similar thoughts, feelings, and orientational constructs of those taking part
in the sociocultural context of production. Thus a style embraces common encoding and
decoding strategies: 'a style like a culture or a climate of opinion sets up a horizon of
expectation, a mental set, which registers deviations and modifications with exaggerated
sensitivity. In noticing relationships the mind registers tendencies' (Gombrich 1960,
p. 53). From this perspective, art can be viewed as a form of communication, a material
manifestation of ideas held collectively and expressed individually by different
members of a community. It is thought in visual form, a concrete expression of abstract
ideas serving the purpose of transmitting across and within groups concepts, values, and
the interrelationships of those concepts and values fundamental to the society in
question. It may exist and operate because the principles that are expressed are not
verbalized and possibly not able to be verbalized. Munn (1973) has demonstrated how
a particular visual form widely used in the iconography of the Walbiri, an aboriginal
group in northern Australia, the circle-line figure,
         presents certain fundamental concepts of world order and thus provides an
         easily reproducible vehicle for their transmission over time ... philosophical
         premises about the macroeconomic order are continuously brought into the
         sense experience of the individual Walbiri man through the agency of this
         iconic symbolism.                                    (Munn 1973, pp. 215-16)

Her specific interpretation is that the circle-line figure provides an image of a 'world
theory' built on the notion of 'coming out' or 'going in', male/female oppositions and
centre/periphery contrasts making up a spatial model of the relationship between the
past and the present, the world of the ancestors and the world of the living. It expresses
multiple and convoluted referential social meanings about the way social reality is
constructed and organized.
Style and ideology                                                                     151


   While expression of habituated social meanings relating to the manner in which the
social world is organized must be a necessary element in any attempt to understand the
nature of art in society, the perspective remains insufficient as it stands because art
works are still only very weakly conceptualized in terms of social practices and their
social conditions of existence. Sackett's view of isochrestic variation as habituated
expression of ethnicity denies the need to conceptualize these conditions of existence.
Presupposed in the views discussed so far is some kind of consensual unity of values
projected into the medium of art so that the meaning of art or style tends to be equated
with consensual value orientation.
   Meaning is always culturally specific and negotiated. No cross-cultural connection
can be held to exist between the meaning ranges for even the simplest graphic elements
(cf. the meanings associated with the circle in Walbiri art (Munn 1966, p. 938) or in
Abelam flat painting (Forge 1973, p. 187)). Munn (1966) attempts to make a distinction
between graphic elements with discontinuous meaning ranges and those with continu-
ous meaning ranges. The first term embraces those graphic attributes with multiple
meanings such as a circle which can, for example, refer to a water hole, fruit, fire, a yam
or a conical hill. The latter term indicates that in a set of possible meanings for a rep-
resentation of a tree only different species of trees would be included. In a similar vein
Humphrey (1971) uses the Saussurian concept of motivated and non-motivated signs in
language. Translating these concepts into the field of graphic design, a motivated visual
sign would look like the thing it refers to whereas non-motivated signs could take any
visual form. Such work provides us with very limited insights as to how social meanings
are embedded in designs and glosses over many difficulties. As Korn (1978, pp. 165-6)
points out, in societies in which feathers indicate virility and are worn by young men a
feather design might be chosen to represent virile men and would, as such, be motivated
even though it obviously does not resemble a man. The nature of visual art as a trans-
formative mediation of the social is too complicated to be adequately embraced by such
a simplistic analytical framework. Similarly, whether any particular graphic element
can be considered to have a discontinuous or continuous meaning range depends to a
great extent on the level of conceptual abstraction one uses to interpret the meaning of
graphic elements. The problem of what social meanings are being referred to in designs
is so complex and difficult that some anthropologists openly dismiss the question. Faris,
in his early work (Faris 1972), regards the only importance ofNuba body designs as the
embellishment of healthy bodies, while Korn (1978) conducts a purely formal analysis
of Abelam painting without reference to meaning.
   The search for the social meaning in design is unlikely to be fulfilled if we conduct an
analysis with each element, design segment, or pattern standing for or representing one
or a number of things. As Forge has suggested, it is an ethnocentric assumption for us
to think that the meaning of a work of art in an alien culture actually should be able to
be verbalized, and to set up rigid dichotomies between representational and abstract
features of design is misleading. To be able to identify any single representation is not
to find out what a work of art means. An alternative position is that meaning resides in
the relationship between the elements used to create a work of art:
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                152


         in an art system such as Abelam flat painting, elements, in this case graphic
         elements modified by colour, carry the meaning. The meaning is not that a
         painting or carving is a picture or representation of anything in the natural or
         spirit world, rather it is about the relationship between things.
                                                (Forge 1973, p. 189, emphasis in original)

  Gombrich (1979, p. 151) has noted a conflict or tension between what he takes to be
the two major functions of perception: the perception of things and the perception of
order. Repetition can detract from, and isolation enhance, potential meaning. A row of
eyes in a series is no longer anybody's particular eyes:
         as soon as a shape is identified as a thing or a creature it becomes transformed.
         No wonder non-figurative artists fight the tendency oflooking for represen-
         tational elements in their shapes or colours, for such projections can have the
         most disruptive effects on the dynamics ofform. Meaning can subvert order,
         just as order can subvert meaning.                                     (ibid., p. 158)

The majority of art in small-scale societies, it can be suggested, is to do with principles
of order and how order should be. That is to say the art rather than representing particu-
lar aspects of the social world and their symbolic referential qualities such as an associ-
ation between males, feathers and virility is to do with principles of social order,
principles which in the widest sense structure society and make it what it is. These
principles become embedded in the art through the practical operation of the conscious-
ness of the artist in the process of the production of the art work. To conclude, the
habituated forms of consciousness which art projects are principles of order, the struc-
turing principles upon which society operates. This is the primary level of meaning in
the art irrespective of its particular execution in terms of representative or non-
representative designs.


Level 2: Art and the restructuring of social reality
We have argued above that art by its very nature does not directly reflect or project
reality into a material form. In the process of production that social reality to which art
relates becomes transformed. The consciousness which art transforms is a conscious-
ness, usually unable to be verbalized, of principles structuring the social order. These
principles are transformed and related to each other through the particular graphic
medium employed. They are inscribed within the frame of reference of a formal graphic
vocabulary. In order to begin to understand what principles in society are given visual
form in any particular set of designs, it is necessary to adopt a form of structural and
formal analysis which goes beyond 'surface' compositional features to the underlying
principles imprinted in the work. To undertake a formal structural analysis is not
sufficient on its own, because such an analysis attempts to seek an interpretation 'within'
the work which will supposedly reveal its secret and result in the discovery of the ration-
ality underlying the work. To be successful, such an analysis needs to be related to
within and between-group social relations and the manner in which other aspects of
material culture, in various social contexts, are produced and structured.
Style and ideology                                                                        153


   A number of anthropological studies clearly suggest that several basic structuring
principles to do with social order underlie disparate aspects of material culture-
patterning and also serve to orientate the form and nature of social relations. The art pro-
vides a formal set of relations whereby these principles are both distanced and revealed.
Adams (1973) has shown that the same principles serve to structure the composition of
designs on textiles, the spatial organization of village ground plans and in social prac-
tices such as marriage, gift exchange and formal negotiations in a small-scale society,
which are presented in the formal order of a dyadic/triadic set. She suggests that the
same principles used in the ordering of composition of textile designs run parallel to and
are a formal transformation of the structuring principles orientating social interaction.
Hodder's ethnoarchaeological study amongst the Mesakin Nuba, Sudan, suggests that
structuring principles underlying disparate aspects of material culture-patterning can
be related to a common conceptual scheme whose principal elements are a concern with
group purity and boundedness (Hodder 1982b, pp. 125-84). Vastokas (1978) has
interpreted the art and architecture of the North-west coast Indians as embodying in
visual terms a tension between opposites or conflicting forces: 'visual images, therefore,
reveal themselves as mechanisms for the expression of these latent cultural-cognitive
tensions, the rivalry between one principle of order and another and a striving for
integration and balance, never perfectly achieved' (Vastokas 1978, p. 257). She goes on
to relate this tension in the art to other aspects of North-west coast society- economi-
cally located between a subsistence and a surplus economy, in social organization
between relative egalitarianism and rigid class structure, in religion between indi-
vidualistic shamanism and organized priesthood. Structural features of the art are thus
seen as formal transformations of tensions and ambiguities in society as a whole.
   The studies mentioned above and others (Fernandez 1966; Levi-Strauss 1968, 1973,
p. 255; Layton 1981) have all lent support to the proposition advanced above that there
is a link between principles of order in art and principles of the social order, a trans-
formative formal link to be discovered in the art itself and also underlying social
relationships.
   In order to locate principles of order we need to undertake a formal analysis of design
configurations which is both detailed and can be carefully controlled. We have already
suggested above that meaning resides in order and in relationships between the elements
and attributes making up a design. We need to pay particular attention to combinations
of attributes and their arrangement in space and may, in this manner, derive the rules
or principles which underlie the graphic vocabulary. Certain combinations of design
attributes or elements may conflict with principles of order and should not, therefore,
occur. Others may only be produced in clearly specifiable sequences and constellations.

Level 3: Art and the insertion of ideology
In the perspectives discussed so far in relation to Levels 1 and 2, insufficient attention
has been given to the role of artistic style within the context of power relations in society,
clashes of interest between individuals, and contradictions between different structur-
ing principles orientating and giving meaning to social production and action in the
world.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               154


    If we accept the position that style in art and other areas of material culture is about
 the relationship (in graphic transformation) between ordering principles of life rather
 than merely being a representation of important elements in the natural and social
 world, this leads us to some interesting possibilities. Artists may manipulate designs and
 graphic elements to create associations between disparate aspects of social relationships
 and practices which may be contradictory. Art and artistic style may be considered to
 be ideological when they are actively utilized in order to resolve contradictions which
 have their basis in social practices. If the principles on which society is based (principles
 which mediate social action and define social reality) exist in a contradictory relation-
 ship, these contradictions may be displaced or 'resolved' through the medium of
 graphic style.
    Levi-Strauss has stated that in the face of social contradictions between different prin-
 ciples of social order, the graphic art of Caduveo women 'is to be interpreted, and its
 mysterious appeal and seemingly gratuitous complexity to be explained, as the
 phantasm of a society ardently and insatiably seeking a means of expressing symboli-
 cally the institutions it might have, if its interests and superstitions did not stand in the
way' (Levi-Strauss 1973, p. 256). In other words the art expresses, embraces and
 suggests an ideal, the way things might be rather than the way they actually are. The art
is speaking not in a neutral voice but in terms of power strategies in the hierarchically
organized Caduveo society with a hereditary aristocracy, an organization of social
relations in terms of endogamous castes, with women subservient to men and exploi-
tation also based upon age divisions (for other analyses of the role of artistic style in
relation to social competition and power strategies, see Braithwaite 1982; Faris 1983;
Miller 1982b; Welbourn 1984).
   Expanding this position the expression of an ideal through the medium of graphic
arts, or indeed any morphological variation in stylistic attributes, may in clearly
specified circumstances be considered to have the important ideological effect of
mystifying or denying the contradictions between the structuring principles on which
society is based. Oppositions and tensions are denied and society is presented in an
imaginary fashion as a unified harmonious whole. The immediate ideological effect of
a work of art may be to dissolve appositional elements present in that art, themselves
graphic transformations of contradictory structural principles in society, into a spon-
taneous whole so that what is in fact in contradiction is brought together through the
graphic medium to form an inseparable unity as a form of signifying practice in which
contradictions between structuring principles are denied to create on an imaginary
plane a universe whose content and nature differ entirely from social reality but whose
components are akin, recognizable, and therefore acceptable. Contradictions in society
can be simultaneously displaced into the realm of visual imagery and dispelled through
this form of signifying practice. In this way graphic design can contribute to the repro-
duction of the social order. So style can be actively manipulated within the context of
within and between-group social strategies. This means that we must take a relational
view of stylistic or artistic production in which it provides an object for subjects (i.e.,
individuals in society) and in turn the subject actively relates to the object (artworks).
As art is produced in a definite social context it may have the effect, within the context
Style and ideology                                                                      155


of social strategies, of negotiating, mediating and transforming that context according to
the interests of the individuals concerned.

Style: a summary
Building on the discussions above, style in material culture will be defined as the mode
of existence of particular attributes of material culture arranged in a series, displaying
regularity, and having specifiable social conditions of existence in terms of the con-
straints placed upon discourse within a determinate set of social relations mediating and
transforming the form in which those social relations are, alternatively, conceptualized,
represented and misrepresented. So style plays an active role in the relation of the sub-
ject to the object world. Style can also only be adequately explained by relating it to its
social conditions of production residing in relations of power and social strategies. Style
is a form of social rather than individual practice offering a triple vision of the world in
terms of habituated forms of social consciousness, principles of structural order, and
can be manipulated so that it has the ideological effect of misrepresenting and
re-presenting strategies of social dominance.

Style as ideology in southern Swedish middle neolithic ceramics
 The data set used to investigate some aspects of the theoretical perspective put forward
 above consists of 70 completely restored or restorable vessels attributable to the
southern Swedish middle neolithic funnel neck beaker (TRB) tradition, datable to
 between circa 2600 b.c. and 2280-2140 b.c. (3370 BC- 2950/2750 BC) (Bakker, 1979,
pp. 142-5; Davidsen 1978, pp. 170-1; Nielsen 1977; calibration after Clark 1975). The
sherds of these vessels were discovered around and immediately outside the entrance to
one megalithic tomb, Fjalkinge No. 9, in the north-east of the southernmost province
of Sweden, Scania (Figs. 7.1, 7.2). Fjalkinge No. 9 was excavated by Hansen in 1927
(Hansen 1927) and the find material was published by Bagge and Kaelas (1950). In the
chamber and passage of the tomb, disarticulated remains of around 20 individuals were
discovered (Hansen 1938, p. 25) but no osteological analyses were carried out. Associ-
ated with these human remains were amber beads, a few bone implements, animal teeth
and flint blades. No pottery was discovered in the tomb chamber and only seven sherds
in the passage. Contrasting with the sparse finds of artifacts from inside the tomb was a
huge accumulation of fragmentary ceramic material around and outside the passage
entrance extending over 40m 2 • These sherds were packed in a layer about 5 cm thick
overlain by large stones and a 50 cm sterile sand layer and, according to Hansen, 'not a
single bit [of pottery] had been disturbed by a plough' (Hansen 1927, p. 2). Of the
approximately 14,000 sherds recovered, a high proportion (62%) are decorated. Bagge
and Kaelas (1950, p. 72) estimated that the original number of vessels, as represented
by the sherd material, amounted to 1,256. It is unusual to find all the sherds belonging
to the same vessel and impossible to fully reconstruct more than a relatively small
number of the pots. Bagge and Kaelas (ibid.) put forward a four-phase relative
chronology for the ceramics which will be adopted here. Unfortunately the radiocarbon
chronology at present available for the middle neolithic is too shaky to assess the relative
duration of these temporal phases. The vast majority of the ceramics are all datable to
Re-Constrncting Archaeology                                                            156


phases 11 and Ill with a comparatively insignificant deposition taking place during the
initial and final phases of the TRB. Bagge and Kaelas were only able to securely date 260
(about 20%) of the estimated original total number of vessels. For the purposes of this
study it was essential to have more or less completely reconstructable vessels which
could also be dated. These criteria limited the sample size to 70 vessels or a 5.6% sample
of the estimated total number of vessels recovered. All these pots are illustrated by
Bagge and Kaelas (1950, Figs. I-XIX) along with more incomplete reconstructions
which were excluded from the analysis. Of these 70 vessels, ten can be assigned to the
earliest phase of the TRB, 25 to phase 11, 31 to phase Ill and 4 to phase IV. This
numerical temporal distribution more or less mirrors differences in the rate of vessel
deposition at the tomb through time, although phase I is over-represented. All the pots
were studied in 1980 and examined again in 1984 in order to check the reconstructions
of Bagge and Kaelas against the originals. The resulting data set, although by no means
ideal, was the best it was possible to obtain in the circumstances and it is beyond the
scope of this chapter to extend the analysis to also consider material from other sites.

Describing the designs
In the discussion which follows we will first present a series of analyses of the designs
on these vessels and then go on to interpret the results in terms of the sociocultural con-
text of the production and use of the pots. Fig. 7.3 shows some representative examples
of the pots from each of the temporal phases and Fig. 7.4 a number of distinct levels of




              20km
     --==

Fig. 7.1 The location of the passage grave Fjalkinge No. 9.
Style and ideology                                                                      157


a hierarchical classification system for a formal analysis of the designs based on previous
work on Swedish TRB ceramics (Tilley 1983, 1984). At the most inclusive level, two
attributes were recorded- whether individual motifs were bounded or unbounded. The
distinction made here is between the closure or non-closure of any particular design. A
bounded design is defined as having lines or boundaries on all sides with or without
internal infill, e.g., lozenges. By contrast an unbounded design serves to break up the
continuous or empty space of the vessel surface without entirely enclosing any area of
it, e.g., zig-zag lines. This is a basic distinction dependent on the formal properties by
means of which the 'carrier' space of the originally undecorated vessel surface is broken
up (for further discussion see Tilley 1984, p. 129). At level2 of the classification system,
ten primary bounded or unbounded forms were distinguished. These form the major
elements utilized to create the overall design structure of the vessels analysed and may
be combined, infilled or have secondary appended forms in some cases. For three of
these primary forms a further level of division is shown (Fig. 7 .4).

Establishing order in the designs
The sequence of designs in zones down the pots from the rim to the base was recorded
at level2 except for banded forms (Fig. 7.4: 13) and lines which were differentiated at
level 3 (Fig. 7.4: 23; 24) in order to take account more fully of basic horizontal/vertical
distinctions in the overall organization of the designs on the pots. The design occurring




Fig. 7.2 The passage grave Fjiilkinge No. 9 (photo: Karin Tilley).
                                                               8                        IV




                                                                                        Ill




                                                                                        11




                                            I\ ~
             ri!H!!I/1/II!JIll\)\\\\\\II\\\\I
                                                                1\~\\\ \\\1/1)}/)fiQJ
               1                                                   2


                     he four tempora1 phases at F )a.. lkinge No. 9.
Fig. 7.3 Pots from:, neck beakers
Pots l and 2: fun~ brimmed beaker
Pot 4: funnel ~~~conical bowls ker
Pots 3, 5, 7, 8.    k brimmed bea
Pot 6: cylinder nee


158
          Style and ideology                                                                                          159


         in the top zone of the vessel on or immediately below the rim was coded as A. The
          following design was then also coded as A if it was the same as the top design or B if it
          was different. A series of alternative zones can thus be described in terms of alphabetical
         sequences, e.g., ABCAD (Fig. 7.5). In carrying out this type of analysis we are not
         interested in the particular empirical sequences of the various primary forms defined at
         levels 2 and 3, but in their structural relationships.
            Table 7.1 gives the frequencies ofTRB vessels possessing particular design sequences
         according to temporal periodization. Looking more closely at these sequences, a
         number of generative principles may be singled out. Using seven simple generative
         principles it is possible to construct 64 (about 90%) of the recorded sequences on the
         individual vessels. Combining these principles is sufficient to generate the sequences on
         the remaining six vessels (Table 7.2). Rule 1 stipulates simple repetition of the same
         design on different areas of the vessel surface, rule 2 requires a contrast between two
         different designs, while rule 3 requires the sequential addition of one different design to
         another. These are the three simplest principles and account for 41 of the vessels
         (58.6% of the total number). Rule 4 stipulates an additive sequence 'broken' by the
         repetition of the first design in the middle of the sequence. Rules 5 and 6 are variants on
         rule 4 - an additive sequence with a double 'break' created by utilizing the first design
         (rule 5) or an additive sequence with a 'break' created by repeating the second design
         before the end of the sequence (rule 6). Finally, rule 7 stipulates an additive sequence
         'offset' by the repetition of the third design at the end of the sequence.
            All except one of the vessels from phase I can be generated using rule 3. One design
         is simply followed by another different design. All but two of the vessels from phase 11
         can be generated by using rules 3, 4 and 7. The pots from phase Ill with longer design
         sequences are considerably more complex with only rule 1 not being utilized, while for
         phase IV the designs on the vessels can be generated by stipulating rules 1 and 2. The
         overall impression to be gained from the analysis is one of developmental complexity in
         design generation from phases I to Ill with a simplification in phase IV. In other words,
         specific generative principles for design, while appropriate at one temporal phase, are
         no longer appropriate at another.


Level1                                                                                    2




     •
 2 11    12                     13         14   15              21          22           23            24          25

         &.              .m                AA   0           •••          (\{\(\                       1\1\1\     1111111111




                     I                I                                          I             I
 3                131                132                                     231          232       241         242
              lilliiililiilli
                                     I
                                                                                                    1\1\1\       1\


                                                                                              Ill
                                                                                                                 1\
                                                                                                                 1\



         Fig. 7.4 A hierarchical classification system for the designs on Swedish TRB ceramics (initial classification
         levels only).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                          160


   Another way of considering the generative structure of the level 2 design sequences
is to reduce the primary forms distinguished at level2 to two basic contrasted forms and
then to investigate their interrelationship. We have already put forward such a division
in the discussion above of bounded and unbounded forms. The sequence of bounded/
unbounded designs was coded from the rim to the base of all the vessels. Table 7. 3 gives
the frequencies of the various sequences for the data set and Table 7.4 shows how the
individual empirical sequences can be generated by a number of simple rules, alone or
in combination. Virtually all the individual design sequences on the pots can be gener-
ated using four rules. All vessels from phases I and IV can be accounted for simply in
terms of the repetition of unbounded designs (U') or by alternating bounded and
unbounded designs (UB' /BU') while the principles required to generate design
sequences during phases 11 and Ill are considerably more complex in form.
   The vessels from phases I and IV can be considered to be more or less equivalent
being characterized by a predominantly unbounded design structure (Fig. 7. 6) either




Fig. 7.5 Design sequences on two pots from Fjalkinge No. 9
(U: unbounded design; B: bounded design).
Style and ideology                                                    161


Table 7 .1. The frequency ofalphabetically coded design
sequences according to a four-phase temporal division of
the TRB

                   Phase
Sequence                   II       III    IV       Total
A                                                    1
AA                                          2        2
AAB                                                  1
AABAB                       1                        1
AB                  7       3                       10
ABA                                  2               3
ABAACA                                               1
ABAB                                                 1
ABAC                        2        3               5
AB ACAD                              3               3
ABACADE                              1               1
ABACBBA                              1               1
AB ACD                      3                        3
ABBAAB                               1               1
ABC                         3        8              11
ABCA                                 1               1
ABCB                                                 1
AB CAD                                               1
ABCBD                                2               2
ABCD                        4        2               7
ABCDBE                               1               1
ABCDC                       1        2               3
ABCDE                       3        2               5
ABCDEC                      1                        1
ABCDEF                      1                        2
ABCDEFC                                              1
Total              10      25       31      4       70




Table 7.2. The frequency ofvessels generated according to different
design rules in relation to a four-phase temporal division of the
TRB

                           Phase
Rule          Example               II     III       IV       Total
1             AA                                         2     2
2             ABAB                           2           2     4
3             ABCD              9   14      14                37
4             ABAC                   6       3                 9
4             AB ACAD                        3                 3
6             ABCBD                          3                 3
7             ABCDC                  3       3                 6
Total                           9   23     28            4    64
%of vessels                90       92     90       100       91
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                           162


Table 7 .3. The frequency of bounded and unbounded
design sequences according to a four-phase periodization of
the TRB

                   Phase

Sequence                   11       III      IV      Total

BB                                                     1
BBB                                  2                 3
BBBBB                                3                 3
BU                                                     1
BUB                                  2                 3
BUBU                        1        2                 3
BBU                         2        3                 5
BBUU                        I        1                 2
BBUUU                       2                          2
BBBUU                       I                          1
BBBUUU                                                 1
BUBUU                       2                          3
BBUBB                                                  1
BUBBUU                                                 1
BUUBUU                                                 1
BUBUBUUU                                               1
u                   1                                  1
uu                  5       2                 2        9
uuu                 1                                  1
uuuu                                                   I
uuuuu               2                                  2
UB                                   3                 3
UBU                         1        3                 5
UBUB                        3        1                 4
UBUBU                       1                          1
UUBUU                       1                          I
UBUUU                       1                          1
UBUUUU                      1                          I
UBUU                        1                          I
UBBUU                       1                          1
UBBBU                                                  1
UBUBUU                                                 1
UUUBUB                                                 1
UBBBB                                                  1
UBUBUB                                                 1
UBUBUBB                                                1
Total              10      25       31        4       70




being generated by repetition of one or two primary forms or by additive sequences.
Through time there is an increasing stress on boundedness and the generative principles
become more involuted no longer involving simple repetition or addition but instead the
structured combination of unbounded and bounded forms in sequences of variable
length with 'breaks' and 'offsets' added to a process of repetition or sequential addition
of primary forms.
   Having arrived at this description of the nature of the design structure from a process
of analysis 'within' the observed designs we need to go on to assign meaning to these
changes in the structural order of the ceramic designs. So far we have investigated the
Style and ideology                                                                        163


Table 7.4. The frequency of TRB vessels captured by various generative rules for the
combination of bounded and unbounded designs according to a four-phase temporal division of
the TRB

                                                        Phase

Rule                                   Example                    11     Ill   IV        Total

U'/B'                                  BBBBB              7        4      5      3       19
UB'/BU'                                UBUBUB             3        7     12      1       23
(UB')U' /(UB')B' /(BU')B' /(BU')U'     UBUBUU                      5      5              10
B'(U')/U'(B')                          BBBUU                       6      6              12
Total                                                    10       22     28      4       64
%of vessels                                             lOO       88     90    lOO       91

U = unbounded design     B = bounded design   ' = repeat n times I= or



formal limits of some aspects of the graphic vocabulary of TRB ceramic design. Com-
paring and contrasting the curtailment or extension of graphic possibilities at any one
temporal phase is illuminating since it leads us to ask why are some graphic possibilities
exploited rather than others? Given those forms that do occur why are some used
frequently as opposed to others?

Interpreting the meaning in the order
TRB ceramic design is strikingly abstract in form. It does not represent anything that
is immediately interpretable in the manner in which an oil painting may clearly depict
people, landscapes, etc. The very geometricity of the designs defies conventional
interpretations in that there is no immediate reference point for 'translation', i.e.,
whether any particular design such as a lozenge stands for or represents a specific feature
of the natural or social world such as snakes or houses, women or men. If the meaning
resides in the order, as suggested in the first part of this chapter, we are forced to ask:
what meaning has order? In order to reach an understanding of the meaning of the order
in the ceramic designs the pottery must be related to its context of production and use.
    The social location of this ceramic art at and around the entrance to the tomb has
important implications. The pottery was almost certainly specifically produced for use
in a ritual context as contemporary settlement ceramics contrast in the use of a very
restricted number of primary forms and their design structure is almost always
sequential and unbounded (Tilley 1983). The character of the deposition of the pots
around the entrance to the tomb has theatrical connotations. This pottery was very
obviously displayed for the benefit of the living and their relationship to the dead. Now
in small-scale 'traditional' societies in which artistic production is highly ritualized,
little room is left for individual expression or innovation in form or the introduction of
new or radical content, hence the potential effectiveness of art to challenge the social
order is severely restricted. The art tends to legitimate a particular and partial social con-
struction of reality serving the interests of particular interest groups. Another feature of
the TRB pottery which should not go unnoticed is not only its geometricity but its
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                         164


strikingly constrained character - the graphic vocabulary is very restricted and the
similarities between individual pots in terms of their overall design structure and
appearance, or aesthetic effect, are much greater than their differences. Temporally, the
same primary forms are combined, recombined and manipulated in various sequences
over a period of about 600 absolute years. In this sense the designs clearly transcend time
whilst also being transformed through time. While the structural sequences change
through time, that which is being structured- the primary forms at levels 2 and 3-
remains the same. A limited number of graphic elements are being structured and
restructured through time with this structuring reaching a peak of complexity during
phase Ill with a drastic simplification in phase IV. The disarticulated human remains
in the tomb suggest that the individual human being is being subsumed in a cultural
order (Shanks and Tilley 1982). Similarly, individual expression in the art is subsumed
beneath a formal geometric order.
   The structural order in the ceramic designs occurs in the dramatic ritual context of the
deposition of the pots outside the entrance to the tomb. It would seem appropriate to
develop a dramaturgical conception of the space-time axes structuring and being
structured by patterns of interaction of the social actors using the tomb. The area outside
the tomb entrance may be considered to be a structured ritual space and we may con-
ceive of this space in terms of its relational qualities: areas to the left or right of the
passage entrance or directly in front of it, and areas at the front or close to the tomb or
at the back farthest away from the tomb. The space in front of the tomb is thus conceived
as a relational contextualized space for action sequences involving pottery deposition-
a stage for conduct.
   Hansen excavated an area of71 m 2 outside Fjalkinge No. 9 and the spatial distribution
of the sherd material was recorded by 1 m2 excavation units for a 47m 2 area. Material
from a further 24m2 area was lumped together (Fig. 7.7). The spatial distribution of
the sherds for the individual excavation units is shown in Fig. 7.8. Fig. 7.9 shows,



                                                      IV


                                                      Ill


                                                       11




    100                    0                   100


D    vessels                              designs    Q
Fig. 7.6 The percentage of vessels possessing bounded designs and the percentage of bounded designs on
vessels for the four temporal phases at Fjiilkinge No. 9.
Style and ideology                                                                                  165


respectively, the total aggregated frequency of sherds (excluding Hansen's area 31)
across the entire excavated area by 1 m bands from left to right in relation to the passage
entrance and from the metre band immediately in front of the passage entrance to the
limits of the excavated area farthest away from the tomb entrance (cf. Figs. 7. 7 and 7. 9).
From these diagrams, even when taking into account that Fig. 7.9 is partially
influenced by the extent of the excavated area, it is evident that there is a strongly
asymmetrical distribution of sherds in relation to the passage entrance. Considerably
more sherds are to the right of the entrance than to the left and sherd frequency tends
to increase with distance from the passage entrance until after six metres they start td
decline. Such a spatial distribution of sherds is characteristic also of other tombs in




                      -            -

                     If       cf         rf




                     lb      cb          rb




 0    1    2    3m




Fig. 7. 7 Plan of Fjalkinge No. 9 showing the excavated area and the six analytical space regions
If: left front space cf: centre front space rf: right front space
lb: left back space cb: centre back space rb: right back space
                                                       Re-Constrncting Archaeology                                                              166


                                                       Scania (Tilley 1983, 1984, p. 127). The sherds belonging to individual vessels are in
                                                       most cases scattered over most or a large part of the excavated area. No complete vesseis
                                                       were recovered, either complete or crushed, in situ. In view of the total lack of plough
                                                       disturbance this strongly suggests deliberate vessel crushing which has been
                                                       documented at other tombs in Scania (e.g., Stri:imberg 1971, p. 351). The assumption
                                                       was made that the excavation square or squares possessing the largest number of sherds
                                                       from an individual vessel provides an indication of its original position or site of destruc-
                                                       tion. The excavated area outside the entrance to the tomb was divided into six analytical
                                                       space regions (Fig. 7.7). These were labelled using the terms left, centre, right and front
                                                       and back according to their position in relation to the passage entrance. Each of the 70
                                                       pots used in the analysis presented above were then assigned to one of these analytical
                                                       space regions after a study of the sherd distributions. Fig. 7.10 shows the relative fre-
                                                       quencies of the vessels occupying these areas through time. In the earliest phase, the
                                                       majority of the vessels are located in right front and back space. In phases 11 and Ill right
                                                       back space is the major area for deposition but this has also spread into all other areas
                                                       with particular emphasis on centre space in phase 11 and back space in phase Ill. All the




                                                           --------   --------- ----
                                    ,-"_,,.," ...   --- --                                ''
                                                                                               ',
                                                                                                    ',
                                /                                                                        ''
                    I
                        /
                            /
                                                                                                              ''\
                I                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                        \
            I
        (
    I
I
I
I
    \
        \
            \

                ' ',,
                                    ', ,_
                                                        --- ----
                    300


        sherds                                          ..,p-




                                                       Fig. 7.8 The distribution of potsherds at the entrance to Fjiilkinge No. 9.
Style and ideology                                                                                        167


vessels are confined to right back space in phase IV. Generalizing, there appears to be
a trend towards a shift of deposition into back space. Left space is only utilized during
phases II and Ill when vessel deposition reaches a peak and the generative rules govern-
ing design are most complex, and it is only during phase II that centre front space
appears to have been important. Now these changes in time-space axes for the
deposition of the pots in relation to the tomb entrance with a trend towards greater com-
plexity can be viewed as a transformation or rearticulation of the complexity of the
generative rules used to structure sequences of designs on the pots. The stress on
unbounded design forms in phase I occurs at the same time as a stress on the utilization
of right space (this also occurs in phase IV). In phases II and Ill, characterized by con-
voluted sequences of unbounded and bounded designs with 'breaks' and 'offsets' in the




Fig. 7. 9 The number of potsherds for I m bands right to left and front to back at the entrance to Fjalkinge
No. 9 (entire frequencies combined into the I m bands).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                                  168


structuring of the sequences, the use of space outside the tomb for vessel deposition and
destruction becomes similarly complex. The contention being made here is that the
graphic order and the spatial order are linked together on a temporal axis. Further con-
firmation of this can be found on a micro scale- in certain of the infill types utilized for
the four primary bounded forms (Fig. 7.4: 11-14). Fig. 7.11 shows the frequencies of
oblique lines, left to right, top to bottom, and right to left, top to bottom, for each of the
primary bounded forms. Oblique infill: right to left, top to bottom, clearly predomi-
nates in all cases and irrespective of the particular primary bounded form in which it
occurs. There is no left to right, top to bottom symmetry in the utilization of oblique
infill for the primary bounded forms. Instead there is a preponderance of right to left
sloping forms. This right/left distinction is a graphic translation of the overall distri-
bution of the sherds and the individual pots in relation to the passage entrance of the
tomb.
   Following from this, we put forward the proposition that the distinction between




                                                                       Phase IV




                                                                             Ill




Fig. 7.10 The changing relative frequencies of vessels found in the analytical space regions outside Fjiilkinge
No. 9 (cf. Fig. 7. 7). The area varies with the percentage of pots of each phasefound in the excavated analytical
space regions.
Style and ideology                                                                                       169


bounded and unbounded primary forms can be linked with the dramaturgical utiliz-
ation of space outside the tomb in terms of left and right. In turn, these structured
oppositions can be linked with other principles structuring social practice in the ritual
context of the tomb.
   The deposition of the ceramics outside the passage entrance suggests that the entrance
to the tomb, as one might expect, had a special symbolic importance and it would seem
to symbolize an inner/outer distinction, an opposition between the world of the living
outside the tomb and the interior world of death, the ancestors, and the spiritual
cosmos. It is significant that cereal impressions occur in relatively large quantities in the
sherds of the pots deposited at the tombs despite the fact that these pots were not used
in an everyday domestic context. This suggests an intimate connection between grain
and the pottery, and the vessels very possibly contained grain and other products. So,
there appears to be an association being made in the ritual stage of the tomb entrance
between human bones disarticulated and deposited inside, death, pottery and the
ancestors in relation to life, grain and fertility. The deposition and destruction of the
ceramics is thus linked with the fertility of grain, disarticulation ofbones, life, death and
the continuance of the social order. A number of conceptual and relationally interlinked
dualities are being mediated at the tomb:
                                living                      ancestors
                                life                            death
                                outer                           inner
                                right                             left
                                boundedness           unboundedness
                                production                destruction
                                fertility                 barrenness
                                individual                    cosmos


10




 5




        11
                J
     primary forms
                   12         13
                                     ~  14




Fig. 7.11 The frequency of oblique infill for each of the primary bounded forms of the classification system
(cf. Fig. 7 .4).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             170


where the reproduction of the social order is presented as being dependent on these
appositional elements as structuring principles of the overall social totality.
   We have no direct access with regard to the nature of social relations existing during
the TRB and rejecting empathy (see Chapter 1) we are forced to use the anthropological
literature for an anticipatory understanding of the past social totality we are investigat-
ing. This is not a question of taking one present day small-scale society and then overlay-
ing it on the archaeological record as theoretically constituted through the formulation
of conceptual objects and the creation of conceptual links between them (see Chapter 5),
the process we have been engaged in up to this point. It is rather a question of using
some generalized insights and working within the limits of a dialectically conceived
hermeneutic circle (see pp. 104-13).
   The most suitable model would seem to be a 'lineage' type social system with a group
of people associated with a tomb and using it in ritual activities in which asymmetrical
within-group and between-group power relations are played out, represented and mis-
represented. Each individual social unit is not structurally independent but linked to
others through feasting, marriage, exchange and other practices. Such societies are very
far from a utopian egalitarianism, but are characterized by socially exploitative practices
with a hierarchical set of social relations based on age and/or sex (Tilley 1984).
   Elsewhere we have argued at length (Shanks and Tilley 1982; Tilley 1984) that an
emphasis on boundedness serves to express an us/them, insider/outsider dichotomy
between different social groups. Through time, at the Fjalkinge tomb, we have seen that
there is an increasing stress on boundedness in ceramic design, or spatial and social
closure, which directly contradicts another principle expressing unboundedness or
non-closure and that such a distinction is also correlated in terms of right/left, inside/
outside, etc.
   In order to maintain internal social cohesion or to reproduce a social order with
definite conflicts of interests between individuals and groups, an us/them distinction is
a cogent strategy since it tends to direct antagonisms and social conflicts of interest out-
side the local group. However, since individual social groups are not self-sufficient or
autonomous socially independent units, an expression of closure conflicts with and
contradicts an expression of non-closure or social interdependency. The generative
principles governing the sequences of bounded and unbounded primary design forms
on the pots deposited outside the tomb during phases 11 and Ill can be seen as an attempt
to resolve on an imaginary (because graphically displaced) plane the contradiction
entailed by an assertion of social boundedness and non-boundedness at the same time.
The denial of the contradiction between these structural principles serves the interests
of those who benefit from the reproduction of the social order rather than its trans-
formation. The style becomes a material form of ideology attempting to transform the
relationship between appositional elements into a spontaneous whole with the overall
aesthetic effect of unity rather than opposition. The particular manner in which design
forms are structurally conjoined is thus used to resolve contradictions which have their
basis in social practices. The formal structured sequences of designs form on an
imaginary basis an inseparable unity as signifying practice in which oppositions
between structural principles orientating the social construction of reality become
Style and ideology                                                                       171


'resolved'. Increasing temporal stress on boundedness necessitates greater generative
complexity in the manner in which social closure and non-closure are tied together. This
is mediated through the utilization of ritual space outside the tomb.

Summary
In the theoretical perspective advanced for an understanding of style, or art, we noted
three levels in which style or art relates to social reality. To recapitulate: style displays
    (i)   a mediation of habituated forms of social consciousness;
   (ii)   a restructuring of social reality in material form;
  (iii)   an insertion of ideology at specific historical moments.
The brief analysis ofTRB ceramic design has attempted to work through these ideas in
practice, through a process of working conceptually on theoretical objects (e.g.,
boundedness) and establishing links between these theoretical objects. Generative
principles producing order in the design sequences were located by means of formal
analyses going 'beneath' the empirical sequences of individual design motifs (lower-
order theoretical objects). Aspects of the formal ordering of design were then related to
the sociocultural context of the deposition of the pottery. Embracing a dramaturgical
conception of the tomb setting as stage, a linkage was suggested between principles
structuring the graphic order of the ceramic designs, the spatial ordering of their
deposition at the tomb and changes in this ordering through time, and principles of the
social order. We attempted to show that the graphic, spatial and symbolic/social orders
can be conceptualized as partial transformations of each other. Finally, the interpret-
ation considered the ideological import of the ceramic designs and suggested that they
played a role in the maintenance and reproduction of the social order.
8

Social values, social constraints
and material culture:
the design of contemporary beer cans

         'Systematicity is found in the opus operatum because it is in the modus operandi. It is
         found in all the properties- and property- with which individuals and groups surround
         themselves, houses, furniture, paintings, books, cars, spirits, perfume, clothes, and in
         the practices in which they manifest their distinction, sports, games, entertainments ...
         In the ordinary situation of bourgeois life, banalities about art, literature or cinema are
         inseparable from the steady tone, the slow, casual diction, the distant or self-assured
         smile, the measured gesture, the well-tailored suit and the bourgeois salon of the person
         who pronounces them.'                                          (Bourdieu 1984, pp. 173-4)


Introduction
We agree with Rathje (1981) that archaeological investigation of the present is of prime
importance. Unfortunately, the majority of modern material culture studies carried out
in Arizona and elsewhere (see Gould and Schiffer (eds.) 1981, with references) have
worked from an empiricist and functionalist perspective which has had the deleterious
effect of strictly limiting the insights to be gained so that the conclusions tend to verge
on the banal, e.g., the observations of Schiffer et al. (1981) on re-use and re-cycling of
items, or the details reported by Rathje that a study of material items at isolated dirt road
ends revealed concentric rings of beer bottles and, in areas secluded from car headlights,
sex related objects which 'conformed to the activities that were assumed to occur at road
ends' (Rathje 1981, p. 52). Perhaps more importantly, the majority of the studies which
have been conducted have failed to realize the potential of the study of modern material
culture as a critical intervention in contemporary society, an intervention with trans-
formative intent.
   Some approaches using insights from semiotics and structuralism (for example, Bath
1981; Hebdige 1983) and critical theory (e.g., Miller 1984) have made illuminating and
pertinent contributions to the study of the symbolic, social and economic structure of
contemporary western society. Miller, for example, shows how architectural styles may
mediate social strategies legitimating dominance and power between various interest
groups. Notwithstanding the general interest of Miller's study in common with other
sociological studies of the present, it has one major drawback from the point of the study
of material culture and the way in which it is used as a resource in relation to ideology
and power- that it is not architectural forms or buildings in themselves that are analysed
in any detail but, rather, discourses about them. Similarly, Barthes's study of fashion
(Barthes 1985) is only concerned with written fashion rather than actual garments. If we
are to demonstrate that archaeology really can make a distinctive contribution towards
an understanding and critique of the present then, we feel, reference must not only be

172
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                    173


made to discourses but must pay detailed attention to the material culture-patterning as
well.
   This chapter is an initial attempt to achieve an understanding of a common and every-
day item of contemporary material culture- beer can and beer bottle design. How can
the designs on cans and bottles be explained? Our approach to this problem involves an
investigation of the social meanings attributed to alcohol consumption and in particular
those connected with beer drinking; we contend that the designs are embedded in the
social and symbolic structures of everyday life. Our analysis extends to can design in two
countries, Britain and Sweden. Even superficial observation reveals a fundamental dif-
ference in social attitudes towards drinking in these two countries. Whereas in Britain
alcohol is not generally considered an item of key public or individual concern, in
Sweden alcohol consumption is generally regarded as one of the most pressing of social
issues, at least in governmental circles. If material culture-patterning is structured in
relation to social processes in a systematic manner, as claimed throughout this book,
then we might expect some considerable differences to exist between British and
Swedish beer can design which can be meaningfully related to social strategies.


THE DESIGNS ON BRITISH AND SWEDISH BEER CANS

Sampling strategy
There are certainly over 1,000 beers retailed on the British market. The Brewery Manual
and Who's Who in British Brewing and Scotch Whisky Distilling 1983 records 727 brand
names. There are many varieties of ale such as bitter, mild, scotch, brown ale, stout;
however, in our analysis of can and bottle design we focus on a more fundamental dis-
tinction, between beer and lager. Although there are perhaps only 60 lagers brewed in
Britain, lager sales accounted for about 25% of the market at the time of the survey in
1983. Lager takes its name from the continental brew, but is rarely, if ever, brewed in
the same way as on the continent. It has been presented by the breweries as new and dis-
tinctive and has been heavily advertised (lager sales accounted for 2% of total beer sales
in 1958, 8.6% in 1972 (Brewers' Society figures)).
   Swedish beer (in Britain it would all be termed 'lager') is divided into three classes on
the basis of alcoholic strength. Class I beer, with the lowest alcohol content, is not
officially regarded as an alcoholic drink and is sold in supermarkets with Class 11 beers.
Class Ill stronger beers are only available in the Systembolaget shops- government con-
trolled outlets for all alcoholic drinks other than Class I and 11 beers. At the time of the
survey we conducted there were 27 different Class Ill beer brands on the Swedish mar-
ket which were either brewed by Swedish companies or foreign brands brewed under
licence in Sweden (Systembolagets prislista 3, 1983). We were unable to find out exactly
how many different Class I and Class 11 beers were marketed in Sweden. No official
statistics exist and the breweries we contacted were either unwilling or unable to provide
this information. Based on a search of retail outlets in all parts of the country from
Malmo in the south to Kiruna in the north, we estimate that the number of different
brands does not exceed 100 and is probably within the range of 80-90.
   The following procedures were used to provide a representative sample of beer cans
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               174


for analysis:

    (1)   Sampling was confined to a two month period: September and October 1983.
    (2)   Sampling was restricted to one British town, Washington, and one Swedish
          town, Lund.
    (3)   Sampling was stratified according to different types of retail outlets.
    (4)   All imported beers were excluded from the sample. Beers brewed under
          licence from a foreign company were included in the sample since it was found
          that in the majority of cases different can designs or bottle labels were used
          according to the country in which the beer was marketed.
   (5)    An identical number of British and Swedish cans or bottle labels was collected.
          If the same brand was marketed in a can and a bottle, the can was chosen in
          preference.

    For the British data the cans (hereafter the term 'cans' is to be taken as an abbreviation
for cans and bottle labels) studied were bought from four shops belonging to different
supermarket chains, Savacentre (Sainsbury's I British Home Stores), Presto, Co-op,
Liptons and one off-licence (Cellarman). For the Swedish data cans were collected from
five different supermarkets, Vildgasen Livs, Fokus (independent stores belonging to
the ICA marketing chain), Konsum and Domus (both belonging to the Swedish Co-op)
and Tempo for beer classes I and 11. Class Ill cans were purchased in the three
Systembolaget (government alcohol monopoly) shops in Lund. These shops varied in
size from the very largest to the smallest. An initial survey of all the different brands, or
differently designed cans on sale in these shops was made. For Sweden a total of 60
different brands, irrespective of beer class, were available for purchase, and 78 from the
British shops. All60 of the Swedish cans were collected and 60 (or a 77% sample) of the
British. Of the 60 British cans 37 were beer cans and 23 lager cans. For Sweden the
sample included 10 Class I cans, 29 Class 11 cans and 21 Class Ill cans. Since the number
of Class I cans was small, in order to facilitate statistical comparison five additional cans
were collected from retail outlets outside Lund. These were only used in internal stat-
istical comparisons of the Swedish data in relation to beer class.



Finding pattern in the variety
How do the cans differ? Do the cans differ significantly between British beer and lager
types, between British and Swedish cans, and between the three classes of Swedish
beer? We recorded 45 variables for each can, variables which cover different aspects of
can design: the number of colours employed over the entire can surface and for the
lettering, the background colour (if any) on which other colours, words or designs are
superimposed, the frequency and substantive content of the wording (excluding legally
required or purely technical information (e.g., wort strength)), the language used,
lettering style, field orientation of the wording, the frequency and form of represen-
tational and non-representational designs and major surface divisions in the design.
Since all the cans are a standardized shape and size, this factor was ignored (Fig. 8.1).
                  The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                175


                  Differences between British and Swedish beer can designs
                  Colours
                  Of the British cans, 37% possessed more than four different colours on the entire can
                  surface as compared with 52% of the Swedish cans. The Swedish cans are not only more
                  colourful but there is also more variability between them in terms of the numbers of
                  colours utilized (variance of British cans 0.76; for the Swedish 1.32). As we might
                  expect, this distinction is replicated in the numbers of different colours used for the
                  lettering. No British cans utilize more than three different lettering colours while 20% of
                  the Swedish cans do so. The choice of background colour also differs significantly.
                  Black and red are the colours most frequently chosen for the British cans (35%), white
                  and blue for the Swedish (58%). The British and Swedish cans were assigned a rank

                                    General
                                       name of beer
                                    2 class of beer (Sweden only)

                                    Colour
                                    3 number of different colours on can
                                    4 number of colours used for lettering
                                    5 background colour
                                    6 silver
                                    7 gold


Wording
 8 number of words
 9 company name                                                              Field orientation of words
10 storing/serving conditions
11 quality of raw ingredients                                                28 horizontal
12 source of raw ingredients                                                 29 vertical
13 character/type of beer                                                    30 diagonal: left to right
                                                                             31 diagonal: right to left
14 strength of beer
15 place of origin of beer                                                   32 oval/circular
16 reference to past/tradition
                                                                             Designs
17 foreign name
                                                                             33 number of representational design elements
Lettering                                                                    34 representational design elements
18 printing                                                                  35 number of abstract design elements
                                                                             36 oval/circular panel
19 italics
                                                                             37 band around middle
20 handwriting
                                                                             38 band around top
21 old-fashioned writing
                                                                             39 band around bottom
22 3-D lettering: one colour
                                                                             40 diagonal band: left to right
23 3-D lettering: two colours
                                                                             41 diagonal band: right to left
24 3-D lettering: three or more
                                                                             42 reference to past/tradition
25 flat lettering: one colour
26 flat lettering: two colours
27 flat lettering: three or more



                                           Surface division
                                           43 top v. bottom
                                           44 right v. left
                                           45 back v. front

                 Fig. 8.1 The variables recorded for each beer can.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              176


Table 8.1. Ranks of the British
and Swedish cans according to
the frequency ofthe occurrence of
background colours

Colour       British Swedish

black         2     9
red           I     4.5
yellow        5.5   6.5
green         3     6.5
brown         7.5   9
blue          4     2
orange        9     9
white         5.5   I
gold          7.5   3
silver       10     4.5

rs = -0.10


according to the frequency of colour choice for various background colours and Spear-
man's coefficient of rank correlation proved to be non-significant (Table 8.1). So, colour
choice differs significantly not only in terms of frequency but also in relation to rank of
preferred colour choice. Colours most commonly associated with luxury and status-
silver and gold- are utilized more frequently on the Swedish than the British cans both
as a background colour and/or for representational or non-representational designs.

Wording, lettering style and field orientation of wording
A clear difference exists between the number of words displayed on the British and
Swedish cans (Figs. 8.2A and 8.3). No British cans employ more than SO words whereas
15% of the Swedish cans possess this feature. Most British cans use one to ten words
(60%). Use of the company name for the beer name, reference to storing/serving con-
ditions, beer type (brown ale, etc.), place of origin (e.g., Newcastle Brown Ale), and to
the past and tradition are more frequent on the British cans. The quality of the raw
ingredients used and the strength of the beer are more frequently described on the
Swedish cans, on which product 'information' is much more detailed and descriptions
more lavish. Foreign languages used for the beer name or to describe the product are a
common feature of the Swedish cans but unusual for the British. Use of different letter-
ing styles such as handwriting rather than printing occurs more frequently on the
Swedish cans as does the use of three-dimensional lettering and two or more colours for
flat lettering. The use of a vertical or a diagonal field for the orientation of the wording/
lettering is virtually restricted to the Swedish cans, while in Britain word orientation is
confined to a horizontal or oval/circular field.

Designs
The number of both representational and non-representational elements in the designs
are far greater on the Swedish than the British cans (Figs. 8.2B, 8.2C and 8.4), and chi-
square tests, adopting an arbitrary division between the numbers of cans with three or
                     The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                     177


                                                                                            30
                                              30




20                                            20                                            20




     itll-
     ~    IT:




                                              10                                            10
 0




                                                                                                                               n
A o             10      +-•·····
                            20     50        B                                              c
     no. of words                                  design elements                               design elements (abstract)


                     Fig. 8.2 British and Swedish cans
                     A: the frequency of words on the cans (legally required and technical information excluded)
                     B: the frequency of different representational design elements on the cans
                     C: the frequency of abstract design elements on the cans.
                     British frequencies are shaded.




                     Fig. 8.3 Writing on Swedish and British beer cans.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             178


more or less than three representational/non-representational designs were very
significant (p = 0.01). Surface division, rare on the British cans, is a fairly common
characteristic of the Swedish data. Table 8.2 gives the frequency of various types of
representational designs on the cans. For both the British and Swedish cans a fairly
restricted range of motifs are utilized, but with differing frequency. These can be
divided into those specifically to do with the product, i.e., illustrations of the raw
materials used, people, illustrations connected with its manufacture, distribution or
consumption, symbols of distinction and depictions of nature or the natural, e.g., birds
or landscape scenes, and other designs (usually trade marks on the British cans). In con-
sidering these designs it is important to notice what is not depicted as much as that which
does appear. Raw ingredients (hops and barley) are more frequently depicted on the
Swedish cans. In both countries these appear in stylized form, in a natural state, rather
than in the form in which they are actually utilized for brewing (e.g., barley is depicted
rather than malted grains). While the dry ingredients are shown, water, constituting
between 90 and 98% of beer, is never depicted. Beer, the weakest of alcoholic drinks,
is thus symbolically differentiated from water. Indeed in the brewing industry the water
used for beer making is referred to as 'liquor' while water is a term reserved for the stuff
used to wash equipment and utensils. There is thus emphasis on beer as a natural
product and beer as alcohol rather than water. The representation of beer as a natural
product is stressed more in Sweden than in Britain as is alcoholic content, expressed
both in the use of a class system based on beer strength, and in descriptions on indi-




Fig. 8.4 British and Swedish beer cans (see text).
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                   179


Table 8.2. Representational designs on British and Swedish beer cans
and bottle labels

                                         British          Swedish

                                         N         %      N         %

Raw ingredients
hops                                      5         8.3   19        31.7
barley                                    8        13.3   14        23.3
People
men                                      16        26.7    7        11.7
women                                     I         1.7    I         1.7
historical figure                         8        13.3    4         6.7
hand                                      I         1.7
Manufacture, distribution, consumption
picture of brewery                        I         1.7
oast houses                               2         3.3
dray                                      2         3.3    2         3.3
beer barrel                                                5         8.3
brewing equipment                                          4         6.7
mugs/glasses                              2         3.3
Symbols ofdistinction
crown                                     3         5.0   16        26.7
scroll                                   11        18.3   13        21.7
medals                                    I         1.7   18        30.0
seal                                      2         3.3    6        10.0
trophy                                    I         1.7
star                                      2         3.3    1         1.7
royal coat of arms                        6        10.0    8        13.3
other coat of arms (e.g. town, county)   16        26.7   13        21.7
flag                                                       5         8.3
castle                                              1.7
'Nature'
landscape scenes                          3         5.0    9        15.0
foliage/flower/tree                      11        18.3    8        13.3
animals/birds                            12        20.0   21        35.0
Other
magnet                                   I          1.7
milk churn                               I          1.7
chain                                    I          1.7
rope                                     I          1.7
ship                                     2          3.3   2          3.3
horseshoe                                1          1.7
globe/map                                1          1.7
harp                                     2          3.3
bell                                                                 1.7




vidual cans. People are more commonly depicted on the British cans and in both
countries there is an emphasis on masculinity and the past. If people are depicted they
are invariably male and often historical figures such as cavaliers and vikings for Sweden,
blacksmiths, brewery workers and cavaliers for Britain. Similarly, when the motifs are
associated with the manufacture or distribution of beer, drays, rather than articulated
lorries, wooden rather than metal barrels, are depicted. Symbols of distinction such as
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             180


medals, crowns, scrolls or coats of arms (real or fictitious) are common on both the
British and Swedish cans in differing combinations as are depictions of foliage or
animals and birds. The latter are invariably the male of the species and aggressive (e.g.,
falcons, eagles, lions, panthers). The major difference between the Swedish and British
cans is not in the form of the representational designs but the employment in Sweden of
a much wider range of combinations of the motifs on individual cans (Fig. 8.4).
   On the basis of the discussion above it is clear that there is a considerable difference
between the British and Swedish cans for virtually all the variables recorded. This is not
an either/or distinction in terms of the individual variables but one of complexity and
elaboration. The Swedish cans tend to be both far more complex than the British and
clearly differentiated from each other. The results of this simple statistical analysis were
confirmed by multivariate analyses of the cans. Fig. 8.5A shows the results of a principal
components analysis for all the cans using standardized frequencies of variables 3, 8, 33
and 35 (see Fig. 8.1) as input data. The first two components accounted for 65% of the
total variability, 36% on the first component. Variables 3 and 33 made approximately
equal positive contributions to the first component with variables 8 and 35 contributing
negatively. All variables contributed approximately equally to the second component,
3 and 8 positively and 33 and 35 negatively. On the plot of the first two components (Fig.
8.5A) a fairly clear separation exists between the Swedish cans clustered to the left and
the British cans to the right due to the higher frequency of different colours, numbers
of words, representational and non-representational designs used on the Swedish cans,
especially Class II. It is mainly the simpler Class Ill Swedish beer cans which tend to
cluster with the more complex British beer and lager cans. Internal differences between
the British beer and lager cans and the Swedish beer classes are largely obscured, as we
might expect, by the overall differentiation between the British and Swedish cans. How-
ever the majority of the lager cans are high on the second component, separated from the
majority of the beer cans on the basis of the possession of more colours and a greater
number of words (see discussion below).
   A similar result is apparent on the basis of a principal coordinates analysis conducted
on a similarity matrix computed using the Gower coefficient for 26 independent
quantitative and presence/absence variables (Fig. 8.5B). Again the majority of the
(more complex) Swedish cans are clustered to the left of the plot, with the British cans
to the right. Differentiation between British beer and lager cans, and the Swedish cans
according to beer class, is more blurred than the overall British/Swedish distinction.


Differences between British beer and lager cans
Colours
Beer cans tend to use more colours than lager cans. Background colour also differs sig-
nificantly with predominant use of black, red and yellow for beer, and green, blue and
white for lager (Table 8.3). Silver only appears on the lager cans and gold appears
roughly twice as frequently on the lager as it does on the beer. In terms of background
colour and use of silver and gold, British lager cans are more similar to Swedish cans
than to British beer cans.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                                                                                 181


Wording, lettering style and field orientation of wording
More words are used on lager cans (Fig. 8.6A) and the content of the wording also
differs significantly. The company name is used more frequently (86% of the cans) for
beer than for lager (52%). While reference to the type of the beer occurs on all the beer
cans only 52% oflager cans possess such descriptions of the character of the lager. The
place of origin of the beer, mentioned on almost half of the beer cans is only noted on a
few lager cans which frequently make reference to storing/serving conditions and
alcoholic strength - features rarely described in connection with beer. More beer cans
make reference to the past or tradition while the use of a foreign 'language' only occurs



           1st component




                                                                                        •               t       ..                            ..
                                                                                                                                     •
             ..                                                                         0        0              • ..              ""


                               ..
                                     ""
     ..,
     c:
     Q)
                   •       \       "" •
                                                                                                                 .. "" ..                            ..•
     c:                                                                                                                                  ..        ..AD.
     0
     c.
     E
     0
                                                                                                                 ..                                           ..
     "c:
    ""0
                                                                                                                     •
A
    N      ~-----------------------------------------------------------J

           1st coordinate
                                                                         0        ..
                                                                                                        ..
                                           ..•                                                   ...
                                                                 .
                                    0
                                                                                             0


                                                                             .. • •8
                           • •• •         •               •
                                                            ....
                                                              .
                                                               oe
                                                                .. ..
                                                                      .
                                                                                   ""
                                                                                                            •
                                                                     •                                                       ..
                                                                                                 ....
                                          oe•
                   •
                           0
                                              ••                                                                         0


                       •
                               •             • •oe                   • •                    ""


                       ...... •
                                           •
                                                  •   0          •
                                    •
                                                                                                                                                   •..
                                                                                        _.o                                  •
     ~
     "'
                                   •          0
                                              •
                                                   8 ..
     c:
    ""0                                                   ""   .. 8o "" • ..
     0
     0
     "c:                                              0              ..
    "0
                                                                             ""
B
    N~------------------~0~------------------------------------~
           Swedish: • Class I • Class 11 ""Class Ill                                                                 British: • Beer                       o Lager


Fig. 8.5 A: principal components analysis of British and Swedish beer cans (input variables: 3, 8, 33, 35;
            cf. Fig. 8.1).
         B: principal coordinates analysis of British and Swedish beer cans (input variables: 3, 6--17, 29, 32,
            33, 35-39, 42; cf. Fig. 8.1).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                           182


Table 8.3. Ranks of the
British beer and lager cans
according to the frequency of
the occurrence of
background colours

Colour      Beer       Lager

black         l        9
red          2         4.5
yellow       3         6.5
green        4.5       1.5
brown        4.5       9
blue         7         l.5
orange       7         9
white        7         3
gold          9        4.5
silver       10        6.5

rs= -0.17




for lager: 35% of the lager cans have foreign-sounding names, many purchased from
continental breweries. A wider range oflettering styles are generally employed for beer
cans, particularly the use of handwriting and three-dimensional lettering.

Designs
Beer cans possess a higher frequency of representational designs (Fig. 8.6B) while
abstract designs tend to be employed more often on lager cans (Fig. 8.6C), especially
bands around the middle and bottom of the can. As one might expect, reference to the
past or tradition is a more frequently employed characteristic of the beer cans. Use of
surface division only occurs on the lager cans. Almost all representational designs occur
more frequently on the beer cans except for crowns and mugs/glasses. The virtual
absence of depictions of people on the lager cans is particularly noteworthy.
   On the whole there appears to be less clear-cut differentiation between British beer
and lager cans than between both these sets of cans considered together and the Swedish
material. However, in some respects such as colour, frequency of wording, use of
abstract designs and surface division some of the lager cans are more similar to the
Swedish ones, while others have a more British style. This is borne out by the results of
a principal components and a principal coordinates analysis (Figs. 8. 7A and 8. 7B
respectively). On the plot of the cans against the first two components, the lager cans,
as opposed to most beer cans, cluster on the first component on the basis of relatively
higher frequencies of words and abstract designs. The lager cans are dispersed on the
second component according to numbers of representational designs. This differen-
tiation of the lager cans can be seen more clearly on the principal coordinates plot (Fig.
8. 7B) in which they are not only differentiated from each other in terms of complexity,
but also from most of the beer cans (Fig. 8.8).
                    The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                       183


                    Differences between Swedish beer classes
                    Colours
                    A negative correlation exists between increasing use of colours and beer strength such
                    that the Class Ill cans tend to be least colourful (Fig. 8.9A). However, use of four or
                    more colours for lettering is most common on the Class II cans. The use of different
                    background colours is most restricted on Class Ill cans (81% utilizing blue, white or
                    gold) and most variable for Class II cans. Gold is most common on the strong Class Ill
                    beer cans and least frequent on Class 11, while silver occurs with roughly the same
                    frequency for all the beer classes.

                    Wording) lettering style and field orientation of wording
                    Descriptions are much lengthier on the Class 11 cans than for Classes I or Ill (Fig.
                    8. 9B). The descriptions used (Fig. 8.1: variables 9-17) either do not differ significantly
                    in frequency between the beer classes or are more common on Class II cans, except for
                    strength, most frequently referred to on Class I cans, and reference to the past or
                    tradition most frequently stressed for Class Ill beer. A wider range oflettering styles are
                    employed for Class II cans and three-dimensional lettering is not frequently employed
                    for Class I as opposed to Classes II and Ill. Field orientation of the wording is most
                    variable for Class Ill cans with comparatively high percentages of cans with diagonal
                    field orientation, right to left or left to right.

                    Designs
                    Class 11 cans possess more representational and non-representational designs than
                    Classes I and Ill. Class I cans have larger numbers of representational designs than Class
                    Ill cans which possess more abstract designs (Figs. 8. 9C and 8.9D). Surface division is
                    a more common characteristic of Class 11 than Class Ill cans and is rarely used for Class
                    I. Depictions of raw ingredients are more common for Classes 11 and Ill while people
                    are confined to Classes I and 11, particularly Class I cans on which virile males occur


50                                          50                                                   50




A              10     15    20    50        B                                                    c
     no. of words                                design elements                                      design elements (abstract)

                    Fig. 8.6 British beer and lager cans
                    A: the relative frequency (per cent) of words on the cans (legally required and technical information excluded)
                    B: the relative frequency (per cent) of different representational design elements on the cans
                    C: the relative frequency (per cent) of different abstract design elements on the cans.
                    Beer frequencies are shaded.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                                                                                               184


(Fig. 8.10). Symbols of distinction are common for all beer classes with particular
emphasis on crowns for Class 11 and medals for Class Ill.
  The class variation between the Swedish cans is not as clear as that between British
beer and lager cans on a multivariate basis (Figs. 8.11A and 8.11B). Some aspects of
design, such as colour or depictions of people, are negatively correlated with increasing
beer strength. Class Ill cans tend to be less elaborate than Classes I or 11 (Fig. 8.12),
while the most complex designs occur on the medium strength Class 11 beers. The lack



            1st component
                                                              •
                                   •
                               •              •
                                                        •                        '1                                                       •
                                                                                           •
                                                                        '1



                                                    • •
                                                                                                                                                       '1
                                                                                      '1


                                                             ""• •
                                                                        .•,.
                                                              '1

                                         '1


                                                   •   •                                                                                           •
                                                                ••
                                               • • • ? • ,.,
                                                                             •        '1


                        • ••
                                                                                                 '1




                                                   ..
    ....c
     Q)                                            •
                                                                   •    '1
                                                                                                           '1
                                                                                                                               •
                                                                                                                                             '1


     c                                                                           '1                             '1
     0
     0.
    E                                                                   '1
                                                                                                '1
    0
    '-'
                                                         •
                                                                        V
    -o
     c                                                                                          '1
A   N




            1st coordinate

                                                                                                                               •    V             ••
                                                   '1    '1

                                                                                                                                                             •
                                                                                            •                                                                     ••• •
                                                    •
                          '1

                                                     •                  ••                                                                             •
                                                                    •                                                                             • • •• •
                                                                                                                                         '1             '1
                          '1                  '1
                   '1
                 '1


                                                                                                                                                                    •
                          '1


                                                                   ••                                                                                         •
                                                                                                                     •                  • •                         ••
                  '1
            '1

    ....
                                                                                 •                                                                      •
                                                                                                                                                  ••• • ••
    Q)


    "'
    c                                                                            '1
                                                                                                      '1
                                                                                                                                        '1
    ~                                                                                                                '1
    0
    0
    '-'                                                                                          '1
    -o                                                                                                                    '1
     c                                                                                                                         '1
                                                                                                                                                             '1
B   N
                                                                                           '1


            • Beer             " Lager

Fig. 8. 7 A: principal components analysis of British beer and lager cans (input as for Fig. 8.5A)
          B: principal coordinates analysis of British beer and lager cans (input as for Fig. 8.5B).
         The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                    185




SPJi~CIAL
HRl~'V




         Fig. 8.8 British beer and lager cans.




            50                                                50




         A                                                    B              10    15   20    50


                 no. of colours                                    words



         50                                                  50




         c                                                   D
                                                                   design elements (abstract )
                 design elements


         Fig. 8.9 Swedish beer cans
         A: the relative frequency (per cent) of different colours on the three classes of Swedish beer cans
         B: the relative frequency (per cent) of words on the cans (legally required and technical information
            excluded)
         C: the relative frequency (per cent) of different representational design elements on the cans
         D: the relative frequency (per cent) of different abstract design elements on the cans
         Class II can frequencies shaded; Class Ill can frequencies black.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             186


of a very clear-cut distinction across the classes on the plots can partially be accounted
for by the fact that for a number of beer brands virtually the same designs are used for
Classes I, 11 and Ill or Classes 11 and Ill with only minor differences such as background
colour, the rest of the design remaining unaltered.
   How is the structure of difference we have discussed above to be explained? To
explain can design, the meaning of the difference, reference must be made to the
location of the cans within social structures and social practices; can design is related to
the meaning of the consumption of alcohol. This makes necessary an investigation of
brewing and the marketing of its products, consumerism and the consumption of drink,
and, because alcohol is a drug, the relation of drinking to images and conceptions of
health and the body. So in the next section we look at the growth of the brewing industry
within the development of the capitalist nation states of Britain and Sweden.


DRINK, THE STATE, CONSUMERISM, DISCIPLINE

Early industrial capitalism and alcohol production
The development of industrial capitalism involved the transformation of labour, dis-
tribution, and consumption, relations previously embedded in non-economic social
forms, into relations mediated by the abstracted goals of commodity exchange and
capital accumulation. With use-value subordinated to exchange-value, the commodity
form became dominant. The associated commodification of labour, the institutionaliz-
ation of wage-labour, made necessary the expropriation of the worker from the means
of production with the latter now subordinated to the logic of capital accumulation




Fig. 8.10 Swedish Class I beer bottle label (see text).
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                                                                       187


rather than the satisfaction of need. Such changes developed at an early stage in the
British and Swedish alcohol industries.
   In Britain in the eighteenth century an increasing farm acreage, an effect of the
enclosure movement, created a grain surplus of which much was converted into spirits.
Distilling gin from such surplus grain was recognized as a very effective means of capital
formation (Park 1983). So too was commercial brewing. With the aim of maximization
of profit the characteristic features of industrial production- processing raw materials
on a large scale using a wage-labour force concentrated in one place and distributing the



           1st component
                                                                                                                    ••
                                                        •
                                                                                                                    ..
            •A


                                                        •                                                               • ••                       •
                                                                •           A

                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                                 A

                                                                                                                             •
                                                        A

                                                    •
                                                                                                                     . ....• •
                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                            A


                                                                                                •                                         •
                                                        •                                                                        I                     •
                                           ••
                                           A    •               •       A
                                                                                                                    A                              A


                                                                                              ••
                                                                                                            A
                                                                                    A                                                 A


                                                                                            ~
    ...,
     c
     Q)
     c
                                                            A
                                                                        A
                                                                                                                        •
     0                                                              A
     c.
     E                                                                          A
     0
     "c
                                                        •
    "C
A   N




           1st coordinate


                                                                                                                             •• ~
                                                                                                A


                                                                                                    •
                                                                                            A
                                                                                                Ae"e
                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                •
            ••                                      •                                       • • ••
                                                        Ae




                                                    •                       .!
                                   A
                 A     •                                     A

                                                                                        •                       •                         A



                                           •
                                       A

                 •                                      •                                                                •                     •
                                                                                                            A




                                                                            .
                                                                        A



                                                                                                                             ••
                                                                                                                                              Ae
                                                                            A


                                                            •
                                                                                                        A


                               •
                           A

                                                            •
                                                                                    ~

    ~
    "'
    c
                                                                        A •
                                                                                                                                          •
    "C
    00                                                                                                  •
     "c
    "0
                                                                                                                                     ••
B   N

           + Class I                   • Class 11                A      Class Ill

Fig. 8.11 A: principal components analysis of Swedish beer cans (input as for Fig. 8.SA)
             B: principal coordinates analysis of Swedish beer cans (input as for Fig. 8.SB).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               188


product to a large number of wholesale and retail outlets- developed at an early date in
brewing (Harrison 1971, p. 65; Park 1983).
   The products of distilling and brewing were supplied to a growing urban population.
Together with the increase in the relative importance of commercial as opposed to
domestic brewing, it is such economic developments which form the determinate
background to the dramatic increase in alcohol consumption from the eighteenth cen-
tury in Britain and the associated problems of 'Gin Lane' and after.
   By the mid-eighteenth century in Sweden, briinnvin or distilled spirits had largely dis-
placed beer as the national drink. Alcohol rapidly grew in importance as a commercial
item in the agrarian economy. Distilling from grain and potatoes became a widespread
domestic industry flooding the country with briinnvin. According to a survey conducted
in 1756 there were a minimum of200,000 stills in operation. At least every seventh adult
possessed a still (Svensson 1973, p. 17). In urban centres such as Stockholm and
Goteborg consumption was public and conspicuous as in British cities (Mathias 1959,
p. 127; Jiirbe 1971, p. 58).
   In 1855 the Swedish parliament introduced the briinnvin reform measures which laid
the basis for subsequent political reforms concerning alcohol. This reform abolished
small stills for domestic use, setting the smallest quantity to be distilled at 300 kannor
(780 litres) per day. On this produce the government received a substantial excise duty.
This measure resulted in a drastic reduction in the number of stills operating to 451 in
1869 (Carnegie 1873, p. 5). In effect the 1855 reform transferred the right to produce




                                                                            EXPC)J{I'
                                                                                    y~,




Fig. 8.12 Class differences between the Swedish beer cans: left to right Classes I-III.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                   189


briinnvin to those already owning large factories, or with the means to invest capital. A
concern for public temperance provided a general justification for the reform bill rather
than its primary motive. With a system of widespread and unregulated production,
taxation to provide state revenue could never be very successful but with production
confined to a relatively small number of rationalized factories taxation could be very
effective. State income from briinnvin increased tenfold after the reform, making up
more than one fifth of the total state revenue (Nycander 1967, p. 11). The briinnvin
reform thus provided a great increase in revenue and an extension of state control. It also
provided the conditions suitable for capital formation on a large scale in a period in
which industrialization was developing at an ever increasing pace. It was at this time that
the brewing industry, in part stimulated by government incentives, rapidly developed.
By 1880 brewing had become the sixth largest industry in the country (Svensson 1973,
p. 47).
   So, in the eighteenth century in both Britain and Sweden drinking reached an
unprecedented level. While in Britain this developed hand in hand with rapid urbaniz-
ation, in Sweden it was largely among an exploited and depressed peasantry. The
development of industrial capitalism in both countries stimulated and impelled con-
sumption. We would wish to argue with Park (1983) that consumption of alcohol is not
encouraged simply in that brewing and distilling are means of profit making and capital
accumulation, but that drinking was (and still is) promoted and encouraged in a
progressive way.
   The profits from the industrial production of alcohol and its increasing consumption
by a demoralized population detached from pre-capitalist social controls on heavy
drinking (see below) enriched a significant number of the emergent bourgeoisie and the
British and Swedish state coffers. Those owning the means of alcohol production
formed a socially prominent and politically powerful interest group in both countries
(Harrison 1971, pp. 58ff., pp. 340ff.; Nycander 1967, pp. 14ff.).

Changes in experience of work and leisure
By the nineteenth century, urbanization and the concentration of wage-labourers in
towns and cities in Britain brought about changes in the character of daily life. Such
developments occurred significantly later in Sweden and on a smaller scale. Dominated
by the experience of industrial labour, the social communities of pre-capitalist society
were increasingly replaced by occupational communities.
   In such communities all aspects of daily life were permeated by the experience of
labour and class contradiction in a class culture of work (Alt 1976). This collective
experience was for most unskilled workers one oflong hours and low pay. Generally the
labour process tended to be harsh and exploitative under the inexorable impulse to
maximization of profit. Profit accrued to capital owners and derived from the surplus
value created by wage-labourers. Although increasingly separated from work,
physically and institutionally through the commodification of labour, leisure was
internally related to work in that recreation served to reproduce the occupational com-
munity and its group cohesiveness.
   In Britain, beerhouse and gin palace provided escape from harsh labour. In contrast
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              190


 to the traditional village alehouse and traveller's inn where classes mingled (Harrison
 1971, pp. 45-6; Park 1983) these new drinking houses were located in working-class
 areas and were patronized by an urban working class (Smith 1983, pp. 370-2; Harrison
 1973). With leisure dominated by the experience oflabour, the pub provided a distinc-
tive class experience, the social infrastructure for relief from industrial labour, but also
an environment for the creation and reproduction of social solidarity (Alt 1976, p. 64).
The public house was (and is) a colonized institution (Clark 1979, p. 245) embodying a
contradiction between acting as a marketing mechanism for the capitalist enterprise of
the brewing industry, inciting consumption for the profit of capital, and through
colonization by the working class acting as the focus for the social reproduction of
working-class solidarity. 'Leisure served the social reproduction of the working class,
which gave them the capacity to labour, but it also created the internal social solidarity
necessary for affirmative class action' (Alt 1976, p. 55).
   Harrison (1971, chapter 2) has outlined the social relations of drinking in early
nineteenth-century England (cf Park 1983; Smith 1983, pp. 377-9). Drinking and
drink sellers were tightly related to wider social relations. They were closely associated
with labour and recreation especially in that alcohol was one of the few safe beverages
and in that drinking houses were practically the only public meeting place apart from
the church. Public houses were a focus for entertainment, acted as labour exchange and
trading centre. The publican often had responsibility for wage payments. Such were the
positive social and commercial incitements to drink.
   Thus the settlement of a wage-labour force around particular capitalist industries
resulted in a 'determining relation between labour and leisure, mediated and repro-
duced through the associations of leisure' (Alt 1976, p. 65). Such associations centred
on the public drinking house.
   This centrality of the public house and drinking in the life of the industrial proletariat
and the earlier inseparability of drink and labour and recreation needs to be stressed in
opposition to the moral and later medical attacks on heavy 'problem' drinking (the
definition of'problem' drinking arising out of the very labour process which established
the occupational community and its vehicle of social reproduction - the drinking
house). Public house and drinking were (and to a lesser extent still are) inscribed in
practice as opposed to the normative attacks on them.
   In Sweden the smaller size of urban communities, together with their later growth
(see Scase 1977), restricted the development of working-class sub-cultures. The drink-
ing house played a similar role to that outlined above for British industrial communities
(Magnusson 1985). However, the life-styles of Swedish workers tended to be more
privatized than in Britain but, in part, this greater degree of privatization was a direct
result of social control and disciplinary power.

Drink, social control and disciplinary power
It is no coincidence that the development of a temperance movement in Sweden ran
almost exactly in tandem with industrialization, or that increasingly restrictive legis-
lative controls on the sale of drink and the 'problem' of alcoholism developed as the
nation rapidly industrialized between 1850 and 1950. The development of a fully
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                   191


 fledged occupational community reproducing its labour power through leisure time
 spent in the drinking house was, in part, broken with the advent of the so-called
 Goteborg system. The period from 1855 to 1900 in Sweden is characterized by the
 gradual enforced transference of drinking from the public to the private sphere, from
 the drinking house to the home.
    The new methods of industrial production in Britain and Sweden with division of
 labour and removal of control of the labour process from the labourer required a new
worker, disciplined and passive. Such an occupational role is incompatible with
 undisciplined drinking. Thus emerged a contradiction between the fostering of a mar-
 ket for the commodity drink and the incompatibility of drink with the new industrial
 labour process. This contradiction is not merely determined by changes in mode of pro-
 duction but is also related to developments in the technology and strategies of power.
The factory-based labour process depends on discipline, a modality of power which
 renders bodily behaviour routine and repetitive, subject to codifiable rules, accessible
to surveillance, to calculation (Foucault 1979). Disciplinary power is the capillary
imposition of a heteronomy of the body aiming at the transformation of individuals and
related to the requirements of capital for a new labour force (Foucault 1980, p. 158;
 1981, pp. 140~1; Smart 1983, p. 122). Thus the factory system developed not as a func-
tional means of increasing productive efficiency but as a means of implementing a
disciplinary control over wage-labourers (Marglin 1976). The logic of the factory is
political not economic; it is more efficient and profitable in terms of an economy ofpower
(Foucault 1980, p. 38). The contradiction thus presupposes the class difference between
capital owner and wage-labourer; the new methods of production created a capital-
owning class with a direct interest in curbing working-class drunkenness (Harrison
 1971' p. 40).
    There was also the drunken 'mob'. Urbanization and demographic expansion was
creating from the eighteenth century a large economically redundant population: the
'mob' - dangerous, unsupervized, escaping surveillance, drunk. Hence a further
necessity for coordination and integration through discipline (Foucault 1980, p. 171).
Thus social control, the subjection of people to normalizing judgement, is inscribed in
the logic of disciplinary power (Foucault 1979, p. 304). It is worth noting in this context
that the concern with working-class drunkenness is not necessarily related to an actual
high incidence of drunkenness but is as much a sign of a moral and political challenge
to the association of work and recreation with drink (Harrison 1971, p. 40).
    So working-class leisure became an object of administrative and moral interest to the
middle classes. Their capital, the means for creating wealth, lay in the hands of the
workers; disciplined workers- capital and wealth was to be protected by a moralization
of the population, by the 'administration of a cultural lobotomy and the implanting of a
new morally superior lobe' (Storch 1977, p. 139).
   With respect to drink, temperance reformers aimed at inculcating self-improvement
and domesticity, privatized leisure dominated by bourgeois values and centring on the
family home, at physically or psychologically separating the worker from the communal
focus of the occupational community (Storch 1977, p. 149).
   Excessive drinking was often blamed on the absence of the moral example of the
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             192


 upper classes, ignoring the fact of drunkenness among the latter (Park 1983). Class
 segregation of drinking was connected with a concern for restoring 'wholesome
 personal contact between men of different social stations' (Starch 1977, p. 147) -
 disciplinary surveillance.
    This disciplinary surveillance and a concern to improve the morality of the working
 classes was particularly strong in Sweden. The Goteborg system began as an extralegal
 communal development and was later made compulsory through legislation and
 brought under increasing state control. In 1850 a group of the middle-class bourgeoisie
with a philanthropic interest in the alcohol trade organized a company in Falun which
 took over the operation of all drinking houses in that town giving up all revenues to the
 disposal of the municipal authorities. In the company charter it was stated that 'the
morals and welfare of the working classes in our community have their worst enemy in
 the pub ... [Consequently] in these places a close scrutiny will be exercised in order that
intemperate drinking may be checked instead of encouraged; that brannvin will never
be dispensed on credit or account or to minors or persons already intoxicated ... and
that cleanliness and order will be striven for to the highest possible degree' (quoted in
Thompson 1935, p. 13). In other words the supposedly loose morality of the proletariat
was to be checked by constant surveillance and the imposition of middle-class standards
of morality. Order was to be drawn into the disordered world of the drinking house. The
method eventually spread over the entire country becoming obligatory through legis-
lation in 1905. Carnegie, a Scot who visited Goteborg in the early years of the operation
of the system, noted the difference between the Swedish company drinking house and
the British gin palace: 'the fittings of the public houses rented by the company are not
in the style of drinking palaces, resplendent in vulgar taste, with plate glass, mahogany,
polished brass, and glittering with gilding, paint and flaring gas; but are simple and
inexpensive ... nothing could be more orderly, sober, and respectable than the whole
scene' (Carnegie 1873, pp. 10-12). One of the measures of the 1855 briinnvin reform had
been to enforce an association between food and drink in that food had to be available
in licensed houses. Now the old disorderly drinking houses were not only to be cleaned
up but also converted into cafes and restaurants. The pub was to become a thing of the
past and consumption to be either privatized or 'civilized'.
   The social embeddedness of drinking meant that temperance reform had little impact
on levels of consumption in either Britain or Sweden (Harrison 1971, p. 306; Nycander
1967, p. 19) (Fig. 8.13). 'To abandon drink was to abandon society itself' (Harrison
1971, p. 50). Despite the advent of the Goteborg system in Sweden consumption rose
to a maximum in the 1870s. Privatized leisure in Britain was unlikely to supersede com-
munal drinking until more readily available consumer goods enabled an enriched home
environment and until the values of consumerism could be fostered (ibid., p. 46). In
some respects in Sweden the Goteborg system actually stimulated drinking because it
was possible for the towns to make large profits from the sale of briinnvin and pay for all
the poor relief with this income.
   The temperance movements had very different effects in Britain and Sweden. The
one in Britain failed and became discredited. Harrison draws attention to the rebuttal of
its central premises especially by the socialist movement: the notion that individual
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                    193


personality was responsible for undisciplined drinking and the sectarian attack on the
drink trade which became a scapegoat for more deeply rooted problems such as the
centrality of drink in relation to poverty (ibid., eh. 17). The period from 1880 to 1920
was one of political struggle in Sweden between right and left, fanatical prohibitionists
and advocates of personal freedom, between the bourgeoisie and the developing socialist
movement. The first lodge of the Order of Good Templars was opened in Goteborg in
1879. This new temperance movement rapidly grew in strength stressing total
abstinence and demanding prohibition. Despite internal divisions amongst its
supporters, especially the middle-class and religious factions of the Order and the
socialists (Jonsson 1946), the question of prohibition was a live one at the turn of the cen-
tury. A referendum on prohibition was narrowly defeated in 1922. That prohibition was
not introduced was partly due to the development of an alternative, the Bratt system of
alcohol control, named after the Stockholm doctor Ivan Bratt who, with the backing of
an influential lobby, put forward an alternative plan in pamphlets and newspaper



       10




                                                                                        total



                                                                                        beer




                                                                                      spirits


                                                                                        wine
A           1850                                                      1900




       5                                                                               total


                                                                                      spirits



                                                                                       beer

                                                                                       wine
B          1850                                                      1900



Fig. 8.13 Per capita consumption (litres) of pure alcohol according to drink type for Britain (A) and
Sweden (B) 1850-1910 (Sources: Wilson 1940; Svensson 1973).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            194


articles published between 1909 and 1912 (see Nycander 1967; Svensson 1973; Bruun
1984, for discussions).
   The Bratt system was made obligatory under law from 1919. The two principles on
which the system operated were removal of the private profit motive from the alcohol
trade and control of the individual consumer by means of a rationing system. This
system lasted until1955.
   The sole rights to the wholesale trade were vested in a state-controlled company
coordinating the manufacture, importation and distribution of all alcoholic beverages
with the exception of beer (see below). The retail trade was vested in a series oflocalized
system companies in the style of the old Goteborg system. Such companies could only
be established in towns with a population greater than 5,000 inhabitants and most rural
districts were entirely 'dry'.
   The Bratt system permitted an unprecedented degree of disciplinary control and sur-
veillance over the individual, almost perfect in its calculation and precision. In order to
purchase spirits or wine it was necessary to obtain a ration book (motbok) from the local
system company within whose control area the applicant resided, and to which pur-
chases were confined. Permits to buy alcohol were not granted to citizens who were
    (i)   not over 21 years of age;
   (ii)   married women;
  (iii)   persons who had more than once during the last three years been found guilty
          of drunkenness;
  (iv)    individuals convicted of crimes involving drunkenness;
   (v)    persons committed to correctional institutions for alcoholics or those pro-
          hibited from drinking by the local temperance board (see below);
  (vi)    persons convicted of selling, manufacturing or purchasing alcohol illegally.
   The maximum spirit ration obtainable was four litres/month (reduced to three litres/
month during World War II). Wine was not rationed as consumption was low, but all
purchases were carefully noted down in the motbok. In practice very few individuals
received the full ration after the first few years of the operation of the system. At the
beginning of 1920, 20% of men and 77% of women received less than the legal
maximum. By the end of the 1930s, the corresponding figures were 77% and 99%
(Thompson 1935, p. 112). The allocation of spirits was 'means tested' according to indi-
vidual 'needs'. Applicants for a motbok were required to state on a special form their
name, sex, age, occupation, place of employment, the parish in which they were
registered, their income, capital, the amount of taxes paid and whether they had been
in arrears for the past three years, the size of their family and the names, ages and dates
of birth of all those members of the household in which they resided over 21 years of age
and their record and reputation for sobriety. On the basis of this detailed personal infor-
mation the allocation of spirits for each applicant was decided by personnel of the local
system company. The allocation of spirits varied widely with the social standing of the
individual applicant. Although the legal age to purchase spirits was 21 it was unusual for
anyone to receive a motbok until they were 25 or older. A married man had, in principle,
the possibility of increasing his allocation, with age, to the maximum, provided he did
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                    195


not fall into debt, receive social help, or be found guilty or suspected of temperance
offences. As noted above it was impossible for a married woman to receive a motbok and
self-supporting women rarely received more than one or two litres of spirits/quarter
(Systembolaget 1965; Thompson 1935; Socialstyrelsen 1952).
   The motbok resembled a cheque book in which the maximum spirit allocation and
associated purchasing restrictions were stamped. Detailed files on all consumers were
kept at the local system company offices against which the signature of the holder of a
motbok could be checked together with his/her ration allocation. These files were also
open to the police and other public officials such as members of temperance boards. By
means of the motbok and the files of the system company it was possible to keep a minute
and precise registration and control of the drinking habits of every individual consumer,
and any 'irregularities' could be investigated. For example, a man taking out his full
ration of spirits within the first few days of the month and thereafter purchasing a large
quantity of wine would almost certainly be subject either to an investigation or to
surveillance by officials of the local system company in conjunction with checks by the
police and the temperance boards for actual or suspected incidence of non-sobriety. Per-
sons convicted of temperance offences would have their motbok confiscated for a shorter
or longer period.
  The motbok system was grossly discriminatory in terms of
    (i)  sex- women were actively discriminated against both in terms of the possibility
         of obtaining a ration book and allowances allotted to them;
    (ii) social class and standing- a close correlation existed between those holding the
         highest quotas and their social status (e.g., 1% of farm labourers received the
         full ration, 30% of businessmen in trade and communications);
   (iii) income- the larger one's income, the more likely one was to receive a larger
         allowance (detailed statistics in SOU 1951: 43). In 1930 the Stockholm system
         company rejected 136 applications solely on the grounds of 'miserable living
         conditions' (Thompson 1935, p. 116). Persons who did not pay their taxes on
         time were in danger oflosing their ration books and those receiving social help
         were unlikely to obtain a ration;
   (iv) place of abode- persons living in rural areas generally received a lower ration.
   Under the old Goteborg system social patterns of drinking had been largely trans-
formed so that in the early years the Bran system operated entirely in relation to sales for
consumption off the premises. The result of this was that consumption in restaurants
began to increase, and these were consequently brought under direct managerial control
of the system companies and an elaborate system of rules was introduced intending to
regulate consumption according to the time of day, the class of restaurant, the sex of the
customer and the type of drink ordered. These controls on public consumption repli-
cated those on private consumption in terms of both sexual and social discrimination.
They ensured the continuance of privatized drinking if only to avoid greater surveil-
lance in public: checkers were frequently employed to inspect restaurants and to ensure,
for example, that those ordering a drink also consumed it rather than giving it to some-
one else (Socialstyrelsen 1952, p. 271).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                            196


   The Swedish brewing industry was not nationalized but brought under indirect state
control. Breweries were spread over the entire country, strongly localized to towns and
their rural hinterlands in which they had a virtual monopoly on sales promoted by legis-
lation and an elaborate complex of cartel agreements with regard to area divisions and
sales quotas (Gabrielsson 1970). The legislation was designed to restrict competition in
the interests of temperance so that the effects of sales competition between breweries
would not increase consumption. In 1919 a tripartite class system for beer was intro-
duced on the basis of alcohol strength and in 1923 the strongest beer (Class Ill) was
banned altogether on the domestic market and was only obtainable on a doctor's
prescription.
   It is clear that the Bratt system was directed in force towards underprivileged groups
(women and the working classes) and especially tried to control the individual 'deviant'
drinker. In addition to the moralizing forces of temperance attempting to 'uplift' the
British and Swedish working classes another aspect of disciplinary interest, displayed
most stridently again in Sweden, was a general concern with public order, with bringing
the dangerous classes under institutional surveillance (Fig. 8 .14). The imposition of an
extensive penal discipline centring on the prison created a criminal class segregated
from the general populace and constituted as dangerous to both rich and poor. This per-
mitted the emergence of police and other predominantly state authorities exercising
disciplinary and surveilling power (Foucault 1979, 1980, p. 47). Just as the Swedish
motbok system has no parallel in Britain the treatment of those individuals socially
defined as alcoholics has no counterpart in British penal legislation.
   The first Swedish 'alcoholic law' was eventually passed in 1913. It was primarily a
public order measure aimed at the protection of society from unwanted alcoholics, using


20




15




                                                                               Sweden
10




                                                                   England and Wales




                                                            1960                    1980



Fig. 8.14 Convictions for drunkenness in England and Wales and Sweden per I ,000 inhabitants over 15 years
of age (England and Wales 1913-48 convictions per total inhabitants). For Sweden the number of people
taken into custody for drunkenness is also shown (2). Drunkenness in Sweden was decriminalized in 1977.
Sources: Royal College of Psychiatrists 1979; SOU 1952: 53; SOU 1974: 90; Alkoholstatistik 1973-82. The
higher frequencies for Sweden are probably as much a result of increased police activity as indicating an
objectively greater amount of drunk and disorderly conduct.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                    197


compulsory internment as a means to this end if necessary. According to the 1913 law,
temperance boards were to be set up in every town, their duties being to promote
temperance and take action against abusers. Changes in the alcoholism laws in 1922,
1931, 1938 and 1954 permitted earlier interventions on the part of the temperance
boards. The duties ofthe temperance boards, originally confined to the most visible and
obviously 'chronic abusers' were thus continually extended and their powers widened
such that 'preventative measures' and 'investigations' could be undertaken prior to the
internment of the most intractable offenders (Fig. 8.15). Detailed records were kept of
actual or suspected temperance infringements. In the case of a report of an individual
for temperance infringement, 'preventative measures' (Fig. 8.15) might include talking


100 000




 80 000




60 000




 40 000




 20 000


                           ----1
                                   ;/~---­
                                             -,                     3
                  ,.,...       /                  '-'-, ...... ____ 4
                ____ ,.-----·'


    A              1950                                         1980




     15




     10




     B              1950                                        1980



Fig. 8.15 Activities of Swedish temperance boards 1945-80. Source: Socialvdrdstatistik. A: (1) total number
of investigations (2) number of people only subject to an investigation for an alleged breach of temperance
(3) number of people subject to 'slight preventative measures' (4) number of people subject to 'more severe
preventative measures' including coercion and imprisonment. B: the number of people per 1,000 inhabitants
against whom a temperance board has proceeded.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             198


to the individual, threats of committal, placing him or her under 'supervision' or giving
aid to change his/her personal environment or place of work. An individual not influ-
enced by these 'remedial' measures would then be interned (Wiklund 1948; Sjohagen
1953; Bremberg 1973). A whole variety of institutional treatment became available for
committal, ranging from internment in 'total institutions' (often converted prisons) to
labour camps in the countryside, boarding with private persons of 'impeccable moral
character', to hostels in which leisure hours away from work had to be spent (Sjohagen
1954; Malmen 1966; Bremberg 1973).
   Class contradiction formed the determinate background to these controls and the
development of the 'problem' of working-class leisure in Britain and Sweden. Working-
class leisure moved into the space of inter-class relations where 'the discovery and
emergence of disciplinary techniques of power cast the dominant classes as collective
teacher prompting the people to learn and observe the one way of life considered
properly human' (Bauman 1983, p. 36; see below on the teacher-judge). And drinking
a lot just wasn't properly human: 'socially, they [alcoholics] do not fulfill the demands
that are usually made on citizens ... a high degree of alcoholic indulgence causes social
unfitness' (Dahlberg 1939).
   Just as the penal system tends to produce criminals and delinquents (new prisons are
invariably rapidly filled), a system such as the one in Sweden designed to cure alcoholics
invariably finds, or creates, people to treat. More broadly, 'problem' drinking with its
moral and/or medical connotations is related to the expansion of disciplinary interest in
the use of the body in leisure time and its health. The determinate relation between
discipline and the capitalist labour process means that heavy drinking (however
defined) and 'alcoholism' are defined as being problematic, as 'deviant'. This is in turn
related to the contradiction between the behavioural consequences of drink and the
disciplined way of life required of the capitalist worker. This is not to belittle the often
severe personal and physical distress which may be associated with heavy drinking. It
is, however, to question the identification of such drinking as deviant, as an object of
societal intervention in the form of disciplinary (educative, medical/psychiatric, penal)
and legislative (taxation, restrictions on availability and drinking hours) procedures.

Consumerism, the welfare state and the medicalization of drinking practices
Since the Second World War the British and Swedish nation states have produced
highly developed welfare systems. The desire to maintain a healthy working population
for capital accumulation and the consumption of consumer goods has led to an increas-
ing degree of medicalization of drinking practices. The moralizing focus of the
nineteenth and early twentieth-century temperance movements involving the incul-
cation of bourgeois values centring on family-based leisure has become augmented in
the welfare state by an increasing degree of medical intervention and definition of the
perceived problem, that of alcohol addiction or alcoholism. Enforced disciplinary pro-
cedures such as the restriction of the availability of alcohol in Sweden or restrictions on
drinking hours in Britain have become supplemented by a bio-politics of life focussing
on the regulatory control of the health of the population. This regulatory 'goal' of the
state increasingly conflicts with and contradicts the fostering of consumerism.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                   199


   With the commodification of labour in capitalism and the institutionalization of
disciplinary power in various state apparatuses the worker lost direct control of the
labour process. The wage form of industrial capitalism created the consumer of
alienated products of labour. The worker was 'free' to spend his/her wage and consume
in leisure time. Such a freedom acted as a compensation for loss of control over the
labour process and, increasingly, this economization ofpower led to the notion that free-
dom lay in leisure-time and leisure-space, consumer needs for leisure consumption
being satisfied by appropriating marketed goods (Bauman 1983, pp. 38-9). The main-
tenance of class hegemony required, however, that the 'acceptable arena of human
initiative is circumscribed by the act of purchasing' (Ewen and Ewen 1982, p. 75). This
entailed that a socially privatized existence, mediated by consumerism, came to super-
sede the mediation of social relations and consciousness by the conditions of class
experience oflabour (Alt 1976).
   The exploitative and harsh nature of labour as a determinant of political struggle has
given way, through higher wages and reduced work time, to the aim of improving at an
ever-increasing pace the standard of living, primarily by providing extended possi-
bilities for consumption. Consequently labour becomes culturally devalued as a source
of values. Individual freedom is defined symbolically through commodity consump-
tion, through style. Consumable leisure is ennobled as a subjective answer to the
discipline of the machine (Ewen and Ewen 1982, p. 35).
   And indeed the development of new bases for stable economic growth in monopoly
capitalism has involved an expanded use of disciplinary technology in industry related
to a rationalization of the labour process. Deskilling and replacement of craft skills by
specialized machine operations have accompanied the separation of mental (adminis-
trative) and manual (operational) labour in corporate capital organizations (Braverman
1974). The disciplined, atomized body of the worker, treated not as a unit but as a
mechanism made up of separately usable parts is economically more efficient.
   The development of consumerism and the extension of hegemonic concern to con-
sumption as well as production means that the worker is no longer considered as merely
a unit-in-production. Increasing attention has been paid to the prediction and control of
the worker-consumer through companies' personnel management and marketing
policies, aggressive advertising and a cultural apparatus directed at the shaping of a con-
sumer consciousness (Ewen 1976; Ewen and Ewen 1982; Featherstone 1982; lnglis
1972; Packard 1981).
   Already, in the nineteenth century new forms of distinct and specialized recreation-
libraries, music halls, museums, for example, developed as diversions. In Britain these
increasingly began to remove the public house from its central place within the
recreation of the occupational community. In addition a mode of rational recreation
developed which has encouraged the replacement of unstructured sports and
activities, which required unspecified amounts of space, time and participants, by spec-
tator sports with a codified set of rules- consumable sport. Legislative and disciplinary
control in Britain regularized and restricted drinking hours. Improved housing and the
increasing availability of consumer goods meant that the home was in process of
becoming the origin and physical setting for leisure -increasingly privatized leisure.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            200


Class segregation in public drinking meant that private as opposed to public drinking
began to be seen more and more as a mark of respectability.
   Regarding conceptions of the body, the belief that fatness signified health was
challenged. The healthy body became the athletic body. The athletic physique
associated with the new leisure sports required disciplined training and was incom-
patible with heavy drinking. The relation between work and drink (drink imparting
strength and energy) was also weakened in that reduced working hours and better work-
ing conditions meant alcohol was less needed as a restorative.
   These processes tended to sever the relationship between drink and work and weaken
that between drink and recreation while the relationship between drink and socializing
remained. These changes have continued in Britain with the increasing dissolution of
the occupational community with its determinate structures of working-class localism,
especially since the 1940s through the effects of changes in the production process and
through the state's social and political policies (Clarke 1979, p. 240; Clarke et al. 1976,
pp. 35ff.).
   In 1955 the popularly termed 'October revolution' occurred in Sweden- the Bratt
system of alcohol rationing was abolished following the findings of a special government
investigative committee (the 1944 Temperance Committee, which published seven
lengthy volumes reviewing the entire system of alcohol control). The Bratt system had
never been popular from its inception. Popular support for the temperance movement
declined drastically after the 1920s. In an increasingly affluent consumer society
developing after World War II a special alcohol rationing system stuck out like a sore
thumb. Although in the 1950s only about one fifth of motbok holders were allowed the
maximum ration of spirits the system was, ostensibly, only meant to restrict excessive
and not moderate drinkers. Most damning of all was the realization that the system was
a failure. Alcohol consumption had increased because of the rising ratio of people taking
out their full ration to those who did not (there was a widespread popular belief that
failure to take out the full ration might lead to reduced entitlements (Thompson 1935,
p. 113, note 12). The system of individual control of the excessive drinker was largely
ineffective. For example, by far the greatest number of drunkenness offences were com-
mitted by precisely those individuals denied a motbok (Dahlberg 1951, p. 38). The very
irregularity in which alcohol was treated in relation to other consumer goods stimulated
and incited consumption (and still does).
   The post-Bratt liberalization of alcohol control policies substituted individual control
for an attempt to control total consumption, via a system of progressive taxation of
drinks in relation to alcohol content. This was accompanied by an increased emphasis
on the dissemination of information (e.g. in schools) and via advertising strategies
intended to produce healthy drinking. Commercial advertising for alcohol was initially
restricted and finally banned altogether (see below). Healthy drinking was promoted by
an attempt to persuade people to consume drinks oflower alcohol content (i.e. wine and
beer rather than spirits). Alcohol-free drinks were (and are) promoted and there was a
general attempt to sever the connection between drink and leisure, drink and sociability
- to promote a drug-free culture especially amongst the young (SOU 1974: 91;
Socialstyrelsen 1983, pp. 52-3). These techniques are supplemented by continued
The design of contempormy beer cans                                                   201


restrictions on the availability of alcohol, with strong beer, wine and spirits being sold
only in the government alcohol monopoly (Systembolaget) shops. Sales in restaurants
remain very closely regulated at a local government level. Permits to sell alcoholic
drinks for consumption on the premises are comparatively few in number compared
with Britain (Fig. 8.16) and generally only given if food is part of the service. Prices
of drinks in restaurants are so high that the sheer cost of public drinking ensures



                                                                          total
    30




    20




    10




A             1920                    1940                    1960     1980




    40




    30




    20




    10




B             1920                    1940                   1960      1980



Fig. 8.16 The number of outlets per 10,000 inhabitants for alcohol
A: England and Wales
   1: alcohol for consumption off the premises
  2: alcohol for consumption on and off the premises
B: Sweden
  1: Systembolaget (government alcohol monopoly retail shops)
  2: restaurants
  3: restaurants (Classes I and II beer only)
  4: sales outlets for beer Classes I and II.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                                         202


privatized consumption (Fig. 8.16B). An entire micropolitics of power is involved in
processing applications to serve alcohol (Fig. 8 .17) which may be compared with the
situation in Britain in which power is vested in local1icensing magistrates. The wording
of the Swedish law concerning licence applications is so ambiguous that, in practice,
almost any grounds may be used by the numerous authorities involved to refuse per-
mission to serve alcohol (Vatanen and Tengvall 1983). An age restriction forbids the
purchase of alcohol in the government monopoly shops, set at 20, despite the age of
majority being 18. The present day restrictions in Sweden appear liberal in an historical
perspective but contrast markedly with those in Britain where restrictions have, since
the nineteenth century, been confined to granting licences for the sale of alcohol and,
since 1828, with imposing restrictions on opening hours of public houses (see Wilson
1940; Monckton 1966, 1969).
   In relation to the development of consumerism and increased leisure the consumption
of alcohol in both countries has risen markedly since the 1940s (Fig. 8.18) and in Britain
all alcoholic drinks have been made freely available in supermarkets since the 1960s.
Despite the far wider range of restrictions in Sweden, as compared with Britain,
throughout the twentieth century the perceived problem of alcoholism has remained.
Alcohol is still considered 'one of our greatest social problems' (Proposition 1976/77:
108 (Swedish government white paper)) yet consumption is considerably higher on a
per capita basis in Britain (Fig. 8.18) where government interest is still primarily
fiscal, alcohol control a matter of minor interest and public opinion indifferent (Bradley




                                                                                Environment and health care
                                                                                authorities



                                                                              I Power board
                                                                              I Streets and parks committee
                                                                              I Police council
                                                                              I National social insurance board
                                                                                Stockholm hotel and restaurant
                                                                                association
                                                                                Swedish restaurant proprietors'
                                                                                society
                                                                                Hotel and restaurant employees'
                                                                                union
                                                                               I Retail services employees' union
                                                                              I Crown bailiff's office
                                                                                 Local tax authorities

-----+-Channels for opinions and suggestions bearing on a decision
• - - - - - Channels along which application sent for consideration


Fig. 8.17 The micropolitics of power involving an application for a licence to serve spirits in Stockholm (after
Dagens Nyheter, 14 July, 1983, p. 21).
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                            203


and Fenwick 1974). Indeed in Sweden alcohol consumption is on a per capita basis one
of the lowest in the industrialized world yet it is one of the leading countries involved in
alcohol research.
   The exceptional concern with alcohol 'problems' in Sweden, very closely tied up with
disciplinary power, is intimately related to a massive proliferation of discourses on


    15


                                                                                                        total




    10

                                                                                                        beer




     5




                                                                                                      spirits

                                                                                                        wine



A                 1920                      1940                     1960                      1980




    10




                                                                                                        total


     5




                                                                                                      spirits

                                                                                                        beer
                                                                                                        wine



B

Fig. 8.18 Per capita consumption (litres) of pure alcohol according to drink type for Britain (A) and
Sweden(B). Sources: Brewers Society; Wilson 1940; SOU 1952: 52; SOU 1974: 90;Alkoholstatistik 1973-82.
(Britain after 1951 per inhabitant over 15 years of age, Sweden after 1946 per inhabitant over 15 years of age).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              204


 alcohol and stat1st1cs concerned with every conceivable aspect of alcohol use, or
 potential use (e.g., attempts to estimate the degree of home distilling on the basis of the
 ratio of yeast sold to that required to make bread on the basis of the quantity of flour
 sold, the remaining yeast being assumed to be used in distilling (SAMO 1981: 21,
 pp. 14--15) to the investigations of the 1944 Temperance Committee concerning the
 frequency of venereal disease in relation to alcohol consumption (SOU 1951: 43,
 pp. 109--24). The exercise of disciplinary power produces both knowledges and their
 object. It is certainly not the case that a simple objective high incidence of problems
associated with alcohol 'naturally' gives rise to a legitimate and objective concern. The
very close connection between temperance agencies and research work done on alcohol
 and alcoholism attests to this.
    To a great extent, both in Britain and Sweden, the intervention of the law as a
mechanism of control has been displaced by attempts to produce a normalization of the
population, both moral and medical. The universal reference has become the norm
rather than the law: the normative judgement of the doctor-judge, the social-worker-
 judge, the teacher-judge imposing homogeneity while measuring and observing indi-
vidual deviance (Foucault 1979, pp. 304--5). The medical imperative of health has
complemented the notion of the disciplinary body. The worker, the body-machine, is
to be maintained as well as controlled. These techniques of power relate to the insertion
of a capitalist conception of the worker-unit into the production-consumption cycle.
    Since 1982 the old alcoholic laws in Sweden have been replaced by two acts, the Social
Services Act and the Act on the compulsory care of abusers. Social aid has thus been
separated from the means of coercion, still maintained as a last resort. Significantly, the
old-style temperance boards are no longer separate administrative agencies of state con-
trol but are integrated with the welfare services as a whole (social welfare, child welfare,
welfare for the aged, etc.). This has broadened the means of social control of deviant
drinkers in that the chances of them being 'recognized' are extended through the entire
gamut of welfare services.
   Despite the impossibility of constructing any universally applicable definition of
alcoholism (see e.g., Christie and Bruun 1968, p. 65) it nevertheless is the case that
people do and have applied the terms 'alcoholic' and 'alcoholism' to what, at any his-
torically contingent moment, appear to be clearly delineated persons or types of states.
The alcoholic, far from being a social fact is, rather, a social accomplishment (Schneider
1978), a product of discourse, classification, definition and struggle between various
interested parties. In the welfare state, medical definitions of 'problem' drinking as
mental 'illness', rather than as a sign of a lack of essential moral fibre, tend to objectify
drinking, removing it from its determinate, constitutive context. The consumption of
alcohol as drug and its physical consequences may then be treated by experts sanctioned
by science and the state, observing all according to the healthy norm and treating the
unhealthy, dysfunctioning, deviant individual. The development of the welfare state is
bound up with the transference of the power to detect and define the alcoholic from civil
to medical authorities, involving the repudiation of the idea that the alcoholic was
simply a social degenerate and the perception of alcoholism as an illness or a problem.
The apparent irrationality of excessive consumption becomes explained in the new
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                   205


medical framework not only as illness, but as mental illness. It is not surprising, there-
fore, to find ever increasing proportions of deviant drinkers treated in mental or
psychiatric hospitals or wards or, given the much greater concern with alcohol in
Sweden, that the Swedish figures should dwarf those for Britain (Fig. 8.19). In the
welfare state, to drink excessively has become linked to madness so the lunatic and the
drinker become grouped together. The hospital has become a major agency of regulative
social control (Fig. 8.20) and the treatment or control of deviance is rooted in techniques
of power over the body and in transformations of its conception (cf. Szasz 1975; Doyal
1979; Bologh 1981).
   Consumerism is internally related to the techniques of disciplinary power discovered
and increasingly exercised from the seventeenth century. While partly a resistance to,
a compensation for institutional discipline, both consumerism and discipline form a




500                                                   50%




               3
              19!§0                   1970



Fig. 8.19 The frequency of alcoholics in mental hospitals or psychiatric wards in Britain and Sweden per
100,000 inhabitants
(I) Sweden: frequency of patients with disorders associated with alcoholism in mental hospitals and
    psychiatric departments in general hospitals. Source: Herner 1972.
(2) Sweden: frequency of discharges (transferred and deceased excluded) of patients with disorders due to
    alcoholism from mental hospitals and psychiatric wards of general hospitals. Source: Statistika
    Meddelanden HS 1981:6.
(3) England and Wales: admissions to mental hospitals and units under regional hospital boards and teaching
    hospitals where the primary or secondary diagnosis was alcoholism or alcoholic psychosis. Source:
    Royal College of Psychiatrists 1979.
(4) Sweden: the percentage of diagnosed patients who were alcoholics. Source: Herner 1972.
(5) Sweden: the percentage of diagnosed male patients who were alcoholics. Source: Herner 1972.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                                 206


determinately contradictory nexus of meanings and attitudes focussed on the human
body. This nexus also includes the regulatory interest in the health of the body.
   Consumerism is not about freedom from control but is about self-imposed 'auton-
omous' discipline: 'it is about the joy of controlling the body of one's own individual
will, with the help of sophisticated products of technology which offer the visibility of
the formidable power of one's controlling agency' (Bauman 1983, p. 40). So the body
needs to be trained, cultivated, taught, and thus brought into line. In training the body
is an object of both institutional heteronomous discipline and individual autonomous
self-surveillance. In such discipline, the body is viewed both positively and negatively,
some aspects to be developed, some suppressed; the body is both redeeming and sinful.
Consumption of a product either magically brings about a desired end or acts as
recompense for lack of it (cf. Williamson 1978, on advertising the product as magical
agent and/or substitute for a desired end). Consumption opposes prohibition: cook-
books and diet books; drinking and temperance and health education.
   Health education demands constant vigilance of the body as machine, self-
responsibility for maintenance of health and appearance. This appeal of the health
educationalist to the rationality and hence value-freedom of self-preservation masks the
influence of the consumer culture's idealization of youth and beauty (Featherstone
1982, p. 25)- consumerism's norm.
   So according to the imperative of health, the body must remain an object of constraint
and drill however much it consumes in displaced compensation for the capillary oper-
ation of institutional discipline.
   Such consumption is abstract in that the use-value of the product is suppressed in
relation to its abstract exchange-value. So 'the body is trained into a capacity to will and
absorb more marketable goods, and ... routines are instilled through a self-inflicted
drill which makes possible just that' (Bauman 1983, p. 41). The body is not to discern




Fig. 8.20 View of Lund, Sweden, from the south. In Ceremonial Chemistry, Szasz (1975) writes of the
transference of the power to define deviants in capitalism from the theocratic (religious/Christian morality) to
the therapeutic (scientific/medical) state. The decline of religious/civil power to define the deviant and the
rise of scientific/medical power is symbolized in the architecture ofLund (and other Swedish cities). The huge
modern building dominating the skyline and visible for miles around from all directions is the hospital. The
cathedral with its twin towers, to the right, is scarcely visible. Pure chance? The hospital is the largest
employer in Lund and for all Sweden no less than 10.5% of the working population is employed in health
care. (Photo: John Duncan)
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                 207


and appreciate but merely to absorb. It doesn't matter what is consumed but merely the
style and symbolism of the act of consumption.

The brewing industry
It is in the context of a consumer society that the general activities of the British and
Swedish brewing industries, and their products, since the 1950s needs to be viewed. In
both countries rationalization, mergers and take-overs have dramatically diminished
the number of breweries with a national rather than regional distribution network for
their products (Fig. 8.21). This trend is particularly marked in Sweden with a reduction
in the number of factories from 223 in 1903, to 16 in 1983. The repeal of legislation
restricting competition, occurring at the same time as the abolition of the Bran system
led to one company, Pripps (now 75% state owned) establishing a virtual monopoly over
the entire beer market, accounting for 74% of all beer sales by 1977 (Dsi 1978: 34; Anell
and Persson 1984, p. 58). In 1983 one of Pripps' brands (Pripps Bh't) had a 33% market
share of all beer brands (Prippsnytt 1983, p. 2; PLM 1983).
   In Britain a similar development occurred with six breweries dominating the market.
Increasingly oligopolist, the larger British breweries rationalized pub design, altered
the product on sale and replaced tenants with managers producing a tendency towards
centralized rather than local control over the context of public drinking (Hutt 1973;
Boston 1977; Protz 1978). Such a development was related to attempts to open up the
drinking market to a new customer: a young (cf. Featherstone 1982, pp. 2lf.), classless
'consumer' rather than a 'member'. As Clarke notes 'this newly forged interpellation
dissolves previous patterns and habits of "how to drink" and substitutes for them
preferred "styles" of drinking' (Clarke 1979, p. 245). With the decline of the British

20




10




     1900   1910                  1940   1950    1960   1970   1980


Fig. 8.21 The number of breweries in Britain and Sweden (shaded) per 100,000 inhabitants. Sources:
Brewers Society; Annell and Persson 1984; Martensson 1961 (no data for Sweden 1910).
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                           208


occupational community, the pub is less patronized by occupational peers with the
fetishized status of wage-labourers reproducing their relationship to work in the public
bar, than by consumers seeking entertainment and symbolically affirming their
mobility and freedom (Alt 1976, p. 72).
   Emphasis on styles of drinking and consumption has the concomitant that it matters
less what the product is or tastes like than what it means. The original use-value of the
product becomes submerged beneath its exchange-value in a market of images. The
individual is on display, is self-conscious, exercising self-scrutiny, self-surveillance,
measuring appearance and performance against the norm (Featherstone 1982,
pp. 19-20).
   The old tripartite class system was retained in Sweden for beer following the abolition
of rationing and the strong Class Ill beer was made available in the government alcohol
monopoly (Systembolaget) shops. The weaker Class I and II beers were sold freely in
food shops as before. The introduction of a fourth class of medium strength beer
(mellanol- Class liB) in 1965 was related to an attempt to radically alter the image of
beer. Prior to the 1960s beer was widely regarded as a drink associated with older
working-class males. The advertising campaign associated with the new beer was
directed to making beer classless and to appeal both to the young and women (see
below). Image was all that mattered, the advertising images were numerous and
provocative to those concerned with temperance. The effectiveness of this campaign
and the rapid increase in beer consumption, especially amongst the young, eventually
led to the withdrawal of this beer from the market through legislation in 1977. However
the image and style-value of beer remained and continues to be promoted by the
breweries, as it does in Britain.
   So beer is marketed by brewery companies like any other product and such
companies have not failed to exhibit all the features of the capitalist corporation -
vigorous advertising programmes and market creation, especially in the last 20 years.
But beer is not just any consumable item; it has strong historical and social links with
community life and socializing in both Britain and Sweden, although after legislative
and social intervention, most beer in Sweden is drunk in the private home. Beer is also
an alcoholic drink, a drug. Alcohol, in its many varieties, may be consumed as intoxi-
cant, as food, as medicine, social lubricant, or as religious sacrament. This density of
alcohol's social and historical mythology (cf. Barthes 1973c), the multiplicity of use and
exchange values, resonate with the contradictory nexus of the meanings of the human
body in contemporary capitalism. Drinking is inserted into structures of disciplinary
power, consumerism, and a health imperative of a biopolitics of the population.
   We have aimed to show how the capitalist state may be held to relate to the production
and consumption of alcohol through a number of relatively autonomous institutions. To
summarize, the major fields of relation are:

   ( 1)   (a) the production of alcohol as a commodity bears on commercial, industrial
              and agricultural policies and interests;
          (b) production of alcohol contributes substantial revenue to the treasury
              through exaction of excise duty.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                  209


    (2)   The consequences of alcohol consumption bear on
          (a) public order,
          (b) industrial productivity,
          (c) the health of the population

(cf. Makela and Viikari 1977; Makela et al. 1981; Bruun et al. 1975). State intervention
may occur through reference to four major forms of power:
   (1)    legal-juridical power which creates restrictive or enabling legislation;
   (2)    disciplinary power focussing on the body as a machine to be supervised and
          placed under surveillance;
   (3)    techniques of power focussing on the health of the population (F oucault 1981,
          Part 5);
   (4)    techniques of power channelled through modes of information dissemination,
          gathering and processing, e.g. television, radio, publications, computer
          technologies (Poster 1984).

   We have attempted to avoid a simplistic conception of the state as a unitary repressive
power, as a coherent set of institutions performing a pre-given role in the reproduction
of capitalism. A lack of coherent functionality is contained within the logic of the
capitalist state. The state fosters consumerism, pursues policies which enable the pro-
duction and consumption of alcohol as a commodity in the capitalist economic cycle,
while exercising various forms of power in dealing with the consequences of drinking on
the population. Consumption opposes and contradicts control, discipline and health. In
returning to the can designs we shall consider two related forms of everyday material
culture - advertisements and newspapers - as a way of refining and elaborating this
fundamental contradiction we have noted as structuring drinking practices, preparing
the ground for explaining the structure of difference which the can designs exhibit.


ALCOHOL IN THE MEDIA AND ADVERTISING

Drink and the news
Newspapers, as ideological vehicles, to a large extent 'produce' as much as 'reflect'
public opinion not only expressing but also repressing and excluding certain issues from
discussion. The mass media and the formation of a public and public opinion are, his-
torically, mutually supportive. As Gouldner has put it, a public is formed when the links
between culture and social interaction are, in essentials, attenuated so that people can
share something (e.g., news) without being involved in a process of interpersonal inter-
action (Gouldner 1976, p. 109). Newspapers, and the mass media more generally,
actively create and facilitate a process by which a public, as opposed to a community, is
formed by dramatically increasing the exchange of information at a distance. News-
papers thus mediate a relatively abstract experience of the social world varying in terms
of social and spatial distance from the readership (local, home, international news, etc.)
and produce a diffuse but nevertheless structured set of meanings for consumption.
Their overt content owes much to competition for readers and advertisers within the
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             210


general field of cultural production, endlessly seeking to increase their readership at the
expense of competitors, involving the production and subsequent interpretation of
information which, by its very inclusion, becomes identified as 'news'.
   We are concerned in this section to investigate the sets of meanings newspapers
present as associated with drinking, to ascertain to what extent alcohol rates as a news
item, and the meanings associated with this news coverage. We again undertook a com-
parative study of Britain and Sweden, analysing newspapers over a four-month period
from September to December 1983. Since it was beyond the scope of this study to
analyse a whole range of different types of British and Swedish newspapers and
magazines it was decided to choose two 'serious', as opposed to tabloid, daily papers
with a similar political outlook and a national distribution. For Britain The Guardian
was studied and for Sweden, Dagens Nyheter. Both of these papers are of identical page
size with similar circulation figures and both put forward an 'independent liberal'
political position. In Britain the press is far more centralized than in Sweden or for that
matter most other European countries (see Williams 1979). Although Dagens Nyheter
has its primary circulation in Stockholm and the surrounding area, it is also read in all
parts of Sweden and may be held to fulfill a dual role as a Stockholm and a national news-
paper. At the time the analyses were undertaken Dagens Nyheter had larger circu-
lation figures than any other daily morning newspaper in Sweden. By contrast the
circulation figures for The Guardian by British standards are small but truly national.
Since Dagens Nyheter has a periodicity of seven issues a week and The Guardian only six
a week, a British 'liberal' Sunday newspaper, The Observer, was also analysed to further
facilitate adequate comparison. Although, inevitably, there are differences in the
amount of editorial and non-editorial matter published in the British and Swedish news-
papers, whether articles are written about alcohol or advertisements inserted is a
matter of choice largely independent of overall newspaper size.
   Table 8.4 gives the results of the survey of the number of articles written about alcohol
and the number of adverts. An obvious and striking contrast exists. While 58 articles
were written about alcohol in the British newspapers over the four-month period, 203
appeared in Dagens Nyheter. When the number of adverts is considered the situation is
reversed. The Guardian and The Observer contained 95% more adverts than Dagens
Nyheter. This difference is, however, a result of differences in alcohol control policies
between the two countries rather than a reluctance on the part of those concerned with
marketing alcohol to advertise in Sweden. Since 1979, advertisements in the press, apart
from trade journals, have been banned in Sweden for spirits, wine and strong beer. No
such restrictions exist in Britain and for the four-month period analysed there was an
interesting trend in the British data- the number of articles about alcohol declined from
September to December while the number of adverts increased significantly, a trend
obviously geared to persuade consumers to buy alcohol for the Christmas/New Year
holiday period.
   A contrast in the visibility of alcohol exists between the British and Swedish news-
papers. In Britain alcohol is primarily visible as a concrete marketed product available
for consumption through the medium of advertisements. In Sweden alcohol is highly
visible but in another way - as an abstract product to be discussed, dissected and
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                  211


Table 8 .4. The frequency ofarticles written about alcohol and alcohol adverts in British and
Swedish newspapers for the periodS eptember-December 1983

            A                   B                   c                   D                   E

month       G+O        DN       G+O        DN       G+O        DN       G+O        DN       G+O       DN

Sept.       21         45        40         6                   4       14                   8          3
Oct.        15         49        70         4                   4       15                   9          l
Nov. 1      12         59        89         3                   6       29                  21
Dec. 2      10         50       Ill         3                   4       32                  29          2
Total       58        203       310        16                  18       90                  67          6

G: The Guardian, 0: The Observer, DN: Dagens Nyheter.
A -number of articles written about alcohol (editorial matter)
B - number of adverts
C - number of front page articles
D- number of front page adverts
E - number of colour adverts
l - Two issues of The Guardian and one issue of The Observer lost because of an industrial dispute.
2 - Five issues of The Guardian lost because of an industrial dispute and one issue of The Observer and two
    issues of Dagens Nyheter lost because of Christmas holidays.




debated. This contrast in the forms of visibility of alcohol is replicated when we consider
differences between the newspapers in terms of the number of times alcohol rates as a
front page news item, front page adverts, and the sizes of the articles and the adverts.
Alcohol was only given front page coverage once in The Guardian, never in The
Observer, but no less than 18 times in Dagens Nyheter. Adverts never occurred on the
front page of Dagens Nyheterwhile being inserted on the front page of90 editions of The
Guardian and The Observer. Similarly, a high proportion of Swedish articles about
alcohol (about 20%) tend to be lengthy, occupying more than 26% of a newspaper page
whereas only two articles in the British newspapers were of any length, this difference
being reversed in relation to advert size.
   The survey thus reveals a much higher degree of news coverage of alcohol in Sweden
than in Britain but what of the content of the articles? The topics discussed were
classified according to 14 general content categories, in terms of newspaper classifi-
cation, and attitude expressed toward alcohol consumption (Table 8.5). The results of
this analysis (Table 8.6) indicate that the major topics discussed in the British articles
concerned alcohol production, consumption and sales figures and articles about wine as
a cultural drink in association with food preparation accounting for 67% of the total
number of articles. This correlates with an emphasis in terms of the newspaper classifi-
cation on women, personal, consumer affairs and finance. Put in another way the
emphasis is on alcohol in relation to capital investment and profit making (e.g., articles
about investing in vintage wines or brewery profits rising during the long hot sum!ller
of 1983) and as a product intimately related to leisure time activities (e.g., knowledge of
the correct wine to serve with such and such a dish). The articles in Dagens Nyheter are
more evenly divided across a whole range of issues. Aspects of legislation, alcohol and
crime, temperance organizations and pubs and restaurants, topics not discussed in the
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                      212


Table 8. 5. Variables recorded for the newspaper analysis

Var.      Topicsdiscussed(variables l-14)
 l       Health (e.g., alcohol related diseases)
 2       Alcoholics and alcoholism (case studies of individuals, etc.)
 3       Welfare and social policy
 4       Legislation and issues arising from it (e.g., restrictions on sale of alcohol)
 5       Drinking and driving
 6       Alcohol and crime (e.g., thefts of alcohol; smuggling)
 7       Illegal trading or production of alcohol (e.g., home distilling)
 8       Temperance organizations, teetotallers, temperance related organizations
 9       Alcohol production (breweries, vineyards, finance, etc.)
10       Alcohol marketing (e.g., prices; selling wine; new initiatives; Swedish Systembolaget alcohol
         stores)
11       Alcohol consumption (consumption and sales figures)
12       Wines and food (cultural issues)
13       Pubs and restaurants
14       Other
         Articles in terms ofnewspaper classification (variables l 5-21)
15       Homenews
16       Foreign news
17       Arts
18       Women I Personal I Consumer affairs
19       Financial
20       Sports
21       Letters
         Articles in terms ofattitude to alcohol (variables 22-24)
22       Positive
23       Neutral or not made explicit
24       Negative




British articles, were given fairly substantial coverage in Sweden (about 35% of the total
number of articles). While a substantial number of articles were concerned with alcohol
marketing ( 13%) the main object of discussion was the Systembolag government alcohol
monopoly with articles about mundane features such as experiments in queuing systems
for customers, and detailed accounts of price rises. Illegality was a favourite topic for
discussion, no less than 25% of the articles being concerned with drinking and driving,
illegal production of alcohol (home distilling) and trading (illegal drinking clubs) and
crimes involving alcohol. Most of the crimes reported were not acts of physical violence
following drinking but thefts or smuggling of alcoholic beverages. Corresponding with
these topics the majority of the articles rated, in terms of newspaper classification, as
home news. Attitude of the articles to alcohol was difficult to record without a very
detailed semantic analysis. Unless very obvious it was recorded as 'neutral or not
immediately evident'. As we might expect, in those articles written fairly explicitly a
greater number of those in Britain expressed a positive attitude toward alcohol con-
sumption while in Sweden a larger proportion were negative or restrictive in tone.
   We know of no comparable study in Britain but in Sweden a similar survey was
carried out during 1970 using a sample of 56 newspapers and magazines (Englund,
Solberg and Svensson 1974). This survey showed a similarly high number of articles
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                 213


Table 8.6. Results of the content analysis of numbers of articles about alcohol

          Topics discussed

Variables: 1            2               3             4             5            6           7

month     G+O      DN   G+O      DN     G+O     DN    G+O     DN    G+O     DN   G+O   DN    G+O     DN
Sept.         3     1               4       3    4             3        3    4          4             5
Oct.                1       1       4            4             3             1          3             4
Nov.                2       2       3            5             3             2         11             5
Dec.                3               3            I             4             5          2             5
Total         3     7       3    14      3      14            l3     4      12         20        I   19
%Total        5     3       5     7      5       7             6     7       6         10        2    9

          8             9               10            11            12           l3          14

month     G+O     DN    G+O      DN     G+O     DN    G+O     DN    G+O     DN   G+O   DN    G+O     DN
Sept.                       2       I    2       4        I    3     7      4                         8
Oct.               3        3       3            9        5    2     5      5           6             I
Nov.               7        4       3    2      11             I     4      4           I             I
Dec.               4        2       3            3             7     6      5                         5
Total              14   11       10      4      27     6      l3    22      18         7         I   IS
%Total              7   19        5      7      l3    10       6    38       9         3      2       7

                                                Newspaper classification
          IS            16              17            18            19           20          21

month     G+O     DN    G+O      DN     G+O     DN    G+O     DN    G+O     DN   G+O   DN    G+O     DN
Sept.      6      37        I       I       I          9       6     3      2
Oct.       2      18        3     3                    7      11     3       I                        3
Nov.       2      41                                   6      16     4      2
Dec.       2      36        1     2              I     4       6     2      5
Total     12      132       5     6      1       2    26      39    12      10                        3
%Total    21       65       9     3      2       1    45      19    20       5                        I
                         Attitude
          22            23              24

month     G+O     DN    G+O      DN     G+O     DN
Sept.      9       4    10       35      2       6
Oct.       5      10     9       32         I    7
Nov.       4       4     6       43      2      12
Dec.       1       6     8       37      1       7
Total     19      24    33      147      6      32
%Total    33      12    57       72     10      16

G: The Guardian, 0: The Observer, DN: Dagens Nyheter. Variable numbers refer to Table 8.5.




about alcohol in the Swedish press, especially in daily newspapers and an advertisement
frequency of between 8.42 and 4.10 adverts per issue (ibid., pp. 19-22, Tables 1-4) in
the large daily newspapers; 5.49 adverts per issue during a 'normal week' and 8.42
adverts per issue in the two days immediately preceding the June midsummer holiday.
This advertising rate is considerably in excess of a 'normal week' for the 1983 sample of
British newspapers (1.43 to 3.17 adverts per issue) and were it not for the legislative
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             214


restrictions in operation in Sweden today we might expect to find not only a consider-
ably higher number of articles about alcohol but a higher advertising rate.
  In general, then, the newspaper survey highlights the contrast between Britain and
Sweden regarding the social meaning of drink: in Britain, primarily a product for con-
sumption, in Sweden, alcohol as an abstract product, topic for concern and discussion.

Advertisements
As Williams (1980, p. 184) has noted, advertising is, in a sense, 'the official art of
modern capitalist society: it is what "we" put up in "our" streets and use to fill up half
of "our" newspapers and magazines'. Advertising is increasingly conspicuous, per-
meating all areas of social life from the public and political to the private arena. The
material products sold through advertising are never in themselves enough, even in the
simplest of adverts, but imbued with denotative and connotative social meanings,
meanings in part created through the advertising medium, and assigned to different
products through play on underlying structural principles, through reference to and
elaboration of ideas and practices of our capitalist society: 'advertisements are selling us
something else besides consumer goods: in providing us with a structure in which we,
and those goods are interchangeable, they are selling us ourselves' (Williamson 1978,
p. 13). So adverts create systems of difference, distinguish one product from another in
the same category, assigning distinctive meaning to products for sale.
   Advertising may have a profound effect on influencing drinking and public knowl-
edge about alcohol, for example by strengthening or weakening the association in
people's minds between alcohol and lifestyles or desirable activities. In a more general
way advertisements may have an effect on the social acceptability of alcohol and of the
industries that produce and market it. Many analyses of alcohol advertisements have
been concerned to reveal such factors as play upon individual susceptibilities (e.g.
Bromme 1971; Breed and DeFoe 1979; Strickland, Finn and Lambert 1982). Our con-
cern here is more to develop a critique of alcohol advertising obliquely, while concen-
trating on analysing the range of social meanings associated with drink in British and
Swedish advertisements.
   We are interested in three sets of questions:
   (1)   To what extent are different meanings associated with drinking in British and
         Swedish advertisements?
   (2)   To what extent do these meanings differ according to the type of drink being
         advertised, i.e. wine, spirits and beer?
   (3)   How do these meanings relate to an understanding of contemporary beer can
         or bottle label design?


Sampling- problems
Before presenting the results of a series of analyses it is necessary to consider the nature
of state alcohol policies in relation to advertising in Britain and Sweden. For Britain the
situation is quite simple. There are no statutory restrictions whatsoever on the advertis-
ing of alcoholic drinks other than those which apply to advertising in general. Only a few
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                  215


voluntary limitations exist with a limited degree of legal backing: television companies
do not usually accept advertisements for spirits, some publishers restrict alcohol
advertising in magazines intended for young people, alcohol advertisements should not
be aimed specifically at the young or associate drinking with driving (CPRS 1982,
p. 56).
   In Sweden, since 1917 with the advent of state control over wholesale and retail dis-
tribution of all alcoholic beverages, with the exception of beer, alcoholic drinks pro-
duced in Sweden (i.e., spirits and some wine) have not been advertised. All advertising
was therefore initiated by agents for imported brands and by the Swedish breweries.
This advertising was effectively free and increased steadily in frequency (SOU 197 4: 91,
pp. 265-6, Tables 20.1 and 20.2). In association with the abolition of alcohol rationing
in October 1955 a six month temporary ban on advertising was introduced and during
the 1960s and 1970s a series of voluntary agreements were made between the govern-
ment alcohol monopoly, the Swedish brewers association and agents for foreign wine
and spirits importers. Flagrant disregard for these guidelines might lead to an import
ban on the part of the government alcohol monopoly or enforced withdrawal of a par-
ticular advertisement. The main feature of these voluntary agreements was an agree-
ment on the part of the brewers not to advertise strong beer (Class Ill). This permitted
a virtually free hand in advertising beer not sold in the government liquor stores (Classes
I, IIA and liB). During the late 1960s and early 1970s a flood of unrestricted advertise-
ments for beer, especially the new middle strength 'mellanol' appeared.
   Since the early 1970s an extensive series of restrictions, voluntary and compulsory, on
advertising alcohol in Sweden (SOU 1976: 63, Bilaga 3; SOU 1974: 92, Bilaga 6,
pp. 53-6) poses problems for a valid comparison of the meanings ascribed to alcohol and
different classes of alcoholic drinks in British and Swedish advertisements since any
differences noted might be the result of different restrictions on advertising content
rather than choice on the part of the advertiser. In 1976 in Sweden a restrictive code of
practice prompted by prevalent abuses of previous voluntary agreements, restricted
wine and spirits advertisements to a picture of the product, raw ingredients used to
manufacture it and such features as glasses and serving equipment. The wording of such
advertisements was similarly restricted.
   After a series of government investigative committees and much debate, advertising
for all alcoholic drinks, except beer Classes I and 11, was eventually banned by law in
1979. Beer advertising was virtually restricted to newspapers and magazines. The fact
that advertising for certain of the weaker classes of beer was still permitted was, no
doubt, due in part to an extensive propaganda campaign on the part of the Swedish
breweries who consistently argued that, in effect, to advertise beer (of the weaker kinds)
promoted temperance, since if people drank beer this might encourage them to drink
spirits and wine, drinks higher in alcohol content, less frequently (Hamberg 1978;
Fakta 1978, pp. 12-13).
   In order to mitigate some of these problems it was necessary to obtain a sample of
Swedish advertisements prior to 1979 when the spirits and wine advertising ban came
into force and over a long period of time before the fairly stringent voluntary agreement
on wine and spirits advertising was introduced in 1976. A systematic sample of wine,
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             216


spirits and beer advertisements was taken from a monthly periodical, Det Biista, for the
 period 1966-1979 (1966-1980 for beer advertisements). Det Biista (the Swedish
language version of Readers Digest) was chosen for two reasons; first it contained a con-
sistently high number of alcohol advertisements per issue, and secondly, circulation
figures were high (c. 230,000-350,000 copies sold every month during the sampling
period). This sample of old advertisements was supplemented by a collection of beer
advertisements from 1983. Of the 16 adverts which appeared in the Swedish newspaper
survey from Dagens Nyheter (see above) only ten were beer advertisements. The remain-
ing six adverts were placed in the paper by the Systembolaget alcohol monopoly,
designed to improve its public image or warn people of the 'dangers' of alcohol con-
sumption, especially the young. No temperance adverts appeared in the British news-
papers sampled. Since the number of adverts was so small an additional random sample
of twenty different adverts was taken from the evening newspaper with the largest circu-
lation figures, Expressen, and six different monthly or weekly magazines (see Table 8.8)
with large circulation figures which might be expected to appeal to different social
groups or interests. This sample, although small, is representative of the types of beer
advertisements being produced during 1983. Since these advertisements are somewhat
restricted in content as a result of governmental regulations, in the comparisons which
follow between the British and the Swedish advertisements the older beer advertise-
ments are used in preference to those from 1983 if significant differences occur.
   For Britain a 50% random sample of the 310 advertisements from the British news-
paper survey was taken, stratified according to drink type as spirits advertisements were
roughly twice as frequent as wine advertisements. A weakness of the British data is that
only three advertisements for beer appeared during the four-month period. Most
adverts for beer occur on TV, radio and on billboards. All billboard adverts in the
Newcastle upon Tyne area were photographed in January 1984 and again in April1985
to provide 25 different adverts for analysis. In spite of the difficulties in obtaining the
sample, we are confident that it is adequate for our purposes.


The advertisements
Table 8. 7 gives the variables recorded for a content analysis of the adverts and is based,
in part, on discussions of advertising in Andren, Ericsson, Ohlsson and Tannsjo (1978),
Chapman and Egger (1983), Dyer (1982), Milium (1975), Williamson (1978) and
Winship (1981). As all the adverts were coded jointly no problems of inter-coder
reliability arise and any possible biases in determination are at least likely to be con-
sistent. Table 8.8 gives the results of this analysis.
   In assessing the results of the analyses presented in Table 8. 8 of the 405 advertise-
ments we considered (i) invariant features of the advertisements, i.e. those features
associated with alcohol in general and not differing significantly in relation to the type
of drink advertised or the country, (ii) features showing a systematic difference between
the British and Swedish advertisements but largely irrespective of the type of drink
being advertised, (iii) features displaying considerable variability both in relation to the
drink being advertised and the country, and (iv) the specific meanings attributed to beer
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                 217


both in Britain and Sweden using the results of Table 8.8 and individual analyses of a
number of specific advertisements.



Invariant features of alcohol advertising
One striking feature of Table 8.8 is how few invariant features there are connected with
drink in general. Those that do occur are primarily related to sex and age. Men are
always more frequently depicted than women, either as models or as 'cropped' depic-
tions, e.g., a male hand. Young or middle-aged men are preferred to old men. If women
are depicted they are invariably young and in the company of men. While males may be
depicted individually, or in groups, groups of female friends drinking never occur. If
women are depicted as role models they are more likely to have eye contact with the
viewer of the advertisement than male models. Drinking is never associated with
families, and hierarchical relationships between those drinking are also virtually absent
(one Swedish beer advertisement). So, the main features of the advertisements
displayed for drink in general may be summarized as:


Appropriate to alcohol in general      Largely or totally inappropriate
men                                    women
young/middle-aged men                  old men/women
single males/groups of males           families/groups of females
convivial relationships                hierarchical relationships




Features showing a systematic difference between Britain and Sweden
Those features displaying systematic variation between Britain and Sweden,
irrespective of drink type, are similarly limited and confined to packaging, the quantity
of drinks displayed and patterns of consumption. The drink packaging is always dis-
played more frequently in the Swedish advertisements and depictions of more than one
package and glasses filled with drink are more common. Advertisements showing
consumption in an ordinary home or with a meal only occur in Sweden. The British
advertisements tend to make more use of familiar, everyday props while those used in
Sweden are more frequently of a luxurious or expensive nature. While British advertise-
ments tend to make heavy use of slogans, jokes or paradoxical use of language, the
Swedish ones have a more 'serious' intent with much use of value-transference, flattery
and temptation as techniques of persuasion. These differences may be summarized as:


Britain                             Sweden
qualities of the drink              quantities of the drink
public drinking                     private drinking
drinking as isolated activity       drinking connected with food
drinking normalized                 drinking problematized
packaging less important            packaging more important
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                       218


Table 8. 7. The variables recorded for a content analysis of the British and Swedish alcohol
advertisements

Var.      The product itself
 l        alcohol content specified or referred to
 2        packaging (bottle or can) shown
 3        more than one package shown
 4        glass shown
 5        more than one glass shown
          People: appearance
 6        people or person present
 7        young man/men
 8        middle-aged man/men
 9        old man/men
I0        young woman/women
I!        middle-aged woman/women
12        old woman/women
13        working-class man/men
14        middle-class man/men
IS        upper-class man/men
16        working-class woman/women
17        middle-class woman/women
18        upper-class woman/women
19        beautiful man/men
20        beautiful woman/women
21        ordinary-looking man/men
22        ordinary-looking woman/women
23        formal clothing (including working clothes)
24        casual clothing
25        eye contact with female
26        eye contact with male
27        cropped picture offemale (i.e., only parts of body shown: head, hands, legs, etc.)
28        cropped picture of male
          People: groups
29        single male
30        single female
31        couple
32        family
33        group of friends: mixed sex
34        group offriends: male only
35        group of friends: female only
36        reciprocal relationship (persons depicted concentrating on each other)
37        semi-reciprocal (one person concentrating on another whose attention elsewhere)
38        divergent relationship (each person's attention directed towards something different)
39        people object-orientated towards the product advertised
40        people object-orientated towards something else (e.g., TV)
41        hierarchical relationship (including sexual domination)
          People: activities
42        handling the product
43        drinking the product
44        relaxing with drink
45        working
          The setting
46        home (ordinary)
47        party
48        meal
49        pub or restaurant
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                        219




Table 8.7 (cont.)

50         countryside
51         working place
52         setting opulent or idealized (usually a home)
53         setting fantastic (anything that could not happen in ordinary life, e.g., a room with all furnishings,
           etc. in the same colour with only the drink advertised being a different colour)
           Propsused 1
54         familiar, everyday
55         idealized, wishful or expensive
56         fantastic
           Techniques ofpersuasion
57         eye catcher (picture more than 50% of advert)
58         sexual connotations
59         emphasis on slogan
60         paradox or syntactic/semantic peculiarity
61         value transference (some quality, person or phenomenon is made to seem obtainable through
           using the product)
62         popularity (suggestion that the product is in great demand)
63         nature (suggestion that the product is natural and therefore it is self-evident that one should
           consume it)
64         flattery (if you're clever or possess good judgement or taste you will consume the product)
65         temptation (owner of the product can achieve some generally desirable state or status)
66         testimonial (some person states the product is good)
67         newness
68         gift (the product makes a good gift)
69         entertainment (the advert contains a joke or a pun)
70         narrative (the advert tells a story)
71         reference to history or tradition
72         reference to art or culture
73         product is cheap
74         product is expensive or exclusive
75         one is initiated into a secret

1 I.e., anything in advert not a person or the package of the product advertised.




Variability between drink type and country
Alcohol content is only specified or referred to in Swedish advertisements for spirits and
especially beer (33-63% of the ads). In both countries the packaging is more frequently
depicted for wine and spirits than for beer but when more than one package is illustrated
this is rarely in connection with spirits but for wine or beer. When glasses are shown
these tend to be in connection with beer rather than wine or spirits but the inclusion of
many glasses tends to be in connection with drinking wine or spirits rather than beer.
Young men and women in the British advertisements are most frequently depicted
drinking spirits or beer rather than wine. However, middle-aged men are least fre-
quently depicted in relationship with beer drinking. In Sweden young or middle-aged
men are most commonly shown in relation to beer or wine consumption, especially
beer, while middle-aged women (never depicted in the British ads) are most commonly
shown drinking wine. Working-class men in both countries are primarily associated
with beer drinking, never with wine consumption, and only in relation to spirits in
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               220


Table 8.8. Results of the content analysis of British and Swedish alcohol advertisements.
Figures in rounded percentages. Numbers ofadverts also given for British and Swedish 1983
beer adverts.

        Wine%                  Spirits%               Beer

Var.    British    Swedish     British    Swedish     British        Swedish     Swedish
                                                                     (1966-80)   (1983)
                                                      N.        %    %           N.        %

 1                                         4                         33          19        63
 2      36         96          54         91           7        28   75          21        70
 3      26         32           4         2l           3        12   20           7        23
 4      18         60          14         32          12        48   84          17        57
 5       8         28          24         28           3        12   24           3        10
 6      16         24          43         25           5        20   45           4        l3
 7       2         10          18          3           5        20   25           3        lO
 8      10         10          16          4           1         4   19
 9                                         3                          5
10                 10          10          3                     4   23
ll                 10                      1                          4
12                                                                    1
l3                              6                      3        12   15           3        lO
14       8         16          l3          3           2         8   16
15       2          6          21          7                          1
16                                                               4    4
17                 16           7          4                         ll
18                  4           7          1
19                  6          17                                     5
20                  6          10                                     9
21       2          8           8          4           2         8   40           2         7
22                  8                                  1         4   17
23       6         20          34          7           1         4   15                     3
24                  4           5          3           3        12   27                     3
25                              4          1                          7
26                              5          1                     4    9
27                  4          lO          3                          3           1         3
28       4          6          17         15                    4     4           3        10
29       4                     22         16           2        8    17                     3
30                                         1                          7
31                  8          12          1                          8                     3
32
33                 14                                                12
34       2                                             2        8     5                     3
35
36       4          6                                                 3
37                  6           2                                    12
38                  6           4                      1         4    7
39       2                     lO                      1         4    5
40                              5                      3        12    1                     3
41                                                                    I
42       2          6          lO         ll          3         12    1           2         7
43       4          8           2          3          3         12    1           2         7
44                 10           6          1                         19           I         3
45       2                      9                               4     7           1         3
46                  4                                                12           2         7
47                 10                                                 1
48                  4                                                33           3        lO
49                              2                     3         12   l3
so      16          2          17          3           I         4   9            3        10
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                 221




Table 8.8. (cont.)

          Wine%                      Spirits%                  Beer

Var.      British      Swedish       British     Swedish       British          Swedish        Swedish
                                                                                (1966-80)      (1983)
                                                               N.        %      %              N.      %

51                                    2                                   4      8              1       3
52         4           22             9           5                             16              4      13
53         4                          1           5
54        10            6            24           4            19        76    64               7      23
55         4           26            12          16             1         4    13
56         8            8             4           4             2         8
57        60          72            70           37            22        88    93              24      80
58                     4            10            1                             5
59        38          30            48            4            12        48    23               9      30
60         8           2            27            1             7        28     7               4      13
61         4          24             4           29             1         4    45               5      17
62         6           8            12           32             4        16    13               3      10
63        24           8            25            8                            17               3      10
64                     2                          5                             1
65         4          14                         24                            29               2       7
66         6                          5
67                                                4                             4                       3
68                      2            5            1
69         8                        12            4            10        40     8                       3
70         2          16            25           15             2         8     4
71         2           8            44           18             4        16     9
72         2                        14                          1         4
73        26           6             1                                          4               1       3
74        44          42            56           33             3        12    15              10      33
75        10                         3            4                             3

Variable numbers refer to Table 8.7. British wine and spirits data from The Guardian, The Observer and The
Observer colour magazine, Sept.-Dec. 1983. Swedish wine and spirits adverts from Det Biista 1966-79.
British beer adverts 1983-5 from billboards in Newcastle. Swedish beer adverts 1966-80 from Det Biista.
Swedish 1983 beer adverts from Dagens Nyheter, Expressen, H emmets Journal, Allt om Mat, Aret Runt, !CA
Kuriren, MdnadensJournal, Det Biista July-Dec. 1983.
British and Swedish wine N = SO, British spirits N = 100, Swedish spirits N = 75, British beer N = 25,
Swedish beer (1966-80) N = 75, Swedish beer (1983) N = 30.



Britain. Middle-class men may be depicted drinking wine, beer or spirits while the
upper classes are never associated with beer drinking. Attractive looking men or women
are primarily associated with spirits in Britain and wine in Sweden whereas ordinary
looking people, irrespective of sex, are generally associated with beer drinking. Simi-
larly, formal clothing is shown as most appropriate for spirits consumption in Britain,
wine in Sweden. Casual clothing (never shown on British wine advertisements) is most
frequently shown in relation to beer.
   As regards groups of drinkers single males in both countries are shown drinking
spirits or beer rather than wine. In Britain single females are never depicted in relation
to drink but occur in Sweden on beer advertisements. Couples, in the British advertise-
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                      222


ments, are only shown drinking spirits whereas in Sweden they are associated with beer
or wine consumption. Groups of friends of mixed sex are virtually never shown in the
British ads (one example for spirits) but occur in Sweden in relation to wine or beer
drinking. Groups of male friends in both countries are primarily shown beer drinking.
Reciprocal relationships tend to be associated with wine and divergent or object
orientated relationships (e.g., people admiring the drink) occur largely in relationship
to spirits or beer.
   The activities associated with drinking differ very considerably both in relation to
country and drink type. In Sweden only beer is associated with work whereas in Britain
beer, wine or spirits are shown in work situations, especially the latter. In Britain people
relaxing with a drink are only shown in relation to spirits whereas handling the drink or
drinking it is primarily associated with beer. In Sweden relaxing is most frequent for
beer, handling for spirits and drinking for wine. Consumption in an 'ordinary' home or
at a party is only shown in Sweden in relation to beer or wine. Drinking with a meal is
shown for Sweden in relation to all drink types, but especially beer. Food is not
associated with drinking in the British ads, the preferred locations being the countryside
for wine and spirits or opulent 'home' surroundings. Beer drinking in both countries is
shown in pubs but not for wine or spirits. Opulent settings (usually the home) are
primarily shown in relation to spirits consumption in Britain and for wine or beer in
Sweden. Ordinary props are most frequent for beer and expensive props for spirits and
wine in Sweden.
   Heavy use of visual imagery is common to all drink types in both countries. Most of
the ads are designed to catch the eye. Reference to the expensive or exclusive nature of
the product is the second most common technique employed for wine and spirits. For
British beer much emphasis is placed on the slogan, while value-transference is
employed for Swedish beer. Suggestions that the product is popular are most frequently
used for Swedish spirits and British beer advertising.
   The complex sets of images in the British and Swedish ads in relation to drink type
may be generalized as:


                British wine                              Swedish wine
Ageandsex       middle-aged men                           young or middle-aged men and women
Class           middle class                              middle-class men or women, upper-class
                                                          men
Appearance      ordinary, formal clothing                 ordinary or beautiful, formal clothing
Groups          single male or male friends               single male, couples, friends of mixed sex
Relationships   reciprocal                                reciprocal, semi-reciprocal or divergent
Activities      drinking                                  handling drink, relaxing, drinking
Associations    countryside                               party or opulent surroundings
                British spirits                           Swedish spirits
Ageandsex       young or middle-aged men, young women     young, middle-aged or old men, young
                                                          women
Class           working, middle or upper-class men,       middle-class men or women, upper class
                middle or upper-class women               men
Appearance      beautiful or ordinary men, beautiful      ordinary men, formal or casual clothing
                women, formal clothing
Groups          single male or couple                     single male
Relationships   orientated to product or something else   none
Activities      drinking, relaxing or handling drink      handling drink
Associations    countryside or opulent                    countryside or opulent
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                          223


                B;itish beer                            Swedish beer
Age and sex     young men                               young, middle-aged or old men, young
                                                        women
Class           working or middle-class men, working-   working or middle-class men and women
                classwomen
Appearance      ordinary, casual clothing               beautiful or ordinary, casual or formal
                                                        clothing
Groups          single male, groups of males            single male or female, couples, groups of
                                                        males or mixed sex
Relationships   orientated to something other than      divergent or orientated to product
                product
Activities      drinking or handling product            handling product, drinking, relaxing
Associations    pub                                     home, meal, pub, working place, country-
                                                        side or opulent setting



These, then, are elements of particular life-styles which advertisers tend to consistently
project or associate with specific types of drink in Britain and Sweden in addition to
those features we noted associated with alcohol in general and those distinctive to Britain
or to Sweden largely irrespective of drink type.

Meaning in beer advertising
A statistical analysis of advertising, as presented above, is an incomplete technique for
uncovering the specific meaning structures associated with drink. Here we employ
some specific analyses of individual advertisements, in combination with the results of
the previous analysis, to look a little more closely at the denotative and connotative
meanings associated with beer consumption.
   Both Swedish and British adverts refer to relationships and meanings commonly
associated with drink - masculinity and conviviality, as opposed to family life and
hierarchical relationships. Such conventional meanings and associations serve to
legitimate the product on offer as do the techniques frequently found in advertising
generally: associating the product with the countryside, with the 'natural', with
nostalgia and tradition, and claiming a product is popular.
   However, the differences between Swedish and British adverts are striking. Swedish
beer adverts, as opposed to the British, consistently indicate a concern for establishing
the consumption of their products as a normal practice associated with many types of
relationship. Swedish adverts also indicate a different pattern of consumption -
packaged private consumption: quantity in private surroundings as opposed to public
conviviality. They also avoid light-hearted punning.
   The British beer adverts establish links between their products and tradition,
consumption with friends in the pub, and with locality through reference to a whole
mythology of 'Geordieland' North East England in the particular cases we considered.
Lager adverts, in contrast, attempted to link the product with conceptions of 'style'.
Drinking is on the whole accepted as a normal activity; there is no need to establish it
as such. It is thus possible to have light-hearted, tongue-in-cheek adverts using slogans,
jokes, puns. British wine adverts make reference to a more restricted set of meanings
than Swedish wine and British spirits and beers: the consumption of wine is relatively
low in Britain (Fig. 8.18A) and is associated particularly with middle-class cultured
consumption.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                               224




Fig. 8.22 McEwan's Best Scotch                                                 Newcastle upon Tyne, Jan. 1984

Notes
An express return, first class too, from the south of England (with its poor beers) back home to the real stuff
- McEwan's Best Scotch in Newcastle (the train is crossing one of the Tyne bridges). However it's not an
Intercity 125 of the 1980s but the Flying Scotsman (depicted in traditional oil painting) from the good old
days of steam when Geordieland north-east England was more distinct than now. The beer is thus associated
with tradition and local community. The connection is further emphasized by McEwan's Best Scotch
appearing on an engine name plate- all the qualities of steam engines (traditional, wholesome) are transferred
to the beer. But to remind you that McEwan's Best Scotch is available now down at the local off-licence and
pub, the pump decoration of the 1980s pub, showing the marketing design, appears within the engine plate
together with a freshly poured pint.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                        225




Fig. 8.23 Pripp                                                                                 Det Bdsta, 1969
Translation of caption
A beer which awakes memories
This is Pripp. A beer which stirs memories.
What do you remember?
We ourselves remember tankards with hops engraved on the glass and oak barrels
in cool cellars and bottles that you have to open with a cork screw
and beer labels with long rows of gold medals.
We have achieved a lot over the years.
Now we're old and big and broad in the stomach
which suits a proper brewer.
Now we have stainless steel barrels, thick as the hull of a ship
And the bottles have crown corks
and the cans have ring-pulls.
Because just as in the old days there is a rush for good beer when you're thirsty.
We remember.
This is why we brew Pripp.

Notes
The beer is given significance through reference to tradition and nostalgia. The use of 'we' is deliberately
ambiguous and the reader is left uncertain as to who it refers to- the company Pripp or a fat brewer. The
brewer referred to is presumably the embodiment ofPripps brewery which in turn gives substance to the
brewer's body. Thus the modern mechanized brewing process is humanized in terms of an unspecified
person. While we are told certain details such as the substitution of metal for wooden beer barrels, the reality
of the modern brewing industry and the alienated labour involved in the production process, in short the
social relations of brewing in monopoly capitalism, are carefully left unmentioned. While we are told of
changes, it is the past which is depicted- wooden barrels and engraved tankard- but connected with the
present via the open modern bottle ofPripp. So although ostensibly about change, the advert in fact fuses past
and present through its imagery. By drinking Pripp today, you're drinking the past; indeed we are challenged
'what do you remember?'. In the advert history is empty, devoid of any content apart from changes in beer
containers. The insecurities of technological change are smoothed over. Even if we don't remember the old
beer bottles and tankards, Pripps do. This assures us that the beer produced, Pripp, is the same as produced
in the past. Through drinking Pripp we can get back to the past, the good old days. Shown a nostalgic past of
old beer barrels and tankards and challenged to remember it as our past which we reconstruct through
remembering to buy Pripp, the gap between past and present can be filled and reconciled by the product.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                                      226




Fig. 8.24 Pripps Eagle                   Dagens Nyheter, 13 Oct. 1983
Translation of caption
Pripps
Eagle
Not too bitter. Not too weak. Just right.
A full bodied flavour of malt and hops. And fresh.
Right price. It's Pripps Eagle.
Beer Class 11

Notes
A group of young men are watching TV. We are drawn into the picture as if we're there watching TV with
them, sharing the sociability of the occasion, for it is sociability of males which is being indicated in the advert:
informal clothing, watching a typically male sport- soccer. They're drinking at home from the can; informally
dressed, they're drinking informally from the can (soccer- a male consumer sport; Pripps Eagle- a male
consumer product). Eagle is presented as a beer to be consumed in leisure time (cf. Fig. 8.31, Lyckholms),
and it is implied that sociability can be achieved with this beer. Everyone is drinking in quantity. The advert
is concerned to stress the packaging; our attention is drawn to the can in the foreground, from can to can and
to the TV screen. The caption replicates the central area on the can. The room background is insignificant in
relation to the cans, the young men and the soccer on the screen, the Eagle life-style, just right.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                     227




Fig. 8.25 Carling Black Label        Newcastle upon Tyne,Jan.J984

Notes
This is part of an advertising campaign using the slogan 'I bet he drinks Carling Black Label' representing
the exceptional qualities of the Carling Black Label drinker. Mocking and humorous reference is made to
those adverts which claim their product will bring about a magical transformation of the consumer. The point
is not that Carling Black Label drinkers are superhuman (the humour is to entertain and so involve the viewer
in the set of meanings of the advert) just special, one of a clan, those who drink Carling Black Label and, as
implied in this advert, enjoy soccer. The link between Carling Black Label and soccer is emphasized by the
orange, white and black colour connections between football sock and boot and the Carling design in the
corner.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                                  228




Fig. 8.26 Harp Lager                  Newcastle upon Tyne, Jan. 1984

Notes
It is claimed that the pint of Harp Lager stays sharp-tasting to the end; this is conveyed by a simple reference
to musical notation, associating, in the process of decoding, the drink with a pre-existing set of meanings. It
is implied that sharpness is a desirable quality in drink: not warm and soft, but cold and sharp (Lager is served
chilled, as opposed to traditional cask-conditioned ale served at cellar temperature). But this advert is part of
a campaign mainly shown on TV using the slogan ' ... stays sharp to the bottom of the glass' in which the
Harp drinker shows he is sharp. So Harp signifies sharpness. The Harp drinker is quick-wined, cool-headed
in sticky situations. Drinking Harp becomes part of being smart and clever.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                      229




Fig. 8.27 Three Towns                                                                    Det Basta, Nov. 1968
Translation of caption
Three towns is beautiful.
A little milder. Rounder.

Notes
The words are almost superfluous to this advert and, indeed, they are assigned to an unimportant position.
The 'beauty' of Three Towns has its symbolic referents in the beauty of nature and the beauty of the people
(and their beautiful relationship?). The 'mildness' and 'roundness' of this beer finds its correlation in the
natural. Real consumption is not actually shown, as in the other Swedish adverts, but is imminent. Our
anticipation is shared with the girl who will surely turn her head from her lover and consume the beer. Time
is momentarily arrested; she has raised her glass; we anticipate the next act and are thus drawn into the world
of the ad vert.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                              230




Fig. 8.28 Federation Best Scotch                                             Newcastle upon Tyne, Jan. 1984

Notes
Here are the lads down at the local club (the Federation Brewery produces beers for Working Men's Clubs)
having a good singalong, perhaps joining in with the night's entertainer (Clubs provide stage entertainment).
These are just ordinary blokes (a mirror image of what we would want to be?), the sort of people who enjoy a
good time with a pint of Federation Best Scotch. It's what clubs are all about- getting together with your
mates and drinking Federation Best Scotch (and are they in fact nottoasting Best Scotch?- all the glasses are
full and they're singing a song in praise of the beer). It's clearly a Geordie club- the pint is 'bonny' and
'canny'. It's also the lads who are drinking Best Scotch (wives wouldn't, it's a man's drink); the only woman
is the barmaid in the centre, friendly and warmly glowing in the bright lights of the bar, mirroring the warm
welcome glow of the pint in the corner. The advert associates the beer with the warm social atmosphere of the
men in the local North East of England club. A Best Scotch design reminds you what to look for at the club
and in the off-licence.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                        231




Fig. 8.29 Dart                                    Det Biista, Feb. 1984
Translation of caption
You're not really afraid of the dark?
Dark beer has more taste.
Dart has a rich colour which
means a rich taste.
Rounded and a full-bodied feeling.
Better for a good lunch.
More exciting as a social drink.
Dark beer is more exciting.

Notes
No one is afraid of the dark, it's irrational, so why be afraid of dark beer? The bowler hat is dark, but an
everyday object, hardly frightening. And against the dark background the beer appears light, reaffirming that
the colour of Dart should not be a cause of concern (dark beers are unusual in Sweden; most are light-coloured
'lager' type). Dart is rich, and British: the bowler hat signifies Britishness as does the name (darts is a game
associated with British pubs). Indeed on old Dart beer labels from the 1960s a dart board was portrayed. On
the contemporary (1983) packaging this is replaced by a British flag as in this advert. The text tells us that it
is exciting to drink Dart, that it makes a good social drink. The sociability of British pubs is transferred to
Dart, dark like British beers. Masculinity is also indicated; a woman's hat would be out of place. The advert
makes play on the difference between British and Swedish drinking; by drinking Dart you can achieve the
British freedom from alcohol restrictions.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                             232




Fig. 8.30 Newcastle Exhibition                                              Newcastle upon Tyne,]an. 1984

Notes
This is one of a series of adverts which depend on puns on 'exhibition' (extrovert, exile, expert, etc.). In
decoding the simple pun on 'sex' and 'ex' (the popular name for Newcastle Exhibition), helped if necessary
by the picture of the drink, we are drawn into the system of meanings created by the advert. Exhibition, the
beer, is associated with and becomes itself a part of everyday vocabulary and reality. The beer is thus given
meaning (a function of adverts generally). There is also an implication that sex and Exhibition are actually
interchangeable- 'I went out for a pint of Ex instead- it's more satisfying'. Such valuation of drinking
accords with the popular mythology of the dedicated Northern drinker, and indeed the product is Newcastle
Exhibition, a local brew.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                          233




Fig. 8.31 Lyckholms                                                                         Det Biista, Apri/1970
Translation of caption
If you have a job in which it is necessary to be sharp,
Lyckholms makes a fine accompaniment to lunch.
It contains only a little alcohol.
But tastes as beer should taste.

Notes
The advert stresses the connection between alcohol and food and a concern with the strength of beer: this beer
contains so little alcohol it is possible to work in forestry, with all its attendant dangers, after drinking it.
However this does not mean the taste is sacrificed, nor does the drinker forfeit his masculinity- these men
are forestry workers, lumberjacks. You can drink and impose bodily discipline at the same time; this product
enables you to mitigate the contradiction. However, as Lyckholms is perfect for lunch on the job, it is implied
that when not on the job another (stronger?) beer would be more suitable. The greenness of the forest and the
workers' clothes blend into each other, as does the Lyckholms bottle, all making a harmonious whole. This
beer is definitely not out of place or unusual in this situation. Just as the workers are in the natural forest, so
it's natural to drink Lyckholms. Naturally in this situation (dangerous work) you'd be sensible to drink
Lyckholms. The people are selected to look ordinary and masculine. The use-value of the beer is stressed but
also the exchange-value: in such a situation Lyckholms can be substituted for a stronger beer without
sacrificing taste or identity as a male. The advert thus addresses and 'solves' two problems: how to be
masculine and drink weak beer, and how to drink and work, especially in a dangerous industry. There is a
strong contrast with the British adverts; this problem would not occur in a British advert.
Fig. 8.32 Porter                                  Det Bd.sta, May 1968
Translation of caption
Porter and Egg yolk!
In the past you used to buy porter only from the chemist. On doctor's prescription. Now the bitter medicine
can be bought everywhere. But it is a bitterness you get used to. The first glass doesn't taste at all good. Nor
do the first drops of wormwood. There are people who show off by ordering porter. It is said that it requires
a more advanced taste. Just like snails and oysters. Crap. Porter is good. Easily digested. Nutritious. You get
used to the taste. Ugh! Sorry.
Recipe: Pour out a glass of porter. Pour in an egg yolk. Stir. Drink!

Notes
This black and white advert occurs in a publication in which all the adverts are in colour and so creates an
immediate impact. The darkness of the advert matches the darkness of the porter. The black and white
photography also signifies the past and it is the past and the traditional element which porter is made to
signify. The reference to a time when porter could only be bought from the chemist refers to the history of
alcohol control in Sweden when strong Class III beer could only be bought in this way. The medicinal and
health angle is stressed: porter as medicine and medicine as bitter like porter. The nutritious qualities of
porter are correlated with the richness and nutrition of an egg yolk. The text is in staccato style. The qualities
of the porter are affirmed then denied: porter requires an 'advanced taste'. This is then ridiculed but
reaffirmed at the end of the text when presumably a novice who has not cultivated the taste for porter is
repelled by the drink. In this manner the status of porter as a drink for the connoisseur is reaffirmed. Unlike
other beers, porter is not to be simply drunk but 'digested', thus asserting the nutritious qualities, that porter
is more akin to food than to drink. Drinks don't usually require a recipe (unless a sophisticated cocktail) but
porter does and one is provided at the end of the text. Porter is a snobbish drink, not for the ordinary person,
but for those who would appreciate snails and oysters. The repelling qualities of snails and oysters, requiring
an advanced taste, are correlated with the taste of porter. It is to be drunk in small quantities and savoured-
note the size of the glass and there is only one foregrounded bottle. Porter is a drink you could order without
embarrassment in an expensive restaurant: a drink for the cultivated. Clearly porter doesn't even require
company; it is company in itself, hence the single male, an individual, apart from the crowd. He clearly knows
what he is doing when drinking porter. The photo is in black and white, but porter is not a simple drink, a
case of black or white; it can both repel and be cultivated, a unity of opposites.

234
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                                     235




Fig. 8.33 Vaux Double Maxim                                                            Sunderland,]an. 1984

Notes
The roast lamb of the Sunday dinner has been transformed into Double Maxim. The beer thus comes to
represent all that Sunday dinner and the roasted joint of meat represents- homely English tradition, no fancy
continental trimmings (the bottle label is consciously anachronistic (personal communication, M. Berriman,
Marketing Manager, Vaux Breweries)). Lean meat, the stuff of life, wholesome, full of goodness, flavour-
some, bringing strength: all these qualities are transferred to the beer.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                           236



TOWARDS AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE DESIGN OF BEER CANS

We noted a major contradiction between principles structuring drinking in the capitalist
state, a contradiction between drinking as promoted consumer activity or as an act of
self-definement connecting with life-styles, and drinking as being contrary to the
requirements of bodily discipline in the production process and consumers' control over
and conceptions of their bodies. In an advanced capitalist society such a contradiction
is increasingly antagonistic, and more so in Sweden than in Britain, given the greater
degree and nature of state intervention in defining alcohol as a dangerous substance with
its contemporary concomitant in the increasing medicalization of drinking practices.
The development of monopoly capitalism has involved an increasingly interventionist
state imposing control through the norm, and measuring and defining deviation from
that norm, rather than imposing direct disciplinary control as in the past.
   As an institutional complex, the state guards the general interest of all classes with
respect to capitalist exchange relations. In this manner the economic is politicized to an
increased degree. However, 'although the circuit of state monopoly capital requires
specific forms of political intervention, the institutional separation of the state casts
doubt on its functionality' (Jessop 1982, p. 237). Through the politicization of the
economic, the state mediates the consumerist compensation for asymmetry of control
within the productive process and the ability of the productive process to maintain
capital accumulation and deliver the goods. The state must reconcile the maintenance of
expanded production and capital accumulation with the demands of the electorate and
pressure groups. The separation of the state has entailed that the effects of its inter-
vention have, as often as not, had the reverse effect to that intended, hence despite the
massive degree of state intervention to control drinking throughout the twentieth cen-
tury consumption has risen rather than declined.
   The differences between British and Swedish can design may be understood as dif-
ferent ideological 'resolutions' of the consumption/discipline contradiction. In Britain
due to the social position and development of public drinking as a mediation between
work and leisure, the public house being a 'colonized' institution, the continued social
importance of the public house as a focus of sociability which is nevertheless being
supplemented by private consumption, and the pub as a focus of the symbolic
expression of the 'ideals' of consumerism, discipline becomes subordinate to consump-
tion with regard to the material forms of drinking. In Sweden consumption is subordi-
nate to the requirements of discipline. Forced into the home, and largely hidden,
private consumption for the purposes of intoxication opposes massive concern, state
and independent, with the attendant restrictions and the proliferation of discourses con-
cerned with alcohol consumption.
   The presentation of alcohol in both countries is mediated by a particular logic of
signification. In one respect the elaboration of can design is connected with the need of
companies to create difference and, therefore, meaning for a consumer market. If this
were not so we might expect the cans to be completely plain and state little more than
'beer' and the name of the company producing it. As a Swedish can designer puts it
'people drink with their eyes' (Ericson 1980). Beer may be good to drink but, in the
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                    237


market of images created, it is also good to think. The maintenance of differences allows
possibilities for self-definement and this should not be considered in a purely negative
light. Consumerism is not simply to be considered as a total and hermetic culture of
mass ideological repression. We have concentrated in this chapter on the products of the
brewing industry and images in advertising and the media and not so much on the recep-
tion and cultural use of beer. Clearly the disjunction between private consumption
habits and temperance discourses in Sweden draws attention to the thoroughly
mediated form of the consumption of commodities not simply reducible to a consumer
ethic (Douglas and Isherwood 1978; Kellner 1983). Some, especially members of the
Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies have stressed the autonomous use of material
culture in sub-cultural style and artifacts as contributing to non-ideological discourses
and practices (e.g., Hall and Jefferson (eds.) 1976; Clarke 1976; Willis 1971; Hebidge
1979). In Sweden, the introduction of beer cans opened out a new way to drink appeal-
ing to the counter culture of youth groups in which the beer can could literally be ripped
open with the forefinger, the contents drunk, and the can subsequently crushed and dis-
carded - a style of drinking which took place on the streets and was heavily loaded with
a deliberate flaunting of governmental restrictions and control of alcohol.
   In Britain can designs create difference and establish meaning for particular beers and
lagers; they are a part of a process of creation of exchange-values. Beer cans draw on and
reproduce a set of meanings associated with beer: they emphasize tradition, place of
origin (most beers until recently were local brews), and inherent differences- types of
beer. Breweries are fully conscious of these possibilities for creating difference (personal
communication, M. Berriman, Marketing Manager, Vaux Breweries): the efforts of the
breweries in the early seventies to create 'national' new brews have been superseded by
an awareness that beer with a local connection (real or invented) sells better (cf. Sharman
1983); old brewery names have been revived, local origin stressed, 'traditional', 'real'
ales made more available.
   The creation of exchange-values is particularly marked in relation to the distinction
between beer and lager. Whether you're a lager drinker or a beer drinker clearly extends
beyond the product itself and is associated with social categories. Lager cans, part of a
marketing operation initiated by breweries to capture a new section of the market -
young, seeking a distinctive social image - are designed to appeal to a classless con-
sumer. There is considerably less use of traditional representational designs associated
with beer- depictions of raw ingredients, oast houses, drays, etc. A different colour set
is employed, abstract designs are more frequent than for beer and representational
designs less common. There is less emphasis on the character of the beer or its place of
origin, and more emphasis on strength and predominant use of foreign names. Thus a
different, more abstract and less traditional image is stressed, a different style of drink-
ing. The logic of competition with beer leads to the marketing oflager as a distinctive
product fulfilling a different role and opening out further possibilities for defining social
relationships.
   Swedish cans make a similar reference to a symbol set which signifies masculinity and
tradition and in addition quality and naturalness, and connection with foreign beers
(with already-defined and accepted meanings), in creating significance for the marketed
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                            238


product. But this functional 'need' of brewing companies to manufacture difference and
distinction, whatever their subsequent cultural use or transformation, cannot of itself
provide a satisfactory account of the differences in the degree and type of elaboration of
the British and Swedish can designs. The greater complexity of the Swedish cans is,
however, in part explicable in terms of mechanisms of ideological control and legit-
imation emanating from the economic logic of capitalism when contradicted and
mediated by structures of consumerism, health and bodily discipline.
   Alcoholic drinks may be held to constitute an internally related symbolic field. As
Bourdieu points out, the consumption of goods 'always presupposes a labour of
appropriation, to different degrees depending on the goods and the consumers; or, more
precisely, that the consumer helps to produce the product he consumes, by a labour of
identification and decoding which ... requires time and dispositions acquired over
time' (Bourdieu 1984, p. 100). The symbolic field of alcoholic drinks may be rep-
resented as in Fig. 8.34, in which the three major forms of alcohol- beer, wine and
spirits - are related to and yet at the same time opposed to each other. This is clearly
apparent in the similarities and differences revealed by the statistical analysis of the
adverts. At a secondary level, drinks are sub-divided according to quasi-objective
features of taste and appearance and finally according to brands sold on the consumer
market, at each point the distinctions proliferating. The choice of such and such a drink
for one occasion or another is dependent on cultural conceptions of its social usage. In
terms of general cultural connotations the relationship between classes of drinks, based
on the newspaper and advertisement surveys in Britain and Sweden, may be presented
as:
Britain:                                  beer                          wine
                                                 ~spirits/
           distinctive differences in terms of cultural connotation and strength
Sweden:                            spirits ~ beer ~ wme
                                   (briinnvin)
           increasing cultural connotation of refinement and style.




2



3

Fig. 8.34 Simplified representation of the structural relationship between various alcoholic drinks.
The design of contemporary beer cans                                                    239


   In Sweden, beer does not fit readily into established cultural connotations of alcohol.
The history of alcohol control in Sweden has, by and large, been a history of attempts
to reduce the consumption of spirits of briinnvin, in terms of volume of pure alcohol the
dominant drink (Fig. 8.18B). Spirits have always been associated in Sweden with
drunkenness, crime, alcoholics, persons of low morality or, more recently, as consti-
tuting medical/psychiatric deviants. Wine, on the other hand, has been regarded as the
drink of culture, of refined taste. Spirits and wine thus mark opposite extremes of a
polarized scale: spirits relate to wine as the vulgar to the refined. Beer, however, does
not fit readily in terms of such a categorization. On the one hand, it is the principal table
drink in Sweden (at least for lunch, for dinner in less 'refined' social circles) and there-
fore culturally acceptable. On the other hand, beer has also been traditionally associated
with drunkenness and a lack of bodily discipline in much the same way as briinnvin
(teenagers getting drunk on mellanol, a fourth beer class sold between 1965 and 1977,
was a principal cause of its removal). Brewers have always been able to claim that their
products stimulate sobriety because of their low alcohol content yet, at the same time
during the period of alcohol rationing it was strong beer (despite its strength still weak
in alcohol content in relation to wine or spirits) and not drinks higher in alcohol content
-wine and spirits- that was removed from the market. This is especially surprising in
view of the particularly high level of spirits consumption (Fig. 8 .18B).
   Beer has an ambiguous status, a lack of fit into the established scheme of things. As
such, it automatically becomes more dangerous, a substance requiring a finer degree of
control. Because of this lack of fit it has become hedged around with boundaries and
classes. These classes, unique to beer (there are no classes for wine or spirits), and by
no means natural, enable consumers to measure and regulate alcoholic intake and to
maintain self-surveillance over their bodies (see the Lyckholms advertisement, Fig.
8.31). Beer, then, is the type of alcoholic drink most subject to a contradictory nexus of
meanings in Swedish society, symbolized through the development of a class system. By
contrast in Britain beer much more clearly fits into an established scheme as a working-
class drink in a symbolic field in which alcohol is not constituted as dangerous. The
comparative lack of distinction between the Swedish beer classes, as compared with the
beer/lager distinction, is explicable because beer classes, unlike beer brands or beer
types, do not open out the same possibilities for the manipulation and construction of
meanings. The meanings cross-cut the classes in terms of product brands. The differen-
tiation that does exist between the classes can be related to social meanings connected
with alcohol strength. Physiologically, it is very difficult to get drunk on Class I
or 11 beer unless it is consumed very rapidly on an empty stomach and in vast quantities.
As beer must be, and is presented by the breweries as alcohol rather than water, this has
the concomitant that the strong beer cans usually have simpler designs because since
this beer is only sold in the alcohol monopoly shops its qualities as beer rather than water
lend it a self-legitimating force. The Class I cans with their emphasis on male imagery
clearly reduce the potential threat to masculine prowess that drinking very weak beer
might produce. The most complex designs occur on the medium strength Class 11 beer
which because of its greater availability in supermarkets and increased strength when
compared to Class I beer, has the largest market share. The proliferation of the designs
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                            240


on these cans creates a dense web of meanings and images drawing attention away from
its strength and towards its exchange-value as alcohol, as a product to be consumed in
leisure time.
   Most of the differences noted in the discussion of British and Swedish beer can design
can be considered in terms of a difference of complexity and elaboration. The Swedish
can designs are far more elaborately designed in terms of colours, wording, styles, or
orientation of lettering, numbers of representational or abstract designs. We suggest
that this is because there is a greater need to mediate the consumption/discipline contra-
diction through the design in Sweden than in Britain especially given the ambiguous
status of beer in Sweden in relation to other alcoholic drinks. However, the form of the
mediation of the contradiction is effected in a similar way in both countries, but given
the ambiguous nexus of meanings surrounding beer is more developed in Sweden. The
creation of life-styles in relation to brand distinctions mediates the contradiction by
obscuring it, by encouraging the focus of attention towards the product's exchange
rather than use-value.
   As part of everyday culture beer cans form systems of communication, expression and
representation, creating a symbolic order of meaning. The power of the symbolism on
the cans in the structuring of social attitudes towards alcohol in general and beer in par-
ticular is its seeming naturalness. As we have seen the representational designs are
restricted in content and legitimate the product in terms of purity and naturalness,
masculinity, as alcohol, and via the medium of the past or tradition. Beer cans with
space age or high-tech designs simply do not exist. The very repetitiveness of the use of
the same types of designs, endlessly connected and re-connected in various combi-
nations, lends them a false obviousness or a naturalizing quality which they would not
otherwise possess. The symbolism on the cans creates an imaginary set of relationships
to the present and the consumption of the product in the present - by invoking a
mythical past. The symbols used have little to do with present-day sociopolitical reality
or the manner in which beer is actually produced or distributed. The designs on the
cans, iflooked at in a detached manner, are patently ridiculous: what real connection is
there between lions or eagles, coats of arms or sailing ships and beer? Precisely, none.
What is surprising is that these designs appear natural to all of us. The obviousness of
the designs is an obviousness effected through the power of ideology. The more alcohol
is considered dangerous, as in Sweden, the greater the number of codes employed to
mediate the contradictions involved in consumption and effect an artificial view of
reality- a reality in which the freedom of the consumer is to symbolically define him or
herself and participate in the reproduction of capital.
    PART IV


Conclusions
Page Intentionally Left Blank
9

Archaeological theory and practice today




At the present archaeology is pervaded by two conflicting attitudes: a radical scepticism
opposes a crude scientism seeking objectivity and reducing the archaeological record to
the effect of mechanical adaptive process. The sceptical and empirically minded 'dirt'
archaeologist digs and 'rescues' the past, describes and lodges the finds in a museum or
archive. These sceptics, at heart, believe that all statements about the past (with possible
exceptions when dealing in the realms of economy and technology) are little more than
subjective whim enlivened by empathy. Those advocating scientism believe it possible
to read off the past from its traces in the present without too much trouble providing a
suitable technical apparatus can be developed. We replace scepticism with an optimism
based on an intervention which denies the polarization of objectivity and subjectivity.
For the subjective idealism of scientistic archaeology we substitute a view of the disci-
pline as an hermeneutically informed dialectical science of past and present unremit-
tingly embracing and attempting to understand the polyvalent qualities of the socially
constructed world of the past and the world in which we live. We sustain throughout a
rejection of the past as presented in archaeological texts as objective, or alternatively, as
subjective. There is no question of choosing one or the other. Archaeological theory and
practice as labour in the present completely transcend this artificial division, labour
which draws past and present into a fresh perspective, a perspective which serves to
rearticulate their interrelationship. The study presented in Chapter 7 does not pretend
to be an account of what the past was really like, nor does Chapter 8 claim to be a pure
and unsullied account of present social processes. Neither are the analytical narratives
or 'stories' presented a pure figment of our imagination. They tie together past and
present through a political interpretation of the materials, an interpretation which ulti-
mately aims to write our lived present into a past. Archaeology is a particular and active
relation between past and present.
   In expressing a strong dissatisfaction with the project of modelling archaeology on the
natural sciences, we have no intention of erecting the old division between the natural
and social sciences. By stressing the need to move beyond the opposed terms subjec-
tivity and objectivity, to hermeneutic interpretative processes, dialectics, praxis, and
archaeology as critique, we are not proposing that archaeology as a social science pro-
vides a weak and in some way inferior kind of knowledge. Our rejection of empiricism
is not simply a rejection in terms of its suitability or otherwise for archaeology. It also
involves a rejection of assertions that natural science relies on empiricist procedures and
knowledge claims. Recent post-empiricist philosophy of science is engaged in putting
forth, in a large number of different expositions, some version or other of realism (e.g.,

                                                                                         243
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             244


Hesse 1974; Bhaskar 1978) which has led to a curious convergence with what might be
termed analytical Marxist philosophy (Ruben 1977; Collier 1978; Callinicos 1983) and
we adopted some essential realist tenets in Chapter 5. However, realism in an unrevised
form(s) provides no panacea and there are a number of central flaws in the approach,
such as the embodiment in one form or another of a correspondence theory oftruth, i.e.,
the notion that propositions are either true or false by virtue of the state of the world
rather than of human knowledge, with the concomitant that thought is, in some sense,
a reflection or mirror of the world rather than at least in part constitutive of what that
world is. In this book we have stressed a subject-object dialectic which questions both
these realist assumptions and reveals truth and knowledge as essentially mediatory.
Meaning is considered to be neither given to the world to be passively revealed by the
operations of science nor as solely constituted by a 'knowing' subject. Knowledge
instead is acquired through practice, through a subject-object dialectic, in which
primacy is granted to neither. The essential question is not whether science is applicable
to the study of human individuals and societies but what sort of science this should be.
In so far as archaeology is concerned to study past social systems as the product of
sentient social beings it becomes irrevocably a social science and should contribute
towards social science as a whole.
   This raises the question: what difference is there between sociology or geography or
history or psychology and archaeology? Archaeology is archaeology is archaeology as
Clarke (1968, p. 13) asserted only if archaeologists are to do no more than measure or
describe artifacts while making no reference whatsoever to their meaning and signifi-
cance, worth and value. Archaeologists have never been content to restrict their
activities to this level and Clarke certainly was not. Attempting to reduce archaeology to
the science of the artifact would entail silence. The attributes ascribed to artifacts are a
product of social relations existing both in the past and the present, amongst dead social
actors and the living archaeological community. They are always produced and the
natural sciences can provide no exact guidelines on the basis of which the ascriptions of
meanings might be made. Chemical reactions may be granted significance but they can
never have any meaning in the sense that there is any purpose to them. It is above all the
notion of purpose or intentional agency that distinguishes human beings and requires a
framework which is not isomorphic with those of the natural sciences, although many
features may well be shared. To underline the fact that human agency is intentional
agency does not mean, of course, that explanation should be left at that level, as was dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. In terms of principles and procedures, we would argue that there
is no difference between archaeology and sociology and geography or any other social
science. In claiming this we are, of course, arguing that the fundamental characteristics
of forms of knowledge are not based upon the empirical materials with which they may
deal but instead on the problems that are posed and tackled and the kinds of concepts
employed. The essential concern of all the social sciences is the manner in which people
construct and deconstruct their own social worlds in various ways. Understanding the
nature of this process crucially requires conceptualizations of the nature of social action,
of the unintended and intended consequences of this action, of structure, power,
ideology, symbolism and the creation and recreation of meaningful frameworks in
Archaeological theory and practice today                                                245


which to live and work. Seen in this light archaeology can have no unique problems,
 concepts, or disciplinary structure, and in human geography a similar realization has
 developed with the widespread abandonment of the notion that geography might
 constitute an independent disciplinary structure, a 'science of space'.
   There are no essentially archaeological ramifications of geographical, psychological
or sociological conceptual structures. These should be commonly shared by all the
 social sciences and worked through in various ways in relation to different bodies of evi-
 dence. In archaeology this will involve a view of material culture-patterning as a resource
employed in social strategies. The corollary is that the work of Freud or Foucault,
Douglas or Derrida, Barthes or Bourdieu, Weber or Wittgenstein, or any other 'non-
archaeological' writer, should be of essential concern to all archaeologists in all their
practical work and not considered as totally or partially irrelevant distractions from the
business of the discipline.
   A mathematical archaeology which would explain material culture as an aspect of a
logical relation, which would attempt to explain the complex data we investigate using
statistical tests and procedures externally applied to the data is incompatible with
archaeology being an active mediation of past and present. However, as we indicate in
Chapters 7 and 8, statistical procedures, especially those which are computer-based, are
a valuable heuristic device, manipulating large bodies of data, summarizing variability,
redescribing, but in no way explaining anything or providing the basis for contentions.
   We criticized many varieties of archaeology as ideology, as a passive function of the
present, producing pasts relevant to and/or in support of particular interest groups. We
are not passing judgement by claiming that we have established a viewpoint which is
objective and value-free (no archaeology can be value-free and stand outside history).
Nor are we claiming ours to be a framework simply based on another set of values. The
criticisms made of cultural resource management were not directed at whether or not it
is important to safeguard the past. They were criticisms levelled at the practice of
archaeology (as were those of museum displays in Chapter 4) in the present.
   In the arguments we presented for archaeology as an active mediation of past and
present, we suggested that the discipline should rest on understanding, critique and
commitment. Understanding: archaeology should consider the manner in which
material culture forms a component of the social construction of reality, and the social
reality it studies and within which it is located. Critique: archaeology should subject
itself and that which it seeks to understand to criticism, self-reflection into the contem-
porary meanings and significance of the archaeological project. This negative moment
implies a denial of finality, a denial of there being a final orthodoxy to grope towards,
an unalterable past. Archaeology is primarily a critical contemporary discussion on the
past (or the present) which has no logical end. Archaeology is historical and history has
no end. A unitary and monolithic past is an illusion. What is required is a radical
pluralism, a pluralism which recognizes that there are multiple pasts produced actively
in accordance with ethnic, cultural, social and political views, orientations and beliefs.
Asserting a crude scientism in the discipline merely fragments concerns and will never
be productive.
   We do not mean to suggest that all pasts are equal. Clearly, some pasts are inferior to
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             246


others, especially those which are a non-reflective mirror of the present. A feminist
archaeology, to mention one area, is likely to be substantially different in orientation
from current archaeological practice. It remains the case that archaeology has been and
is written substantially by men. Homo Artifex (Chapter 4) is not Femina Artifex; such
concepts are male and do refer to a mankind. To obscure this may be to perform an
ideological service for mankind. Archaeology, significantly, although eminently well
placed to do so, has not paid much attention to the origins, nature and development of
sexual repression and exploitation.
   We can also mention in this context the conflicts of interests between American
Indian groups and archaeologists. This conflict of concerns has its roots not only in the
issue of whether or not archaeologists have the right to uncover Indian remains but also
in the images created of the constructors of those remains (Trigger 1980). The white
American having dispossessed the indigenous inhabitants of their land and possessions
and virtually destroyed their culture now requires that the Indians respect his or her
'right' to reconstruct their past and if this involves the violation of sacred remains the
type of empiricist science subscribed to ensures that this action is eminently justifiable
(cf. Cheek and Keell984). Archaeological discourse may or may not have truth value.
It certainly can have power effects operating to reproduce the relationship between the
dominant and the dominated in contemporary society. It is this which must be opened
to critique.
   A radical pluralism involves discussion and critique according to an assessment of
commitment. Subjecting particular archaeologies to ideology critique is in part to assess
their commitment to the present, to assess the present and future worlds contained
within any archaeological project. To repeat, propositional truth hinges on the inten-
tion of a true society.
   We cannot stand outside history and arrest the past and present. What is important
is that archaeology recognizes its temporality and fragility, recognizes itself as a contem-
porary practice in which men and women engage in discussions and debates and estab-
lish positions which need to be criticized and transcended.
                                                                            September 1985
APPENDIX: ARCHAEOLOGY INTO THE 1990s




 Critique and the new archaeology
 Our work together in Re-Constructing Archaeology (RCA) and Social Theory and Archae-
 ology (STA) began because of a feeling of unease and dissatisfaction with archaeological
 theory and practice as it had developed during the 1960s and 1970s. The development
 of theory and new orientations in archaeology during this period was stimulating and
arousing, yet after an initial period of intense debate, archaeology appeared to be
slumbering once more, even regressing, with the advocacy of so-called 'middle range
theory', back to the kinds of asocial explanatory frameworks and disciplinary nihilism it
had so desperately tried to escape (RCA: Chapter 2). We perceived much of the
new archaeology as an uncritical proliferation of eclectic borrowings from other social
sciences, sometimes based on a rather narrow and superficial reading of secondary
literature. Despite these borrowings the aim was paradoxically to reinstate the disciplinary
independence and autonomy of archaeology. Meanwhile the traditional archaeology of
sceptical empiricism remained firm in institutional structures, adopting only cosmetic
changes such as problem orientation. New archaeology reinforced the deep-rooted
empiricism of traditional archaeology, while in a contradictory way its emphasis on
theory was a radical challenge. All too often, however, theory became identified with the
provision of new methodologies (STA: Chapter 1).
   We took as our first object the articulation of criticisms of basic orientations and
philosophical positions present but not explored in new and processual archaeologies.
These were naturalism and scientism, phenomenalism and empiricism (RCA: Chapters
2 and 5). We criticized naturalism as reducing the social world to a second nature,
assimilating social practices to simple material behaviours. This reduction involved an
unacceptable rejection of meaning and agency in social analysis. It is also associated with
the accreditation of 'scientific' method and explanation: scientism. While questioning
the definition of scientific method as based on procedures of quantification, testing, and
falsification of hypotheses, we were concerned to raise the issue of value freedom and to
show the notion of an impartial, value-free observer and scientist to be a dangerous myth
(RCA: Chapter 3; STA: Chapter 7). We strongly attacked phenomenalism- the doctrine
that certainly lies in the physical senses - and the associated emphasis on unmediated
experience of material fact as the guarantor of truth. Instead, we stressed the creation
of facts and the necessary interplay of theory with the practice of archaeological analysis.
   In both books we used various philosophical positions and theoretical frameworks to
counter the technicist emphases arising in the new archaeology in particular, in order to
develop a critique of empiricist method. Rather than emphasizing theory as a con-

                                                                                       247
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             248


templative refinement of method we intended to rearticulate it as something active and
critical, a practice that was not merely incidental or in a 'superstructural' relationship to
the real business of archaeology. Part of this process was to break down a divide erected
in the new archaeology between theory and practice: the presentation of a theoretical
position followed by a series of 'applications' aimed either at demonstrating the validity
of the position adopted or at 'testing' its worth and its relevance. We attempted to
emphasize theory as a practice, as a process indelibly linking the archaeologist and that
which he or she constructs and re-constructs. Such a position puts an end to theory
viewed as something essentially divorced from and standing beyond the practice of
actually doing archaeology. What we were working towards was a theory of and in
practice, the notion that all archaeology is theoretical practice.
   On the one hand we concerned ourselves with epistemology - how we might gain
knowledge of the past- and this resulted in the critique, via hermeneutics and dialectical
thought, of grounding philosophies such as positivism (RCA: Chapter 5). Here a decisive
point of departure was a move away from the mechanistic procedures of so-called
scientific or objective analysis to a discussion of the interplay or dialectic between the
subject and object of an interpretative practice. Our consideration of epistemology led
us away from it to consider the grounding of interpetative practice in subjectivity and
the manner in which subjects of different kinds are created within a determinate social
field of interpretative practices (STA: Chapter 3). An emphasis on hermeneutics or the
process of interpretation leads us to understand that the entire world is always already
a vast field of interpretative networks. We cannot escape interpretation via some appli-
cation of method, but what we can do is to make choices and insert ourselves within a
particular interpretative field while undermining and challenging other interpretative
practices which appear to be inadequate or unhelpful. In relation to this last point we
drew (RCA: Chapters 3 and 5) on the devastating attacks on positivist empiricism and
scientism delivered by Critical Theory - Marxists such as Adorno, Horkheimer, and
Habermas (in his early work) who produced a sophisticated cultural critique of capitalism.
We conceived both RCA and STA as part of an assault on a whole system of social and
cultural and academic values embedded within both traditional and new archaeology.
   It was Critical Theory in particular, but conjoined with aspects of post-structuralist
critical practice, that brought us to consider matters which we might term meta-
theoretical: the problem of theory itself and its relation to the practice of archaeology
(STA: Chapter 1); the idea of value freedom in academic work (RCA: Chapters 1 and
3); the politics of theory (STA: Chapter 7) and its relation with the present as well as
the past. Here we emphasized the insertion of archaeology as a cultural practice within
late capitalism in the West. This required looking reflexively at the social conditions,
interests, and structures within which archaeological practices, meanings, and expla-
nations arise.
Ontological and epistemological questions
The major criticisms made of us are:

  (1)   That we reject objectivity and stress an unfettered subjectivity in the process of
        gaining knowledge ofthe past.
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                    249


   (2)   This means we advocate a hopeless relativism, a never-ending proliferation of
         equally valid pasts that become incommensurable and beyond critical evaluation.
   (3)   That we cannot, by the very logic of our own approach, distinguish between
         fictional and real (scientific) pasts.
   (4)   The end result is an impotency in which archaeological investigation becomes
         pointless and meaningless. Confidence is sapped; the discipline destroyed.

We approach the question of archaeologists and the object world which they investigate
with the aim of developing a thoroughly materialist understanding of the manner in which
 archaeological knowledges become attained and established. This materialism extends
to archaeologists themselves (issues of the constitution of subjectivity), the object world
being studied (material culture) and the linguistic forms (archaeological texts; verbal
discussions) in which these knowledges are expressed and physically embodied. Advocacy
of this materialism has a number of important consequences. While we might talk of the
relationship between epistemological subject and object, we wish to avoid an idealist
tendency of regarding such an issue as a philosophical abstraction: a purely philosophical
quest which can be sorted out solely on the basis of a series of disembodied abstractions.
We try to shift the arena of discussion over to one of real concrete archaeologists
confronting a material past now and in history.
   Our main purpose is to avoid these errors which result from too radical a separation
of the archaeologist and the objects studied. One error found in much archaeology
supposes a contemplative and passive attitude towards objects of study. The aim of
archaeological investigation becomes simply to mirror the past in a mimetic fashion. The
mirror is, of course, clouded darkly, but the aim is gradually to dispel the shadows. The
archaeologist remains in subjection to a primary object world providing simultaneously
both absolute foundation and measure of validity. An independent definable reality 'out
there' is somehow to be absorbed by a receptive consciousness which is itself conceived
as unrestrained, disembodied, universal and non-material.
   Research programmes involving hypothesis formation, prediction, testing, falsification
may be adopted, and the role of expectation and theory in knowledge accepted. But we
feel that vital philosophical and social questions of the theory dependence of 'data', the
relation of observation languages to consciousness, the senses and the object world, are
glossed over in the archaeological literature in general, and the comments made on our
work in particular. The key question is not whether objectivity exists, but what it is. What
is the relationship of the 'objectivity' to our practice?
   A notion of objectivity cannot be grounded in common sense. This merely begs the
question and presupposes that we already know, and can intersubjectively agree, without
any discussion or debate, what 'it' is at the outset. What happens when a notion of
objectivity remains unproblematic, as is usually the case in archaeological work, is that
in practice an instrumentalist relation is adopted towards a supposedly finished and
completed past that itself becomes constituted as objectivity. Far from being passive and
detached, archaeological consciousness manipulates the object past with assumptions, a
priori conceptions and methodologies, while remaining insufficiently reflective of the
relation of the archaeologist who actively investigates the object past.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             250


    A second error involves an investigating archaeological subjectivity which is too active,
 actually constituting or making up an object past, while remaining unresponsive to its
 materiality. This is the error of idealism which considers objectivity as entirely dependent
 on the thinking subject. This is intimately linked to another error: that of relativism and
 historicism whereby knowledges become entirely collapsed in terms of the contemporary
 or historical context of the investigating archaeologist. Different aspects of the object
past become mobilized by archaeologists in these contexts producing incommensurable
but valid knowledges. The important issue here is not a denial that knowledges are
context-bound, which they undoubtedly are, but that context dependence provides a
necessary and sufficient explication.
    We wish to stress that our concern is, and has been, to work with the question of
archaeological knowledge in a manner which takes account of both the objects studied
 and the fact that archaeologists actively ask questions of that objectivity which remains
 a raw and unconstituted past without the actively interpreting archaeologist. We want to
go beyond a narrow philosophical epistemology and ontology to reach out and embrace
a material and social praxis - real archaeologists digging up and thinking about a real
past -which is a very different matter from thinking through the medium of abstractions
such as 'hypotheses', 'subjectivity', 'objectivity', 'theory', 'data'. These terms, as com-
monly employed, require the kind of deconstruction we attempted in RCA and STA
because they systematically lead us away from any sophisticated understanding of what
is actually involved in doing archaeology.
    In accordance with our materialism we wish to do away with an entirely abstracted,
universalist and idealist notion of objectivity. We replace this with a particular and
contingent objectivity. While real, objects of archaeological knowledge are nevertheless
meaningless in themselves. They are raw matter which require completion to turn them
into discursive objects. It is at this point they become meaningful, can be discussed, be
known. For all our purposes, objects can only exist in relation with the excavating,
observing, photographing, writing, questioning archaeologist. There is no independently
definable reality or past as far as we are all concerned. The unknown cemetery we have
just discovered was not independently defining itself prior to our discovery. It is, of
course, part of a real past nevertheless. It becomes part of our present when we do
discover it and call the collection of material traces a cemetery. The object is translated
into meaningful existence in the particular and contingent moment of archaeological
practice and interpretation. This is partly what we refer to when we talk of capturing the
object in its particularity. And, of course, interpretation is not an innocent act but
informed: the object world, always already organized, creates thoughts in us. We have
proposed that it is better to regard objects as a network of resistances to theoretical
appropriation than as abstract objectivity. Why? Because this conception emphasizes the
materiality involved in the process of gaining knowledge, the materiality of ourselves as
subjective agents and the materiality of the object past. It should be clear that this
approach is very far removed from the rampant subjectivism of which we are accused.
The archaeologist must respect and deal with the material nature of the object past. It
is also important to realize that as real people archaeologists are also part and parcel of
the object world; we may thus speak of the final primacy of objectivity.
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                     251


   However, the object world is not left unchanged for the very reason that the process
of understanding it is a material one. Artifacts and their associations are not static data.
In a simple sense everything we know is discovered, excavated, measured, displayed and
these are by no means automatic and unproblematic processes. Beyond all this there is
a dynamic relation of archaeological practice into which archaeological data inevitably
enter - a complex of meanings, discourses, representations, powers. Our purpose was,
and is, to investigate this dynamic constitution of the past involving archaeologist and
past object in a relation of mediated non-identity. It hinges on an active archaeological
practice which makes the objects of which it speaks, while recognizing the primacy of
concrete material objectivity to which any discourse must relate.
   We cannot write the past without reading its material traces first. The question
becomes: what are the most fruitful strategies for this reading and writing? As we have
been at pains to point out, varieties of empiricism do not form an appropriate medium
for a materialist practice because they all result in an idealism of the object which either
supposedly 'speaks to us', and the more objects speaking the better, or simply refutes or
falsities what we have to say removing from us a burden of choice in an unmediated and
non-materialist fashion. The point is that the materialism of the object, its meaning and
its material inscription, goes far beyond surface appearances. Varieties of empiricism
cannot adequately capture material differences and relations and this, of course, includes
the relation between the archaeologist and that studied.
   We wish to dispel abstract epistemologies involving absolute subject/object dicho-
tomies, an unfortunate and particularly tenacious weed of Enlightenment thought, to
consider the nature of real sensuous practice. For us this involves three areas of concern:

  (1)   Experience. Archaeologists are individuals inevitably constituted today in terms
        of a modernist sense of self-identity which involves acting in and on the world.
        The problem is that this Western modernist identity has not been sufficiently
        explored in the process of how we acquire knowledge - hermeneutically making
        meaning of an object world. Archaeological experience comes into existence
        through autobiographic experience. Our personal sense of identity is not pure,
        free, radically unique. It is rather a contingent and conjunctural combinational
        bricolage of self-experiences involving how we have lived, what we have read, what
        we remember and what we forget, who we have spoken to, what we have done,
        and what has been done to us. We refer to all this to underline the somatic
        dimension to knowledge: our sensuous receptivity and sensibility to a world
        beyond ourselves. So, there is a need for a phenomenology of archaeological
        experience and knowledge - an investigation of the character of the experiences.
  (2)   Intersubjectivity. We repeat here the necessity of considering archaeology as a
        social practice which takes place here and now, in this text, as dialogue about
        material objects, and how we create meaning out of a meaninglessness. Here it
        is necessary to remind ourselves that an interest in the past is never disinterested.
        History and myth are not radically opposed in so far as they are structurally
        necessary, the former to a modernist sense of self-understanding and identity,
        the latter to small-scale societies that have no need of history. We cannot evade
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                               252


         a sense of history and the materiality of that history. We write history but that
         history is simultaneously that which creates pain, limits desire, mediates and
         bounds our own practice. We inscribe history, it scarifies us.
   (3)   Coping strategies. We refer here to the active relation of archaeologist and object
         past and the responsibilities this entails. These are the issues of representation
         and writing, making as opposed to finding knowledges, awareness of language
         and textuality. In the context of this 'epistemological' discussion we might refer
         to a crucial distinction between a true empirical archaeology, to which we
         adhere, and the formal and abstract application of empirical methodologies.
         The distinction is between being empirical and being empiricist, between an
         informational past constituted by predefined methods, and an understanding of
         the dynamic between empirical past and interpreting archaeologist.

Truth does not reside in the past, nor does falsity. Our aim is the construction of material
truths forged out of a mediation between the activities of object-subjects (archaeologists)
and subject-objects (the traces of the past). We reject fictional and scientific (in the sense
of the 'new' archaeology) pasts because these are idealist pasts. Those arguing for a
properly scientific archaeology consistently tend to reify science. It is not understood as
the activity of a particular form of reasoning, or as a social practice. It becomes some
thing to be used, some thing with an inherent intangible essence giving it power; it has a
definite status. Against this status our efforts are to be measured. Science is that thing
that is possessed, standing apart supposedly from social relations and modes of being in
the world.

Material culture
On the other hand we found stimulating those bodies of thought which we felt helped
us focus on what we saw as the object of any archaeology - the relationship between
contextually situated social practices and material culture. We considered this missing
in its essentials from the predominantly functionalist social archaeologies (STA: Chapter
2) of the 1970s and early 1980s. Structuralism crucially provided a different ontological
basis for understanding both material culture and social practices and their relations. A
basic premise here, running counter to all forms of empiricism, is that what cannot be
observed determines the world of appearances, that which we do see. Consequently, any
analysis needs to go beyond the surfaces of the empirical world to uncover underlying
structures constituted by rules and principles which help to constitute meaning and
significance. Analysis shifts from the things themselves (axes, pots, and so on) to relations
between them. We also viewed a structuralist perspective as important in asserting the
mediation of nature by culture (hence no simple environmental determinism is possible)
and the individual by society (STA: Chapters 3 and 4; RCA: Chapters 6 and 7). Perhaps
more important was that an understanding of structuralism opened the way to an
understanding of material culture as being in some senses analogous to a text, a
meaningful signifying system to be 'read' and interpreted. Semiology provided a parallel
source of inspiration with its emphasis on the endowment of all social practices with
patterns of signification. There can be no innocent fact or sign. 'Facts' speak to their
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                      253


culturally conditioned audiences in determinate ways. Culture becomes viewed as a kind
of speech with underlying codes. The job of the investigator is to decode the various
cultural messages. The general point is that the whole of human culture can be viewed
as a vast web of messages which communicate. This helps to create the cultural
construction of reality. Material culture, in which archaeologists have their main inter-
est, becomes part of the way in which social reality becomes constituted. It must
therefore be seen as an active element in society, not as a passive reflection of social
process.
   Our consideration of structuralism was informed and modified by two major lines of
critical influence. First, progressive Marxist sociologies and anthropologies laid import-
ant emphasis on totality - the context of a particular social practice or artifact; on the
ubiquity of the political and relations of power; on society having no preordained
hierarchy of determination (such as economy over religion); on the importance and
materiality of ideology; on the need for a genuine theory of history, with no artificial
split between the synchronic and the diachronic, between static analysis and the dynamics
of social change.
   Second, there were various forms of post-structuralist critique. On the one hand there
was the attempt by Bourdieu, Giddens, and others to link a theory of structure to one
of social action involving considerations of agency, power, ideology, material praxis, and
the symbolic. On the other hand there were the various discourse perspectives advocated
principally by Barthes, Derrida, and Foucault (RCA: Chapters 6 and 7; STA: Chapters
3 and 4). Rather than advocating a search for universal structures in material culture in
a Uvi-Straussian manner, we stressed that it should be regarded as having the following
general characteristics:
    (1) being subject to multiple transformations in form and meaning content;
    (2) that its meaning must be regarded as contingent and contextually (i.e., his-
          torically and socially) dependent;
    (3) that it does not necessarily reflect social reality. There may be various relations
          of ideological inversion. Material culture is charged with power relations;
    (4) that it forms a framing and communicative medium in, for, arid of social
          practice;
    (5) that like a text it requires interpretation but that such an interpretative process
          can never end: there are no final answers;
    (6) that it forms a channel of reified and objectified 'expression', both being
          structured and structuring in a manner analogous to a language;
    (7) that it is a social, not an individual production. The individual agent should be
          regarded as being structured through language and material culture;
    (8) that the meaning of the archaeological record is irreducible to the elements that
          go to make it up;
    (9) that the primary importance of material culture is not so much its practical
          functions (to say that a chair is for sitting on tells us virtually nothing about it)
          but its symbolic exchange values as part of the social construction of reality;
          and
  (10) that it is polysemous: the meaning of an artifact alters according to (i) who uses
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              254


         it; (ii) where it is used, its social and material location; (iii) where and in what
         circumstances the interpretation takes place; (iv) who does the interpretation;
         (v) why they are bothering to interpret in the first place and in relation to what
         expected audience.

From reading to writing the past
The above perspective on material culture leads us significantly away from any kind of
analysis which claims that it is a simple matter of reading off the way the past really was
from its present traces occurring in the archaeological record. Any attempt to mirror a
real past is insufficiently self-reflexive. In RCA (Chapters 1 and 5) and STA (Chapter 4)
we questioned the notion of a real past and set out to demonstrate that any attempt to
recover or reconstruct such a past was both impossible (we would never know when we
were there) and suspect in view of the polysemous nature of material culture, which we
characterized as consisting of a series of metacritical rather than diacritical signs. In the
latter notion (advocated by Saussure), meaning is fixed through the difference between
signs in an overall system; in the former, meaning is regarded as slippery, as sliding
through shifting frames of reference, something which cannot be pinned down once and
for all (Derrida). The effect of these critiques of the notion of a real past and meaning
as stable was to emphasize interpretation as a contemporary act which does not attempt
to recover original meaning. The consequences, some of which we have already touched
upon above, are that studying the past must be regarded as an act requiring self-reflexive
discourse. The meaning of the past does not belong to the past but to the present. A
corollary is that the primary event of archaeology is not the event of the past but the
event of archaeology itself: discourse, writing, excavation. Archaeology is not, then, so
much a reading of the signs of the past, but a process in which these signs are written
into the present. And writing, of course, transforms. There is a fundamental gap between
words and things. We move from a material culture 'text' to an archaeological text
backing up our arguments and statements by 'quoting' with artifacts. This is a process
involving both resistance (the material record does constrain what we can write in various
ways) and transformation (the movement from things to words) (see figure on p. 255).
   Such a process of writing and analysis is in principle no different from reading
works of literature and backing up interpretative argumentative structures by quoting
the words of authors. Archaeology may then be said to bear a far closer resemblance
to literary criticism than, say, to nineteenth-century conceptions of physics usually
referred to, or implied in the arguments used to suggest it is, or should become, a
'hard' science.
   It is important to appreciate that there is a gap between theory and reality. This
means that we cannot resolve, except in an imaginary way, real contradictions in
thought; nor is a concept identical with the reality it represents. This is why we have
stressed questions of representation, style, textuality and writing. These are again
questions involving the real material practice of archaeology - that it textually
inscribes and translates objects. At the root of all this is the need, we feel, for a
critical attitude: archaeological texts are not innocent mirrors of an object world,
nor are they to be conceived simply in terms of authorial intention. There is a
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                             255


MATERIAL CULTURE (a multidimensional 'text' with a plurality of meaning)




                     01(           resistance

                    -'11(          transformation




ARCHAEOLOGICAL TEXT (argumentative structure with material 'quotations')


Relations between artifact and text.


problem of the adequacy of concepts and there exists the question of what constitutes
a realist representation.
   Much of our writing in RCA and STA is deliberately polemical and provocative
and we have stressed the importance of rhetoric as a strategic device. We regard
this strategy as part and parcel of what we have already been stressing: the tension
between past and present. We wanted to draw attention to our work as text, as
transformation of the past of which we speak. This may, of course, be infuriating to
some but seems preferable to the con-texts pretending to be a mirror image of the
past rather than its linguistically mediated transformation.
   We have also tried to avoid the commodification of concepts. By this we mean
abstraction - the definition of concepts in themselves; identity - the identification
of concept with reality; and reification - treating concepts as things. All involve a
collapse of the dialectic between concept and reality and the loss of particularity.
This is the point of our criticism of 'prestige goods economy', for example. Not the
validity of the political and material relations it might represent, but its a priori
specification and wholesale application. It needs to be stressed that concept and
reality form a material relation which cannot be resolved in theory.
   We would argue that we might take a tentative and faltering approach to the object
past, avoiding clearly defined premises, abstract theories applied from the top down.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                  256


The attempt to define and redefine concepts to obtain an absolute purity is to be
avoided. We need concepts such as power, ideology, contradiction, but these need
to be worked and reworked in relation to the specificity of that being studied. We
begin any work with the establishment of theoretical objects that we appropriate
further and link in to an ever-broadening discursive network. Here we are suggesting
again mediated resistances involving the subjectivity of the archaeologist and his or
her relation to the object world.

The relation of past and present
Archaeology is a making of a past in a present. We argued this dialectic at length in RCA
(Chapters 1 and 5) and STA (Chapter 5). We have been concerned to relate concepts
of past and present to the material practice of archaeology, referring in particular to
Heidegger's seminal concept of 'presencing' (later taken up in Gadamer's hermeneutics):
'an historic present, mutual reaching out and opening up of future, past and present,
holding them together in their difference, a relational nexus' (STA, p. 127). We have also
argued in STA that we must choose between alternative pasts on political grounds. This
is not to be taken in a grossly literal reading of the phrase to suggest, for example, that
we forget about empirical objects altogether. The phrase (and many others) was employed
by us to deconstruct empiricist oppositions between facts and values, to break the
spell of past over present, in the process of understanding the past and in evaluating
archaeological discourses.
   So the past is real, it did happen, it is not just our fiction, and can be used in and
against the present, in its difference. We make four points here:


  (1)     The past does not just have one meaning. In this respect at least it does mirror
          the present. The truth of the past in the present is not an illusion, it has a material
          basis in institutions. It is necessary to reject a legalistic notion that unless we
          have the whole truth and nothing but this whole truth, we have no truth at all.
          A contextualization of truth in terms of the manner in which it is created in the
          academy helps us to understand this truth better, materially as forming part of a
          nexus of power relations. This is another aspect of the particularism we advocate.
  (2)     The past is read from the present and its reality may have different pertinent
          meanings in different historical circumstances.
  (3)     This reading of the past from the present is an advocacy of reading real and
          relevant trajectories in a practical relation where past is 'non-identical' with the
          present.
  (4)     The past relates to the archaeologist as a 'network of material resistances'.


To clarify, we intend this term to encompass a range of meanings:


    (i)    it implies an active interpretative relation;
   (ii)    it makes reference to archaeological entities as theory-laden rather than theory-
           determined (in RCA Chapter 5 we termed these entities 'theoretical objects');
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                       257


   (iii)   it refers to a past actively resisting attempts to appropriate it theoretically in
           such a manner as to ignore its materiality;
   (iv)    it implies opposition: the past may be forgotten or obscured because it threatens
           a valued framework;
    (v)    it implies difference;
   (vi)    it implies a surplus, an empirical redundancy in the past; we can never
           encompass all the details of the past, and much is lost anyway.

 The relationship of the archaeologist to her or his object of study is a dialectical one
 involving a notion of two entities (let us say the archaeologist and objects of archaeological
 study) which form part of each other, help to constitute each other, but do not collapse
into each other. The dialectic is not just a fancy term. We inevitably live it in our material
practice. The theory-data relation is one of continual mediated modification. The
appropriate starting point, in a social archaeology, is to conceptualize the past as precisely
that - a social construction. Evolutionary principles, of whatever form, or the a priori
use of social typologies, do not appear useful in this regard. Theory and data do not
exist in an external relation to each other. This relation has to be conceived as a very
specific one. Every data set (whatever might be precisely meant by that term) should
have its own specific theoretical orientation. In other words, we reject the idea of an
abstracted body of theory which just has to be applied wherever or whenever necessary.
Our dialectical approach means that theoretical structures become part of data structures
and vice versa, held in a relation of tension. The technique involved is a spiralling one
in which theoretical structures are dropped or transformed in order to accommodate
data resistances. There is no end to this process. We can never theoretically appropriate
the entire data set, nor can such a process be simplified in a cook-book fashion as it
inevitably involves different subjectivities and different objectivities. Evaluation of the
results of study is dialogic involving what we know, what we want to know, and discussion
of the particular interpretative choices we have made along the way, and the manner in
which we have written what we have done.
   We wish to make some further comments about critique and pluralism. We are
criticized for supporting a relativist pluralism, for apparently arguing that validity depends
simply on the present, for being nihilistic, negative and political. This amounts to a
stultification of any meaningful conditions under which archaeological practice might
be undertaken. It is interesting in this context to consider the reactions to our work, as
expressed in Norwegian Archaeological Review 22. A number of the commentators appear
to be broadly in agreement with most, or some, of what we have written (Bender,
Herschend, Hodder, Nordbladh and Olsen). Renfrew, Trigger and Wenke are in pro-
found disagreement with almost everything. It is interesting to note the relationship of
these responses to the socio-political conditions in which they arise. From Canada and
the United States, condemnation, from Britain a mixed reaction, from Scandinavia a
generally sympathetic response. All the authors, of course, work within capitalist nation-
states but within very different material circumstances ranging from the most imperialist,
to Britain riddled with deep-rooted class division, to the more muted and socially softer
forms of Scandinavian capitalist-socialism. The geographical shift of opinion is rather
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             258


intriguing and it may indicate something of significance about the conditions in which
critical work takes place and the responses it may engender, in a conservative discipline.
   Our purpose in theorizing pluralism is not to defend absolute provisionality. It is to
encourage the development of different pasts, new and valid pasts, new truths, to pose
questions, to examine doubt and uncertainty. We wish to create space for challenge and
debate, to challenge hegemonic pasts, to create conditions for the expression of minority
pasts. We make no claim to intellectual authority other than as a challenge to established
and orthodox archaeologies, an opposition to dogmatism.


Politics and the new right
Our project crystallized in political experience of the early 1980s. We witnessed a
masterful display of the mobilization of the past in the ideological service of the present,
with assumptions and basic outlooks of new and traditional archaeologies easily written
into a new hegemonic culture of the right. In Britain the Thatcher solution involved a
populist invocation of common sense understanding providing simple remedies to a
Britain in decline and their mechanical and resolute application. Fundamentally anti-
intellectual and irrational, it raised mythical and demagogic imageries of heritage, lost
transcendent values, national collective identities, and traditions. And at the heart was
a consumerist individualism - free wills exercising free choice in the market of history.
   So we saw archaeology's adherence to a supposed objectivity of fact as irrational,
ignoring the basic nature of such a claim: subjective idealism, i.e, an idealism arising out
of a contradiction between objective essence received by attuned subjectivities. What this
amounted to was an irrational acceptance of values such as efficiency and optimization
regarded as transcendent, but which were in reality the values of capitalist economic
practices projected back into the past. The origin of these abstract values in the present
was lost. The mechanistic logics of culture process and evolutionary sequences involved
a loss of socio-cultural specificity in the momentum of generalities. Above all, scientific
archaeology was formulaic and authoritarian, applying general methodologies and algor-
ithms, universal remedies for world histories.
   Traditional archaeology is at its roots anti-intellectual, sceptical of 'new' approaches,
celebrating its common sense categories, home-spun truths. Its object-based and unique
pasts fitted well with the modern past of traditional customs, folk museums, and craft
shops. There was also a sceptical complacency and resignation providing no serious
answers to challenges made either to its past or to its practices. It remains apparently
sure of itself with a belief in an enshrined and unexamined conservation ethic, and in a
sacred past.
   We considered that this was a loss of the past. The past was becoming alien and
unintelligible. Scientific and traditional archaeology and the culture of the new right
offered no vital lifeworld for a past. The present was instantaneity, available to instant
experience, consumption; the past was everywhere, a palimpsest of 'heritage', and
similarly instantaneous, locked into its immediate present. The past through cultural
resource management had become marketable, open to the 'public'. Historicity, our
historical agency, was being purposefully forgotten.
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                     259


 Reconstituting archaeology
 In the context of this experience our aim became wider: to institute an investigation of
 the basics of any genuine social archaeology; to supersede the fixed categories, predefined
 social schemes and universal histories of established archaeologies.
    We considered that essentialism and reductionism, two disabling orientations, per-
 meated the social archaeologies of the 1970s and 1980s. Essentialism is the notion that
 there is an essential meaning or substance to the past: the archaeological record becomes
 the manifestation of predefined entities or units and their interaction (RCA: Chapter
 6). Social typologies (band, tribe, chiefdom, state, and so on) and the mechanics of
 functionalist social archaeology (economy-environment-population-technology, and so
 on, in interaction) are clearly essentialist. Reductionism is closely linked to essentialism.
 This is the notion that the particularity of the archaeological record can be reduced
 to overarching generalizations, subsuming social or other processes. A millennium of
 particularity may be reduced to the analytical process 'prestige goods economy'. It was
 in the light of essentialism and reductionism that we undertook a substantial critique of
 theories of social and cultural evolution (STA: Chapter 6).
    We were concerned not to substitute an alternative definition of 'society' or whatever,
a new and better essential object of archaeology. We wished to avoid hierarchies of
determination with the relegation of substantial and substantive areas of social experience
to irrelevancy. We aimed instead to elucidate a set of concepts which would enable a
grasp of aspects or fragments of the past in their particularity within a flexible mediatory
totality; a set of concepts which would make no pretence to being a representation of a
complete past, but would enable fertile interpretation of material culture in a non-
deterministic and dynamic engagement between past and present (RCA: Chapters 5-7;
STA: Chapters 2-5, Chapter 6, pp. 176-86).
   In particular we aimed to overcome the occlusion of the individual in conventional
social archaeologies, to overcome the split between individual and society. Our focus
was the decentred subject: a subject located within structures conceived as both the
medium and outcome of intentional practice. As will be clear from the above discussion,
the concept of structure carries a heavy theoretical burden. We linked structure to
practice through power, focusing on strategies and technologies of domination and
subordination. The dynamic of structure and practice thus involves issues of legitimation
and ideology, contradiction and historical conjuncture: the politics of social reproduction
and change. Our consideration of the event of change related to a theorization of time
in archaeology; time too is structured, and is not a neutral context or background
dimension to 'measure' change. Like space it forms a medium and outcome of human
praxis. Abstract date and chronology are subordinate to our historical plot and to political
conjuncture.

A programme for the 1990s
The aims of any progressive archaeology should now, we consider, contain the following:

  (1)   The refinement and extension of a reflexive and mediatory conceptual apparatus
        such as that mentioned above. Particular attention needs to be paid to a fresh
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                              260


        consideration of ecological context and economic practices, areas largely omitted
        from RCA and STA.
  (2)   A continuing investigation of the relation of theory to practice.
  (3)   The development of a democratic politics of archaeology; a questioning of
        institutions, decision-making, and values.
  (4)   A rediscovery and refinement of the subjective, rooting archaeology in an exam-
        ination of basic and ordinary experiences of the past: the development of a
        politics of subjective identity and its relation to the past.
  (5)   Experimentation with fresh ways of producing the past and relating it to the
        present, in the contexts of excavation strategies, museum displays, and writing
        texts.
  (6)   Detailed critical analyses of the nature of archaeological discourses and their
        relations to a capitalist present.
  (7)   The full realization of archaeology as a strategic intervention in the present
        through a focus on (i) archaeology itself as constituting a micropolitical field; (ii)
        an adequate theorization of the relation between material culture and social
        structures both within contemporary society and in the past; (iii) using the
        difference of the past to challenge established economic and social strategies,
        categorizations, epistemologies, rationalities, modes of living, and relating to
        others.

Our work continues with the following issues.

Making sense of historicity
Archaeology is a making of a past in a present. In order to forge an acceptable practice
of archaeology this means that we need to take history seriously. Taking the past seriously
involves recognizing its otherness not as a matter of exoticism but as a means of
undercutting and relativizing the legitimacy of the present. The new archaeology and
various forms of evolutionary theory fail precisely because of the attempt to reduce
history to a set of ahistorical processes; ahistorical because these generalities are sup-
posedly always present. Taking history seriously also requires that we recognize the
importance of discontinuity. Such a recognition implies that representations of the social,
in material or other forms, simply cannot be the same across time. A renewed sense of
historicity also demands inclusion and consideration of ourselves. The past is not a fetish
in the mud; it is not simply found or observed in an arresting backward glance. As
archaeologists we engage the past in subjective experience. For too long this subjectivity
has been occluded- and that means ourselves- in a valorization of rationalized experience
and a systematic analytics. Instead we seek a re-enchantment of the past, not in the sense
of a mysticism centred on a new subjectivism, but as a serious examination of the relation
of archaeologist to the material past, an examination of ourselves as positioned and
decentred subjects.
  At the root of all this is our relation to time: personal and social (STA: Chapter 5).
We need to think of time and its meaning to us, its social valuation in capitalism. If we
are to rediscover historicity- our involvement in past and future, our social agency (and
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                      261


this is to talk of democratic values) - then time must be reassociated with lifeworld,
realized as substantial, not abstract. So we do not look back into the past and hope to
find its truths - truth is not to be found in history; history is to be found in the truth.
Archaeology thus loses its dependency on an object past, becomes our involvement in a
material world (and in a 'post-modern' world of style and signification archaeology is
ever-more relevant). Archaeology becomes future-orientated, a project.

A poetics of archaeology
In RCA and STA we abandoned any attempt to create a privileged or foundational
discourse which would suggest that it is 'in the true' by virtue of internal logical coherency
or by means of reference to, or correspondence with, realities standing outside discourse
 (as in the phenomenalist premise that we must take our theories to an external physical
reality of 'hard' data which will then pass judgement on (test) their validity).
   Language use does not merely imitate reality; rather, it helps to constitute it. This means
that we must shift attention away from the notion that we gain knowledge through
supposedly objective testing to a position which suggests that an epistemological and
ontological basis for gaining knowledge and truth resides within the confines of different
and competing language games which play with and represent 'reality' in different forms.
What we are proposing is a communicative epistemology stressing the production of the
past and present as a dialogue taking place between persons, groups, and different
interpretative communities. Such a position embraces the importance of both empirical
description and observation; it is deeply empirical while being hostile to empiricism.
   Our project must of necessity include a poetics of archaeology. If we are to consider
archaeology as a social practice, a mediation between past and present, a translation,
then we must look to the media of the past's creation and transformation. We must ask
the questions of an archaeological stylistics and rhetoric: what is the adequacy of an
inventory of finds? What is the meaning of an 'objective' account? What is the use of a
measured floor plan in a historical narrative?
   It is important to experiment with ways of writing, ways of seeing, ways of presenting.
It is equally important to resist appropriation and incorporation into the sterility of a
hegemonic culture which translates everything into its own terms and makes other
expression unintelligible. Consequently our strategies should be those of polemic and
provocation, challenging orthodoxy, working with the unfamiliar. In this we are not
erecting an alternative authority on the past, seeking ultimate truths. For the archae-
ological past such truths do not exist. We aim at a pluralist and democratic exploration
of the past, fragmented, provisional, negotiated. Here we must express dissatisfaction
with the conventions of archaeological discourse. The canons of third-person narrative,
informative and unambiguous cataloguing in a site report, for example, are only valid in
terms of an authoritarian pronouncement on the past and only have relevance in terms
of power structures in the discipline including funding opportunities and so on.
   We need to recognize the difficulty of language use and deny the validity of empiricist
notions. Within archaeology one hegemony reigns based on an empiricist theory of
reading and writing. Discourse becomes a mere medium, as, the mode in which the
non-discursive, the ideas or mental conceptions of the individual archaeologist, become
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                                262


realized; or alternatively, the ways in which knowledges of the 'real' (archaeological data)
are set down and recorded. Discourse becomes reduced to either a record of the thought
patterns of the thinker or the manner in which the real may be reproduced in a text.
Reading an archaeological text is therefore deemed (ideally) to be a kind of activity as
obvious as eating, drinking, or sleeping. The call is to make the text as simple, clear,
concise, and transparently obvious (thus instantly available for consumption) as
inhumanly possible. Any text which might require interpretation or uses 'difficult'
language is really quite shameful. 'Why can they not say it more simply' is the usual cry
from the empiricist reader who wishes implicitly to separate our statements, concepts,
and positions from their conditions of textual production; the demand to read 'simple'
rather than 'complex' texts is merely a valorization of anti-intellectualism. Any notion
that the 'complex' can be translated or put into the 'simple' is immediately deconstructive.
If the complex could be put into the simple then of course it could not have been very
complex in the first place. On the other hand if the simple is to perform the requirement
to be an adequate medium of complexity it cannot be simple any longer. A 'simple' form
of expression or writing cannot but destroy any complexity and vice versa. One does not
simply translate back into the other. We are not calling for all texts to be 'complex'; what
we are suggesting is that a plurality of discursive forms needs to be recognized without
any necessary possibility of mutual transference or passage from one to the other.
   As an illustration consider the essay 'The Present Past' (RCA: Chapter 1). Any
archaeological writing is immediately ironic and metaphorical. The traces of the past are
obliterated in their moment of supposed preservation. They must be recreated in different
form, in text: identity in difference. The chapter in question attempted to work with
these basic notions. Interrogating our experience of archaeology, it superimposed images
and metaphors: tense and time; distance and the past; memory and rhetoric; narrative
truth and time; destruction and preservation; judgement and loss; observation and
experience. These were related to complex cultural images of an emergent Western
rationalism in Archaic and Classical Greece. The purpose of the essay was kaleidoscopic
and suggestive, recovering to discussion diffuse background issues. We attempted to
employ similar textual strategies in other contexts, for example, the discussion of sub-
jectivity in STA, whilst elsewhere deliberately conforming to accepted (or rather unques-
tioned, unchallenged) modes of writing.
   We are now focusing on the meaning of narrative; on illustration and images of the
past, developing an expanded visual vocabulary; on more creative use of technology; on
stretching language into different directions, looking into the potential of control over
writing and presentation as well as more conventional data manipulation and processing
(Tilley 1989b, 1990a, 1991 b; Shanks 1992).
   A basic tenet underlying this work is that archaeology, instead of seeking to efface its
own discursivity, needs to consider itself as a set of strategies for establishing interventions
in our present, interventions which will prove their validity through their effects rather
than relying on prior epistemological grounding. We cannot any more secure the validity
of what we say by attempting to locate our discourse as a knowledge relation to the past
involving correspondence, coherence, or whatever. We aim to dispel such nineteenth-
century theologies, philosophies and ideologies of science. We are seeking instead to
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                    263


disrupt and to render dishevelled prevailing contemporary archaeological discourses in
order to foster fresh discourses and new pasts, socially and politically relevant pasts.


Discourse and power
This brings us to the question of the connection between discourse and power. Foucault
has taught the lesson well that discourse - structures enabling the production of know-
ledges - is permeated with relations of power. We intend to develop further (RCA:
Chapter 4; STA: Chapter 7) a critical sociology of archaeology examining power and
discourse, examining structures of oligarchic orthodoxy with its centralized provision of
public pasts and marginalization of others. Central questions to be asked here are: who
produces the past and why? For whom exactly is this production taking place? In what
circumstances? Who has the right to speak and expect to have their statements considered
as worthy of attention and comment? In developing such an archaeology we intend to
destroy the myth that archaeological practices and archaeological communities are
essentially benign and apolitical, 'only' having a serious and disinterested interest in the
past. We must examine corridor and coffee-room talk (the unpublished as well as the
published); networking of references, acknowledgements, citations, who gets grants and
for what and who does not; who gets employed and who does not; who gets promotion
and who does not; who gets read and who gets ignored. No doubt we can expect such
work to be extremely unpopular and particularly difficult, especially in Britain with its
labyrinth of secret committees accountable to no one except themselves. Such an analysis
will also challenge the cult of professionalism in archaeology which is growing in strength
daily and which threatens drastically to restrict our scope of thought and action so that
what is deemed to be properly archaeological becomes more and more severely restricted.
This is a matter of dissolving rather than reinforcing disciplinary boundaries by constantly
asking the question: just what is archaeological about archaeology?
   The aim is to establish a different socio-politics of archaeology, not one that will evade
power but will use it in emancipatory ways. Established institutional frameworks must
be challenged as the correct or only places to do serious archaeology; the notion that
archaeology is only concerned with the past must be challenged more seriously than at
present; power hierarchies in academia and without need to be impugned; above all we
need to escape from the cloistral seclusion of archaeology from real political processes.
Archaeology as a disciplinary ghetto must be destroyed.
   Another important area that needs consideration is the widespread ideology of indi-
vidual authorship that exists in academia. Genuine co-operation would, of course, strike
at the heart of current academic hierarchies depending on signing and owning texts.
Almost the first question we get asked, often in a somewhat suspicious manner, is: who
wrote what and how much? What we do not understand is why such a question should
have any importance or relevance. When writing RCA and STA we considered producing
them either as authorless texts or creating pseudonyms. This is not to evade responsibility
for having produced something; it is to assert that it is ideas that matter, not the names
proprietorially stamped over them.
Re-Constructing Archaeology                                                             264


 Democratic pluralism
 In RCA and STA we were effectively arguing for a radical pluralism in archaeological
theory and practice and paid particular attention to four major contemporary lines
 of thought: hermeneutics; structuralism and post-structuralism; Critical Theory; and
 dialectical materialism. We do not seek for a final all-embracing theoretical structure
that might, for example, attempt to integrate these different perspectives into a totalizing
framework. The very notion of a unified theory with a place for everything, and everything
in its place, is both essentialist and reductionist. Rather than a totalizing theoretical
structure, what we propose is one that is detotalizing. A totalizing framework either
ignores that which it cannot subsume or marginalizes it either as an anomaly or as
something eventually to be incorporated at a future date (RCA: Chapter 6; STA: Chapters
 1 and 2). The effects are either the coercive inclusion of everything into a total order or
an exclusionary strategy denying the relevance or validity of that which is left out. It is
important to recognize that many of the grounding presuppositions involved in, say,
hermeneutics and post-structuralist thought are incompatible. Rather than attempting
to develop a coherent unity out of these frameworks we suggest that their relationship
should be seen as one of shifting frames of reference that allow us in various ways to
develop a truly self-reflexive and mature social archaeology.
   Now any advocacy of shifting frames of reference, different ways of seeing and thinking,
entails that a static imagery of the past is less than adequate. Predetermined social
schemes are at variance with our effort to refine a set of conceptual apparatuses capable
of producing a heterogeneous and complex past, an archaeology which does justice to
the particularity of material culture, and to the fact that any archaeology always creates
a present-past.
   We need to realize a genuine pluralism. Not different approaches, the latest intellectual
fashion from the continent, but a critical appreciation of different pasts. And the critical
element is to deny a disabling relativism - not just anything goes.
   It should be clear that we are not proposing a new particularism- objects locked into
their particular cultural milieux. This would beg the question of understanding and is a
lapse into the ideology of the unique aura of an artifact. There are regularities in the
past, but these are not the simple schemes of social evolution or the static concepts of
conventional social analysis. They are, if you like, plots or sequences charged with a
contemporary political purpose. We might say with Adorno that there is no universal
history which leads from savagery to civilization, but there is one that leads from the
slingshot to the plutonium bomb.

Interpretative politics
It is important that archaeology shifts from instituting a series of judgements on the
past, attempting to locate a supposed inner essence or essential core of meaning and
significance, to becoming a form of 'counter memory', aiming to challenge current
modes of truth, justice, rationality, and social and economic organization. In other words
archaeology should be helping us to understand and change the present by inserting it
in a new relation to the past. Those who claim that such a perspective is misguided or
irrelevant are of course those who have no use or need for it.
Appendix: Archaeology into the 1990s                                                   265


   We inhabit the cellars of a crumbling archaeological edifice which we wish to topple
and reconstruct. This may entail being buried and suffocated in the process but there is
an even greater danger - that of becoming simply archaeologists who write for other
archaeologists who write for other archaeologists. We need to escape from the attitude
that when all has been said and done archaeology still remains just archaeology, isolated
by an immense gulf from current social and political issues. A counter memory aims at
combating the onset of such an archaeological amnesia and sense of hopelessness. We
need to acknowledge archaeology as a micropolitical practice and take seriously its
location as a culture practice in a capitalist society.
   Gramsci's analysis ofhegemony has laid the basis for understanding the field of culture,
and especially education (what is archaeology if it does not have an educative goal?) as
not merely a superstructural reflection of economic and social relations, but a means
through which those relations are created, reinforced, reproduced or challenged and
transformed. Critical Theory has furthermore provided major insights into the culture
industry as a means of social domination and control. As archaeology clearly lacks any
autonomy from society, the effects of archaeological discourse pervade the entire cultural
fabric of our times. It is important to analyse just what these effects are and how they
may be altered or enhanced. This entails analysis of the mass media, popular and fictional
writing about the past, museum presentations, and the rapidly growing heritage industry.
It also means intervening in all these sectors, taking power, taking control. An opposi-
tional discourse will be less than pointless until it begins to work in these areas.
   The current movement of archaeology into contemporary material culture studies
(RCA: Chapter 8) is thus another vital component of developing a politics of interpret-
ation and this also has to be regarded in the light of a political challenge to the notion
that archaeology is only (hopelessly?) concerned with the past, and the more distant this
past the better. To work in the present should be to challenge that present either through
an analysis of the material world we inhabit or through the presentation of the past.

Even the dead aren't safe
The culture of the new right and the heritage industry that it has spawned hardly
constitute a will to preserve a disinterested academic past. Pluralism is only tolerated so
long as it creates no authentic opposition that cannot be neutralized (in a diversity of
equally 'true' views) or otherwise contained. Its populist imagery, slogans, and set
formulae go hand in hand with its attacks on research in the humanities, silencing of
informed debate, and creation of unaccountable committees. Market values meanwhile
propagate an entrepreneurial past in the publishing and media industries.
   The obviously political attempts we have witnessed to provide a coherent critique to
this hegemonic success have been inadequate. With others we feel a challenge to a socialist
political imagination, a challenge which while necessarily rooted in our experience in
Britain, applies to a Western world of renewed capitalism. Our aim is a pragmatic
rethinking and exploration, a refusal to accept the past as a guarantee for a conservative
present. We embrace a contradictory and fluid past which, even if not simple, will be
intelligible.
Page Intentionally Left Blank
REFERENCES




Place of publication is London unless otherwise stated.
Adams, M. J. (1973). 'Structural aspects of a village age', American Anthropologist 75:
265-79
Adorno, T. W. (1964). 'Nachtmusik' in T. Adorno Moments Musicaux: Neugedruckte Aufsatze
     1928 bis 1962, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt
  (1967). 'Cultural criticism and society' in T. Adorno Prisms, Neville Spearman
  (1973a). Negative Dialectics, Routledge and Kegan Paul
  (1973b). 'Die Aktualitat der Philosophie' in T. Adorno Gesammelte Schriften 1, ed.
     R. Tiedemann, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt
  (1976a). 'Sociology and empirical research' in Critical Sociology, ed. P. Connerton, Penguin,
     Harmondsworth
  (1976b). 'Introduction' in T. Adorno et al. The Positivist Dispute in German Sociology,
     Heinemann
  (1978). MinimaMoralia, Verso
Adorno, T. W. and Horkheimer, M. (1979). Dialectic of Enlightenment, Verso
Alt, J. (1976). 'Beyond class: the decline of industrial labour and leisure', Telos 28: 55-80
Althusser, L. (1976). Essays in Self-Criticism, New Left Books
  (1977). 'On the materialist dialectic' in L. Althusser For Marx, Verso
Althusser, L. and Balibar, E. (1977). Reading Capital, New Left Books,
Andn!n, G., Ericsson, L., Ohlsson, R. and Tannsjo, T. (1978). Rhetoric and Ideology in
     Advertising, Liber, Stockholm
Anell, B. and Persson, B. (1984). Bryggeriniiringen och pilsnerpolitiken, Linkoping

Bachelard, G. (1975). La Philosophie du non: Essai d'une philosophie du nouvel esprit scientifique.
     Presses Universitaires de France (7th edn.), Paris
  (1978). Le Nouvel Esprit Scientifique, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris
Bagge, A. and Kaelas, L. (1950). Die Funde aus Dolmen und Ganggriibern in Schonen, Schweden
    I., Wahlstrom and Widstrand, Stockholm
Bakker, J. (1979). The TRB West Group, University of Amsterdam Press, Amsterdam
Balibar, E. and Macherey, P. (1981). 'On literature as an ideological form' in Untying the Text,
    ed. R. Young, Routledge and Kegan Paul
Bann, S. (1978). 'Historical text and historical object: the poetics of the Musee de Cluny', History
    and Theory 17: 251-66
Barker, P. (1982). Techniques of Archaeological Excavation, Batsford
Barthes, R. (1973a). 'The Blue-Guide' in R. BarthesMythologies, Granada, St Albans
  (1973b). 'Myth today' in R. Barthes Mythologies, Granada, St Albans
  (1973c). 'Wine and milk' in R. Barthes Mythologies, Granada, St Albans
  (1975). S!Z, Jonathan Cape
  (1977a). 'Writers, intellectuals, teachers' in R. Barthes Image-Music-Text, translated and
    edited by S. Heath, Hill and Wang, New York
  (1977b). 'The death of the author' in R. Barthes Image-Music-Text, Hill and Wang, New
    York


                                                                                                267
References                                                                                     268


   (1982). 'The plates of the encyclopedia' in Selected Writings, ed. S. Sontag, Fontana
   (1985). The Fashion System, 1onathan Cape
Bath, 1. (1981). 'The raw and the cooked: the material culture of a modern supermarket' in
       R. Gould and M. Schiffer (eds.)
Bauman, Z. (1978). Hermeneutics and Social Science, Hutchinson
   (1983). 'Industrialism, consumerism and power', Theory, Culture and Society 1 (3): 32-43
Bayard, D. (1969). 'Science, theory and reality in the "new archaeology"', American Antiquity
      34(4): 376-84
Bender, B. (19787). 'Gatherer-hunter to farmer', World Archaeology 10: 203-22
Benjamin, W. (1955). Schriften, ed. T. Adorno (2 vols.), Suhrkamp, Frankfurt
   (1973a). 'The task of the translator: an introduction to the translation ofBaudelaire's Tableaux
      Parisiens' in W. Benjamin Illuminations, Fontana
   (1973b). Charles Baudelaire: A lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, Verso
   (1973c). 'The storyteller: reflections on the work ofNikolai Leskov' in W. Benjamin
      Illuminations, Fontana
   ( 1973d). 'The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction' in W. Benjamin Illuminations,
      Fontana
   (1973e). 'Theses on the philosophy of history' in W. Benjamin Illuminations, Fontana
   (1979). 'Eduard Fuchs, collector and historian' in W. Benjamin One Way Street, New Left
      Books
Bennett, T. (1979). Formalism and Marxism, Methuen
Ben ton, T. ( 1977). Philosophical Foundations of the Three Sociologies, Routledge and Kegan Paul
Berger, 1. (1969). Art and Revolution: Ernst Niezvestny and the Role of the Artist in the USSR,
      Weidenfeld and Nicolson
   (1984). And Our Faces, My Heart, Brief as Photos, Writers and Readers
Berger, 1. and Mohr, 1. (1982). Another Way of Telling, Writers and Readers
Berger, J. et al. (1972). Ways of Seeing, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Bernstein, R. (1983). Beyond Objectivism and Relativism, Blackwell, Oxford
Bhaskar, R. (1978). A Realist Theory of Science, Harvester, Hassocks
  (1979). The Possibility of Naturalism, Harvester, Hassocks
Binford, L. (1962). 'Archaeology as anthropology', American Antiquity 28 (2): 217-25
  (1963). "'Red ochre" caches from the Michigan area: a possible case of cultural drift', South-
      western Journal ofAnthropology 19: 89-108
  (1964). 'A consideration of archaeological research design', American Antiquity 29: 425-51
  (1965). 'Archaeological systematics and the study of culture process', American Antiquity 31:
      203-10
  (1972). An Archaeological Perspective, Seminar Press
  ( 1977). 'General introduction' in For Theory Building in Archaeology, ed. L. Binford, Academic
      Press
  (1978). Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology, Academic Press
  (1981). Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths, Academic Press
  ( 1982). 'Objectivity- explanation -archaeology 1981' in Theory and Explanation in Archae-
      ology: The Southampton Conference, ed. C. Renfrew, M. Rowlands and B. Segraves,
      Academic Press
  (1983a). Working at Archaeology, Academic Press
  (1983b). In Pursuit of the Past, Thames and Hudson
Binford, L. and Sabloff, 1. (1983). 'Paradigms, systematics and archaeology' in L. Binford
      Working at Archaeology, Academic Press
Bloch, M. (1977a). 'The past and the present in the past', Man (N.S.) 12: 278-92
  (1977b). 'The disconnection between rank and power as a process' in]. Friedman and
      M. Rowlands (eds.)
References                                                                                  269


Bologh, R. (1981). 'Grounding the alienation of self and body: a critical phenomenological
     analysis of the patient in western medicine', Sociology of Health and Illness 3 (2):
     188-206
Bommes, M. and W right, P. (1982). 'Charms of residence: the public and the past' in Centre for
     Contemporary Cultural Studies Making Histories: Studies in History Writing and Politics,
     Hutchinson
Borges, J. (1970). 'Pierre Menard, author of the Quixote' in J. Borges, Labyrinths, Penguin
Boston, R. (1977). Beer and Skittles, Fontana
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge University Press
  (1979). 'Symbolic power', Critique of Anthropology 4: 77-86
  (1984). Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, Routledge and Kegan Paul
Bradley, M. and Fenwick, D. (1974). Public Attitudes to Liquor Licensing Laws in Great Britain,
     HMSO
Braithwaite, M. (1982). 'Decoration as ritual symbol: a theoretical proposal and an ethnographic
     study in southern Sudan' in I. Hodder (ed.)
Braithwaite, R. (1968). Scientific Explanation, Cambridge University Press
Braun, D. and Plog, S. (1982). 'The evolution of"tribal" social networks: theory and prehistoric
     north American evidence', American Antiquity 47: 504-25
Braverman, H. ( 1974). Labour and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth
     Century, Monthly Review Press
Breed, W. and DeFoe, J. (1979). 'Themes in magazine alcohol advertisements; a critique',
    Journal of Drug Issues 9: 511-22
Bremberg, L. (1973). Treatment of Alcoholics and Drug Addicts in Stockholm, Stockholm
Brodbeck, M. (1966). 'Methodologicalindividualisms: definitions and reduction' in Philosophical
     Analysis and History, ed. W. Dray, Harper Row
Bromme, R. (1971). 'Status i alkoholreklamen' in Alkoholreklamen- en motskrift, ed. B. Arenader
     and K. Johanson, Sober, Viinersborg
Brown, P. (1934). 'The Friday Book of North Country Sketches', Beales, Newcastle upon Tyne
Bruun, K. ( 1984). 'Nya perspektiv pa Brattsystemets tillkomsthistoria', Alkoholpolitik: 13-23
Bruun, K., Edwards, G., Lumio, M., Miikelii, K., Pan, L., Popham, R., Room, R.,
     Schmidt, W., Skog, 0.-J., Sulkunen, P. and Osterberg, E. (1975). AlcoholControlPoliciesin
     Public Health Perspective, Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies, Vol. 25
Buck-Morss, S. (1977). The Origin of Negative Dialectics, Harvester Press, Hassocks

Callinicos, A. (1983). Marxism and Philosophy, Oxford University Press
Carnegie, D. (1873). The Licensing Laws of Sweden, Alex MacDougall, Glasgow
Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, Popular Memory Group. (1982). 'Popular memory:
     theory, politics, method' in Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies Making Histories:
     Studies in History Writing and Politics, Hutchinson
Chagnon, N. and Irons, W. (eds.) (1979). Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behaviour,
     Duxbury Press, North Scituate, Mass.
Chapman, S. and Egger, G. (1983). 'Myth in cigarette advertising and health promotion' in
     Language, Image, Media, ed. H. Davis and P. Walton, Basil Blackwell, Oxford
Cheek, A. and Keel, B. (1984). 'Value conflicts in osteo-archaeology' in Green (ed.)
Childe, V. G. (1956). Piecing Together the Past. The Interpretation of Archaeological Data,
     Routledge and Kegan Paul
Chorley, R. and Haggett, P. (1967). Models in Geography, Methuen
Christenson, A. (1980). 'Change in the human niche in response to population growth' in
     Modelling Change in Prehistoric Subsistence Economies, ed. T. Earle and A. Christenson,
     Academic Press
Christie, N. and Bruun, K. (1968). 'Alcohol problems: the conceptual framework' in 28th
 References                                                                                    270


     International Congress on Alcohol and Alcoholism, ed. M. Keller and T. Coffey, Hillhouse
     Press, Highland Park, N.J.
Clark, J. G. D. (1970). Aspects of Prehistory, University of California Press, Berkeley
  (1972). Archaeology and Society, Methuen
  (1979). 'Archaeology and human diversity', Annual Review ofAnthropology 8: 1-20
  (1983). The Identity of Man, Methuen
Clark, R. M. (1975). 'A calibration curve for radiocarbon dates', Antiquity XLIX: 251--66
Clarke, D. (1968). Analytical Archaeology, Methuen
  (1972). 'Models and paradigms in contemporary archaeology' in Models in Archaeology, ed.
     D. Clarke, Methuen
  (1973). 'Archaeology: the loss of innocence', Antiquity XLVII: 6-18
Clarke, J. (1976). 'Style' in Resistance Through Rituals, ed. S. Hall and T. Jefferson, Hutchinson
  (1979). 'Capital and culture: the post-warworkingclass revisited' in WorkingClassCulture, ed.
     J. Clarke, C. Critcher and R. Johnson, Hutchinson
Clarke, J., Hall, S., Jefferson, T. and Roberts, B. (1976). 'Subcultures, cultures and class: a
     theoretical overview' in Resistance Through Rituals, ed. S. Hall and T. Jefferson, Hutchinson
Cleere, H. (ed.) (1984). Archaeological Approaches to our Heritage, Cambridge University Press
Cleere, H. (1984). 'World cultural resource management: problems and perspectives' in
     H. Cleere (ed.)
Cohen, M. ( 1977). The Food Crisis in Prehistory, Yale University Press, New Haven
Coles, J. (1973). Archaeology by Experiment, Hutchinson
  (1979). Experimental Archaeology, Academic Press
Collier, A. (1978). 'In defence of epistemology' in Issues in Marxist Philosophy Vol. 3:
     Epistemology, Science, Ideology, ed. J. Mepham and D.-H. Ruben, Harvester, Hassocks
Collingwood, R. (1946). The Idea of History, Oxford University Press
Conkey, M. (1978). 'Style and information in cultural evolution: towards a predictive model for
     the Palaeolithic' in C. Redman et al. (eds.)
Conkey, M. and Spector,]. (1984). 'Archaeology and the study of gender' in Advances in
     Archaeological Method and Theory, ed. M. Schiffer, Vol. 7, Academic Press
Cooke, K. and Renfrew, C. (1979). 'An experiment on the simulation of culture changes' in
     C. Renfrew and K. Cooke (eds.)
Cornforth, M. (1968). The Open Philosophy and the Open Society, Lawrence and Wishart
Coward, R. and Ellis, J. (1977). Language and Materialism, Routledge and Kegan Paul
CPRS (Central Policy Review Staff) (1982). Alcohol Policies in United Kingdom, confidential
     document suppressed by the British government, published by Kettil Bruun in Studier i
     Svensk Alkoholpolitik, Stockholm
Cunningham, R. (1979). 'Why and how to improve archaeology's business work', American
     Antiquity 44: 573-4
Cutler, A., Hindess, B., Hirst, P. and Hussain, A. (1977-8). Marx's Capital and Capitalism
     Today (2 vols.), Routledge and Kegan Paul

Dahlberg, G. (1939). Alcoholism from aSocialPointofView: A SurveyofConditionsinStockholm,
    Stockholm
  (1951). 'A note on drinking and drunkards in Sweden' ,Acta GeneticaetStatisticaMedica: 6-41
Daniel, G. (1962). The Idea of Prehistory, Penguin, Harmondsworth
  (1981). A Short History of Archaeology, Thames and Hudson
Davidsen, K. (1978). The Final TRB Culture in Denmark, Akademisk Forlag, Copenhagen
Davis, H. ( 1982). 'Professionalism in archaeology', American Antiquity 47: 15 8--63
Debord, G. (1983). The Society of the Spectacle, Black and Red, Detroit
Deetz, J. (1965). The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics, Illinois Studies in
    Anthropology 4, University of Illinois Press, Urbana
 (1968). 'The inference of residence and descent rules from archaeological data' in New
References                                                                                       271



    Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. S. Binford and L. Binford, Aldine, Chicago
Derrida, J. (1974). OfGrammatology (trans G. Spivak), Johns Hopkins University Press,
    Baltimore
Dorfman, A. and Mattelart, A. (1975). How to Read Donald Duck: Imperialist Ideology in the
    Disney Comic, International General, New York
Douglas, M. and Isherwood, B. (1978). The WorldofGoods, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Doyal, L. (1979). The Political Economy of Health, Pluto Press
Dsl, (1978: 34) (Industri- Departementet) Bryggeriindustri -forslag till framtida struktur, Liber,
    Stockholm,
Dunnell, R. (1978a). 'Style and function: a fundamental dichotomy', American Antiquity 43 (2):
     197-202
 (1978b ). 'Archaeological potential of anthropological and scientific models of function' in
    Archaeological Essays in Honour of I. B. Rouse, ed. R. Dunnell and E. Hall, Mouton, The
    Hague
 ( 1980). 'Evolutionary theory and archaeology' in Advances in Archaeological Method and
     Theory, ed. M. Schiffer, Vol. 3
 (1984 ). 'The ethics of archaeological significance decisions' in Ethics and Values in Archaeology,
    ed. E. Green, Free Press, New York
Durkheim, E. ( 191 5). The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, All en and Unwin
Dyer, G. (1982). Advertising as Communication, Methuen

Eagleton, T. (1976). Criticism and Ideology, Verso
  (1981). Waiter Benjamin: Or Towards a Revolutionary Criticism, Verso
  (1983). Literary Theory: An Introduction, Blackwell, Oxford
Earle, T. (1980). 'A model of subsistence change' in Modelling Change in Prehistoric Subsistence
     Economies, ed. T. Earle and A. Christenson, Academic Press
Elshtain, J. (1976). 'The social relations ofthe classroom: a moral and political perspective', Telos
     27: 97-110
Engelbrecht, W. (1978). 'Ceramic patterning between New York Iroquois sites' in The Spatial
     Organisation of Culture, ed. I. Hodder, Duckworth
Englund, A., Solberg, J. and Svensson, P.-G. (1974). Information om ellermed anknytning till
     alkohol i dags-, populiir och fackpress under 1970, Rapport friin alkoholpolitiska utredningar,
     Stockholm
Entwistle, H. (1979). Antonio Gramsci: Conservative Schooling for Radical Politics, Routledge and
     Kegan Paul
Ericson, H. (1980). 'Folk dricker ol med ogonen' in Boken om burken, PLM Pac, Malmo
Ewen, S. (1976). Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social Roots of the Consumer
    Culture, McGraw-Hill, New York
Ewen, S. and Ewen, E. (1982). Channels of Desire: Mass Images and the Shaping of American
    Consciousness, McGraw-Hill, New York

Fabian, J. (1983). Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes its Object, Columbia University
     Press, New York
Fagan, B. (1984). 'Archaeology and the wider audience' in Ethics and Values in Archaeology, ed.
     E. Green, Free Press, New York
Fagg, W. (1973). 'In search of meaning in African art' in Primitive Art and Society, ed. A. Forge,
     Oxford University Press
Fakta (1978). (Faktafrdn svenska bryggareforeningen) '10 starka argument for olreklam', Fakta:
     12-13
Faris, J. (1972). Nuba Persona/Art, Duckworth
  (1983). 'From form to content in the structural study of aesthetic systems' in Structure and
     Cognition in Art, ed. D. Washburn, Cambridge University Press
References                                                                                    272


Featherstone, M. (1982). 'The body in consumer culture', Theory, Culture and Society 1 (2): 18-33
Feigl, H. (1970). 'The "orthodox" view of theories: some remarks in defence as well as critique'
     in Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, ed. M. Radner and S. Winokur, Vol. 4,
     Minneapolis
Fernandez, J. (1966). 'Principles of opposition and vitality in Fang aesthetics' ,Journal of
     Aesthetics and Art Criticism: 53-64
Flannery, K. (1968). 'Archaeological systems theory and early Mesoamerica' in Anthropological
     Archaeology in the Americas, ed. B. Meggers, Washington
  ( 1972). 'The cultural evolution of civilisations', Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 3:
     399-426
  (ed.) (1976). The Early Mesoamerican Village, Academic Press
  (1982). 'The golden Marshal!town, a parable for the archaeology of the 1980s', American
     Anthropologist 84: 265-78
Flannery, K. and Marcus, ]. (1976). 'Formative Oaxaca and the Zapotec cosmos', American
     Scientist 64 (4): 374-83
Ford, R. ( 1973). 'Archaeology serving humanity' in Research and Theory in Current Archaeology,
     ed. C. Redman, Wiley, New York
Forge, A. (1973). 'Style and meaning in Sepik art' in Primitive Art and Society, ed. A. Forge,
     Oxford University Press
Foucault, M. (1974). The OrderofThings, Tavistock
  (1979). Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, Penguin, Harmondsworth and Vintage
     Books, New York
  (1980). Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977 (ed. C. Gordon),
     Harvester, Hassocks
  ( 1981). The History of Sexuality Volume 1: An Introduction, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Fowler, P. (1977). Approaches to Archaeology, Adam and Charles Black
  (1981). 'Archaeology, the public and the sense of the past' in Our Past Before Us: Why Do We
     Save It?, ed. D. Lowenthal and M. Binney, Temple Smith
Frankel, D. (1978). 'Pottery decoration as an indicator of social relationships: a prehistoric
     example' in Art in Society, ed. M. Greenhalgh and V. Megaw, Duckworth
Frankenstein, S. and Rowlands, M. ( 1978). 'The internal structure and regional context of Early
     Iron Age society in south-western Germany', Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology, London
     15: 73-112
Frere, S. (1975). Principles of Publication in Rescue Archaeology, Report for the Ancient Monu-
     ments Board for England, Committee for Rescue Archaeology, HMSO
Friedman, J. and Rowlands, K. (1978). 'Notes towards an epigenetic model of the evolution of
     "civilisation"' in The Evolution of Social Systems, ed. J. Friedman and M. Row lands,
     Duckworth
Frisch, M. (1981). 'The memory of history', Radical History Review 25: 9-23
Fritz, J. (1973). 'Relevance, archaeology and subsistence theory' in Research and Theory in
     Current Archaeology, ed. C. Redman, Wiley, New York
Fritz, J. and Plog, F. (1970). 'The nature of archaeological explanation', American Antiquity 35:
     405-12

Gabrielsson, A. (1970). Koncentration och skalekonomi inom malt- och liiskedrycks-industrin under
    1950 och 1960- talen, Forskningsrapporter fran Kulturgeografiska institutionen, Uppsala
    U niversitet
Gadamer, H-G. (1975). Truth and Method, Sheed and Ward
 ( 1979). 'The problem of historical consciousness' in Interpretative Social Sciences: A Reader,
    ed. P. Rabinow and W. Sul!ivan, University of California Press, Berkeley
Gardin, J-C. (1980). Archaeological Constructs: An Aspect of Theoretical Archaeology, Cambridge
    University Press
References                                                                                      273


Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs
Gebhardt, E. (1978). 'A critique of methodology' in The Essential Frankfurt School Reader, ed.
     A. Arato and G. Gebhardt, Blackwell, Oxford
Gellner, E. (1982). 'What is structuralisme' in Renfrew, Rowlands and Segraves (eds.)
Giddens, A. (1976). New Rules of Sociological Method, Hutchinson
  (1977). 'Positivism and its critics' in A. Giddens Studies in Social and Political Theory,
     Hutchinson
  (1979). Central Problems inS ocial Theory: Action, Structure and Contradiction inS ocial Analysis,
     Macmillan
  (1981). A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, Macmillan
  (1982). Profiles and Critiques in Social Theory, Macmillan
  ( 1984). The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration, Polity Press,
     Cambridge
Gilman, A. (1984). 'Explaining the upper palaeolithic record' in Marxist Perspectives in Archae-
     ology, ed. M. Spriggs, Cambridge University Press
Girouard, M. (1975). Victorian Pubs, Studio Vista
Gledhill, J. (1981). 'Time's arrow: anthropology, history, social evolution and Marxist theory',
     Critique of Anthropology 16: 3-30
Gledhill, J. and Rowlands, M. (1982). 'Materialism and socio-economic processes in multilinear
     evolution' in Ranking, Resource and Exchange, ed. C. Renfrew and S. Shennan, Cambridge
     University Press
Gombrich, E. (1960). Art and Illusion, Phaidon
  (1979). The Sense of Order, Phaidon
Gould, R. and Schiffer, M. (eds.) (1981). Modem Material Culture: The Archaeology of Us,
     Academic Press
Gouldner, A. (1973). 'Anti-minotaur: The myth of a value-free sociology' in A. Gouldner For
     Sociology, Alien Lane
  (1976). The Dialectic of Ideology and Technology, Macmillan
Green, E. (ed.)(1984). Ethics and Values in Archaeology, The Free Press, New York
Gregory, D. (1982a). Regional Transfonnations and Industrial Revolution, Macmillan
  (1982b ). 'Solid geometry: notes on the recovery of spatial structure' in A Search for Common
     Ground, ed. P. Gould and G. Olsson, Pion
Griffiths, D., Irvine, J. and Miles, I. (1979). 'Social statistics: towards a radical science' in
     Demystifying Social Statistics, ed. J. Irvine, I. Miles and J. Evans, Pluto Press
Grinsell, L., Rahtz, P. and Williams, D. (1974). The Preparation ofArchaeological Reports, John
     Baker


Habermas, J. ( 1972). Knowledge and Human Interests, Heinemann
Hall, M. (1984). 'The burden of tribalism: the social context of southern African Iron Age
     studies', American Antiquity 49 (3): 455-67
Hall, S. and Jefferson, T. (eds.) (1976). Resistance Through Rituals: Youth Subcultures in Post-War
     Britain, Hutchinson
Hamberg, 0. (1978). 'Olkulturarbattre an supkultur' ,FaktafranSvenskaBryggaref6reningen 1:
     1-2
Hammond, F. ( 1981). 'The colonisation of Europe: the analysis of settlement processes in P attem
     of the Past: Studies in HonourofDavid Clarke, ed. I. Hodder, G. Isaac and N. Hammond,
     Cambridge University Press
Hansen, F. (1927). 'Undersokning af ganggrift i Fjalkinge', unpublished excavation report,
     Antikvarisk-Topografiska Arkivet, Stockholm
 (1938). Stenaldersproblem, Gleerups, Lund
Hanson, N. (1958). Patterns of Discovery, Cambridge University Press
References                                                                                   274


Hantman, J. and Plog, S. (1982). 'The relationship of stylistic similarity to patterns of material
     exchange' in Contexts for Prehistoric Exchange, ed. J. Ericson and T. Earle, Academic Press
Harn!, R. (1979). Social Being, B1ackwell, Oxford
Harn\ R. and Madden, P. (1975). Causal Powers, Blackwell, Oxford
Harrison, B. (1971). Drink and the Victorians: The Temperance Question in England 1815-1872,
     Faber and Faber
  (1973). 'Pubs' in The Victorian City: Images and Realities, ed. H. Dyos and M. Wolff,
     Routledge :1nd Kegan Paul
Hawkes, C. (1954). 'Archaeological theory and method: some suggestions from the old world',
     American Anthropologist 56: 155-68
Hawkes, J. (1968). 'The proper study of mankind', Antiquity 42: 255-62
Hebdige, D. (1979). Subculture: The Meaning of Style, Methuen
 (1983). 'Travelling light: one route into material culture', RoyalAnthropological/nstitute News:
     11-13
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time (trans. J. MacQuarrie and E. Robinson), Basil Blackwell
  (1972). 'Time and being' in On TimeandBeing(trans. J. Stambaugh), Harper and Row, New
     York
  (1978). 'The origin of the work of art' in Basic Writings (trans. D. F. Krell), Routledge and
     Kegan Paul
Held, D. (1980). Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas, Hutchinson
Hempel, C. (1959). 'The function of general laws in history' in Theories of History, ed.
     P. Gardiner, Free Press, New York
  (1965). Aspects of Scientific Explanation, Free Press, New York
Herner, T. (1972). 'The frequency of patients with disorders associated with alcoholism in
     mental hospitals and psychiatric departments in general hospitals in Sweden during the
     period 1954-1962', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica Suppl. 234: 7-88
Hesse, M. (1974). The Structure of Scientific Inference, Macmillan
  (1978). 'Theory and value in the social sciences' in Action and Interpretation, ed. C. Hookway
     and P. Pettit, Cambridge University Press
Hill, J. (1970). Broken K Pueblo: Prehistoric Social Organization in the American South-West,
     Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona 18, Tucson, Arizona
  (1972). 'The methodological debate in contemporary archaeology: a model' in Models in
     Archaeology, ed. D. Clarke, Methuen
  (ed.) (1977). The Explanation of Prehistoric Change, New Mexico, Albuquerque
  (1977). 'Individual variability in ceramics and the study of prehistoric social organization' in
     Hill and Gunn (eds.)
  (1978). 'Individuals and their artifacts: an experimental study in archaeology', American
     Antiquity 43, 245-57
Hill, J. and Gunn, J. (eds.) (1977). The Individual in Prehistory, Academic Press
Hindess, B. (1977). Philosophy and Methodology in the Social Sciences, Harvester, Hassocks
Hindess, B. and Hirst, P. (1977). Mode of Production and Social Formation: An Auto-Critique of
     Precapitalist Modes of Production, Macmillan
Hobsbawm, E. (1962). The Age of Revolution, Weidenfeld and Nicolson
Hodder, I. (1977). 'The distribution of material culture items in the Baringo district, western
     Kenya', Man 12: 239-69
  (ed.) (1978). Simulation Studies in Archaeology, Cambridge University Press
  (1981). 'An ethnographic study amongst the Lozi, western Zambia' in Pattern of the Past:
     Studies in Honour of David Clarke, ed. I. Hodder, G. Isaac and N. Hammond, Cambridge
     University Press
  (1982a). 'Theoretical archaeology: a reactionary view' in I. Hodder (ed.)
  (1982b). Symbols in Action, Cambridge University Press
  (ed.) (1982). Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, Cambridge University Press
  (1984). 'Archaeology in 1984', Antiquity 58: 25-32
References                                                                                       275


Hollis, M. (1977). Models of Man, Cambridge University Press
Horkheimer, M. (1968). 'Zum Problem der Voraussage in den Sozialwissenschaften' in Kritische
     Theorie, ed. A. Schmidt, S. Fischer Verlag, Frankfurt
  (1976). 'Traditional and Critical theory' in Critical Sociology, ed. P. Connerton, Penguin,
     Harmondsworth
Horne, D. (1984). The Great Museum: The Re-Presentation of History, Pluto Press
Huff, D. (1973). How to Lie with Statistics, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Humphrey, C. (1971). 'Some ideas ofSaussure applied to Buryat magical drawings', ASA
     monograph 10, London
Hutt, C. (1973). The Death of the English Pub, Hutchinson

Inglis, F. (1972). The Imagery of Power: A Critique ofAdvertising, Heinemann

Jameson, F. (1977). 'Reflections in conclusion' in E. Bloch, G. Lukacs, B. Brecht, W. Benjamin
      and T. Adorno Aesthetics and Politics, New Left Books
   (1984). 'Postmodernism, orthe cultural logic of Late capitalism', New Left Review 146: 53-92
Jiirbe, B. (1971). Krogarnas Stockholm, Tidens Forlag, Stockholm
Jarman, M., Bailey, G. and Jarman, H. (eds.) (1982). Early European Agriculture, Cambridge
      University Press
Jay, M. (1984). Marxism and Totality: The Adventures of a Concept, Polity Press, Cambridge
Jelinek, A. (1976). 'Form, function, and style in lithic analysis' in Cultural Change and Continuity:
      Essays in Honour ofJames Griffin, ed. C. Cleland, Academic Press
Jessop, B. (1982). The Capitalist State, Martin Robertson, Oxford
J ochim, M. ( 1976). Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlement: A Predictive Model, Academic
      Press
   (1983a). 'Optimization and models in context' in Archaeological Hammers and Theories, ed.
      J. Moore and A. Keene, Academic Press
   ( 1983b). 'Palaeolithic cave art in ecological perspective' in Hunter-Gatherer Economy in Prehis-
      tory, ed. G. Bailey, Cambridge University Press
Johnson, T., Dandeker, C. and Ashworth, C. (1984). The Structure of Social Theory, Macmillan
Jonsson, E. (1946). 'Socialdemokratien och nykterhetsrorelsen pii 1800- talet'. Tirfing40: 141-72

Keene, A. (1979). 'Economic optimisation models and the study of hunter-gatherer subsistence-
     settlement systems' in C. Renfrew and K. Cooke (eds.)
  (1981). Prehistoric Foraging in a Temperate Forest: A Linear Programming Model, Academic
     Press
Kellner, D. (1983). 'Critical theory, commodities and the consumer society', Theory, Culture and
     Society 1 (3): 66-83
Kenny, A. (1973). Wittgenstein, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Kermode, F. (1967). The Sense of an Ending: Studies in the Theory of Fiction, Oxford University
     Press
King, T. (1983). 'Professional responsibility in public archaeology', Annual Review of Anthro-
    pology 12: 143-64
Kohl, P. (1981). 'Materialist approaches in prehistory', Annual Review ofAnthropology 10: 89-118
Korn, S. (1978). 'The formal analysis of visual systems as exemplified by a study of Abelam
     (Papua New Guinea) paintings' in Art in Society, ed. M. Greenhalgh and V. Megaw,
     Duckworth
Krieger, A. (1944). 'The typological concept', American Antiquity 9: 271-88
Kristiansen, K. (1984). 'Ideology and material culture: an archaeological perspective' in Marxist
    Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. M. Spriggs, Cambridge University Press
Kuhn, T. (1970). The Structure ofScientific Revolutions (2nd edition), University of Chicago Press

Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1985). Hegemony and Socialist Strategy, Verso
References                                                                                    276


Layton, R. (1981). The Anthropology of Art, Paul Elek
Leach, E. (1973). 'Concluding address' in The Explanation of Culture Change, ed. C. Renfrew,
     Duckworth
Leitch, V. (1983). Deconstructive Criticism: An Advanced Introduction, Hutchinson
Leone, M. (1972). 'Issues in anthropological archaeology' in Contemporary Archaeology, ed.
     M. Leone, Southern Illinois Press, Carbondale
  ( 1973). 'Archaeology as the science of technology: Mormon town plans and fences' in Research
     and Theory in Current Archaeology, ed. C. Redman, Wiley, New York
  (1978). 'Time in American archaeology' in C. Redman et al. (eds.)
  (1980). 'The presence of the present in St. Mary's City, Maryland', Paper for Cultural
     Separations and the Anthropology ofPremodern and Modern America, American Anthro-
     pological Association Meetings, Washington
  (198la). 'Archaeology's relationship to the present and the past' in Modem Material Culture:
     The Archaeology of Us, ed. R. Gould and M. Schiffer, Academic Press
  (198lb). 'The relationship between artefacts and the public in outdoor history museums',
     Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 376: 301-14
  (1982). 'Some opinions about recovering mind', American Antiquity 47: 742-59
  (1984). 'Interpreting ideology in historical archaeology: the William Paca garden in Annapolis,
     Maryland' in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds.)
Levi-Strauss, C. (1968). 'Split representation in the art of Asia and America' in C. Levi-Strauss
     Structural Anthropology, Allen Lane
  (1973). Tristes Tropiques, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Lipe, W. (1977). 'A conservation model for American archaeology' in Conservation Archaeology:
     A Guide for Cultural Resource Management Studies, ed. M. Schiffer and G. Gummerman,
     Academic Press
  ( 1984). 'Value and meaning in cultural resources' in Archaeological Approaches to our Heritage,
     ed. H. Cleere, Cambridge University Press
Longacre, W. (1970). Archaeology as Anthropology: A Case Study, Anthropological Papers of the
     University of Arizona, 17, University of Arizona Press
Lowe, D. (1982). History of Bourgeois Perception, University of Chicago Press
Lowenthal, D. (1981). 'Introduction' in D. Lowenthal and M. Binney (eds.)
Lowenthal, D. and Binney, M. (eds.) (1981). Our Past Before Us: Why Do We Save It?, Temple
     Smith
Luklics, G. (1963). The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, Merlin
  (1971). History and Class Consciousness, Merlin
  (1980a). Essays on Realism, Lawrence and Wishart
  (1980b). The Ontology of Social Being: Labour, Merlin


Macherey, P. (1978). A Theory of Literary Production, Routledge and Kegan Paul
Mackie, J. (1974). The Cement of the Universe, Clarendon Press, Oxford
Magnusson, L. (1985). 'Orsaker till det forindustriella drickandet-supandet: hantverkets
    Eskilstuna', Alkoholpolitik 1: 23-9
Miikela, K. and Viikari, M. (1977). 'Notes on alcohol and the state', Acta Sociologica 20 (2):
    155-79
Miikelii, K., Room, R., Single, E., Sulkunen, P. and Walsh, B. (1981). Alcohol, Society and the
    State: A Comparative Study of Alcohol Control (2 vols.), Addiction Research Foundation,
    Toronto
Malmen, G. (1966). Miinniskovdrd och samhiillsskydd, Stockholm
Malmer, M. (1962). 'Jungneolithische Studien', Acta Archaeologica Lundensia, series in 8°: 2
Marcuse, H. ( 1964). One Dimensional M an: Studies in the Ideology ofAdvanced IndustrialS ociety,
    Routledge and Kegan Paul
References                                                                                   277


  (1978). 'On science and phenomenology' in The Essential Frankfurt School Reader, ed.
     A. Arato and E. Gebhardt, Blackwell, Oxford
Marglin, S. (1976). 'What do the bosses do? The origins and functions of hierarchy in capitalist
     production' in The Division of Labour, ed. A. Gorz, Harvester, Hassocks
Martensson, S. (1961). Bryggeriniiringen i Goteborg: Tiden frdn bryggaregillets tillkomst dr 1661
     intill1800-talets bdrjan (2 vols.), Goteborg
Martin, P. and Plog, F. (1973). The Archaeology of Arizona, American Museum of Natural
     History, New York
Marx, K. (1970). 'Theses on Feuerbach' inK. Marx and F. Engels The German Ideology,
     Lawrence and Wishart
Mathias, P. (1959). The Brewing Industry in England, Cambridge University Press
McGimsey, C. (1972). Public Archaeology, Seminar Press
McGimsey, C. and Davis, H. (1984). 'United States of America' in H. Cleere (ed.)
McLuhan, M., Parker H. and Harzun, J. (1969). Exploration of the Ways, Means and Values of
    Museum Communication with the Viewing Public: A Seminar, Museum of the City of New
    York
Meltzer, D. (1979). 'Paradigms and the nature of change in American archaeology', American
    Antiquity 44: 644-57
 (1981). 'Ideology and material culture' in R. Gould and M. Schiffer (eds.)
Miller, D. (1982a). 'Explanation and social theory in archaeological practice' in C. Renfrew,
    M. Rowlands and B. Segraves (eds.)
 (1982b). 'Structures and strategies: an aspect of the relationship between social hierarchy and
    cultural change' in I. Hodder (ed.)
 (1984). 'Modernism and suburbia as material ideology' in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds.)
Miller, D. and Tilley, C. (1984a). 'Ideology, power and prehistory: an introduction' in D. Miller
    and C. Tilley (eds.)
 (1984b). 'Ideology, power and long-term social change' in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds.)
 (eds.) (1984 ). Ideology, Power and Prehistory, Cambridge University Press
Milium, T. (1975). Images of Women: Advertising in Women's Magazines, Chatto and Windus
Monckton, H. (1966). A History of English Ale and Beer, Bodley Head
 (1969). A History of the English Public House, Bodley Head
Morgan, C. (1973). 'Archaeology and explanation', World Archaeology 4: 259-76
Muller, J. (1979). 'Structural studies of art styles' in The Visual Arts Plastic and Graphic, ed.
    J. Cordwell, Mouton, The Hague
Munn, N. (1966). 'Visual categories: an approach to the study of representational systems',
    American Anthropologist 68: 936-50
 (1973). 'The spatial presentation of cosmic order in Walbiri iconography' in Primitive Art and
    Society, ed. A. Forge, Oxford University Press

Nielsen, P. (1977). 'De tyknakkede flintS'lksers kronologi', Aarb~ger for Nordisk Oldkyndighed og
    Historie: 5-66
Nietzsche, F. (1956). The Birth of Tragedy and the Genealogy of Morals, Anchor Doubleday,
    Garden City
  (1981). The Portable Nietzsche, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Nycander, S. (1967). Svenskama och Spriten, Prisma, Oskarshamn

Ollman, B. (1971). Alienation: Marx' s Conception ofMan in Capitalist Society, Cambridge Univer-
    sity Press
Orton, C. (1980). Mathematics in Archaeology, Collins

Packard, V. (1981). The Hidden Persuaders, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Papineau, D. (1979). Theory and Meaning, Blackwell, Oxford
References                                                                                     278


Park, P. (1983). 'Sketches toward a political economy of drink and drinking problems: the case
     of 18th and 19th century England' ,Journal of Drng Issues 13
Passmore, J. (1962). 'Explanation in everyday life, in science and history', History and Theory
     II (2)
Phillipson, M. (1972). 'Phenomenology, philosophy and sociology' in P. Filmer, M. Phillipson,
     D. Silverman and D. Walsh New Directions in Sociological Theory, Collier-Macmillan
Piggott, S. (1954). The Neolithic Cultures of the British Isles, Cambridge University Press
PLM. (1983). 'Marknadsandelar, burk, Sverige 1983', unpublished manuscript
Plog, F. ( 1974). The Study of Prehistoric Change, Academic Press
  (1975). 'Systems theory in archaeological research', Annual Review of Anthropology 4: 207-24
  (1977). 'Archaeology and the individual' in J. Hill and J. Gunn (eds.)
Plog, S. (1976). 'Measurement of prehistoric interaction between communities' in The Early
     Mesoamerican Village, ed. K. Flannery, Academic Press
  (1978). 'Social interaction and stylistic similarity: a reanalysis' in Advances in Archaeological
     Method and Theory I, ed. M. Schiffer, Academic Press
  (1980). Stylistic Variation in Prehistoric Ceramics, Cambridge University Press
  (1983). 'Analysis of style in artifacts', Annual Review of Anthropology 12: 125-43
Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Hut chinson
  (1963). Conjectures and Refutations, Routledge and Kegan Paul
  (1966). The Open Society and its Enemies. Vol. 2. The High Tide of Prophecy: Hegel, Marx and
     the Aftermath, Rout! edge and Kegan Paul
  (1974). 'Intellectual autobiography' in The Philosophy of Karl Popper, ed. P. Schilpp, Open
     Court, La Salle
  (1976). 'The logic of the social sciences' in The Positivist Dispute in German Sociology, ed.
     T. Adorno, Heinemann
Poster, M. ( 1984). F oucault, Marxism and History: M ode ofProduction versus M ode ofInformation,
     Polity Press, Cambridge
Price, B. (1982). 'Cultural materialism: a theoretical review', American Antiquity 47 (4): 709-41
Proposition (1976/77: 108). Om alkoholpolitiken (Swedish government white paper)
Protz, R. (1978). Pulling a Fast One: What the Brewers Have Done to Your Beer, Pluto Press
Putnam, H. (1978). Meaning and the Moral Sciences, Henley

Quine, W. V. 0. (1960). Word and Object, Cambridge, Mass.
 (1961). 'Two dogmas of empiricism' in W. V. 0. QuineFromaLogicalPointofView, Harvard
    University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Raab, L. and Goodyear, A. (1984). 'Middle-range theory in archaeology: a critical review of
    origins and applications', American Antiquity 49 (2): 255-8
Rahtz, P. (ed.) (1973). Rescue Archaeology, Penguin, Harmondsworth
Rappaport, R. (1967). Pigs for the Ancestors, Yale University Press, New Haven
  (1971a). 'The sacred in human evolution', Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 2: 23-44
  (1971b). 'Ritual, sanctity and cybernetics', American Anthropologist 73: 59-76
Rathje, W. (1981). 'A manifesto for modern material culture studies' in Modern Material Culture:
    The Archaeology of Us, ed. R. Gould, Academic Press
Redman, C. (1978a). 'Multivariate artifact analysis: a basis for multidimensional interpretations'
    in C. Redman et al. (eds.)
  (1978b ). 'Mesopotamian urban ecology: the systemic context of the emergence ofurbanism' in
    C. Redman et al. (eds.)
Redman, C., Berman, J., Curtin, E., Langhorne, W., Versaggi, N. and Wanser, J. (eds.) (1978).
    Social Archaeology: Beyond Dating and Subsistence, Academic Press
Renfrew, C. (1972). The Emergence of Civilisation: The Cyclades and the Aegean in the Third
    MillenniumB.C., Methuen
References                                                                                     279


  (1978a). 'Trajectory discontinuity and morphogenesis: the implications of catastrophe theory
     for archaeology', American Antiquity 43: 202-22
  (1978b). 'Space, time and polity' in The Evolution of Social Systems, ed. J. Friedman and
     M. Rowlands, Duckworth
  (1979a). 'Transformations' in C. Renfrew and K. Cooke (eds.)
  (1979b ). 'Systems collapse as social transformation: catastrophe and anastrophe in early state
     societies' in C. Renfrew and K. Cooke (eds.)
  (1982a). 'Explanation revisited' in C. Renfrew, M. Rowlands and B. Segraves (eds.)
  ( 1982b). 'Discussion: contrasting paradigms' in Ranking, Resource and Exchange in Early
     European Prehistory, ed. C. Renfrew and S. Shennan, Cambridge University Press
  (1982c). Towards an Archaeology of Mind, Cambridge University Press
  (1983). 'Divided we stand: aspects of archaeology and information', American Antiquity 48:
     3-16
Renfrew, C. and Cooke, K. (eds.) (1979). Transformations: Mathematical Approaches to Culture
     Change, Academic Press
Renfrew, C. and Wagstaff, M. (eds.) (1982). An Island Polity, Cambridge University Press
Renfrew, C., Rowlands, M. and Segraves, B. (eds.) (1982). Theory and Explanation in Archae-
     ology: The Southampton Conference, Academic Press
Ricoeur, P. (198la). 'The hermeneutical function of distanciation' in P. Ricoeur Hermeneutics
     and the Human Sciences (ed. and trans. J. Thompson), Cambridge University Press
  (198lb). 'Metaphor and the central problem ofhermeneutics' in P. Ricoeur Hermeneutics and
     the Social Sciences (ed. and trans. J. Thompson), Cambridge University Press
  (198lc). 'The narrative function' in P. Ricoeur Hermeneutics and the Social Sciences (ed. and
     trans. J. Thompson), Cambridge University Press
Romer, J. (1984). Ancient Lives: The Story of the Pharoah's Tombmakers, Weidenfeld and
     Nicolson
Rorty, R. ( 1980). Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Blackwell, Oxford
Rose, G. (1984). Dialectic of Nihilism: Post Structuralism and Law, Blackwell, Oxford
Rowlands, M. (1982). 'Processual archaeology as historical social science' in C. Renfrew,
     M. Rowlands and B. Segraves (eds.)
  (1984). 'Objectivity and subjectivity in archaeology' inMarxistPerspectivesinArchaeology, ed.
     M. Spriggs, Cambridge University Press
Royal College of Psychiatrists, Special Committee (1979). Alcohol and Alcoholism, Tavistock
Ruben, D.-H. (1977). Marxism and Materialism, Harvester, Hassocks


Sabloff, J. (ed.) (1981). Simulations in Archaeology, New Mexico, Albuquerque
Sackett, J. (1982). 'Approaches to style in lithic archaeology', Journal of Anthropological Archae-
    ology 1: 59-112
  (1985). 'Style and ethnicity in the Kalahari: a reply to Wiessner', American Antiquity 50: 154-60
Sahlins, M. (1976). The Use and Abuse of Biology, Tavistock
Sahlins, M. and Service, E. (eds.) (1960). Evolution and Culture, University of Michigan Press,
    Ann Arbor
Salmon, M. (197 5). 'Confirmation and explanation in archaeology', American Antiquity 40:
    459-65
  (1982). Philosophy and Archaeology, Academic Press
SAMO (1981: 21) (Samordningsorganet for alkoholfragor) Data om alkoholkonsumtionen och dess
    skadeverkningar, Social-departementet, Stockholm
Samuel, R. (1983). 'Soft focus nostalgia', New Statesman 27/5/83 (Victorian Values Supplement
    ii-iv)
Sanders, W. and Webster, D. ( 1978). 'U nilinealism, multilinealism and the evolution of complex
    societies' in C. Redman et al. (eds.)
References                                                                                     280


Sartre, J-P. (1958). Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology, Methuen
   (1982). Critique of Dialectical Reason, Verso
Saxe, A. and Gall, P. (1977). 'The ecological evolution of culture: the state as predator in
      succession theory' in Exchange Systems in Prehistory, ed. T. Earle and J. Ericson, Academic
      Press
Sayre, K. (1976). Cybernetics and the Philosophy of Mind, Routledge and Kegan Paul
Scase, R. (1977). Social Democracy in Capitalist Society, Croom Helm
Schapiro, J. (1977). 'The slime of history: embeddedness in nature and critical theory' in On
      Critical Theory, ed. J. O'Neill, Heinemann
Schiffer, M. (1976). Behavioural Archaeology, Academic Press
  (1979). 'A preliminary consideration of behavioural change' in C. Renfrew and K. Cooke
       (eds.)
   ( 1981). 'Some issues in the philosophy of archaeology', American Antiquity 46: 899-908
   (1983). 'Toward the identification of formation processes', American Antiquity 48: 675-706
Schiffer, M. and Gummerman, G. (eds.) (1977). Conservation Archaeology: A Guide for Cultural
      Resource Management Studies, Academic Press
Schiffer, M., Downing, T. and McCarthy, M. (1981). 'Waste not, want not: an ethnoarchaeo-
      logical study of refuse in Tucson, Arizona' in R. Gould and M. Schiffer (eds.)
Schlereth, T. (1978). 'It wasn't that simple', Museum News 56 (3): 36-44
Schneider, J. (1978). 'Deviant drinking as disease: alcoholism as a social accomplishment', Social
      Problems 25: 361-72
Schutz, A. (1972). The Phenomenology of the Social World, Heinemann
Sellars, W. (1963). Science, Perception and Reality, Humanities Press, New York
Service, E. (1975). Origins of the State and Civilisation, Norton, New York
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. (1982). 'Ideology, symbolic power and ritual communication: a
      reinterpretation of neolithic mortuary practices' in I. Hodder (ed.)
  (n.d.). Social Theory and Archaeology, Polity Press, Cambridge (in press)
Sharman, H. (1983). 'Canny moves: brewers draw on bitter heritage', Marketing Week: 27 May
Shennan, S. (1978). 'Archaeological "cultures": an empirical investigation' in The Spatial Organ-
      isation of Culture, ed. I. Hodder, Duckworth
Sherratt, A. (1981). 'Plough and pastoralism: aspects of the secondary products revolution' in
      Pattern of the Past: Studies in Honour of David Clarke, ed. I. Hodder, G. Isaac and
      N. Hammond, Cambridge University Press
Sjohagen, A. (1953). 'How a Swedish temperance board works', Quarterly Journal of Studies on
      Alcohol14: 69-77
  (1954). 'Measures between inpatient and outpatient care for alcoholics', Quarterly Journal of
      Studies on Alcohol IS: 111-15
Smart, B. (1983). Foucault, Marxism and Critique, Routledge and Kegan Paul
Smith, M. (1983). 'Social uses of the public drinking house: changing aspects of class and
      leisure', British Journal of Sociology XXIV: 367-85
Socialstyrelsen (1952). Social Sweden, Stockholm
  (1983). Bakgrunden: Fakta om Sveriges Alkoholpolitik, Stockholm
Society of Professional Archaeologists (1984a). 'Code of Ethics' in E. Green (ed.)
  (1984b). 'Standards of research performance' in E. Green (ed.)
Sontag, S. (1979). On Photography, Penguin
SOU (195 1: 43) (Statens offentlige utredningar) Statistika undersokningar kring alkoholfrdgan,
      Stockholm
  (1952: 52). Nykterhetsforhdllanden i vissaframmande lander mm., Stockholm
  (1952: 53). 1944 drs nykterhetskommitte V. Principbetankande, Stockholm
  (1974: 90). Alkoholpolitik 1 Bakgrund, Stockholm
  (1974: 91). Alkoholpolitik 2 Atgarder, Stockholm
  (1974: 92). Alkoholpolitik 3 Bilagor, Stockholm
References                                                                                       281


  ( 1976). Reklamen for alkohol och tobak, Stockholm
Spanos, W. (1977). 'Breaking the circle: hermeneutics ad dis-closure', Boundary 2 5: 421-57
Spivak, G. (197 4). 'Introduction' in J. Derrida Of Grammatology, Johns Hopkins University
     Press, Baltimore
Sterud, E. (1978). 'Changing aims of Americanist archaeology: a citations analysis of"American
     Antiquity", 1964--75', American Antiquity 43: 294--302
Steward, J. (1955). Theory of Culture Change, University of Illinois Press, Urbana
Storch, R. (1977). 'The problem of working class leisure. Some roots of middle-class moral
     reform in the industrial north 1825-1850' in Social Control in Nineteenth Century Britain, ed.
     A. Donajgrodzji, Croom Helm
Strickland, D., Finn, T. and Lambert, M. (1982). 'A content analysis of beverage alcohol
     advertising I. Magazine advertising', Journal of Studies on Alcohol43 (7): 655-82
Stromberg, M. (1971). 'Die Megalithgriiber von Hagestad', Acta Archaeologica Lundensia, series
     in 8° No. 9
Svensson, A. (1973). Svensk alkoholpolitik, Sober, Viinersborg
Swingewood, A. (1977). The Myth of Mass Culture, Macmillan
Systembolaget (1965). 10 dr utan motbok, Stockholm
Szasz, T. (1975). Ceremonial Chemistry: The Ritual Persecution of Drugs, Addicts, and Pushers,
     Routledge and Kegan Paul


Thomas, D. ( 1972). 'Western Shoshone ecology: settlement patterns and beyond' in Great Basin
     Cultural Ecology: A Symposium, ed. D. Fowler, Desert Research Publications in the Social
     Sciences 8
Thompson, E. P. (1963). The Making of the English Working Class, Penguin, Harmondsworth
  (1967). 'Time, work-discipline, and industrial capitalism', Past and Present 38
Thompson, W. (1935). The Control of Liquor in Sweden, Columbia University Press, New York
Tilden, F. (1957). Interpreting Our Heritage, University of North Carolina Press
Tilley, C. (1981a). 'Conceptual frameworks for the explanation of sociocultural change' in
     Pattern of the Past: Studies in Honour ofDavid Clarke, ed. I. Hodder, G. Isaac and
     N. Hammond, Cambridge University Press
  (1981 b). 'Economy and society: what relationship?' in Economic Archaeology, ed. A. Sheridan
     and G. Bailey, British Archaeological Reports, Oxford
  (1982a). 'Social formation, social structures and social change' in I. Hodder (ed.)
  (1982b). 'An assessment of the Scanian Battle-Axe tradition: towards a social perspective',
     Scripta Minora: 1-72
  (1983). Prehistoric Change: A Dialectical-Structuralist Perspective, unpublished doctoral
     dissertation, Cambridge University
  (1984). 'Ideology and the legitimation of power in the middle neolithic of southern Sweden' in
     D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds.)
  ( 1985). 'Archaeology as sociopolitical action in the present' in Critical Traditions in Contempor-
     ary Archaeology, ed. V. Pinsky and A. Wylie, Cambridge University Press
Torrence, R. (1983). 'Time budgeting and hunter-gatherer technology' in Hunter-Gatherer
     Economy in Prehistory, ed. G. Bailey, Cambridge University Press
Trigger, B. (1968). Beyond History: The Methods ofPrehistory, Holt, Rinehartand Winston, New
     York
  (1970). 'Aims in prehistoric archaeology', Antiquity 44: 26-37
  (1978). Time and Traditions: Essays in Archaeological Interpretation, Edinburgh University Press
  (1980). 'Archaeology and the image of the American Indian', American Antiquity 45: 662-76
  (1981). 'Anglo-American archaeology', World Archaeology 13: 138-55
  (1984). 'Archaeology at the crossroads: what's new?', Annual Review ofAnthropology 13:
     275-300
References                                                                                   282


Tringham, R. (1978). 'Experimentation, ethnoarchaeology and the leapfrogs in archaeological
    methodology' inExplorationsinEthnoarchaeology, ed. R. Gould, UniversityofNew Mexico
    Press, Albuquerque

Ucko, P. (1983). 'Australian academic archaeology: Aboriginal transformation of its aims and
    practices', Australian Archaeology 16: 11-26

Vastokas, J. (1978). 'Cognitive aspects of Northwest Coast art' in Art in Society, ed.
    M. Greenhalgh and V. Megaw, Duckworth
Vatanen, 0. and Tengvall, G. (1983). 'Krogarnas kriingliga labyrint', Dagens Nyheter, 14 July
Von Wright, G. (1971). Explanation and Understanding, Routledge and Kegan Paul

Walka, J. (1979). 'Management methods and opportunities in archaeology', American
     Antiquity 44: 575-82
Wallace, M. (1981). 'Visiting the past: history museums in the United States', Radical History
     Review 25: 63-96
Watkins,}. (1970). 'Methodological individualisms and social tendencies' in Readings in the
     Philosophy of the Social Sciences, ed. M. Brodbeck, London
Watson, P., LeBlanc, S. and Redman, C. (1971). Explanation in Archaeology: An Explicitly
     Scientific Approach, Columbia University Press, New York
Weber, M. (1964). The Theory of Social and Economic Organisation, Free Press, New York
We bster, G. ( 1974). Practical Archaeology: An Introduction to Archaeological Fieldwork and
     Excavation, Adam and Charles Black
Weissner, P. (1983). 'Style and social information in Kalahari San projectile points', American
     Antiquity 48: 253-76
 (1985). 'Style or isochrestic variation? A reply to Sackett', American Antiquity 50: 160-5
We1bourn, A. (1984). 'Endo ceramics and power strategies' in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds.)
Wenke, R. (1981). 'Explaining the evolution of cultural complexity: a review' in Advances in
     Archaeological Theory and Method Vol. 5, ed. M. Schiffer, Academic Press
Whallon, R. (1968). 'Investigations oflate prehistoric social organisation in New York state' in
     New Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. L. and S. Binford, Aldine, Chicago
 ( 1982). 'Comments on "explanation" 'in Ranking, Resource and Exchange, ed. C. Renfrew and
     S. Shennan, Cambridge University Press
Wheeler, M. ( 1954). Archaeology from the Earth, Penguin, Harmondsworth
White, L. (1959). The Evolution of Culture, McGraw-Hill, New York
Wiatr, }. (1969). 'Sociology-Marxism-Reality' in Marxism and Sociology- Views from Eastern
    Europe, ed. P. Berger, Appleton Century Crofts, New York
Wiklund, D. (1948). 'Proposal of the Swedish government committee for reform of the care of
     inebriates', Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol9: 37-87
Willey and Sabloff, J. (1980). A History ofAmerican Archaeology (2nd edn), Freeman, New York
Williams, R. (1979). 'The growth and role of the mass media' in Media, Politics and Culture, ed.
     C. Gardner, Macmillan
 (1980). 'Advertising: the magic system' in R. Williams Problems in Materialism and Culture,
     Verso
Williamson, J. (1978). Decoding Advertisements: Ideology and Meaning in Advertising, Marion
     Boyars
Willis, P. (1977). Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs, Saxon
     House
Wilson, E. 0. (1975). Sociobiology: A New Synthesis, Harvard University Press
 (1978). On Human Nature, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Wilson, G. (1940). Alcohol and the Nation, London
Winship, J. (1981). 'Handling sex', Media, Culture and Society 3: 25-42
References                                                                                 283


Wishart, T. (1984). 'Sights and sounds of lOth century Coppergate', Popular Archaeology
Winter, J. (1984). 'The way to somewhere: ethics in American archaeology' in E. Green (ed.)
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophicallnvestigations, Blackwell, Oxford
 (1969). The Blue and Brown Books, Blackwell, Oxford
Wobst, M. (1977). 'Stylistic behaviour and information exchange', Anthropological Papers of the
    University of Michigan 61: 317-42
Wolff, J. (1981). The Social Production ofArt, Macmillan
 (1984). Aesthetics and the Sociology ofArt, George Allen and Unwin
Wolin, R. (1982). WalterBenjamin: AnAesthetic ofRedemption, Columbia University Press, New
    York
Wood, M. (1985). InSearchofthe Trojan War, BBC

Zubrow, E. (1972). 'Environment, subsistence and society: the changing archaeological
    perspective', Annual Review of Anthropology 1: 179-206
  (1980). 'International trends in theoretical archaeology', Norwegian Archaeological Review
    13 (1): 14-23
Page Intentionally Left Blank
INDEX




adaptation, 45, 53, 54, 56, 118,       as science, 12-13, 26 (Fig.       comparative method, 11, see also
      119, 121, 133, 139, 140,            1.1), 29-45 passim, 46, 61,          evolution, cultural
      141, 146, 150                       63,91-2                        conceptual links, 111-13
Adorno, T., 9, 47, 48, 50, 57,         social, 14, 53, 116-34 passim     consciousness
      59, 93, 99, 248                  and social sciences, 244-5           discursive and practical, 125-
advertising (with drink), 200,         and statistics, 11, 56-7, 62,           6, 133, 144, 146
      208, 210, 211, 214-35               122, 245                       conservation, conservation
aestheticization, 72-3, 79-80          traditional humanist, 13, 30-           ethic, 8, 22, 24-6 and Fig.
agency, 122-6, 128, 147, 244,             2, 46, 91-2                          1.1, 64-5, 85-6, 90, 120
      see also power                 archaeology as ideology, 46-67         cultural resource and
alcoholic drink, 172-240 passim           passim, 116, 245                     management and rescue,
   Bratt system, 193-6, 200, 207     aura (with artifact), 75-6                24-5, 64, 120, 245
   health, 198, 200, 206, 207,                                           consumerism, 198-200, 202,
      239                            Bachelard, G., 103                        205-6,208,209,237,238
   legislative control, 188-9,       Barthes, R., 84, 88, 147, 172,      context, xix
      190, 197-8, 199, 201, 202,         208,253                         contradiction, 52, 110, 116,
      207, 211, 215, 239             behaviourism, 55-6, 118, see              119, 127, 130, 133, 137,
   newspapers, 209-14                    also functionalism                    149, 154, 170, 190, 191,
   problem drinking, 190, 191,       Benjamin, W, 18, 89                       236,240
      196, 198, 200, 202-4, 211,     Binford, L., 13, 29, 44, 52, 53,    correspondence rules, 39
      239                                54, 60, 117, 139-40             critical archaeology, 14, 28, 62,
   the state, 204-5, 208-9, 236      Borges, }., xx, 15                        65-7, 68, 69, 97-9, 103-4,
   temperance, 189, 190, 191,                                                  109-10, 114-15, 116, 243-
                                     Bourdieu, P., 128, 172, 238, 253
      192-7, 198,200,204,206,                                                  6, 258, 265 passim, see also
                                     brewing industry, 186-9, 196,
      211, 216, 237                      207-8                                pluralism, radical; rhetoric;
   work and leisure, 189-90,                                                   archaeology as ideology
                                       capital accumulation, 186-7
      191, 198-9,236,240                                                 culture, 117, 119, 147
allochronism, 9, 11                                                        material culture, 13-14, 106,
Althusser, L., 43, 114, 121, 123     Caduveo Indians, 154                      129, 130-4, 137-240
American Indians, 246                capitalism, 14, 19, 21, 45, 48-          passim, 245
analytic terms, 39                        9, 50, 51, 66, 82, 93, 172-      modern material culture
analytical space regions, 166-9           240 passim, esp. 186                studies, 14, 172, 172-240
anthropology, 108, 119                  cultural, 24                          passim
   and art, 150-2, 153, 154          carbon 14 dating, 13, 155
anthropomorphism, 57                 catastrophe theory, 31, 58, see
archaeology                               also mathematization           Daniel, G., 93
   antiquarianism, 11 7              causation, 39, 45, 113              decision theory, 50, 51
   autobiographical, 23-4            ceramics, 137-71 passim, esp.       Derrida,}., xx, 253-4
   economic, 49-51                         155-71                        design
   experimental, 12, 16              change, 52, 53, 118, 129-30,           bounded and unbounded,
   feminist, xxii, 246                    138, 139, 140, 141, 146, see         160, 162-3 (Figs. 7.3 and
   fiction, 111-12                        also contradiction                   7.4), 170
   fieldwork, 22-3, 26 (Fig. 1.1),   Childe, V. G., 30, 117                 on beer cans, 173-86
      27, 86-9                       Clark,J. G. D., 26 (Fig. 1.1),         ceramic, 137, 156-71
   justifications, 8, 25-7 (Fig.          63-4, 117                         rules, 159-62
      1.1), 62, 92                   Clarke, D., xvii, 13-14, 29, 30-       see also style
   mathematical, 35, 57-9, 245            1, 49, 52, 92, 93, 244         dialectics, 103-15 passim, esp.
   'new', 13, 29-45 passim, 4 7,     classification, 11, 117                   110, 257
      48, 53, 58, 60, 117, 247          ceramic designs, 157-9           discourse, xix, 251,254-6,261-
   palaeoeconomy, 34, 35, 60,        commodification, 48, 68, 70,              4
      63, 128                             72,74,81-2,88,98               discovery, 71, 86-8, 90
   popular, 76, 91-3                    oflabour, 186, 189, 199          distanciation, 17-20

                                                                                                      285
Index                                                                                                    286


ecology, 53                           holism, 119-20                      mimesis, 21, see also narrative
empathy, 12-13, 15-16, 22, 106        homeostasis, 52, 53, ll7, ll9,      model building, 49, 50, 58
empiricism, 32, 36, 38-40, 43-             121, see also functionalism;   modern material culture, 14,
     4, 47, 59, 61, 103, 105,              systems theory                      172-240 passim
     106, 113, 172, 243, 247 see      hunter-gatherers, 50, 51-2          motivated/non-motivated signs,
     also positivism                  hypothetico-deductive method,            151
epistemology, see knowledge                36, 108, 117, see also         museums
equilibrium, 52, see also    -             archaeology as science;          British Museum, 71-3, 77
     homeostasis                           theory-data relationship         Castle Museum, York, 76-82
essentialism, 120, 259                                                      George Joicey Museum, 80-1
ethics, xviii                         idealism, 250, 252                    Jorvik Viking Centre, 86-90
ethnoarchaeology, 14                  ideology, 14, 26 (Fig. 1.1), 27,      Museum of Antiquities,
ethnocentricism, 151-2                     48, 94, llO, 116, ll9, 122,         Newcastle upon Tyne, 69-
evolution                                  12~ 124, 127, 13~ 131,              71, 77
  biological, 54-6                         133, 134, 137, 148, 149,         Museum of London, 7 4-6
  cultural, 53-4, 117                      154, 155, 170, 171, 172,         North of England Open Air
explanation, 29-45 passim, esp.            209, 236, 238, 240, 244, see        Museum, Beamish, 83-6
     38-40,49-50,103-15                    also archaeology as ideology     as ideology, 68, 73, 92, 96-7
     passim, esp. 112-13, see also    individualism, 123-6, 128, 141,       as institution, 90-1, 99
     knowledge; truth                      14 7-9, see also agency;
  deductive nomological, 38                subject                        narrative, 13, 14, 19-20, 69, 70,
  inductive statistical, 38           information exchange theory,             73, 74, 79, 81, 98, 123, see
                                           141-2                               also text and discourse
Flannery, K., 32-3                    instrumentalism, 26 (Fig. 1.1),       display, 74-6
Foucault, M., 147, 191,253                 49, 59, 66, 118                naturalism, 34-6, 41, 45, 247
Fourier, C., 34                       internal relations, 122, 127,       necessity, 121
Fowler, P., 93-4                           129, 132                       Neolithic (Sweden), 155-71
function, 52, 118-19, 121, 140,       interpretation, 22, 103-4, 105-     New Right, 258
     239, see also style                   7, 103-15 passim               Nietzsche, F., 21, 93
functionalism, 32, 53, 123, 137,      inventory, 16, 78                   non-identity thinking, 17-20,
     172                              isochrestic variation, 142-6             76,95-6
Gadamer, H.-G., 105-7
game theory, 50                       knowledge, 27-8, 46, 66, 78,        objectification, 130-2, 134, see
Gardin, J,-C., 16                         Ill, 113-14, 29-45                   also culture, material
generalization, 38, 57-8, see also        passim, 103-15 passim, see      objective past, 18, 22-3, see also
    laws                                  also explanation; laws               archaeology, 'new';
Giddens, A., 29, 107, 128, 253        Kuhn, T., 30, 37                         archaeology as science; laws
Goteborg system, 192                  !Kung Bushpeople, 145, 146          objectivity, xviii, xxi, 36, 44, 46-
Gouldner, A., 61                                                               67 passim, 69-70, 73, 94,
Gramsci, A., 265                      laws, 14, 32, 38, 41, 44, 48, 63,        95, 96, 98, 105, 108, 110,
                                            105, ll7                           112, ll8, 128, 248-50
Habermas, J., 62, 248                 Leone, M., 14, 31, 94               optimization, 50-1, 53
Hawkes, J., 91-2                      Ii:vi-Strauss, C., 154, 253         overdetermination, 121, 129
hegemony, 29                          ley-lines, 13
Heidegger, M., 9, 21, 105             Lukacs, G., 124                     Palaeolithic cave art, 56
Hempel, C., 32, 39, 41                Lund (Sweden), 174, 206             paradigms, 30, 48, 61
heritage, xxii, 23, 26, 27, 28, 74,                                       phenomenalism, 36-43
     83-6                             management science, 51              philosophy of action, 34-5, 118-
hermeneutics, 105-8, 110, 114,        Marxism, ll9, 120,244                    19, 122-6
      248                               Structural Marxism, 60            philosophy of NO, 103
  fourfold hermeneutic, 107-8           Western Marxism, 119              philosophy of science, 32, 34-5,
  hermeneutic circle, 104-6,          materialism, xviii, 249-51               110, 243
      109                             mathematization, 50, 57-9           photography, 77-9, 80
Hill, J., 31, 141                     megalithic tomb (Fjiilkinge No.     pluralism
history, 16-17, 22, 23, 26 and            9), 155-79                        radical, 11, 28, 245-6, 257-
     Fig. 1.1, 27, 31, 43, 50, 54,    memory, 17, 18, 22, 71,82                8,264
      58, 67, 68, 71, 73, 80, 81,     Mesakin Nuba, 153                     repressive, 60-1
     84-5, 90, 94, 95, 97, 98,        metaphor, 20-1                      poetics, 261-2
      108, 109, llO, 114, 116,        method and methodology, 43,         Popper, K., 38, 41-2
      120, 121, 123, 134, 138,            46, 47, 48, 59-62, 66, 96,      pornography, 79-80
      145, 148, 246, 260                  105, 108, 109, 116              positivism, 29-45 passim, 47,
Hodder, I., 14, 27, 141, 142,         middle-range theory, 13, 44,             48, 63, 103, 113, see also
      153                                 122, 247                             empiricism
Index                                                                                                      287


pottery, 18, 137-71 passim             Schiffer, M., 33, 119                 theoretical objects, 11, 112,
power, 110, 123, 129, 131, 133,        scientism, 48, 54, 108,243,245,             113,171
     149, 153, 155, 172, 209,                see also archaeology as         theory-data relationship, 36-44,
     244,263-4                               science; laws                         59, 66, 104, 110-15, 248
  disciplinary, 190, 191, 192,         Seferis, G., 74-5, 76                 time, 7, 23, 27, 51, 53-4, 68,
     194-206,208-9,236,238             social identity, 142-6                      77, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 96,
  and 'new' archaeology, 31            social typology, 53                         116, 122, 125, 127, 128,
practical inference, 125               sociobiology, 55, 56                        164
presencing, 21                         spectacular archaeology, 22-3            presencing, 21
presentation (display), 68, 69,        storytelling, 18-19                      spatial commodified time, 9-
     74, 76-9, 81, 82, 90, 95,         structuralism, 76, 122, 123,                11, 22, 68, 69-70, 75-6,
     96,98                                   172,252-3                             82, 138, see also archaeology
professionalism, 24-6, 69, 97-8        structure, 106, 113, 116, 121,              as ideology
progress, 30, 53, 54                         122, 123, 127-30, 131,             subjective time, 71
progressive educational theory,              132, 137, 144, 146, 148,           synchrony and diachrony,
     91                                      149, 244                              121, 122
public houses, 189-90, 191,               structural (formal) analysis,      topological thinking, 9-1 0
     192, 199,207-8,211                      152, 157-63                     totality, 104, 120, 121-2, 126-
                                          structuration, 113, 128, 134             7, 132, 134, 264
Quine, W. V. 0., 39-40                    structuring principles, 113,          total system, 121, 122
rational method, 46-67 passim,               132, 152, 153, 154, 169-        'transformations', 57-8
      esp. 4 7, see also empiricism;         70                              TRB (of Sweden), 155-71
      positivism                       style, 56, 138-55, 254                Trigger, B., 31
rationality, 26 and Fig. 1.1, 27,         and function, 137, 139, 142-       truth, 20-2, 27-8, 36, 41, 62,
      42, 47, 48, 50, 51, 59-61,             6                                     67, 79, 93, 94, 95, 96, 106,
      73                                  and art, 147-55                          112, 244
realism and naturalism, 77-9,          stylistic drift, 139-40
      85, 88, 97                       subject                               values, xviii, 44, 45, 46-67
realism (philosophical), 112-13,          decentered, 123, 147-8                  passim, 116, 125, 247,
      243-4                               positioned, 123                         264-5, see also critical
reductionism, 259                         see also agency; individualism          archaeology; theory-data
reification, 48, 49, 93, 97, 118,      subjective idealism, 43, 45                relationship
      see also commodified time        subjectivity                            the valuable past, 26 (Fig.
relativism, 14, 62, 93-4, 110,            subjective experience, 11, 23-          1.1),64-5
      114, see also repressive               4, 79, 80, 123                  verification and falsification, 40-
     pluralism                            subjectivism, 44, 110                   2, 103, 105, 111
Renfrew, C. 29, 30, 35, 36, 38,           subjectivity, 12, 28, 73           Vienna circle, 38, 39, 40, 41
      52, 58, 117                         subjectivity and objectivity, 8,   Virgil's Aeneid, 88-9
rhetoric, 17,66-7,68, 69, 76,                12, 28, 37-8,40, 42-3, 71,      voluntarism, 123
      95, 116, 129, see also                 103, 115, 243, 248-50           Von Wright, G. H., 125
      critical archaeology             synthetic terms, 39
Ricoeur,P., 17-18                      system, 116, 127
ritual, 118                            systems theory, 32, 52-3              Walibiri art, 150
   funerary, 163-4, 169-70                social system, 117-18, 119         Washington (England), 174
Rowlands, M., 14, 120                                                        Wittgenstein, L., 35, 125, 132
                                       teleological positing, 124-5          Wobst, M., 141-2
Sackett, J., 142-6, 151                testing, 38, 40-3, 47, 111            World Archaeological Congress
sampling, 23, 156, 173-4, 210,         text and discourse, 16-21, 254             1986, xxii
    214-16                                  see also rhetoric; critical      writing, xviii, xix, 254-6, 261-
scepticism, 11, 46, 65, 243                 archaeology                           2, see also narrative
