Table of Contents

EUROPE AND THE PEOPLE WITHOUT HISTORY

Foreword to the 2010 Edition

Preface (1997)

Preface (1982)

Part One Connections

1 Introduction

The Rise of the Social Sciences

Economics and Political Science

The Development of Sociological Theory

Anthropology

The Uses of Marx

2 The World in 1400

Political Geography of the Old World

Trade

Pastoral Nomads

The Near East and Africa

North and West Africa

East Africa

South and East Asia

India

China

Southeast Asia

The New World

Mesoamerica

3 Modes of Production

Production and Social Labor

Modes of Production

The Capitalist Mode

The Tributary Mode

Civilizations

Mercantile Wealth

The Kin-Ordered Mode of Production

The Problem of Chiefdoms

4 Europe, Prelude to Expansion

The Shift in Patterns of Long-Distance Trade

The Rise of the Italian Ports

Political Consolidation

War Abroad

Commerce

Enlarging the Royal Domain

State Making and Expansion

Portugal

Castile-Aragón (Spain)

The International Circuits of Mercantile Wealth

The United Provinces

France

The Limits of Mercantile Circulation

England

Part Two In Search of Wealth

5 Iberians in America

The Great Dying

The Wealth of Spanish America

The Search for Silver

The Flow of Silver

Secondary Exports: Dyestuffs and Cocoa

The Siphon of External Trade

New Systems of Supply

The Hacienda

Indian Communities

Brazil and the Caribbean

Contraband

Pirates, "Colonial Tribes," and Maroons

6 The Fur Trade

History of the Fur Trade

Northeastern Populations

Abenaki

Huron

Iroquois

Populations of the Great Lakes

The Midewiwin

Expansion Westward

Changes in the Fur Trade

Pontiac's Revolt

Northwestern Athabascans

New Companies

Horse Pastoralists on the Plains

The Red River Métis

Northwest Coast

The Siberian Fur Trade

Populations of the Northwest Coast

7 The Slave Trade

The Course of the Slave Trade

Why Africa?

The African Background

Mechanisms of Enslavement

Areas of Supply: West Africa

The Gold Coast

Oyo and Dahomey

Benin

The Niger Delta

Areas of Supply: Central Africa

The Kingdom of Kongo

Imbangala

Luba-Luttda

Ivory and Slaving in Eastern Africa

The Bemba

8 Trade and Conquest in the Orient

Islam in South Asia

The Portuguese in Asia

The Dutch in Asia

The English in India

The Mughal Empire

The Development of English Rule

New Patterns of Land Tenure and Taxation

A New Army and Bureaucracy

Rebellion

From India to China

Opium for Tea

Trade in the Pacific

Part Three Capitalism

9 Industrial Revolution

The English Transformation

Dutch and Indian Competition

The New Entrepreneurs

Mechanization

The Factory

Cotton Exports

Regions of Supply: The Cotton South

Brokers

Indian Removal

Regions of Supply: Egypt

The Indian Textile Industry

Bombay

Crisis and Renewed Expansion

Railroad Construction

Shipping

10 Crisis and Differentiation in Capitalism

Capitalism: Mode and Market

The Expansion of Capitalism

Differentiation in the Capitalist Mode

Differentiation: The State

11 The Movement of Commodities

The Great Depression

Regional Specialization

Commercial Agriculture: Plantations

Commercial Agriculture: Cash-Cropping Small Farms

Commodity Production: Foodstuffs

Industrial Crops

12 The New Laborers

Labor Markets

Working Classes

Urbanization

Labor on the Move

The United States

Labor for the Mines: South Africa

Labor for the Planters: East Indians

Labor for the Planters: Europeans

Rio Claro, Brazil

The Trade in Chinese Labor

Singapore

Chinese Labor: Other Destinations

Ethnic Segmentation

Afterword

Bibliographie Notes

 Europe and the People Without History

EUROPE AND THE PEOPLE WITHOUT HISTORY

With a New Foreword by Thomas Hylland Eriksen

ERIC R. WOLF

Cartographic Illustrations by Noël L. Diaz

University of California Press Berkeley Los Angeles London

University of California Press, one of the most distinguished university
presses in the United States, enriches lives around the world by
advancing scholarship in the humanities, social sciences, and natural
sciences. Its activities are supported by the UC Press Foundation and by
philanthropic contributions from individuals and institutions.

For more information, visit www.ucpress.edu.

University of California Press Berkeley and Los Angeles, California

University of California Press, Ltd.

London, England

Copyright © 1982, 1997, 2010

by The Regents of the University of California

ISBN 978-0-520-26818-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)

The Library of Congress has cataloged an earlier edition as follows:

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Wolf, Eric Robert, 1923- Europe and the people without history.

Bibliography: p. 427

1. Europe—History—1492- 2. Europe—Economic

conditions. 3. Europe—Social conditions. 4. Social change. I. Title.

D208.W64 940.2 81-24031

AACR2

Printed in the United States of America 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10

98765432 1

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (R 1997)

(Permanence of Paper).

FOR SYDEL

Contents

Foreword to the 2010 Edition ix

Preface (1997) xix

Preface (1982) xxv

Part One Connections 1

1 Introduction 3

2 The World in 1400 24

3 Modes of Production 73

4 Europe, Prelude to Expansion 101

Part Two In Search of Wealth 127

5 Iberians in America 131

6 The Fur Trade 158

7 The Slave Trade 195

8 Trade and Conquest in the Orient 232

Part Three Capitalism 263

9 Industrial Revolution 267

10 Crisis and Differentiation in Capitalism 296

11 The Movement of Commodities 310

12 The New Laborers 354

Afterword 385

Bibliographic Notes 393

Bibliography 427

Index 473

Foreword to the 2010 Edition

A Book for the Twenty-First Century

   It might well be argued that the late Eric Wolf's Europe and the
People Without History is even more important today than it was when it
was written. In this as yet unsurpassed survey of comparative global
anthropology, Wolf analyzes not only the dynamics of culture and
identity but relations of power and economic processes, showing both how
anthropologists can learn from world history and why historians should
take an interest in the methods and perspectives of anthropology. When
it was first published in 1982, no comparable work existed in any
academic discipline. Years before the concept became commonplace, Wolf
demonstrated the importance of multi-sited anthropological fieldwork,
arguing persuasively that even global processes must be studied in their
local contexts.

   Wolf remains one of the few anthropologists to have described the
historical processes that led to the creation of the modern world in an
idiom that is recognizably anthropological. In this book, he applies the
professional bias of the anthropologist—favoring the insider's view and
the significance of the small scale for the large scale—to the history
of colonialism. Unlike colonial historians, regardless of their
theoretical or ideological allegiances, however, Wolf had a keen
interest in kinship organization and indigenous political structures and
worldviews, and he combined this anthropological perspective with an
infusion of political economy and macro history. In accounting for the
transition from a tributary mode of production to capitalism, Wolf shows
his allegiance to Marxist perspectives on technological innovations and
changes in the relations of production, but he then moves on to show why
these factors must be understood in the contexts of kinship systems and
local cultural worlds. His analyses always tend to gravitate toward the
intersection between culture and power, frequently mediated by ideology
and property relations.

   By shifting the focus of global processes from their formal
properties to their embeddedness in local circumstances, Wolf indicates
ways in which local ethnographies can be historicized, not just in the
tradition of Franz Boas's historical particularism, but simultaneously
in the context of the global history of capitalism, colonial expansion,
and the growth of the state. He shows how the world was about to become
one place during high colonialism, how human destinies slowly became
ever more intricately interweaved, how global power discrepancies that
were modest at the outset grew, and how European or North Atlantic
hegemony would eventually become a defining feature of the human world.
Discarding methodological nationalism, both in the literal sense and in
the classic anthropological sense of studying named peoples with shared
identities, continuous histories, and clear boundaries, Wolf adopted an
approach privileging connections over bounded systems, mobility over
stability, impurity over purity. He not only rejects nationstates as
natural units of analysis but treats "peoples”—ethnic groups or
tribes—as dynamic systems, with fuzzy boundaries, inherently susceptible
to change. Unlike many classic anthropologists writing about the
Americas, Wolf therefore sees contemporary ways of life among
Amerindians, not as vestiges of a pre-Columbian era, but as the outcome
of centuries of direct and indirect contact. The world, as it is
depicted in this book, is one in which identities and cultures are never
fixed, where systemic change reverberating throughout the world system
ensures that "a man can never enter the same river twice,” where people
are eternally rebuilding the ship at sea while struggling to make a
living.

   It should be noted that Wolf's perspective is not that of "Third-
Worldism”; although he does not relativize poverty and oppression,
neither does he use Western concepts of development as benchmarks in
surveying the achievements of "The Rest.” In this, Wolf's analysis is
qualitatively different from the work of scholars like Immanuel
Wallerstein and Andre Gunder Frank, with whose work he was familiar.
Local worlds, as they come across in this book, are irreducibly
"glocal”: they are marked and sometimes dominated by transnational
economic processes, but they adapt in flexible ways, retaining,
adopting, and transforming cultural traits as they go along.

II

Wolf's contribution to a global historical anthropology has been widely
recognized. However, his work was pioneering in other respects as well.
Notably, his dynamic, systemic view of cultures as perpetually changing,
unbounded entities was a critique of the classic Boasian concept of
culture that would have an enormous impact on cultural anthropology some
years later. However, while the later critics of the culture concept
were poststructuralists and postmodernists (e.g., the "writing culture”
group—see Clifford and Marcus 1986), Wolf's radical revision of the
culture concept grew out of a very different kind of agenda. His
reasoning was that since communities had always been connected through
relations of power, politics, communication, and trade, their cultures
could no more be bounded than their corresponding social relations.

   Systemic boundaries, in Wolf's analysis, are thus always relative.
Already in the 1950s, he had spoken of the webs of group relations that
"extend through intermediate levels from the level of the community to
that of the nation” (Wolf 1956: 1065). In Europe and the People Without
History, he traces these webs of relations through a succession of
historical layers, showing beyond doubt why the notion of the isolated
tribe or community is absurd.

   Acknowledging internal diversity, fuzzy boundaries, and historical
transformations is not tantamount to saying that societies or cultures
do not exist, or that everything is equally mixed. The centrifugal
forces of modernity are continuously counteracted by the centripetal
forces of community, and the human need to make sense of the world
together in collectives ensures a certain degree of cohesion.
Nonetheless, with Wolf's analysis of the multiple interrelationships of
power and communication resulting from colonialism and other forms of
political expansion, exploitation, and trade, it plainly becomes
impossible to talk of societies as being either modern or non- (or pre-)
modern, or for that matter, state societies or non-state societies.
Indeed, Wolf's earlier work on peasants (e.g., Wolf 1966) effectively
exposed and discarded facile dualisms used by many anthropologists at
the time to distinguish between societal or cultural types. Unlike
traditional cultivators, peasants were partly integrated into a market
society, a monetary economy, and a state system. Unlike modern farmers
in a capitalist economy, however, they produced food for subsistence,
and were, in other words, engaged in a mixed mode of production. They
were neither fully modern nor fully pre-modern. Like most of us, one
might add.

   The replacement of the concept of the border with that of the
frontier, as it comes across in Wolf's work, is therefore neither a mere
semantic or classificatory device nor implies a particular political
agenda; rather, it is a pragmatic way of making empirical description
more rigorous and accurate.

   As noted by Abbink and Vermeulen (1992: 3) and other commentators,
Europe and the People Without History calls for a reconsideration of the
culture concept. Again, Wolf's agenda was not postmodernist or
poststructuralist, nor was he primarily concerned, as other radical
critics of the classic culture concept were, to reveal the immanent
ideological dimension of "culture” conceptualized as "webs of
significance” spun by humans (Geertz 1973), where only a few in fact do
the weaving and the majority are simply caught (Scholte 1986). To Wolf,
the ideological dimension of culture was obvious, and power
discrepancies mediated by worldviews are central to his cultural
analysis, but his main critique of the culture concept followed a
different line of argument. Just as social systems were changing—and
different parts of those systems at differing speeds—and were interwoven
at various levels, ultimately reaching the level of the global tapestry,
so cultures were changing, internally diverse, interacting with the
outside world, contested and fraught with internal tensions.

   Social systems and cultural worlds share many of the same
characteristics. They are internally diverse, imperfectly bounded,
changing and contested, upheld by reciprocity and sharing as well as
inequalities and power discrepancies. As Wolf would later emphasize,
quoting Anthony Wallace (1961), "social relations depend not on a
'replication of uniformity' but on the 'organization of diversity'
through reciprocal interaction. Culture is not a shared stock of
cultural content” (Wolf 1999: 66, cf. Hannerz 1992: 13).

III

Wolf's global anthropological history ends roughly when the period
spoken of by Benedict Anderson (2005) as "early globalization,” la belle
époque of intensive international trade and large-scale intercontinental
migration, came to an end. This era of enhanced connectivity, the age of
the fast steamship, the transatlantic cable, and the empire where the
sun never set, a time when many Europeans could travel freely without
even a passport, was brought to an abrupt halt by World War I and
succeeded by a period of strengthened nationalism and, a generation and
a war later, by decolonization. Eric Hobsbawm's "long nineteenth
century” gives way to his "short twentieth century” in 1917 (Hobs- bawm
1987, 1994). Many anthropologists, including Sidney Mintz (1998),
Michel-Rolph Trouillot (2003), and Wolf himself (2001, see also Abbink
and Vermeulen 1992, Schneider and Rapp 1995, Krohn- Hansen and Nustad
2005), have drawn on Wolf's dynamic, global perspective in writing about
events and itineraries of the latter half of the twentieth century.

   It seems appropriate at this historical juncture to ask how the tools
and methods developed to perfection by Wolf in this book might be used
for a similar study of the present era—in other words, an empirically
rigorous, non-ethnocentric anthropological history of the global system
of the early twenty-first century.

   Our present world cannot be understood independently of an
appreciation of the significance of colonialism as it is analyzed in
this book. With a few exceptions, the territorial divisions remain
intact. The centers, peripheries, and semiperipheries still correspond
rather well to the scheme of things laid out in Immanuel Wallerstein's
world-system theory (Wallerstein 1974-79), dividing the modern world
into a core, a semiperiphery, and a periphery.

   There is, admittedly, a certain reshuffling taking place, most
notably with respect to China, but it has not so far affected the main
divisions of power in the world. Brazil, Russia, and South Africa remain
semiperipheral seen from a perspective of global political economy.
Pockets of wealth and industrial or informational growth have, however,
appeared in many areas of the world, largely thanks to technological
changes that have made transport and communication faster, cheaper, and
more reliable.

   In spite of the continuities with the colonial world, there is
something new about the contemporary era. Although it grew out of—and
still preserves deep continuities with—the earlier worlds of conquest,
colonialism, and twentieth-century capitalism founded in the
nation-state, our present world began in 1991.

   First, 1991 was the year when the Cold War was called off once and
for all. With the final dismantling of the Soviet Union, the two-bloc
system that had defined the postwar era was gone, never to return. The
conflict between socialism and capitalism, which had constituted the
defining space of ideological struggles in the twentieth century, seemed
to have been replaced with the triumphant sound of one hand clapping. By
1991, it was also clear that apartheid was about to go; Mandela had been
released from prison the year before, and negotiations between the
National Party and the ANC had begun in earnest.

   Second, Yugoslavia began to dismantle itself with surprising
violence, fed by a kind of nationalistic sentiment many had relegated to
the mists of history, at least in Europe. Around the same time, the
Hindu nationalists of the BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party, Indian People's
Party) went from strength to strength in India, and politicized religion
appeared with renewed force elsewhere as well. The identity politics of
the state, or of statelike bodies, was most emphatically not something
of the past. In other words, openness and closure were still twin
features of politics, but they were operating along new lines.

   Third, 1991 was the year in which the Internet began to be marketed
to ordinary consumers. Mr. and Mrs. Smith could now walk into the shop
and buy a subscription to America Online. This was new, just as new as
the pocket-sized mobile phones that all of a sudden began to spread all
over the world, from Mauritius to Iceland, around 1991. Deregulation of
markets had taken place in the preceding decade, but many of the effects
of reduced state control and a less manageable and predictable market
were being felt only now, helped by new information and communication
technology.

   The networked capitalist world is a framework, or scaffolding, for
almost any serious inquiry into contemporary cultural and social
dynamics. One need only count the present number of transatlantic
flights or the number of transpacific telephone connections to realize
that the webs of connectedness today are hotter, faster, and denser than
in any previous period, with repercussions virtually everywhere (Eriksen
2007). Text messages in China went from nil to eighteen billion a month
in under ten years. The growth of urban slums throughout the Third World
is also, however, an indirect result of economic globalization (Davis
2006), and the relative disconnectedness from the Internet in
Africa—South Africa aside, there are more Austrians than Africans
online—is significant. This post-1991 world is one of intensified
tensions and frictions.

   Zones of tension are manifold in this world. In addition to the
general lines of conflict given flesh and blood by Wolf—power versus
powerlessness, wealth versus poverty, autonomy versus dependence—which
remain relevant, perhaps eternally so, new conflicts, frictions, and
tensions appear today:

•       Globalization versus alterglobalization—the new social movements
looking for viable, locally based alternatives to the TINA ("there is no
alternative”) doctrine;

• Environmentalism versus development—a very real, if undercommunicated
tension in countries like China and India, but also in the rich
countries;

• Cosmopolitanism versus identity politics (including xenophobia and
religious fundamentalism)—a main dimension of politics almost everywhere
in the world now, sometimes supplanting the Left/Right divide;

• Inclusion versus exclusion—walls, physical and metaphorical,
preventing the free movement of people and their full inclusion in
society;

• Uniformity versus diversity—shared templates of modernity articulating
with local specificity; and, finally,

• Cultural autonomy versus the quest for recognition—finding the
balance, as Lévi-Strauss once put it, between contact and isolation.

A main concern in Wolf's work is with the ways in which social
relationships are invested with economic and political power
discrepancies. Drawing on theories of capitalism, modifying them to fit
local circumstances as he goes along, he shows the great transformative
power of this, now nearly universal, system of production, consumption,
and distribution; how trade, and later industrial production on a
massive scale, transformed local communities worldwide.

IV

   A global anthropology in the spirit of Wolf and his Europe and the
People Without History could take on any of the tensions or conflict
zones enumerated above. It could also, somewhat more grandly, take as
its point of departure what we might call the three crises of
globalization: economy/finance, climate/environment, and
culture/identity. Through the dual processes of integration and
disintegration, wealth creation and poverty creation, empowerment and
humiliation, global capitalism leaves contradictions in its wake. The
story of contemporary globalization is not a straightforward saga of
development and progress, nor is it a simple tale of neocolonialism and
oppression. It needs to be narrated from a local vantage point, and
whatever their degrees of interconnectedness, localities are always
unique blends of the old and the new, the endemic and the foreign, power
and powerlessness.

   To conclude this brief appreciation of Wolf's significance for
contemporary anthropology, and to signal why there is a large, untapped
potential in his legacy, let me give a short example of one of several
possible global anthropologies of the contemporary world, where
movement, change, interconnectedness, and power discrepancies are
defining features rather than secondary outgrowths, and where a view of
the whole is necessary in order to see the parts properly.

   In Europe and the People Without History, Wolf shows how migration
changed not only the face of the earth, but also the social composition
of communities. In the context of the industrial revolution, he
describes three waves of migration, the intergenerational effects of
which can be observed easily today: (i) local migration to new
industrial centers, for example, in Flanders or Lancashire, rarely
covering more than fifty miles in distance; (ii) European migration to
the New World, from New Zealand to Canada; and (iii) migration to the
tropical plantation economies from diverse origins—South Indian rubber
workers to Malaysia, North Indian cane cutters to Fiji, Mauritius,
Guyana, and Trinidad, Italian coffee pickers to Brazil, Lebanese traders
to the Caribbean, and so on. The global proportion of migrants was,
incidentally, much higher in 1908 than it is in 2010, but unlike the
contemporary situation, much of the migration taking place in la belle
époque flowed from north to south, from the metropoles to the colonies.

   Migration today follows many itineraries and cannot be easily
classified. The boundaries between statistical categories such as
foreign student, labor migrant, seasonal worker, and refugee are often
fuzzy. Generally, areas with expanding economies exert a gravitational
pull on people from areas experiencing population growth and economic
stagnation or social upheavals resulting in a deteriorating
infrastructure, but other factors also play a part, such as immigration
regimes, language, size, and geographical location. Areas of economic
expansion, moreover, shift, often without upsetting the fundamental
global inequalities of the system. Regions that were net importers of
labor in the nineteenth century, such as the colonial Caribbean, became
net exporters after World War II. Conversely, European regions that were
massive exporters of labor have become net importers in the past century
or so. In Norway, there was a parliamentary proposal to ban migration to
Australia as late as 1947, in order to avoid a drain, not so much of
brains, as of willing hands and able bodies; today, one in ten
Norwegians is a first- or second-generation immigrant, and the majority
of these are from outside the European peninsula. In the past, European
governments tried to limit the emigration of their subjects; at present,
their successor governments try to limit the immigration of foreigners.

   The economic remittance, similarly, originally went from the
metropolitan country to a colony. A "remittance man” in
nineteenth-century Britain was usually a "black sheep,” a person of good
family who had fallen from grace, often due to excessive drinking, and
was sent to some outpost of the British empire, there to lead a modest
life as the recipient of remittances from home. Today, the remittances
are transferred from those who have left to those who stay at home, from
richer to poorer regions.

   It is an indication of increased global interconnectedness that the
value of migrant remittances has grown quickly in recent decades and
continues to do so. Migrant remittances from the United States were
estimated to have expanded sixfold between 1981 and 2003 (CBO 2005), and
by the early twenty-first century, they greatly exceeded total U.S.
government development aid. The latest estimates suggest that the total
global value of remittances sent overseas by migrants is somewhere
between $250 billion and $400 billion, in any case far more than the
amount given in development assistance from rich countries to poor ones.
In some poor countries, formal remittances account for a substantial
part of the national economy.

   In academic research, transnational remittances have largely been
discussed within a framework of development theory. Few have so far
studied remittances in their total cultural and social context. This
must be an oversight, given that remittances virtually overflow with
cultural meaning and reflect the nature of significant social
relationships in quite accurate ways. It is easy to see that a greater
emphasis on the moral, gifting, and socially structuring aspects of
remittances would help an anthropology of globalization to come into its
own as a distinct form of social analysis.

   A precondition for remittances to function efficiently is trust and
moral obligation, which continue to be operative years and decades after
the migrant's departure. In some West African countries, family members
may receive "order forms that can be traded for goods with local
suppliers. Suppliers are then paid directly by the migrants” (Azam and
Gubert 2006: 446). With informal transfers of money—that is,
transactions taking place outside the formal banking
system—interpersonal trust is more crucial than in the case of formal
money transfers: very often, middlemen are involved, and the money is
carried physically as legal tender.

   The remittance system can have vast consequences for social
organization in both the sending and the receiving countries. Often—and
this has been the experience in the Caribbean and Southern Africa for
decades—households "at home” tend to become female-headed or matri-
focal, since the men are abroad working. In the country of immigration,
similarly, there tends to be a shortage of women and many all-male
households. The local structuring of power and class relationships can
also significantly be affected by the uneven distribution of
remittances. Families in Kerala with two or three members working in the
Gulf region may make sudden leaps on the local ladder of consumption and
respectability (Wilhite 2008), leading to a long-term readjustment of
the local caste hierarchies.

   Like most ostensibly voluntary gifts, the remittance is usually
obligatory, but the degree of obligation varies from weak to
imperative—a Tamil in Europe may choose whether or not he sends money to
his grandparents in Sri Lanka for the festival of Divali, but if one's
family has borrowed money from a local moneylender to send one to
Europe, facing the prospect of losing everything they own if the loan is
not repaid, there is no real choice involved.

   As a rule, remittances are more important the poorer the country is,
representing 24.2 percent of GDP in Haiti, 16.6 percent in Guyana and
12.2 percent in Jamaica (Nurse 2004), but falling to an almost
negligible amount in the relatively prosperous state of Trinidad and
Tobago. However, no matter how poor the recipients of remittances are, a
proportion is invested in land, livestock, or small enterprises. It has
been suggested that every dollar sent back to the Philippines leads to a
further three dollars in local growth, either through investment or
through boosting local demand. This "multiplier effect” is, in analyses
of development and remittances, balanced against increased dependence,
brain drain, and the loss of incentives to produce work locally.

   A global anthropology of migrant remittances, some dimensions of
which I have briefly sketched here, is just one of many possible lines
of inquiry that would continue Wolf's analytical project into the
present era. Remittances call attention to the relationship between
culture and power, the formal economy and the informal sector,
instrumental agency and emotional attachment, inequalities in the global
system and processes of cultural change. Such a line of inquiry would
draw on Wolf's methods for combating tendencies of professional myopia
in anthropology. Paying attention to large-scale historical processes,
Wolf shows, does not entail a lack of interest in the present, and a
keen interest in global and transnational processes does not preclude an
equally strong devotion to local circumstances. These are some of the
things Wolf has taught us, and in this volatile, conflictual, but also
globally integrated era, where the forces of homogenization are
counteracted by equally powerful forces of heterogenization, his kind of
perspective is even more sorely needed than it was when Europe and the
People Without History was written in the early 1980s.

Thomas Hylland Eriksen

Oslo

March 8, 2010

References

Abbink, Jan, and Hans Vermeulen, eds. 1992. History and Culture: Essays
on the Work of Eric Wolf. Amsterdam: Spinhuis.

Anderson, Benedict R. O'G. 2005. Under Three Flags: Anarchism and the
AntiColonial Imagination. London: Verso.

Azam, Jean-Paul, and Flore Gubert. 2006. "Migrants' Remittances and the
Household in Africa: A Review of Evidence.” Journal of African Economics
15, supp. 2: 426-62.

Clifford, James, and George E. Marcus, eds. 1986. Writing Culture: The
Poetics and Politics of Ethnography. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

xviii FOREWORD TO THE 2010 EDITION

Congressional Budget Office. 2005. "Remittances: International Payments
by Migrants.” Congress of the United States, May.

DAVIS, MIKE. 2006. Planet of Slums. London: Verso.

Eriksen, Thomas Hylland. 2007. Globalization: The Key Concepts. Oxford:
Berg.

GEERTZ, CLIFFORD. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays.
New York: Basic Books.

HANNERZ, ULF. 1992. Cultural Complexity: Studies in the Social
Organization of Meaning. New York: Columbia University Press.

HOBSBAWM, ERIC. 1987. The Age of Empire: 1875-1914. London: Weidenfeld &
Nicolson.

. 1994. The Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1917-1991.
London: Michael Joseph.

Krohn-Hansen, Christian, and Knut Nustad, eds. 2005. State Formation:
Anthropological Perspectives. London: Pluto.

MINTZ, SIDNEY. 1998. "The Localization of Anthropological Practice: From
Area Studies to Transnationalism.” Critique of Anthropology 18, 2:
117-33.

NURSE, KEITH. 2004. "Diaspora, Migration and Development in the
Americas.” Internationale Politik und Gesellschaft 2: 107-26.

Schneider, Jane, and Rayna Rapp, eds. 1995. Articulating Hidden
Histories: Exploring the Influence of Eric R. Wolf. Berkeley: University
of California Press.

SCHOLTE, BOB. 1986. "The Charmed Circle of Geertz' Hermeneutics: A
NeoMarxist Critique.” Critique of Anthropology 6: 5-15.

TROUILLOT, MICHEL-ROLPH. 2003. Global Transformations: Anthropology and
the Modern World. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Wallace, Anthony F. C. 1961. Culture and Personality. New York: Random
House.

WALLERSTEIN, IMMANUEL. 1974-79. The Modern World-System. Vols. 1-3. New
York: Academic Press.

WILHITE, HAROLD. 2008. Consumption and the Transformation of Everyday
Life. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Wolf, Eric R. 1956. "Aspects of Group Relations in a Complex Society:
Mexico.” American Anthropologist 58: 1065-78.

. 1966. Peasants. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

. 1999. Envisioning Power: Ideologies of Dominance and Crisis. Berkeley:

University of California Press.

, with Sydel Silverman. 2001. Pathways of Power. Building an
Anthropology of the Modern World. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

 

Preface (1997)

   Fifteen years have passed since this book first saw the light of day.
It thus seems an apt moment to reflect on what the book set out to do
and how it has been understood by readers. This new preface also offers
the occasion for clarifying some of the issues raised by commentators,
both friendly and critical.

   I wrote the book as an anthropologist but also drew on history and
the social sciences. I tried to be historical by envisaging the
unfolding of structures and patterns over time. I also attempted to
relate the findings of anthropology to perspectives drawn from a
historically oriented political economy—with the emphasis on the
historical. The term "political economy," usually defined as the study
of ways in which resources are made available to society and the state,
tends to confound two kinds of inquiry. One works with techniques
derived from market economics to assess state fiscal policy. The other,
with which I associate myself, studies societies, states, and markets as
historically evolving phenomena and hence questions whether conceptions
of these arrangements particular to the capitalist experience can be
generalized to cover all times and places. We must remember that Karl
Marx subtitled his Kapital "A Critique of Political Economy." I thus use
the term "political economy" to designate inquiries into the economic
foundations of different polities and societies in their changing
trajectories.

   I drew on both history and political economy in order to locate the
peoples studied by anthropology in the larger fields of force generated
by systems of power exercised over social labor. These systems are not
timeless; they develop and change. It is thus important to understand
how they unfold and expand their reach over people in both time and
space. Although I wrote as an anthropologist rather than as a
professional historian, I think history matters. It is also important to
understand how and why these systems develop and extend their sway over
people, and I located the rationale in the ways power and the economy
sustain and drive each other on. Although I am not an economist, I think
a grasp of a historically grounded political economy is imperative in
understanding the structures that determine and circumscribe peoples'
lives. Contrary to the opinion that this does not tell us much about
"real people doing real things," I think it has a lot to do with just
that. There may be "pie in the sky when you die," but how the pie is
dished out on the ground has considerable existential relevance.

   The title of this book posed an initial difficulty in presenting this
problematic. The phrase "the people without history" is not my own; it
goes back to the nineteenth century. Marx and Engels used it to signal
their lack of sympathy with some national separatist movements in
eastern Europe. I meant it to be ironic, but that irony was lost on some
readers. My intent was to challenge those who think that Europeans were
the only ones who made history. I took a.d. 1400 as the initial dateline
for the presentation precisely because I hoped to make clear that
European expansion everywhere encountered human societies and cultures
characterized by long and complex histories. I argued that these
developments were not isolated from one another but were interlocked and
that this interconnectedness held also for the world that Europe built.
The history of European expansion interdigitates with the histories of
the peoples it encompassed, and their histories in turn articulate with
the history of Europe. Since much of this history involved the rise and
spread of capitalism, the term "Europe" can also be read as shorthand
for the growth of that mode of production. It incubated in the European
peninsula of the Eurasian landmass, then expanded its sway in widening
circles over all the continents.

   My objective in writing this book was not to present a record of
world history that would encompass the globe nor to develop a history of
capitalist expansion as such. The idea was to show that human societies
and cultures would not be properly understood until we learned to
visualize them in their mutual interrelationships and interdependencies
in space and time.

   I asserted this idea on pragmatic grounds, not because I think
everything in the world is ultimately connected to everything else. What
has been called "functionalism" in the social sciences remains
methodologically useful, especially when we explore internal connections
that are not manifest and obvious. At the same time, we need to
continually remind ourselves that the elements of any configuration are
rarely stable and are unlikely ever to return to an original state of
equilibrium. Connections within social configurations are marked by
lines of tension, contradiction, and fracture, and they are exposed to
the pressures generated in the larger fields of interaction that
surround them. Societies and cultures have always formed parts of larger
systems. This was so before the rise of capitalism, and it has become
increasingly the case as the capitalist mode of production has colonized
ever more spaces of social and cultural life all over the globe. It is a
commmonplace to say this expansion has brought about significant changes
in the social and cultural arrangements of peoples everywhere, but a
major task remains: to conceptualize and explain both the causes of
expansion and the nature of its effects.

   To characterize these interdependencies and their consequences, I
drew from Karl Marx's stock of useful concepts that of the "mode of
production." As I explain in the text, I find the idea analytically
useful and intellectually productive. Its emphasis on how a society
mobilizes social labor draws attention at one and the same time to the
human relations to the natural environment, the social relations of
humans to humans, the institutional structures of state and society that
guide these relations, and the ideas through which these relationships
are conveyed. The use of such relational synoptic concepts is one of the
important strengths of the Marxian tradition.

   I acknowledge my debt to Marxian thought without apology. There is
nowadays a temptation to consign this body of ideas to the scrap heap of
intellectual history, as part of the unusable wreckage of the "really
existing" socialist systems that collapsed at the end of the 1980s. We
need to remind ourselves that the Marxian tradition encompassed many
variants of thought and politics, some of which are intellectually
richer than the orthodoxies that prevailed politically. I use the term
"Marxian" advisedly, to refer to the variants of the tradition, in
contrast to the term "Marxist," which has come to denote a particular
kind of politics. Our intellectual and political world would be greatly
impoverished if we could not draw on this Marxian legacy, just as
sociology would suffer should its practitioners turn their backs on Max
Weber because he was an ardent German nationalist, or physics would
suffer if physicists abandoned Newton because he was a closet alchemist.
It is of course necessary not to enshrine any of these significant
figures in a pantheon of eternal verities: they were not always right in
their own times; they sometimes changed their theories and opinions; and
some of their understandings have not stood the test of time. In Marx's
case, especially, one should draw a line between the analyst and the
prophet. Many of his analyses still speak to us, but his vision of how a
new class "in itself' might come to acquire a consciousness "for itself"
lacked sociological realism even in his own time.

   Using Marxian concepts also draws us into long-standing debates that
raise questions about the Marxian tradition as a way of thinking about
the world. That tradition has sometimes been defined as falling into two
categories: "Systems Marxism" and "Promethean Marxism." Systems Marxism
wanted to be a science, a disciplined body of logically enchained
postulates that could be used to formulate general laws of social
development in history. Promethean Marxism embodied the hope for human
liberation from economic and political exploitation and celebrated the
revolutionary will as opening the way to that desired future.

   Some readers, approaching Europe and the People Without History from
quite opposite political positions, have characterized the book as an
exercise in Systems Marxism. They have either envisaged it as an
intellectual Trojan horse or bemoaned its lack of Promethean enthusiasm.
I did use Marxian concepts, but not as foundational notions for a
science aimed at developing laws of universal generality. I see these
concepts as suppositions that orient and guide research and discovery.
They are initial approximations to a much more extended task of drawing
out what may be at work in particular cases. This effort may also
involve employing additional or alternative explanatory strategies. As
for Prometheus, I think that glorifications of the will are more likely
to underwrite elitist insurrections than broadly based popular movements
for change. Nor is Prometheus's own story very encouraging. He stole
fire from the gods and gave it to humans, but paid for this by ending up
chained to a rock for all eternity, with Zeus's eagle feeding on his
liver.

   I raise these considerations to define more clearly what Europe and
the People Without History is about. It does not try to present an
integrated Marxian theory of global development. It uses Marxian
concepts to help me locate the peoples anthropology has studied in the
fields of force to which they became subject. As some readers have
noted, my book is not an inquiry into concepts. If I am faulted for
this, I can only say that this is the book I wrote; others will write
their own. I focused, for instance, on the history and distribution of
major commodities under capitalism, but I did not engage the
interesting, if problematic, concept of "commodity fetishism." My intent
was to exhibit the ways in which commodity production and trade drew in
the peoples who produce these commodities, because such incorporation
has consequences for peoples' lives.

   Contrary to the claims of some commentators, I have not argued—
either in this book or elsewhere—that this incorporation into capitalist
networks necessarily destroys peoples' distinctive, historically
grounded cultural understandings and practices or renders their cultural
schemata inoperative and irrelevant. I did portray commodity gatherers
and producers as "agents of capitalism," just as I portrayed the various
populations of laborers in capitalist enterprises as wage-earners
offering their labor for sale under capitalist conditions. I did this
because I was persuaded that the lives of people the world over have
been increasingly dictated by capitalist markets, including markets that
offer labor power for sale. This is not purveying any "tristes tropes"
of "cosmologies of capitalism." Capitalist expansion may or may not
render particular cultures inoperative, but its all-too-real spread does
raise questions about just how the successive cohorts of peoples drawn
into the capitalist orbit align and realign their understandings to
respond to the opportunities and exigencies of their new conditions.
Posing these questions does not spell the end of ethnography. Quite the
contrary— more ethnography is urgently required precisely because we
cannot know the answers on theoretical grounds alone.

   Further ethnography will also be needed to properly evaluate some
unexamined romantic notions about the nature of human action in the
world. Such ideas are increasingly popular and have informed some of the
reactions to this book. One notion portrays humans as inherently
creative and ever ready to reinvent who they are and who they want to
be. Another is that humans will instinctively resist domination and that
"resistance" can be thought of and studied as a unitary category. I
believe that here the wish has become father and mother to the thought.
People do not always resist the constraints in which they find
themselves, nor can they reinvent themselves freely in cultural
constructions of their own choosing. Culture refashioning and culture
change go forward continually under variable, but also highly
determinate, circumstances. These may further creativity or inhibit it,
prompt resistance or dissipate it. Only empirical inquiry can tell us
how different peoples, in their particular varied circumstances, shape,
adapt, or jettison their cultural understandings—or, alternatively, find
themselves blocked in doing so. It remains to be discovered why and how
some cohorts of people adapt their cultural understandings to capitalism
and prosper as a result of doing so, while others do not.

   My use of the concept of capitalism in the book also requires
clarification. The capitalist mode of production may be motivated
everywhere by the same dynamic interplay of capital accumulation and
labor power, but this interplay can take many forms and assume many
different guises. In Europe and the People Without History I emphasize
the combination of capitalist ownership and management with factory
production by hired labor as the strategic means that enabled capitalism
to undo other modes of production. Yet under other circumstances
capitalist production has gone forward under the sponsorship of merchant
capital. It would also seem that the new computer-based technologies of
control and information, coupled with new modes of transport, can
underwrite a more decentralized capitalism to intensify capital
accumulation through production in households and "flexible” workshops.
Historically, the mode has been subject to phases of expansion and
contraction. These changes of phase are accompanied by changes in the
mix of products, in the technology and organization deployed to produce
them, in the geographical distribution of plants and markets, and in the
recruitment of new workers and service personnel. The capitalist mode
may thus be propelled forward by a unitary logic and yet simultaneously
produce differentiation and heterogeneity through the great variability
of its operations. In the book I emphasize this point. As capitalism
expands its reach and occupies new niches, it sets up new and
diversified entrepreneurial scenarios. These scenarios attract new
laborers, as well as new middle classes and entrepreneurial strata. All
face the problem of how to fit their varied cultural understandings to
the requirements of an ever-changing political economy. How these
adaptations unfold is not predictable a priori.

   In the end, asking the right questions and finding satisfactory
answers requires us to return to questions of basic theory. All the
social sciences, including anthropology, straddle two realities: the
reality of the natural world and its human transformations by technics
and organization and the reality of schemata of organized knowledge and
symbolic operations learned and communicated among human beings. The
contradistinction between these two realities has bedevilled Western
philosophy, including Marxian perspectives, and it continuously
resurfaces in anthropology, no matter what dialectical prestidigitations
we perform to leap across the divide. One way to deal with this impasse
has been to disregard it. Some anthropologists view behavior in the
material world as primary, and discount the mental events reported by
people themselves. Others accord priority to mental schemata as defined
by the people themselves, and treat behavior in the material world as
epiphenomena of these cerebral understandings. Still others
pragmatically assign equal importance and value to material behavior and
mentifacts, and simply postpone any discussion on how they might be
reconciled.

   The key to resolving the issue may not be immediately at hand, but we
can perhaps advance our search for explanation with partial answers by
focusing on the articulation of particular domains in which material and
mental events intersect. In the epilogue to Europe and the People
Without History I suggest one way of doing this: pay closer attention to
the relations of power that mediate between the mobilization of social
labor in society and the mental schemata that define who does what in
the division of that labor. This has several implications. For one
thing, it requires us to grapple with the realization that both social
tasks and mental schemata are variably distributed among men and women,
young and old, wealthy and poor, homebodies and immigrants, powerful and
powerless, people who speak with the spirits and those who do not. This,
in turn, directs our attention to the processes that bring these
socially distributed and variable repertoires of understandings and
imaginings into concordance and correspondence. We might then begin to
look more closely at how knowledge is accumulated, communicated, or
withheld in both verbal and nonverbal performances; how cosmological
orders are built up and invoked to construct and accumulate some forms
of power, while muting or disarticulating other forms; and how some
mental schemata come to dominate others in the formation of genders,
classes, and ethnicities, even as alternative schemata contest that
hegemony. The units in such an inquiry should be defined by the
processes on which we fasten our attention, rather than taking
arbitrarily delimited societal and cultural entities. Historically
informed political economy and political- economic history will both be
necessary, as will be ethnography in the field and cultural analysis.
Some of this work is already under way; much more remains to be done.

Preface (1982)

   In 1968 I wrote that anthropology needed to discover history, a
history that could account for the ways in which the social system of
the modern world came into being, and that would strive to make analytic
sense of all societies, including our own. Such an analytic history was
needed, I believed, to counter the ascendancy in the human sciences of a
formal rationality that no longer inquired into the causes of human
action but sought merely technical solutions to problems conceived
primarily in technical terms. Our methods were becoming more
sophisticated, but their yield seemed increasingly commonplace. To stem
a descent into triviality, I thought, we needed to search out the causes
of the present in the past. Only in this way could we come to comprehend
the forces that impel societies and cultures here and now. This book
grew out of these convictions.

   It was clear to me from the start that such an analytic history could
not be developed out of the study of a single culture or nation, a
single culture area, or even a single continent at one period in time.
It was necessary to return to the insights of an older anthropology and
to recover the inspiration that guided anthropologists such as Alfred
Kroeber and Ralph Linton in their efforts to develop a global culture
history. They understood, as we seem to have forgotten, that human
populations construct their cultures in interaction with one another,
and not in isolation.

   That older anthropology had little to say, however, about the major
forces driving the interaction of cultures since 1492—the forces
propelling Europe into commercial expansion and industrial capitalism.
Yet the cultural connections that these anthropologists sought to
delineate can be rendered intelligible only when they are set in their
political and economic context. The insights of anthropology therefore
have to be rethought in the light of a new, historically oriented
political economy.

   Such rethinking must transcend the customary ways of depicting
Western history, and must take account of the conjoint participation of
Western and non-Western peoples in this worldwide process. Most of the
groups studied by anthropologists have long been caught up in the
changes wrought by European expansion, and they have contributed to
these changes. We can no longer be content with writing only the history
of victorious elites, or with detailing the subjugation of dominated
ethnic groups. Social historians and historical sociologists have shown
that the common people were as much agents in the historical process as
they were its victims and silent witnesses. We thus need to uncover the
history of “the people without history"—the active histories of
“primitives," peasantries, laborers, immigrants, and besieged
minorities.

   To that end, this book strives to cross the lines of demarcation that
separate the various human disciplines from one another, and to abrogate
the boundaries between Western and non-Western history. It was written
in the belief that a better understanding of our human condition is now
within our grasp.

   The project for this book emerged from the intellectual reassessments
that marked the late 1960s. It was carried forward during a year's
research in England in 1973-1974, made possible by the grant of a senior
fellowship from the National Endowment for the Humanities. I acknowledge
the support of the Endowment with abiding gratitude.

   I began to write this book in the spring of 1974; the final draft was
completed in 1981. Several friends read it with a critical eye. I am
grateful for this to Roderick Aya, Richard Fox, Ashraf Ghani, Shirley
Lindenbaum, Rayna Rapp, Roger Sanjek, Jane Schneider, and Peter
Schneider. Samuel Bowles and Sidney Mintz took time to correspond about
various ideas. Where I have not followed their counsel, the
responsibility is mine alone. I am grieved that my friend Angel Palerm
died before he could read this work; I miss his penetrating comments.

   I owe thanks for advice on sources to Anne Bailey, Mario Bick,
Charles Bishop, Warren DeBoer, Ashraf Ghani, Herbert Gutman, Shirley
Hune, Herbert Klein, Carol Kramer, Hermann Rebel, Roger Sanjek, Gerald
Sider, Juan Villamarin, Elizabeth Wahl, and Frederick Wyatt. I received
advice and help on pictorial materials from Anna Roosevelt, James G. E.
Smith, and Donald Werner of the Museum of the American Indian, Heye
Foundation; from Robert Carneiro, Barbara Conklin, and Gordon Ekholm of
the American Museum of Natural History; from William Sturtevant of the
Smithsonian Institution; as well as from Lambros Comitas, June Finfer,
Fred Popper, Lucie Wood Saunders, Bernard B. Shapiro, and Archibald
Singham. No?l L. Diaz and Caryl Davis drew excellent maps. I am indebted
to all. I am also most grateful to The School of Oriental and African
Studies and to The London School of Economics and Political Science,
University of London, for granting me access to their library holdings.
Throughout my labors, Herbert H. Lehman College of the City University
of New York, and the Ph.D. Program in Anthropology, The Graduate School
and University Center, City University of New York, provided me with an
unusually stimulating setting for research, teaching, and the exchange
of ideas. I want to express my thanks for this opportunity.

   None of these efforts would have come to fruition, however, without
the advice, editorial skill, and unfailing encouragement of Sydel
Silverman, my helpmate, wife, and foremost anthropological critic. "Di
tante cose quant' i'ho vedute, dal tuo podere e dalla tua bontate
riconosco la grazia e la virtute" (Paradise, XXXI). To her, in love and
admiration, this book is dedicated.

E. R. W.

Caravan leaving Aleppo. Copper engraving by Theodore de Bry, 1599.
(Courtesy of the Rare Books and Manuscript Division, The New York Public
Library. Astor, Lenox, and Tilden Foundations)

Part One Connections

1  Introduction

   The central assertion of this book is that the world of humankind
constitutes a manifold, a totality of interconnected processes, and
inquiries that disassemble this totality into bits and then fail to
reassemble it falsify reality. Concepts like "nation,” "society," and
"culture" name bits and threaten to turn names into things. Only by
understanding these names as bundles of relationships, and by placing
them back into the field from which they were abstracted, can we hope to
avoid misleading inferences and increase our share of understanding.

   On one level it has become a commonplace to say that we all inhabit
"one world." There are ecological connections: New York suffers from the
Hong Kong flu; the grapevines of Europe are destroyed by American plant
lice. There are demographic connections: Jamaicans migrate to London;
Chinese migrate to Singapore. There are economic connections: a shutdown
of oil wells on the Persian Gulf halts generating plants in Ohio; a
balance of payments unfavorable to the United States drains American
dollars into bank accounts in Frankfurt or Yokohama; Italians produce
Fiat automobiles in the Soviet Union; Japanese build a hydroelectric
system in Ceylon. There are political connections: wars begun in Europe
unleash reverberations around the globe; American troops intervene on
the rim of Asia; Finns guard the border between Israel and Egypt.

   This holds true not only of the present but also of the past.
Diseases from Eurasia devastated the native population of America and
Oceania. Syphilis moved from the New World to the Old. Europeans and
their plants and animals invaded the Americas; the American potato,
maize plant, and manioc spread throughout the Old World. Large numbers
of Africans were transported forcibly to the New World; Chinese and
Indian indentured laborers were shipped to Southeast Asia and the West
Indies. Portugal created a Portuguese settlement in Macao off the coast
of China. Dutchmen, using labor obtained in Bengal, constructed Batavia.
Irish children were sold into servitude in the West Indies. Fugitive
African slaves found sanctuary in the hills of Surinam. Europe learned
to copy Indian textiles and Chinese porcelain, to drink native American
chocolate, to smoke native American tobacco, to use Arabic numerals.

   These are familiar facts. They indicate contact and connections,
linkages and interrelationships. Yet the scholars to whom we turn in
order to understand what we see largely persist in ignoring them.
Historians, economists, and political scientists take separate nations
as their basic framework of inquiry. Sociology continues to divide the
world into separate societies. Even anthropology, once greatly concerned
with how culture traits diffused around the world, divides its subject
matter into distinctive cases: each society with its characteristic
culture, conceived as an integrated and bounded system, set off against
other equally bounded systems.

   If social and cultural distinctiveness and mutual separation were a
hallmark of humankind, one would expect to find it most easily among the
so-called primitives, people "without history," supposedly isolated from
the external world and from one another. On this presupposition, what
would we make of the archaeological findings that European trade goods
appear in sites on the Niagara frontier as early as 1570, and that by
1670 sites of the Onondaga subgroup of the Iroquois reveal almost no
items of native manufacture except pipes? On the other side of the
Atlantic, the organization and orientations of large African populations
were transformed in major ways by the trade in slaves. Since the
European slavers only moved the slaves from the African coast to their
destination in the Americas, the supply side of the trade was entirely
in African hands. This was the "African foundation" upon which was
built, in the words of the British mercantilist Malachy Postlethwayt,
"the magnificent superstructure of American commerce and naval power."
From Senegambia in West Africa to Angola, population after population
was drawn into this trade, which ramified far inland and affected people
who had never even seen a European trader on the coast. Any account of
Kru, Fanti, Asante, Ijaw, Igbo, Kongo, Luba, Lunda, or Ngola that treats
each group as a "tribe" sufficient unto itself thus misreads the African
past and the African present. Furthermore, trade with Iroquois and West
Africa affected Europe in turn. Between 1670 and 1760 the Iroquois
demanded dyed scarlet and blue cloth made in the Stroudwater Valley of
Gloucestershire. This was also one of the first areas in which English
weavers lost their autonomy and became hired factory hands. Perhaps
there was an interconnection between the American trade and the onset of
the industrial revolution in the valley of the Stroud. Conversely, the
more than 5,500 muskets supplied to the Gold Coast in only three years
(1658- 1661) enriched the gunsmiths of Birmingham, where they were made
(Jennings 1977: 99-100; Daaku 1970: 150-151).

   If there are connections everywhere, why do we persist in turning
dynamic, interconnected phenomena into static, disconnected things? Some
of this is owing, perhaps, to the way we have learned our own history.
We have been taught, inside the classroom and outside of it, that there
exists an entity called the West, and that one can think of this West as
a society and civilization independent of and in opposition to other
societies and civilizations. Many of us even grew up believing that this
West has a genealogy, according to which ancient Greece begat Rome, Rome
begat Christian Europe, Christian Europe begat the Renaissance, the
Renaissance the Enlightenment, the Enlightenment political democracy and
the industrial revolution. Industry, crossed with democracy, in turn
yielded the United States, embodying the rights to life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness.

   Such a developmental scheme is misleading. It is misleading, first,
because it turns history into a moral success story, a race in time in
which each runner of the race passes on the torch of liberty to the next
relay. History is thus converted into a tale about the furtherance of
virtue, about how the virtuous win out over the bad guys. Frequently,
this turns into a story of how the winners prove that they are virtuous
and good by winning. If history is the working out of a moral purpose in
time, then those who lay claim to that purpose are by that fact the
predilect agents of history.

   The scheme misleads in a second sense as well. If history is but a
tale of unfolding moral purpose, then each link in the genealogy, each
runner in the race, is only a precursor of the final apotheosis and not
a manifold of social and cultural processes at work in their own time
and place. Yet what wou Id we learn of ancient Greece, for example, if
we interpreted it only as a prehistoric Miss Liberty, holding aloft the
torch of moral purpose in the barbarian night? We would gain little
sense of the class conflicts racking the Greek cities, or of the
relation between freemen and their slaves. We would have no reason to
ask why there were more Greeks fighting in the ranks of the Persian
kings than in the ranks of the Hellenic Alliance against the Persians.
It would be of no interest to us to know that more Greeks lived in
southern Italy and Sicily, then called Magna Graecia, than in Greece
proper. Nor would we have any reason to ask why there were soon more
Greek mercenaries in foreign armies than in the military bodies of their
home cities. Greek settlers outside of Greece, Greek mercenaries in
foreign armies, and slaves from Thrace, Phrygia, or Paphalagonia in
Greek households all imply Hellenic relations with Greeks and non-Greeks
outside of Greece. Yet our guiding scheme would not invite us to ask
questions about these relationships.

   Nowhere is this myth-making scheme more apparent than in schoolbook
versions of the history of the United States. There, a complex
orchestration of antagonistic forces is celebrated instead as the
unfolding of a timeless essence. In this perspective, the ever-changing
boundaries of the United States and the repeated involvements of the
polity in internal and external wars, declared and undeclared, are
telescoped together by the teleological understanding that thirteen
colonies clinging to the eastern rim of the continent would, in less
than a century, plant the American flag on the shores of the Pacific.
Yet this final result was itself only the contested outcome of many
contradictory relationships. The colonies declared their independence,
even though a majority of their population—European settlers, native
Americans, and African slaves—favored the Tories. The new republic
nearly foundered on the issue of slavery, dealing with it, in a series
of problematic compromises, by creating two federated countries, each
with its own zone of expansion. There was surely land for the taking on
the new continent, but it had to be taken first from the native
Americans who inhabited it, and then converted into flamboyant real
estate. Jefferson bought the Louisiana territory cheaply, but only after
the revolt of the Haitian slaves against their French slave masters
robbed the area of its importance in the French scheme of things as a
source of food supply for the Caribbean plantations. The occupation of
Florida closed off one of the main escape hatches from southern slavery.
The war with Mexico made the Southwest safe for slavery and cotton. The
Hispanic landowners who stood in the way of the American drive to the
Pacific became "bandits” when they defended their own against the
Anglophone newcomers. Then North and South—one country importing its
working force from Europe, the other from Africa—fought one of the
bloodiest wars in history. Fora time the defeated South became a colony
of the victorious North. Later, the alignment between regions changed,
the "sunbelt" rising to predominance as the influence of the industrial
Northeast declined. Clearly the republic was neither indivisible nor
endowed with God-given boundaries.

   It is conceivable that things might have been different. There could
have arisen a polyglot Floridian Republic, a Francophone Mississippian
America, a Hispanic New Biscay, a Republic of the Great Lakes, a
Columbia—comprising the present Oregon, Washington, and British
Columbia. Only if we assume a God-given drive toward geopolitical unity
on the North American continent would this retrojection be meaningless.
Instead, it invites us to account in material terms for what happened at
each juncture, to account for how some relationships gained ascendancy
over others. Thus neither ancient Greece, Rome, Christian Europe, the
Renaissance, the Enlightenment, the industrial revolution, democracy,
nor even the United States was ever a thing propelled toward its
unfolding goal by some immanent driving spring, but rather a temporally
and spatially changing and changeable set of relationships, or
relationships among sets of relationships.

   The point is more than academic. By turning names into things we
create false models of reality. By endowing nations, societies, or
cultures with the qualities of internally homogeneous and externally
distinctive and bounded objects, we create a model of the world as a
global pool hall in which the entities spin off each other like so many
hard and round billiard balls. Thus it becomes easy to sort the world
into differently colored balls, to declare that "East is East, and West
is West, and never the twain shall meet." In this way a quintessential
West is counterposed to an equally quintessential East, where life was
cheap and slavish multitudes groveled under a variety of despotisms.
Later, as peoples in other climes began to assert their political and
economic independence from both West and East, we assigned these new
applicants for historical status to a Third World of underdevelopment—a
residual category of conceptual billiard balls—as contrasted with the
developed West and the developing East. Inevitably, perhaps, these
reified categories became intellectual instruments in the prosecution of
the Cold War. There was the "modern" world of the West. There was the
world of the East, which had fallen prey to communism, a "disease of
modernization" (Rostow 1960). There was, finally, the Third World, still
bound up in "tradition" and strangled in its efforts toward
modernization. If the West could only find ways of breaking that grip,
it could perhaps save the victim from the infection incubated and spread
by the East, and set that Third World upon the road to modernization—the
road to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness of the West. The
ghastly offspring of this way of thinking about the world was the theory
of "forced draft urbanization" (Huntington 1968: 655), which held that
the Vietnamese could be propelled toward modernization by driving them
into the cities through aerial bombardment and defoliation of the
countryside. Names thus become things, and things marked with an X can
become targets of war.

The Rise of the Social Sciences

  The habit of treating named entities such as Iroquois, Greece, Persia,
or the United States as fixed entities opposed to one another by stable
internal architecture and external boundaries interferes with our
ability to understand their mutual encounter and confrontation. In fact,
this tendency has made it difficult to understand all such encounters
and confrontations. Arranging imaginary building blocks into pyramids
called East and West, or First, Second, and Third Worlds, merely
compounds that difficulty. It is thus likely that we are dealing with
some conceptual shortcomings in our ways of looking at social and
political phenomena, and not just a temporary aberration. We seem to
have taken a wrong turn in understanding at some critical point in the
past, a false choice that bedevils our thinking in the present.

   That critical turning point is identifiable. It occurred in the
middle of the past century, when inquiry into the nature and varieties
of humankind split into separate (and unequal) specialties and
disciplines. This split was fateful. It led not only forward into the
intensive and specialized study of particular aspects of human
existence, but turned the ideological reasons for that split into an
intellectual justification for the specialties themselves. Nowhere is
this more obvious than in the case of sociology. Before sociology we had
political economy, a field of inquiry concerned with "the wealth of
nations," the production and distribution of wealth within and between
political entities and the classes composing them. With the acceleration
of capitalist enterprise in the eighteenth century, that structure of
state and classes came under increasing pressure from new and "rising"
social groups and categories that clamored for the enactment of their
rights against those groups defended and represented by the state.
Intellectually, this challenge took the form of asserting the validity
of new social, economic, political, and ideological ties, now
conceptualized as "society," against the state. The rising tide of
discontent pitting "society" against the political and ideological order
erupted in disorder, rebellion, and revolution. The specter of disorder
and revolution raised the question of how social order could be restored
and maintained, indeed, how social order was possible at all. Sociology
hoped to answer the "social question." It had, as Rudolph Heberle noted,
"an eminently political origin... . Saint Simon, Auguste Comte, and
Lorenz Stein conceived the new science of society as an antidote against
the poison of social disintegration" (quoted in Bramson 1961: 12, n. 2).

   These early sociologists did this by severing the field of social
relations from political economy. They pointed to observable and as yet
poorly studied ties which bind people to people as individuals, as
groups and associations, or as members of institutions. They then took
this field of social relations to be the subject matter of their
intensive concern. They and their successors expanded this concern into
a number of theoretical postulates, using these to mark off sociology
from political science and economics. I would summarize these common
postulates as follows:

   1. In the course of social life, individuals enter into relations
with one another. Such relations can be abstracted from the economic,
political, or ideological context in which they are found, and treated
sui generis. They are autonomous, constituting a realm of their own, the
realm of the social.

   2. Social order depends on the growth and extension of social
relations among individuals. The greater the density of such ties and
the wider their scope, the greater the orderliness of society.
Maximization of ties of kinship and neighborhood, of group and
association, is therefore conducive to social order. Conversely, if
these ties are not maximized, social order is called into question.
Development of many and varied ties also diminishes the danger of
polarization into classes.

   3. The formation and maintenance of such ties is strongly related to
the existence and propagation of common beliefs and customs among the
individuals participating in them. Moral consensus, especially when
based on unexamined belief and on nonrational acceptance of custom,
furthers the maximization of social ties; expectations of mere utility
and the exercise of merely technical reason tend to weaken them.

   4. The development of social relations and the spread of associated
custom and belief create a society conceived as a totality of social
relations between individuals. Social relations constitute society;
society, in turn, is the seat of cohesion, the unit to which
predictability and orderliness can be ascribed. If social relations are
orderly and recurrent, society has a stable internal structure. The
extent of that structure is coterminous with the intensity and range of
social relations. Where these grow markedly less intense and less
frequent, society encounters its boundary.

   What is the flaw in these postulates? They predispose one to think of
social relations not merely as autonomous but as causal in their own
right, apart from their economic, political, or ideological context.
Since social relations are conceived as relations between individuals,
interaction between individuals becomes the prime cause of social life.
Since social disorder has been related to the quantity and quality of
social relations, attention is diverted from consideration of economics,
politics, or ideology as possible sources of social disorder, into a
search for the causes of disorder in family and community, and hence
toward the engineering of a proper family and community life. Since,
moreover, disorder has been located in the divergence of custom and
belief from common norms, convergence in custom and consensus in belief
are converted into the touchstone of society in proper working order.
And, finally, the postulates make it easy to identify Society in general
with a society in particular. Society in need of order becomes a
particular society to be ordered. In the context of the tangible
present, that society to be ordered is then easily identified with a
given nation-state, be that nation-state Ghana, Mexico, or the United
States. Since social relations have been severed from their economic,
political, or ideological context, it is easy to conceive of the
nation-state as a structure of social ties informed by moral consensus
rather than as a nexus of economic, political, and ideological
relationships connected to other nexuses. Contentless social relations,
rather than economic, political, or ideological forces, thus become the
prime movers of sociological theory. Since these social relations take
place within the charmed circle of the single nation-state, the
significant actors in history are seen as nation-states, each driven by
its internal social relations. Each society is then a thing, moving in
response to an inner clockwork.

Economics and Political Science

  This severance of social relations from the economic, political, and
ideological contexts in which they are embedded and which they activate
was accompanied by the assignment of the economic and political aspects
of human life to separate disciplines. Economics abandoned its concern
with how socially organized populations produce to supply their polities
and became instead a study of how demand creates markets. The guiding
theory of this new economics was

   a theory of markets and market interdependence. It is a theory of
general  equilibrium in exchange, extended almost as an afterthought, to
cover production and distribution. It is not a theory of a social
system, still less of economic power and social class. Households and
firms are considered only as market agents, never as parts of a social
structure. Their 'initial endowments,' wealth, skills, and property, are
taken as given. Moreover, the object of the theory is to demonstrate the
tendency towards equilibrium; class and sectoral conflict is therefore
ruled out almost by assumption. [Nell 1973: 77-78]

Stated in another form, this new economics is not about the real world
at all (Lekachman 1976). It is an abstract model of the workings out of
subjective individual choices in relation to one another.

   A similar fate befell the study of politics. A new political science
severed the sphere of the political from economics and turned to
consideration of power in relation to government. By relegating
economic, social, and ideological aspects of human life to the status of
the "environment," the study of politics divorced itself from a study of
how the organization of this environment constrains or directs politics,
and moved instead to an inquiry into decision making. The political
process is one in which demands are aggregated and translated into
decisions, much as in the market model of economics the interplay of
demands issues in the production of supplies. As in the market model,
such an approach easily slips into the assumption

that the organized private power forces of the society balance one
another so as to preclude concentrated irresponsible rule. .. . wise
public policy is assumed to prevail, explained by a mystique not unlike
Adam Smith's invisible hand. [Engler 1968: 199]

Ultimately, in such a model, the willingness to abide by the rules of
the political market is necessarily determined not by the market itself
but by the orientation and values of the participants, aspects of what
political scientists have come to call their "political culture." Much
of political science thus focused on the study of decisions, on the one
hand, and the study of orientations, understood as constituting together
the autonomous political system of a given society, on the other.

   Underlying all these specialties is the concept of an aggregate of
individuals, engaged in a contract to maximize social order, to truck
and barter in the marketplace, and to provide inputs for the formulation
of political decisions. Ostensibly engaged in the study of human
behavior. the various disciplines parcel out the subject among
themselves. Each then proceeds to set up a model, seemingly a means to
explain "hard," observable facts, yet actually an ideologically loaded
scheme geared to a narrow definition of subject matter. Such schemes
provide self-fulfilling answers, since phenomena other than those
covered by the model are ruled out of the court of specialized
discourse. If the models leak like sieves, it is then argued that this
is either because they are merely abstract constructs and not expected
to hold empirical water, or because troublemakers have poked holes into
them. The specialized social sciences, having abandoned a holistic
perspective, thus come to resemble the Danae sisters of classical Greek
legend, ever condemned to pour water into their separate bottomless
containers.

The Development of Sociological Theory

  We have seen how sociology stemmed from an attempt to counteract
social disorder by creating a theory of social order, by locating order
and disorder in the quantity and quality of social relations. An
important implication of this approach is that it issues in a polarity
between two types of society: one in which social order is maximized
because social relations are densely knit and suffused with value
consensus; and another in which social disorder predominates over order
because social relations are atomized and deranged by dissensus over
values. It is only a short step from drawing such a polarity to
envisioning social process as a change from one type of society to the
other. This seemed consistent with the common view that modern life
entails a progressive disintegration of the lifeways that marked the
"good old days" of our forebears. In nineteenth-century Europe, where
older social ties in fact disintegrated under the twin impact of
capitalism and industrialization, such a temporal interpretation of the
sociological polarity carried the conviction of experience. Ferdinand
Tonnies saw this movement as one from "community," or Gemeinschaft, to
"society," or Gesellschaft. Sir Henry Maine phrased it as a shift from
social relations based on status to social relations based on contract.
Emile Durkheim conceived it as a movement from a kind of social
solidarity based on the similarity of all members to a social solidarity
based on an "organic" complementarity of differences. The Chicago school
of urban sociology saw it as the contrast between a cohesive society and
the atomized, heterogeneous, disorganized city. Finally, Robert Redfield
drew the various formulations together into a polar model of progression
from Folk to Urban Society. In this model the quantity and quality of
social relations again were the primary, independent variables.
Isolation or paucity of social interaction, coupled with homogeneity or
similarity of social ties, generated the dependent variables:
orientation toward the group, or "collectivization"; commitment to
belief, or "sanctity"; and "organization," the knitting together of
understandings in the minds of men. In contrast, contact, or high
frequency of contact, coupled with heterogeneity or dissimilarity of
social ties, was seen as producing the dependent variables of
"individualization," "secularization," and "disorganization." In sum,
increases in the quantity and diversity of social interaction caused
"the moral order" of the folk to give way to "the technical order" of
civilization.

   Sociology thus took its departure from a sense that social order was
threatened by the atrophy of community. As the twentieth century wore
on, however, it gradually came to be taken for granted that society was
headed toward increased size and differentiation, and hence also toward
the growth of utilitarian and technical relations at the expense of
sacred and moral ties. Society was evidently moving toward what Max
Weber, using Tonnies's terms, had called Vergesellschaftung. By this he
meant the expansion of relations resting on

rationally motivated adjustment of interests or a similarly motivated
agreement, whether the basis of rational judgement be absolute values or
reasons of expediency. It is especially common, though by no means
inevitable, for the associative type of relationship to rest on a
rational agreement by mutual consent. [1968: 10)]

Although Weber himself used the term with ambivalence and misgivings,
his latter-day followers embraced the prognosis with enthusiasm. Whereas
“traditional society" had fitted people narrowly into inherited
positions, and then bound them together tightly in particularistic
positions, "modern society" would sever people from inherited ties and
allocate the newly mobile population to specialized and differentiated
roles responding to the changing needs of an overarching universal
society. Such an emerging society would also require a mechanism for
setting social goals and a machinery for implementing them. The way the
modernizers saw it, goal setting would come out of enlarged popular
participation. Implementation of the goals, such as economic
development, in turn would require the creation of bureaucracy, defined
as organizations capable of marshalling resources rationally and
efficiently toward stated goals. Finally, public participation in
setting and meeting goals would require a psychic reorientation that
could sustain the enactment of such technical and rational norms. Those
capable of generating such new arrangements would find themselves
launched into modernity. Those incapable of doing so would find their
society arrested at the point of transition or mired in traditionalism.
In the succession from Max Weber to Talcott Parsons, therefore,
Vergesellschaftung was transfigured into "modernization" through a
simple change of signs. If Gesellschaft had once seemed problematical,
after the mid-twentieth century it came to be seen as desirable and
forward-looking. The negative pole of the polarity was now allocated to
"traditional society," slow to change, inflexible, and lacking in
psychic drive toward rational and secular achievement.

   Thus, in a reversal of sociology's original critical stance toward
the workings of nineteenth-century society, "modernization theory"
became an instrument for bestowing praise on societies deemed to be
modern and casting a critical eye on those that had yet to attain that
achievement. The political leaders of the United States had pronounced
themselves in favor of aiding the development of the Third World, and
modernization theorists seconded that pronouncement. Yet modernization
theory effectively foreclosed any but the most ideologically charged
understanding of that world. It used the term modern, but meant by that
term the United States, or rather an ideal of a democratic, pluralistic,
rational, and secular United States. It said traditional, but meant all
those others that would have to adopt that ideal to qualify for
assistance. As theory it was misleading. It imparted a false view of
American history, substituting self-satisfaction for analysis. By
casting such different entities as China, Albania, Paraguay, Cuba, and
Tanzania into the hopper of traditional society, it simultaneously
precluded any study of their significant differences. By equating
tradition with stasis and lack of development, it denied societies
marked off as traditional any significant history of their own. Above
all, by dividing the world into modern, transitional, and traditional
societies, it blocked effective understanding of relationships among
them. Once again each society was defined as an autonomous and bounded
structure of social relations, thus discouraging analysis of
intersocietal or intergroup interchanges, including internal social
strife, colonialism, imperialism, and societal dependency. The theory
thus effectively precluded the serious study of issues demonstrably
agitating the real world.

Anthropology

If these social sciences have not led to an adequate understanding of
the interconnected world, what of anthropology? Anthropology,
ambitiously entitled The Science of Man, did lay special claims to the
study of non-Western and "primitive” peoples. Indeed, cultural
anthropology began as world anthropology. In its evolutionist phase it
was concerned with the evolution of culture on a global scale. In its
diffusionist phase it was interested in the spread and clustering of
cultural forms over the entire face of the globe. The diffusionists also
saw relations between populations exhibiting the same cultural
forms—matriliny, blackening of teeth, or tailored clothing—as the
outcome of intergroup communication by migration or by copying and
learning. They were not much concerned with people, but they did have a
sense of global interconnections. They did not believe in the concept of
"primitive isolates."

   Such interests and understandings were set aside, however, as
anthropologists turned from a primary concern with cultural forms to the
study of "living cultures,” of specified populations and their life-
ways in locally delimited habitats. Fieldwork—direct communication with
people and participant observation of their ongoing activities in
situ—became a hallmark of anthropological method. Fieldwork has proved
enormously fruitful in laying bare and correcting false assumptions and
erroneous descriptions. It has also revealed hitherto unsuspected
connections among sets of social activities and cultural forms. Yet the
very success of the method lulled its users into a false confidence. It
became easy for them to convert merely heuristic considerations of
method into theoretical postulates about society and culture.

   Limitations of time and energy in the field dictate limitations in
the number and locations of possible observations and interviews,
demanding concentration of effort on an observable place and on a corps
of specifiable "informants." The resulting observations and
communications are then made to stand for a larger universe of
unrealized observations and communications, and used to construct a
model of the social and cultural entity under study. Such a model is no
more than an account of "descriptive integration," a theoretical halfway
house, and not yet explanation. Functionalist anthropology, however,
attempted to derive explanations from the study of the microcosm alone,
treating it as a hypothetical isolate. Its features were explained in
terms of the contribution each made to the maintenance of this
putatively isolated whole. Thus, a methodological unit of inquiry was
turned into a theoretical construct by assertion, a priori. The outcome
was series of analyses of wholly separate cases.

   There were three major attempts to transcend the boundaries of the
microcosm. One of these, that of Robert Redfield, had recourse to
sociological theory. It applied the polarity of Gemeinschaft and
Gesellschaft to anthropological cases by using "communities" as
representations or exemplifications of such "imagined types of
societies." Thus the communities of X-Cacal and Chan Kom in Yucatan were
made to exemplify the folk end of a universal folk—urban continuum of
social relations and cultural understandings. The two locations
illuminated the theory, but the theory could not explicate the political
and economic processes that shaped the communities: X-Cacal as a
settlement set up by Maya-speaking rebels during the Caste Wars of the
nineteenth century; Chan Kom as a village of cultivators released from
the hacienda system by the Mexican Revolution, settling as newcomers in
a frontier area with the support of the Yucatecan Socialist Party. Thus,
like Gemeinschaft-Gesellschaft theory in general, Redfield's concepts
led only in one direction, up to the theory but not back down from it.

   A second attempt to generate a theoretical construct for
understanding the microcosm studied in a larger context was Julian
Steward's concept of levels of sociocultural integration. The concept,
derived from the philosophy of "emergent evolution," was meant to
suggest that units of the same kind, when subjected to integrative
processes, could yield novel units that not only subsumed those of the
lower level but also exhibited qualitatively different characteristics
at the higher, emergent level. Steward initially used the concept to
counter arguments that treated "the community" as a small replica of
"the nation," as if these were qualitatively identical structural
phenomena. He then proceeded, however, to construct a conceptual edifice
in which units at the family level became parts of a community level,
units at the community level became parts of a regional level, and units
at the regional level became parts of the level of the nation.

   Although the term integration suggests a process, the concept is not
processual but structural. It suggests an architecture of a whole and
its parts, which remain to be specified substantively only after the
fact. The model is thus a "hollow" representation of societal
complexity, theoretically applicable to all complex sociocultural
wholes. Yet it makes no statement about any processes generating the
structure, or about the specific features that integrate it, or about
the content of any of its parts. Knowledge about processes does not flow
from the model but must be added to it. Thus, when Steward turned to the
study of "contemporary change in traditional societies," the model
remained silent about the penetration of capitalism, the growth of a
worldwide specialization and division of labor, and the development of
domination by some populations over others. Steward was forced back,
unhappily, to the comparative study of separate cases and the
unsatisfactory concepts of tradition and modernization.

   The third attempt to go beyond the microscopic study of populations
in specified locations took the form of a revival of evolutionism.
Evolutionary thinking in anthropology, so prominent in the nineteenth
century, had been halted by the assertion that "the extensive occurrence
of diffusion . . . lays the axe to the root of any theory of historical
laws" (Lowie 1920: 434). Evolutionists and diffusionists were not so
much opposed as interested in quite different phenomena. The
evolutionists had recognized the facts of diffusion, but had felt
justified in abstracting from these facts to their model of successive
stages of social and cultural development. The diffusionists, in turn,
sidestepped the problem posed by major inequalities in the technology
and organization of different populations to focus instead on the
transmission of cultural forms from group to group. Whereas the
evolutionists disclaimed an interest in the history of particular
societies and cultures, the diffusionists disclaimed any interest in the
ecological, economic, social, political, and ideological matrix within
which the cultural forms were being transmitted in time and space. The
two schools of thought thus effectively talked past each other. The
functionalists, in turn, rejected altogether the "conjectural history"
of the diffusionists in favor of the analysis of internal functioning in
putatively isolated wholes.

   When Leslie White reintroduced the evolutionary perspective into
American anthropology in the forties and fifties, he did so by
reasserting the validity of the earlier model proposed by Tylor, Morgan,
and Spencer. To this model of universal or unilineal evolution, Julian
Steward opposed a multilineal model that depicted evolution as a process
of successive branching. Subsequently Sahlins and Service sought to
unify the two approaches by counterposing general and specific evolution
as dual aspects of the same evolutionary process. General evolution was
defined by them as "passage from less to greater energy exploitation,
lower to higher levels of integration, and less to greater all-round
adaptability" (Sahlins and Service 1960: 22-23). Specific evolution they
defined as "the phylogenetic, ramifying, historic passage of culture
along its many lines, the adaptive modification of particular cultures"
(1960: 38). Though cognizant of convergence as an aspect of cultural as
opposed to biological phylogeny, they defined it in old- fashioned
diffusionist terms as the diffusion of culture traits, and not as the
outcome of multifaceted relationships between interacting culture-
bearing populations. When they turned to the detailed analysis of
specific evolution, they thus emphasized adaptation as “specialization
for the exploitation of particular facets of the environment" (1960:
50). They understood that environment included both the physical and the
sociocultural matrices of human life, but they laid primary stress on
adaptation to different physical environments. In the sixties and
seventies, the study of particular ecological "systems" became
increasingly sophisticated, without, however, ever transcending the
functional analysis of the single case, now hypothesized as an integral,
self-regulating ecological whole. Thus, despite its theoretical effort,
evolutionary anthropology turned all too easily into the study of
ecological adaptation, conducting anthropology back to the comparative
study of single cases.

   The ecological concentration on the single case is paralleled by the
recent fascination with the study and unraveling of what is "in the
heads" of single culture-bearing populations. Such studies turn their
back on functionalism, including what was most viable in it, the concern
with how people cope with the material and organizational problems of
their lives. They also disregard material relationships linking the
people with others outside. Instead, their interest lies in the
investigation of local microcosms of meaning, conceived as autonomous
systems.

   This turn toward the study of meaning has been influenced strongly by
the development of linguistics, notably by de Saussure's structural
theory of language as a superindividual social system of linguistic
forms that remain normatively identical in all utterances. Such a view
relates linguistic sign to linguistic sign without reference to who is
speaking to whom, when, and about what. It was originally put forward to
oppose the position that a language consisted of an ever-changing
historical stream of individually generated utterances, a perspective
associated with the names of Humboldt and Vossler. De Saussure, instead,
wholly divorced language (langue) from utterance (parole), defining
signs by their mutual relation to one another, without reference to any
context external to them. In the same way, meanings were defined in
terms of other meanings, without reference to the practical contexts in
which they appear.

   Clearly, the opposition between the two views requires for its
resolution a relational, dialectical perspective, as Volosinov noted
fifty years ago. He called into question de Saussure's view of the
static linguistic system carried by a faceless and passive collectivity,
noting instead that in reality such a collectivity consisted of a
population of speakers with diverse "accents" or interests,
participating in a historical stream of verbal utterances about diverse,
concrete contexts. Contexts should not be thought of as internally
homogeneous and externally segregated. For Volosinov, they constituted
instead intersections between "differently oriented accents ... in a
state of constant tension, of incessant interaction and conflict" (1973:
80). Neither sign nor meaning could be understood without reference to
what they are about, their theme in a given situation. The trend within
anthropology to treat systems of meaning as wholly autonomous systems
threatens to reverse this insight by substituting for it the study of
solipsistic discourses generated in vacuo by the human mind.

   While some anthropologists thus narrow their focus to the ever more
intensive study of the single case, others hope to turn anthropology
into a science by embarking on the statistical cross-cultural
comparisons of coded features drawn from large samples of
ethnographically known cases. A good deal of attention has been paid to
the methodological problems of how to isolate discrete cases for
comparison and how to define the variables to be coded and compared. Are
the hundreds of Eskimo local groups separate cases? Are they instances
of larger, selfidentified clusters such as Copper, Netsilik, ahd
Iglulik? Or do they constitute a single Eskimo case? Other questions
deal with the nature of the sample. Can one be sure that the cases are
sufficiently separated historically and geographically to constitute
distinct cases? Or is the sample contaminated by spatial or temporal
propinquity and communication? All the answers to these questions
nevertheless assume the autonomy and boundedness of the cases that are
selected in the end. Whatever sample is finally chosen, it is
interpreted as an aggregate of separate units. These, it is held, either
generate cultural traits independently through invention, or borrow them
from one another through diffusion. We are back in a world of
sociocultural billiard balls, coursing on a global billiard table.

   What, however, if we take cognizance of processes that transcend
separable cases, moving through and beyond them and transforming them as
they proceed? Such processes were, for example, the North American fur
trade and the trade in native American and African slaves. What of the
localized Algonkin-speaking patrilineages, for example, which in the
course of the fur trade moved into large nonkin villages and became
known as the ethnographic Ojibwa? What of the Chipe- weyans, some of
whose bands gave up hunting to become fur trappers, or "carriers," while
others continued to hunt for game as "caribou eaters," with people
continuously changing from caribou eating to carrying and back? What of
the multilingual, multiethnic, intermarrying groups of Cree and
Assiniboin that grew up in the far northern Plains of North America in
response to the stimulus of the fur trade, until the units "graded into
one another" (Sharrock 1974: 96)? What of the Mundurucü in Amazonia who
changed from patrilocality and patri- liny to adopt the unusual
combination of matrilocality and patrilineal reckoning in response to
their new role as hunters of slaves and suppliers of manioc flour to
slave-hunting expeditions? What, moreover, of Africa, where the slave
trade created an unlimited demand for slaves, and where quite unrelated
populations met that demand by severing people from their kin groups
through warfare, kidnapping, pawning, or judicial procedures, in order
to have slaves to sell to the Europeans? In all such cases, to attempt
to specify separate cultural wholes and distinct boundaries would create
a false sample. These cases exemplify spatially and temporally shifting
relationships, prompted in all instances by the effects of European
expansion. If we consider, furthermore, that this expansion has for
nearly 500 years affected case after case, then the search for a world
sample of distinct cases is illusory.

   One need have no quarrel with a denotative use of the term society to
designate an empirically verifiable cluster of interconnections among
people, as long as no evaluative prejudgments are added about its state
of internal cohesion or boundedness in relation to the external world.
Indeed, I shall continue to use the term in this way throughout this
book, in preference to other clumsier formulations. Similarly, it would
be an error to discard the anthropological insight that human existence
entails the creation of cultural forms, themselves predicated on the
human capacity to symbol.

   Yet the concept of the autonomous, self-regulating and
self-justifying society and culture has trapped anthropology inside the
bounds of its own definitions. Within the halls of science, the compass
of observation and thought has narrowed, while outside the inhabitants
of the world are increasingly caught up in continent-wide and global
change. Indeed, has there ever been a time when human populations have
existed in independence of larger encompassing relationships, unaffected
by larger fields of force? Just as the sociologists pursue the
will-o'-the-wisp of social order and integration in a world of upheaval
and change, so anthropologists look for pristine replicas of the
precapitalist, preindustrial past in the sinks and margins of the
capitalist, industrial world. But Europeans and Americans would never
have encountered these supposed bearers of a pristine past if they had
not encountered one another, in bloody fact, as Europe reached out to
seize the resources and populations of the other continents. Thus, it
has been rightly said that anthropology is an offspring of imperialism.
Without imperialism there would be no anthropologists, but there would
also be no Dene, Baluba, or Malay fishermen to be studied. The tacit
anthropological supposition that people like these are people without
history amounts to the erasure of 500 years of confrontation, killing,
resurrection, and accommodation. If sociology operates with its
mythology of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, anthropology all too
frequently operates with its mythology of the pristine primitive. Both
perpetuate fictions that deny the facts of ongoing relationships and
involvements.

   These facts clearly emerge in the work of anthropologists and
historians who have specialized in what has come to be known as
ethno-history. Perhaps "ethnohistory" has been so called to separate it
from "real” history, the study of the supposedly civilized. Yet what is
clear from the study of ethnohistory is that the subjects of the two
kinds of history are the same. The more ethnohistory we know, the more
clearly "their” history and "our" history emerge as part of the same
history. Thus, there can be no "Black history" apart from "White
history,” only a component of a common history suppressed or omitted
from conventional studies for economic, political, or ideological
reasons.

   These remarks echo those made by the anthropologist Alexander Lesser
who, in a different context, asked years ago that "we adopt as a working
hypothesis the universality of human contact and influence"; that we
think "of human societies—prehistoric, primitive, or modern— not as
closed systems, but as open systems"; that we see them "as inextricably
involved with other aggregates, near and far, in weblike, netlike
connections" (1961: 42). The labors of the ethnohistorians have
demonstrated the validity of this advice in case after case. Yet it
remains merely programmatic until we can move from a consideration of
connections at work in separate cases to a wider perspective, one that
will allow us to connect the connections in theory as well as in
empirical study.

   In such a perspective, it becomes difficult to view any given culture
as a bounded system or as a self-perpetuating "design for living." We
thus stand in need of a new theory of cultural forms. The
anthropologists have shown us that cultural forms—as "determinate
orderings" of things, behavior, and ideas—do play a demonstrable role in
the management of human interaction. What will be required of us in the
future is not to deny that role, but to understand more precisely how
cultural forms work to mediate social relationships among particular
populations.

The Uses of Marx

  If we grant the existence of such connections, how are we to conceive
of them? Can we grasp a common process that generates and organizes
them? Is it possible to envision such a common dynamic and yet maintain
a sense of its distinctive unfolding in time and space as it involves
and engulfs now this population, now that other?

   Such an approach is possible, but only if we can face theoretical
possibilities that transcend our specialized disciplines. It is not
enough to become multidisciplinary in the hope that an addition of all
the disciplines will lead to a new vision. A major obstacle to the
development of a new perspective lies in the very fact of specialization
itself. That fact has a history and that history is significant, because
the several academic disciplines owe their existence to a common
rebellion against political economy, their parent discipline. That
discipline strove to lay bare the laws or regularities surrounding the
production of wealth. It entailed a concern with how wealth was
generated in production, with the role of classes in the genesis of
wealth, and with the role of the state in relation to the different
classes. These concerns were common to conservatives and socialists
alike. (Marx addressed himself to them when he criticized political
economists for taking as Universals what he saw as the characteristics
of historically particular systems of production.) Yet these concerns
have been expunged so completely from the repertory of the social
sciences that the latest International Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences does not even include entries under "political economy" and
"class." Today, concern with such matters is usually ascribed only to
Marxists, even though Marx himself wrote in a letter to a friend (Joseph
Weyde- meyer, March 5, 1852):

no credit is due me for discovering the existence of classes in society
nor yet the struggle between them. Long before me bourgeois historians
had described the historical development of this class struggle and
bourgeois economists the economic anatomy of the classes, [quoted in
Venable 1945: 6, n. 3]

   It is likely that it was precisely the conception of political
economy as a structure of classes that led the nascent social sciences
to turn against the concept of class. If social, economic, and political
relations were seen to involve a division into antagonistic classes,
endowed by the structure of the political economy itself with opposing
interests and capabilities, then the pursuit of order would indeed be
haunted forever by the specter of discord. This was what led James
Madison, in his tough- minded Federalist Papers, to define the function
of government as the regulation of relations among antagonistic classes.
The several social science disciplines, in contrast, turned their back
on political economy, shifting instead to the intensive study of
interaction among individuals —in primary and secondary groups, in the
market, in the processes of government. They thus turned away also from
concern with crucial questions about the nature of production, class,
and power: If production is the condition of being human, how is
production to be understood and analyzed? Under what conditions does
production entail the rise of classes? What are the implications of
class division for the allocation of resources and the exercise of
power? What is the nature of the state?

   Although these questions were abandoned by the social sciences, they
persist as their hidden agenda. Because Marx raised these questions most
persistently and systematically, he remains a hidden interlocutor in
much social science discourse. It has been said, with reason, that the
social sciences constitute one long dialogue with the ghost of Marx. If
we are to transcend the present limits and limitations of the
specialized disciplines, we must return to these unanswered questions
and reconsider them.

   Marx is important for this reconsideration in several ways. He was
one of the last major figures to aim at a holistic human science,
capable of integrating the varied specializations. Contrary to what is
all too often said about him, he was by no means an economic
determinist. He was a materialist, believing in the primacy of material
relationships as against the primacy of "spirit." Indeed, his concept of
production (Produktion) was conceived in opposition to Hegel's concept
of Geist, manifesting itself in successive incarnations of spirit. For
him, production embraced at once the changing relations of humankind to
nature, the social relations into which humans enter in the course of
transforming nature, and the consequent transformations of human
symbolic capability. The concept is thus not merely economic in the
strict sense but also ecological, social, political, and
social-psychological. It is relational in character.

   Marx further argued—against those who wanted to universalize Society,
or the Market, or the Political Process—the existence of different modes
of production in human history. Each mode represented a different
combination of elements. What was true of one mode was not true of
another: there was therefore no universal history. But Marx was profou
ndly historical. Both the elements constituting a mode of production and
their characteristic combination had for him a definable history of
origin, unfolding, and disintegration. He was neither a universal
historian nor a historian of events, but a historian of configurations
or syndromes of material relationships. Most of his energy was, of
course, spent on efforts to understand the history and workings of one
particular mode, capitalism, and this not to defend it but to effect its
revolutionary transformation. Since our specialized disciplinary
discourse developed as an antidote to revolution and disorder, it is
understandable that this ghostly interrogator should have been made
unwelcome in the halls of academe.

   Yet the specter has vital lessons for us. First, we shall not
understand the present world unless we trace the growth of the world
market and the course of capitalist development. Second, we must have a
theory of that growth and development. Third, we must be able to relate
both the history and theory of that unfolding development to processes
that affect and change the lives of local populations. That theory must
be able to delineate the significant elements at work in these processes
and their systemic combinations in historical time. At the same time, it
ought to cut finely enough to explain the significant differences
marking off each such combination from all the others—say, capitalism
from other historically known combinations. Finally, theoretically
informed history and historically informed theory must be joined
together to account for populations specifiable in time and space, both
as outcomes of significant processes and as their carriers.

   Among those who have contributed to a theoretically informed history
of the world to which capitalism has given rise, two names stand out,
both for the trenchancy of their formulations and the scope of their
research effort. One of these is Andre Gunder Frank, an economist, who
began to question the modernization approach to economic development in
the early 1960s. Frank clearly articulated the heretical proposition
that development and underdevelopment were not separate phenomena, but
were closely bound up with each other (1966, 1967). Over the past
centuries, capitalism had spread outward from its original center to all
parts of the globe. Everywhere it penetrated, it turned other areas into
dependent satellites of the metropolitan center. Extracting the
surpluses produced in the satellites to meet the requirements of the
metropolis, capitalism distorted and thwarted the development of the
satellites to its own benefit. This phenomenon Frank called “the
development of underdevelopment." The exploitative relation between
metropolis and satellite was, moreover, repeated within each satellite
itself, with the classes and regions in closer contact with the external
metropolis drawing surplus from the hinterland and distorting and
thwarting its development. Underdevelopment in the satellites was
therefore not a phenomenon sui generis, but the outcome of relations
between satellite and metropolis, ever renewed in the process of surplus
transfer and ever reinforced by the continued dependency of the
satellite on the metropolis.

   Similar to Frank's approach is Immanuel Wallerstein's explicitly
historical account of capitalist origins and the development of the
"European world-economy." This world-economy, originating in the late
fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, constitutes a global market,
characterized by a global division of labor. Firms (be they individuals,
enterprises, or regions) meet in this market to exchange the goods they
have produced in the hope of realizing a profit. The search for profit
guides both production in general and specialization in production.
Profits are generated by primary producers, whom Wallerstein calls
proletarians, no matter how their labor is mobilized. Those profits are
appropriated through legal sanctions by capitalists, whom Wallerstein
classifies as bourgeois, no matter what the source of their capital. The
growth of the market and the resulting worldwide division of labor
generate a basic distinction between the core countries (Frank's
metropolis) and the periphery (Frank's satellites). The two are linked
by "unequal exchange," whereby "high-wage (but low-supervision),
high-profit, high-capital intensive” goods produced in the core are
exchanged for "low-wage (but high-supervision), low-profit, low- capital
intensive goods" produced in the periphery (see Wallerstein 1974: 351).
In the core, goods are produced mainly by "free" wage- remunerated
labor; in the periphery goods are produced mainly by one kind or another
of coerced labor. Although he adduces various factors to explain this
difference, Wallerstein has recourse to what is basically a demographic
explanation. He argues that the growth of free wage labor in the core
area arose in response to the high densities of population that made
workers competitive with one another and hence willing to submit to
market discipline, while in the periphery low population densities
favored the growth of labor coercion. We shall have occasion to look
critically at some of these propositions. Yet what is important about
both Frank’s and Wallerstein's work is that they have replaced the
fruitless debates about modernization with a sophisticated and
theoretically oriented acount of how capitalism evolved and spread, an
evolution and spread of intertwined and yet differentiated
relationships.

   Both Frank and Wallerstein focused their attention on the capitalist
world system and the arrangements of its parts. Although they utilized
the findings of anthropologists and regional historians, for both the
principal aim was to understand how the core subjugated the periphery,
and not to study the reactions of the micro-populations habitually
investigated by anthropologists. Their choice of focus thus leads them
to omit consideration of the range and variety of such populations, of
their modes of existence before European expansion and the advent of
capitalism, and of the manner in which these modes were penetrated,
subordinated, destroyed, or absorbed, first by the growing market and
subsequently by industrial capitalism. Without such an examination,
however, the concept of the "periphery" remains as much of a cover term
as "traditional society." Its advantage over the older term lies chiefly
in its implications: it points to wider linkages that must be
investigated if the processes at work in the periphery are to be
understood. Yet this examination still lies before us if we wish to
understand how Mundurucu or Meo were drawn into the larger system to
suffer its impact and to become its agents.

   This book undertakes such an examination. It hopes to delineate the
general processes at work in mercantile and capitalist development,
while at the same time following their effects on the micro-populations
studied by the ethnohistorians and anthropologists. My view of these
processes and their effects is historical, but in the sense of history
as an analytic account of the development of material relations, moving
simultaneously on the level of the encompassing system and on the
micro-level. I therefore look first at the world in 1400, before Europe
achieved worldwide dominance. I then discuss some theoretical constructs
that might allow us to grasp the determining features of capitalism and
the modes that preceded it. Next I turn to the development of European
mercantile expansion and to the parts played by various European nations
in extending its global sway. Following the global effects of European
expansion leads to a consideration of the search for American silver,
the fur trade, the slave trade, and the quest for new sources of wealth
in Asia. I then trace the transition to capitalism in the course of the
industrial revolution, examine its impact on areas of the world
supplying resources to the industrial centers, and sketch out the
formation of working classes and their migrations within and between
continents. In this account, both the people who claim history as their
own and the people to whom history has been denied emerge as
participants in the same historical trajectory.

2 The World in 1400

  In the year 1271 the Venetian merchants Niccolo and Maffeo Polo,
together with Niccolo's son Marco, left the eastern shore of the
Mediterranean and traveled through Iran to Hormuz on the Persian Gulf.
From there they set off northeastward to Kashgar, where they took the
old Silk Road and went on to Peking. After long travels through China
and South Asia, the Polos set sail for Europe, arriving in Venice in
1295. Some forty years later, Ibn Battutah, a scholar-official from
Morocco, embarked on a pilgrimage to Mecca, and went on through Iran,
Anatolia, and the Crimea to Constantinople. From there he traveled to
Central Asia and India, spending some years in government positions in
Delhi and the Maldive Islands. After visiting southern China and
Sumatra, he went home to Morocco in 1349. Three years later he
accompanied Moroccan merchants across the Sahara to the kingdom of Mali
in the Western Sudan and returned to Fez to dictate his travel story to
a scribe. Between 1405 and 1433 the Chinese admiral Cheng-ho sailed
seven times to southern Asia, reaching as far as the Red Sea and the
East African coast. In 1492 a Genoese sea captain in the employ of the
Queen of Aragon got his first glimpse of the New World, where he sighted
the Bahamas and thought he had arrived in Japan.

   These voyages were not isolated adventures but manifestations of
forces that were drawing the continents into more encompassing
relationships and would soon make the world a unified stage for human
action. In order to understand what the world would become, we must
first know what it was. I shall therefore follow an imaginary voyager in
the year 1400 and depict the world that he might have seen.

   In this effort at global anthropology, I will go beyond the portrayal
of distinctive tribes, culture areas, and civilizations to delineate the
interlocking networks of human interaction that extended across each of
the two still separate hemispheres—the “Old World” of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, and the "New World" of the Americas. These networks grew up and
spread out in time as well as space. To account for them—to follow their
growth and spread—means also to trace the historical itineraries of
populations that history written from a Western point of view has tended
to ignore or to caricature. Like the anthropologist's “primitive
contemporaries," they have been treated as people without a history of
their own.

   These wide-ranging linkages among populations before European
expansion were outcomes of identifiable material processes. One of these
processes was the build-up of contentious hegemonic political and
military systems. Each of the two hemispheres witnessed, separately, the
rise of empires, which drew toward themselves the surpluses produced by
varied and manifold groups. A second process at work was the growth of
long-distance trade, which everywhere connected zones of supply with
centers of concentrated demand, and which opened up specialized roles
for the peoples who sat astride the routes of commerce. Empire building
and trade, in turn, created extensive grids of communication, which
bound together different populations under the aegis of dominant
religious or political ideologies. Together these processes shaped the
world that Europe would soon reorganize to answer to requirements of its
own.

Political Geography of the Old World

To understand this world of 1400, we must begin with geography. A map of
the Old World reveals certain physical constants. One of these is the
great chain of mountains running in an east—west direction across the
Eurasian landmass. Rising up from the rugged ranges of southern and
western China, the chain ascends to the heights of the Kunlun, Himalayas
and Pamir, “roof of the world," and reaches across the Elburz Range to
the Caucasus, the Carpathians, the Alps, and finally the Pyrenees.
Sometimes these mountains retarded contact between north and south. At
other times, gaps in the chain encouraged population movement and
attacks. In northern China, the Han had to build their big wall to keep
the Chinese in and the Mongols and Turks out. In Turkestan, roads led
southward into Iran and India. In the west, raiders could move up the
valley of the Danube into the heart of Europe.

   An endpaper map shows us a second constant, the distribution of major
climatic zones. These encourage different covers of natural vegetation
and, hence, favor different kinds of human habitation. The map
immediately shows us a major belt of dry country running east and west
from the Sahara and the Arabian deserts across the plateau of Iran into
Turkestan and Mongolia. This is the country of pastoral populations,
driving their herds over the pasture available along desert margins and
on the steppe. Cultivation is possible only around permanent water
sources in oases. South of the dry zone of desert and steppe lie warm
and moist tropical and subtropical forest and savanna, often favorable
to cultivation, as in West Africa, the Gangetic Plain, the peninsulas
and islands of Southeast Asia, and southern China. To the north of the
dry zone extends the forest. West of the Ural Mountains, the forest
country is rainy and experiences a longer growing season; hence, when
cleared, it makes good farming country. To the east of the Urals, the
forest is drier and colder. It becomes taiga, cold-weather coniferous
forest, and— together with the treeless, lichen-covered belt of
circumpolar tundra— the predilect habitat of forest hunters. Here
cultivators ventured only rarely, and herders found it difficult to keep
their animals alive.

   When we compare the distribution of cultivable and improvable
agricultural land with that of desert and steppe, a significant contrast
emerges. The distribution of the dry belt is continuous; that of the
cultivable landscape is spotty and archipelagic. The pastoral corridor
facilitated centrifugal movement; the compartmentalized arable zones
oriented people centripetally toward the grounds of their home village.
This dichotomy between steppe and sown shaped much of the course of
human action in the Old World, sometimes dividing pastoralist and
villager, at other times prompting them into interaction.

   Cultivation in northwestern Africa is confined mainly to the
Mediterranean vertient north of the Atlas, and is impeded to the south
and east by steppe and desert. Wheat raised in the Sus Valley and the
Rharb of Morocco, in the plains of Shelif and Mitidja in Algeria, and in
the Medjerda Plain of Tunis was important in sustaining local courts and
elites. East of Tunis lies the oasis of Tripoli, and beyond that Egypt,
the great oasis formed by the Nile. Its grain had fed Rome during the
days of the Roman Empire, and thereafter it played the same role for
Byzantium, for the Arabs at Damascus, and—after 1453—for the Ottomans.
Byzantium and the Ottoman Empire also drew increasingly on the lands of
the lower Danube and the shores of the Black Sea for their grain supply.
(See map at back of book.)

   Small islands of cultivation could be sustained on terraced hillsides
in Palestine, and there were major agricultural oases at Antioch (now
Antakya) and Damascus. The Syrian steppe, farmed in Roman times and
again in the twentieth century, is ecologically marginal and long lay
abandoned to occupation by pastoral nomads. In Anatolia agriculture is
possible along the shores of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea and in
occasional patches on the mountainous plateau, but the rest is steppe,
and to the southeast the desert again supervenes. Iraq—the land between
the Tigris and the Euphrates—was once enormously productive. Surplus
production, aided by hydraulic works, had underwritten state formation
since Akkadian times; construction of waterworks of all kinds reached a
climax here under the Sassanid dynasty of Iran (A.D. 226-637). But with
the Islamic conquest of the area and the concomitant growth of Baghdad
into a capital with over 300,000 inhabitants, agricultural wealth and
human resources were increasingly sacrificed to the city. This led to a
decline in agricultural output and a steady decrease in the amount of
tribute obtained (Adams 1965: 84 ff.). A final blow to productivity was
delivered by the Mongol invasion in the mid-thirteenth century, when the
Mongol khan Hulagu destroyed the irrigation works of the lower valley.

   Beyond the mountain chain of the Zagros lies the Iranian plateau.
Most of it is covered by steppe and desert, with cultivation possible
only in favored spots along a belt of alluvial fans extending around the
inside rim of the mountain chain. On occasion cultivation has been
extended into the drier zone by means of underground tunnels (qanats),
which carry water by gravity flow along the water table to outlying
fields. Waste and desert again restrict cultivation in Afghanistan and
Baluchistan to the east.

   Despite the prevalence of inhospitable desert and steppe throughout
this area, a string of urbanized oases based on irrigation agriculture
furnished rest stops and supply stations for caravans moving east and
west. The most important of these caravan routes was the Silk Road. It
began at Antioch in northern Syria, ran through Rai (near Teheran), then
passed through Merv and Balkh (Bactria) to Kashgar. At Kashgar the road
forked, conducting travelers both north and south of the Taklamakan
(southern Gobi) Desert. The northern fork led to Kucha and Karashahr,
the southern one through Yarkand and Khotan. Both forks met again at
Tunhwang in Chinese Kansu, whence roads led on into China. Kashgar—which
Marco Polo praised for its gardens and vineyards—was thus a major hub of
long-distance commerce, inhabited, in Polo's words, by people “who
travel and trade all over the world." From Kashgar another route led
northward to Samarkand and on to Sarai on the lower Volga, from which
point one could reach Azov and the Black Sea. All along the northern
escarpment of the great Eurasian mountain chain, too, there were pockets
of arable land that could be cultivated if the herders, with their
demand for pasture and water, could be kept at bay.

   Thus, a chain of widely spaced cultivated regions formed a great arc
extending from the Moroccan Atlas Mountains to the very gates of China
in Kansu. The agricultural regions were connected by routes of traffic
and trade. This long chain was unified, both politically and
religiously, only once in history, when the armies of Islam fanned out
from the Arabian peninsula east and west in the course of the seventh
and eighth centuries A.D. After that the links of the chain ripped apart
and were never reassembled. Political separation was further exacerbated
by religious sectarianism, each kind of segmentation reinforcing the
other.

   Renewed segmentation weakened many of the links in the long chain.
Separate agricultural regions generated separate polities, limited
internally by the circumscribed resources at their command and exposed
to incursions and takeovers across unprotected boundaries. What held
this beadlike geopolitical structure together were connections of trade
and religious faith. These proved capable of transcending the
limitations of each separate component and could aggregate resources on
a wider scale; yet in the absence of a politically unified force to
defend them, these linkages, too, were exposed to repeated interference
and rupture.

   North of the Eurasian mountain chain lay the steppe, forming a vast
corridor from the Mongolian steppe in the east, through the Kirghiz and
Russian steppes, to the Hungarian steppe close to the heart of Central
Europe. These were the predilect traveling grounds of pastoral nomads.
The conversion of the southern Russian prairie to permanent cultivation
had to await the defeat of the pastoralists and their khans by the
Russians in the seventeenth century A.D.

   Westward beyond the Russian prairie lay the European peninsula, a
zone of temperate forests that could be cleared and farmed. The
development of this peninsula beyond the confines of the Roman
Mediterranean was, however, very slow. Almost completely surrounded by
bodies of water—the Baltic Sea, the North Sea, the Atlantic, and the
Mediterranean—this proximity to water could be turned into a major asset
only when the shores could be held and defended against sea marauders
from both north and south. This task was not realized completely until
the ninth century A.D. At the same time, the clearing of the European
forest took millennia. Not until A.D. 1000 did the balance between
forest and farm tilt in favor of the cultivators. Secure cultivation in
favored and militarily defensible core areas developed then in the belt
between forest and sea, often where some major river furnished an outlet
for coast-bound shipping. Such favored regions of high productivity were
the Low Countries, the Seine basin, the drainage of the Middle Rhine,
the Thames Valley in England, the valley of the Tejo in Portugal, and
the Po Valley in Italy. The agricultural surpluses of these regions fed
the growth of political power, becoming strategic bases of supply for
developing states.

   At the eastern end of the Silk Road, in Kansu, the trans-Eurasian
route extended into China, a political-economic world very different
from that of both Europe and Islam. Europe was confined to the outliers
of a peninsula, its geopolitical core areas consolidating along the
perimeter of the land. The Islamic world lay stretched out
longitudinally across the Eurasian spine, with extensions into western
and eastern Africa. China, instead, developed into a compact unit, huge
in comparison with the polities of the west. This development took place
only gradually. State formation was first underwritten by agricultural
expansion in the north, the areas of the Ching and Wei rivers in Shansi,
the Fen River in Shansi, and the lower valley of the Yellow River.
Millet was the main crop in this region, although wheat came
increasingly to the fore after A.D. 700. This older political center of
gravity was then brought into relationship with the rice-growing Yangtze
Valley, and the two areas were connected by big canals at the beginning
of the seventh century. Somewhat later a third key area developed south
of the Yangtze. Migration by ethnic (Han) Chinese into the fertile
deltas and basins of this area began in the third century A.D. but
speeded up greatly in the seventh and eighth centuries, supported by a
more sophisticated rice-growing technology based on improved tools,
seeds, and irrigation techniques.

   A state structure influenced by both Chinese and Hindu models, and
sustained by irrigated rice, arose in the Mekong Delta as early as the
first century A.D. The formation of hydraulic cores in adjacent regions
and islands during the first millennium A.D., however, followed
primarily Hindu prototypes. Among these were the Khmer kingdom of Angkor
and kingdoms of central Java and Ceylon. In India itself an earlier core
area lying on the Indus River had once supported the state systems of
Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa; but these had been destroyed in 1200 B.C.,
probably by Indo-European invaders. After that the dry Indus Valley
never recovered its previous key role, except as a staging area for
armed incursions from Central Asia. When states formed thereafter, they
originated in the valley of the Ganges, especially in the region of
Bihar and Bengal. Rice was here the main crop, grown with supplementary
irrigation where annual rainfall reached only forty to eighty inches,
and defended against floods with dams and dykes in the areas receiving
more than eighty inches a year.

   The advance of irrigation agriculture in eastern and southern Asia
displaced populations employing less intensive modes of cultivation.
Intensive cultivators in India pressed against hill tribes engaged in
slash-and-burn agriculture, such as the Mundas and the Oraons of Bihar.
In China the Han people assumed their historical identity as their
irrigation-based political economy developed after 700 B.C. To the south
of them were non-Han "barbarians”—Mong (Miao), Yu Mien (Yao), and
Tai-speakers. As the Han advanced across the Yangtze River into
"barbarian" territory, they incorporated some of the groups with
agricultural and political patterns similar to their own, while pushing
back the slash-and-burn cultivators into more mountainous or
inhospitable regions. Elsewhere the migratory cultivators withdrew to
protect their kin-ordered societies from the pressures of political and
economic exactions. As a result, remnant populations of non-Han
minorities have existed in the mountains of southwestern China and
adjacent Burma, Thailand, Laos, and Vietnam since the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. The same processes were repeated on a smaller
scale wherever nuclei of irrigation agriculture developed in the
lowlands, while the hill dwellers resorted to extensive slash-and-burn
cultivation to farm the mountainous and inaccessible hinterlands.

Trade

In making his way across the heights and fastnesses of the Old World in
1400, our imaginary observer would have followed in the footsteps of
innumerable traders, who, for millennia, had labored to construct far-
flung commercial networks between widely separate regions. Indeed, the
archipelagic distribution of agricultural areas put a premium on
connecting routes, whether by sea or by land. Such routes, whether
short- or long-distance, required servicing and defense against attack.
At the same time, any group that seized control of a major connecting
link could insert itself into the transport grid to its own benefit, or
else cut off connections together, accentuating the compartmentalization
of the cultivable archipelagos. Thus, the history of the Old World could
be written not only in terms of the strategic agricultural areas but
also in terms of the links among them.

   One of the great advantages possessed by the European peninsula of
Eurasia was its proximity to water routes all along its perimeter, from
the Gulf of Finland and the Baltic Sea to the eastern Mediterranean.
From the northeasternmost pole of this maritime network, people could
portage across to the Volga, and—like the Vikings—sail down to the
Caspian. This route, however, was interrupted by the steppe nomads and
not reopened until the middle of the sixteenth century. From the ports
of the eastern Mediterranean, the Silk Road led toward Kashgar and on
into China. A second route from the Mediterranean led from Aleppo on to
the Persian Gulf, and thence by ship to India and Southeast Asia. A
third route involved portage across the isthmus of Suez and maritime
transport through the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden to East Africa and
India beyond. From the southern Mediterranean littoral, caravan routes
using camels, the "ships of the desert," crossed the Sahara to converge
upon the cities of Gao and Timbuctu on the bend of the Niger River. From
there, river transport and pack donkeys carried goods deep into the West
African heartland. Southeast Asia, in turn, was traversed by innumerable
routes of raiding and trading, from Malaya to the Philippines and Japan.

   The existence of such routes reminds us that long-distance exchanges
possess ancient roots. Merchants have long moved goods from areas of
surplus production to deficit areas, and obtained a return for their
service. As long as transport facilities were limited—as long as burdens
had to be borne overland by human or animal carriers, and across the
seas in the hold of ships of low tonnage—the movement tended to favor
luxury goods, that is, goods that yielded a high profit per unit sold.
To the extent that trade in elite goods predominated, trade exchanges
tended to move in two different spheres. There was the sphere of local
trade and exchange, in which goods for everyday use moved among villages
and towns within restricted regions; and the sphere of long-distance
trade in valuables, produced for consumption by elites and serving to
underline their positions of political and economic domination.

Pastoral Nomads

In traversing the Old World dry belt from Africa to the far reaches of
Asia, traders and other travelers entered the predilect habitat of
populations specialized in its use, the pastoral nomads. These were not
merely herders; they also sat astride most of the routes that connected
oasis with oasis, core area with core area, region with region. Equipped
with cavalry, they could interdict movement across strategic points and
could mass attacks against hubs of trade in oases and towns. Today the
tables have turned against the pastoralists, who increasingly have been
deprived of their ability to wage war on their own behalf. Before the
Europeans opened up the sea route to the Orient, however, the
pastoralists played a major role in the transcontinental caravan trade,
exacting tribute in return for promises of safe conduct. The ability to
impose such "protection rents," in F. C. Lane's phrase, furnished a
lucrative income. Niels Steensgard has estimated the financial loss to
the Levant resulting from direct European trade with Asia—by sea around
the Cape of Good Hope—at 3-4 million piasters (1973: 175).

   In A.D. 1400 the caravan trade was still in its heyday, as were the
pastoral nomads who patrolled it. It is not that pastoralists could
survive in independence of the settled zone. Although pastoralists were
specialists in livestock keeping, moving with their herds in search of
pasture and water, they usually depended upon cultivators to furnish
them with grain and artisan products. Pastoralists and cultivators were
thus often linked by necessary exchanges. The terms of these exchanges
depended upon the distribution of power between the exchanging
populations. Where pastoral nomads possessed horses, they frequently
held the advantages of surprise, mobility, and superior impact in
dealing with settled populations. Pastoralists organized into segmentary
and ranked lineages also held strategic advantages. Lineages that
ordinarily operated on their own could be brought together through
appeals to a common genealogical charter, the massing body led by
lineages of higher rank.

   This does not mean that pastoralists always stood ready to attack
settled populations. There were many kinds of pastoralists who lived in
pacific symbiosis with settled villages. There were also many pastoral
populations who carried on some cultivation during the course of the
annual migratory cycle or delegated tasks of permanent tillage to a
subgroup of their federation. There were numerous factors that affected
the rates of exchange between pastoral and agricultural products;
certain shifts caused pastoralists to abandon herding in favor of
tillage, while other shifts led cultivators to abandon their fields and
become full-time raisers of livestock. The question that must be asked,
and which has no easy answer, concerns the precise conditions under
which pastoral nomads chose the alternative of aggressive war, rather
than strategies of accommodation or symbiosis.

   Our observer of A.D. 1400 would undoubtedly have thought of pastoral
nomads as "scourges of God." For the better part of 400 years, they had
unleashed attack after attack against the centers of cultivation. The
reasons for this are not wholly clear. Owen Lattimore has traced the
source of movements in the history of the steppe to those border zones
where cultivators and nomads competed for land that could serve either
as arable or as pasture (1951). Such areas were also political shatter-
belts, where the interest of those who ruled over cultivators lay in
setting the nomads at each other's throats, while at the same time the
nomads acquired a knowledge of the strengths and weaknesses of the
settled areas. The impact of pastoral nomads—whether Turk, Mongol, Arab,
or Berber—reached an intensity and scope in the four centuries before
our observer's trek that set this time span off from others before or
since.

   The ability to mass large mobile fighting forces under effective
command served the nomads well in times of war, but it created problems
in times of peace. It rendered difficult the continuous administration
of conquered populations without attendant loss of their fighting
effectiveness. "The empire was created on horseback, but it cannot be
governed on horseback," the Sinicized Khitan Ch'u-ts'ai is supposed to
have said to Jenghiz Khan's successor, Ogodai (Grousset 1970: 257). To
consolidate their gains, therefore, the pastoral conquerors usually
adopted the administrative models of the peoples that they had overcome.
In practice this meant that the nomads of the western steppe followed
Islamic prototypes, while those of the eastern steppe and desert
borrowed the models of the Han Chinese. This step had further
consequences. Concentration on the skills of routine administration
tended to weaken the skills that supported military prowess. At the same
time, success in improving the tax base, on which the splendor of
settled court life depended, invited rivals—still nomadic—to challenge
the conquerors (Lattimore 1951: 76-77). The result was a constant
turnover of ruling elites, often accompanied by violent depreciation or
destruction of the prizes won in war, including the decimation of the
surplus-producing population and of the technological base upon which
their production depended.

   The pastoralists not only interacted with the zones of intensive
cultivation; they also interacted with one another. Pastoralists invaded
pasture grounds of other groups and disputed control of the vital
pressure points of trade. According to Frederick Teggart (1939), for
instance, each defeat at the great wall of China sent pastoralists
reeling backwards against other pastoral populations, transmitting the
pressure until migratory invaders were sent crashing against the Roman
limes in the west. While Teggart's description probably exaggerates the
synchronization of the process, the continuous movement of pastoralists
along the dry belt—Mongol- and Turkic-speakers in the north and Arabic -
speakers in the south—turned the corridor into an area of dense
interaction, as well as a staging area of conflict.

The Near East and Africa

Turks

In 1400 our voyager would have encountered large pastoral populations in
movement all along the trail of the old Silk Road. To the east of
Kashgar, these were mainly Mongol-speakers; west of Kashgar were mainly
speakers of Turkic languages. Since the year 1000, Turkic- speakers had
come into increasing contact with town dwellers and cultivators, notably
in the northern borderland of Iran and the adjacent belt of steppe.
There agriculture and the power of the agrarian class waned as the
steppe warriors gained ascendancy. Converting to Sunna Islam and merging
their warrior ideology with the role of the ghazi frontier fighter for
the faith, the Turks were able to recapture some of the ideological
energies of early, expansionist Islam. From the eleventh century on,
Turks increasingly replaced others as mercenaries and military bondsmen
in the service of Near Eastern rulers. Indeed, in two areas—central
Anatolia and northwestern India—they consolidated their own rule in the
eleventh century, and in the mid-thirteenth century a Turkish and
Circassian elite of military bondservants (mam- luk) replaced a ruling
group of Kurdish descent in Syria and Egypt.

   In the course of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, most
Turkish groups were swept up in the conquests of Jenghiz Khan and his
Mongols, initially joining with the Mongols and later benefiting from
their retreats. In Iran, for example, a dynasty of Seljuk Turks fell
before the Mongol onslaught in the first third of the thirteenth
century, but a

The World in 1400 35

hundred years later competition beween Mongol and Turkic rivals
reopened. This contest was won first by a Turk from Transoxeania, the
terrible Timur (Tamerlane). In 1400 his domain stretched from the Black
Sea to the gates of Kashgar, but it would soon begin to crumble after
his death in 1405. A century later the Timurid heartland in Transoxeania
would fall to Uzbek conquest, led by a khan descended from Jenghiz. Then
the religious leaders of the Shiite Safawi order would mobilize the
pastoralist Turkoman, defeat the Sunnic Uzbeks to the east, and unify
Iran against the pressure of the Sunnic Ottoman Turks encroaching from
the west.

   The Ottomans themselves were descendants of an Oghuz clan holding
grazing grounds around the city of Merv, and led by a Persian-speaking
Seljuk Turkish elite. They became the nucleus of what McNeill has called
"a freebooters' frontier principality" (1963:499). From A.D. 1300 on,
they raided and pillaged Byzantine settlements from a base in
northwestern Anatolia, expanding rapidly into the Balkans in the second
half of the fourteenth century. By 1400 they had reduced the once
powerful Byzantines to enclaves at Constantinople and Salónica and in
the southeastern Peloponnesus, and they were readying their final
attacks on these targets when Timur routed them at Ankara (1402).
Surviving their rivalries with Timur, the Ottomans would resume
expansion in the fifteenth century, conquering Constantinople in 1453
and establishing an empire that would last until the end of World War I.

   Our observer, then, would have encountered the Ottomans just before
their defeat by Timur. He would have noted the power of the ghazi
ideology, which inspired Ottoman expansion against the infidels under
the slogan of the jihad, or holy war; but he would have seen little as
yet of the system the Ottomans would construct to hold and administer
their conquests. This massive empire would for over three centuries
dominate the Near East, block direct European access to the Orient, and
deflect European expansion westward toward the Americas and the sea
routes around the Cape of Good Hope. It is therefore worth looking ahead
briefly to the imperial structure that would develop.

   The Ottoman polity was centered upon the sultan with his imperial
household, consisting of his military bondsmen or slaves—the famous
janissaries. These slaves were usually recruited among non-Moslems, war
captives or children received in payment of tribute imposed upon
conquered populations. Raised in allegiance to the sultan, they owed
loyalty only to him, not to any kin group that crosscut the machinery of
the state. In this way the Ottomans attempted to obviate the problems of
divisiveness and competition usually posed by the segmented social
organization of the pastoral nomads. (This pattern was not original with
the Ottomans. It is attested as early as the eighth century among the
Abbasid caliphs of Baghdad, who recruited mostly Turks from the nearby
steppes, and among the Umayyad caliphs of Córdoba in Spain, who favored
Slavs.)

   The military bondservants were sent out to govern the provinces and
to collect their surpluses, which fed the Ottoman army and guaranteed
the food supply of the core region. In return the military bondsmen
received grants to shares of the tribute for their lifetime (iq ta).
Actual title to land was retained by the sultan and not given as
property, thus inhibiting the growth of a European form of feudalism, in
which bodies of kinsmen came into hereditary possession of land and
labor. The Ottoman state also established domination over the ulema, the
Islamic teachers of the sacred law. Contrary to prior Islamic practice,
they organized the ulema into a hierarchy answerable to the state and
charged with standardizing the law against the centrifugal influences of
local religious variants. The military bondsmen and the ulema together
formed the class of askeri, soldiers. All others were classified as
subjects (raeya), who sustained the state and its officialdom with
tribute.

   The Ottoman economy was, however, based on the extensive use of
money. Tributary surpluses, together with the produce of peasants and
the craft products of artisan guilds, were sold in local, regional, and
inter-regional marketplaces. Thus, both revenue collection and revenue
valorization depended upon a stratum of merchants, whose activities were
necessary to the state and yet always threatened to escape state
control. Merchants were officially licensed by the state, and market
sales were closely scrutinized and taxed by state officials. In the late
sixteenth century, however, trade within the Ottoman realm came to be
increasingly linked to trade with Venice, Genoa, and Florence, and with
the commercial emporia along the Black Sea. Much of this trade was in
contraband, and indeed "contraband carried the day" (Islamoglu and
Keyder 1977: 41). At the same time, the state—increasingly unable to
collect revenues—moved from the remuneration of its officials with
tribute to tax farming. The tax farmer furnished revenue to the state in
exchange for the rights to collect tribute and taxes locally and to
dispose of them at a profit. Diminishing control by the state led, in
turn, to the rise of a class of local notables, the ayans, who
accumulated local power and commercial influence as the power of the
palace and its representatives waned.

North and West Africa

   Further west, in North Africa, nomadic populations also held a
strategic role in 1400. Here each city or caravan emporium stood within
a ring of surrounding fields and palm groves, separated one from the
other by desert or steppe. The towns were linked by wide-ranging routes
of trade, but their caravans had to ply these lanes of traffic across
inhospitable ground held by seminomads and nomads in pursuit of their
own interests.

   While the geography and settlement pattern of the area suggest sharp
contrasts between the steppe and the sown, and between cities and their
rural hinterlands, the societies of Muslim North Africa bridged these
gaps by ties of "horizontal solidarity" (Laroui 1976: 35). Cities were
not set off from the surrounding countryside as independent and
self-ruling entities. Each city contained quarters that housed groups
separated from one another by ethnic, religious, or occupational
distinctions; these groups had their counterparts in towns and villages.
Cities, towns, and villages thus formed "geographical and ecological, as
well as social composites including territories and populations who were
neither exclusively urban nor exclusively rural, but a combination of
the two" (Lapidus 1969: 73 — 74). Each regional composite was dominated
by an elite of intermarrying families, comprising landowners, merchants,
state officials, heads of guilds, and the religious leaders of mosques,
schools, and charitable foundations (ulama). At the same time, ties of
common interest connected such elites across regional boundaries.
Long-distance trade wove a network of commercial relations among
merchant communities and drew into alliance the leaders of pastoral
groups involved in guaranteeing the wide-ranging caravan traffic.
Moreover, the religious elite of the ulama was found throughout the
Muslim world, linking different regions as leaders and interpreters of
religion and law. Strategic centers and strong-points, finally, were in
the hands of political-military elites, usually composed of the slave
soldiery of a paramount sultan, who taxed and ruled in conflict or
accommodation with members of the regional elites.

   The maintenance of power in these polities depended on keeping
control of the region through its elite, and on effective alliances with
pastoral groups able to defend the caravan routes and oases in the
hinterland. Contesting control meant forming alliances with disaffected
tribal segments and enlisting the cooperation of disgruntled urban
merchants and artisans. The result was a constant seesaw in which the
allied dissidents would test the limits of the ruler's control until the
road was clear for their takeover. After a seizure of power the cycle
would recommence.

   This continuous process of building up and tearing down of alliances
was brilliantly analyzed in the fourteenth century by the Berber
courtier Ibn Khaldun, who saw in it a continuous alternation between the
kinship solidarity of the nomad and the diversification of interests
attendant on sedentary life. The process has its own logic, as Ibn
Khaldun showed. Yet in North Africa it was the consequence also of a
larger context, that of trans-Saharan trade, on the one hand, and of
relations with economic and political forces in Iberia and Italy, on the
other.

   The trans-Saharan trade with West Africa was of strategic importance
to North Africa, the Near East, and even to Europe. The trade routes
reached across the desert into the trans-African savanna belt, and
beyond that into the zone of tropical forest. The gold mines of West
Africa, in Bambuk and Bure, played a vital role in the bullion supply of
the Old World. In the late Middle Ages, this area furnished about
two-thirds of the gold circulating in the economy of the hemisphere
(Hopkins 1973: 82). The forest zone also furnished large numbers of
slaves for the Near East. In addition, this zone exported cloth, ivory,
pepper, and kola nuts (prized as a stimulant in areas where Islam
forbade the use of alcohol) and received, in return, horses, brass,
copper, glassware, beads, leather, textiles, tailored clothing, and
preserved foodstuffs from North Africa, as well as salt from the mines
of the Sahara. The trade routes through the western Sahara to Morocco
and Algeria lay mainly in the hands of Mande-speaking Dyula traders, who
had expanded southward from Jenne (located on the Bani, a tributary of
the Niger) to Begho, the major collecting point for gold and forest
products on the edge of the forest zone. The eastern trade routes to
Tunisia and Libya connected up with the commercial network of the Hausa,
who traded south toward the forest from the city of Kano in northern
Nigeria and from other Hausa towns.

   This external network, of course, had political implications. Control
of the transfer points between forest and savanna and between savanna
and desert placed power in the hands of those able to achieve and hold
control. The interface between the three zones also proved to be
critical for state formation in West Africa. The earliest of these
polities, dating from before a.d. 800, had been Aukar, pivoted on market
centers in the grasslands north of the upper Niger and Senegal. This
state, probably founded by Soninke and usually called Ghana after the
title of its ruler, controlled the trade in gold from the placers at
Bambuk and used its monopoly to obtain needed goods from Morocco through
a colony of Muslim traders. The kingdom had fallen in the eleventh
century to Mauritanian Berbers, the Al-Murabitun, who thus seized
control of its northward trade. Then, in the thirteenth century, a
former dependency of Ghana had risen to become the Malinke-dominated
polity of Kangaba (Mali). Once again this power was founded on control
of the gold trade and on hegemony over the routes from Timbuctu.

   In 1400 Kangaba was in decline. In the course of the century, it
would give way to Songhay, with its capital at Gao. Songhay carried on
trade with the north through Muslim Lemtuna Berber merchants from the
oases to the north. Songhay would subsequently fall to Moroccan invasion
from the north. Further state formation would take place along the
southern and eastern peripheries of former Songhay. To the south there
would emerge, toward the end of the sixteenth century, the several
states of the Mossi, controlling the route from Jenne to the forest land
of the Asante and the savanna region of the lower Volta. To the east the
polity of Kanem-Bornu, straddling the trade routes to Tunisia and Libya
and to the Middle Nile, would be pushed into the background by the Hausa
states, centered upon Katsina and Kano, the two leading eastern market
towns. From these centers the Hausa entered into contact with the
Yoruba-speaking peoples and their neighbors of the West African forest.

   Thus, Africa south of the Sahara was not the isolated, backward area
of European imagination, but an integral part of a web of relations that
connected forest cultivators and miners with savanna and desert traders
and with the merchants and rulers of the North African settled belt.
This web of relations had a warp of gold, “the golden trade of the
Moors," but a weft of exchanges in other products. The trade had direct
political consequences. What happened in Nigerian Benin or Hausa Kano
had repercussions in Tunis and Rabat. When the Europeans would enter
West Africa from the coast, they would be setting foot in a country
already dense with towns and settlements, and caught up in networks of
exchange that far transcended the narrow enclaves of the European
emporia on the coast.

   We can see such repercussions at the northern terminus of the trade
routes in Morocco and Algeria. Here one elite after another came to the
fore, each one dependent on interaction with the Sahara and the forest
zone. Each successive elite was anchored in a kin-organized confederacy,
usually mobilized around a religious ideology. We have already referred
to the Al-Murabitun who destroyed Ghana. They were members of a
religious movement, which had arisen in the eleventh century among the
pastoral Sanhaja Berber confederations when their resource base was
threatened by Arab Bedouin moving into the Mauritanian Sahara. From
their military-religious hermitages (ribat, the root of their name),
they preached return to a purified Islam. One branch of the Al-Murabitun
went south to lay hold of the gold of Ghana; another branch moved north
to conquer Morocco and Spain. Under their His- panicized name—the
Almoravids—they ruled Al-Andalus between 1090 and 1110. They were
replaced in the twelfth century by the Al-Muwihiddin (Hispanicized as
Almohades), or Unitarians, of the Masmuda confederacy. The Al-Muwihiddin
were succeeded in the thirteenth century, in turn, by the Beni Marin,
pastoralists from the desert near the trading emporium of Sijilmassa,
who then excluded both Sanhaja and Masmuda from power in favor of their
own confederacy, the Zanata. Subsequently the Beni Marin fought a
two-front war, one against remnants of the Al-Muwihiddin in Tunis, the
Hafsids, and another against a section of their own confederation, the
Zayanids of western Algeria, who disputed their control over Sijilmassa.
Hafsids and Zayanids traded with the European shore, especially with
Aragón in eastern Spain, attempting to counteract Marin power and to
compensate for the impoverishment of their own hinterlands by nomad
depredations. After the fall of Moslem Granada to the kingdom of Castile
in 1492, Hafsids and Zayanids would seek Ottoman protection, which would
come in the shape of a pirate fleet, making piracy the main source of
revenue from then on (Abun-Nasr 1971: 167).

   In 1400 our traveler would have encountered the Beni Marin still in
control of Morocco. Increasingly, however, they would lose support. In
the sixteenth century rulership would pass to the leaders of a religious
movement who claimed descent from the Prophet Mohammed. The movement
originated among the Berbers of the Sus Valley and preached holy war
against the Portuguese. These Sa'dians would strive to regain control of
the gold of the Sudan by invading and destroying Songhay toward the end
of the sixteenth century, but they would merely succeed in driving the
gold trade away from the western caravan routes toward the east. In due
course, like their counterparts in Algeria and Tunis, these rulers of
Morocco also would turn to piracy as a way of tapping the wealth moving
over the new sea-lanes created by the Europeans.

East Africa

   East Africa, too, was involved in the network of overland routes and
sea-lanes, the consequences of which would have been evident to an
observer in 1400.

   This area was inhabited largely by Bantu-speaking populations. While
their history remains to be fully unraveled, present evidence from
archaeology, comparative linguistics, and ethnohistory indicates that
they originated in the central Cameroons. From there two streams of
populations moved outward, in different directions. The first stream
moved eastward through the Sudanic belt, taking up cereal production,
animal raising, and ironwork by the second millennium B.C. By 1000 B.C.
clusters of populations belonging to this eastern stream had reached the
Rift Valley and the highlands of Tanzania and southern Kenya. Around 500
B.C. this stream turned southward, crossing the belt of tropical forest
in the vicinity of Lake Victoria. From this point of entry, populations
of Bantu-speaking cultivators and herders moved southward toward
Transvaal and southwestward into central Zambia, Zimbabwe (Rhodesia),
and on into Angola. The southward movement crossed the Limpopo River
into Transvaal about a.d 400.

   A second stream of migrations carried Bantu-speakers from the
Cameroons southward, along coastal and riverine routes to the mouth of
the Congo. In contrast to the stock-raising and ironworking cultivators
of the eastward movement, the populations of this second stream long
remained stone-tool-using cultivators of root crops. Around the
beginning of the Christian era, the populations of these two movements
came together, probably in northern Angola. By A.D. 500 they were
expanding eastward into Zambia and southeastern Zaire, setting in motion
some of the state-making processes still evident in historic times.
Their advance displaced hunting-and-gathering populations; their
Khoisan-speaking predecessors were driven into the inhospitable African
Southwest, where they still survive as Khoi-Khoi("Hottentot") cattle
raisers and San ("Bushmen") food collectors.

   These expanding Bantu came increasingly into contact with Near
Eastern and Asian traders. Arab trading stations existed in East Africa
at least by the tenth century, if not before; they exported slaves,
ivory, iron, rhinoceros horn, tortoise shell, amber, and leopard skins
to India and beyond. Chinese sources mention slaves from Zenj (Black
Africa) as early as the seventh century, and by 1119 most of the wealthy
people of Canton were said to have possessed Black slaves (Mathew 1963;
108). It seems possible that the traders involved in this early export
trade were Malays from the kingdom of Sriviyaya in Sumatra, which
controlled the trade between India and China from the eighth to the
eleventh centuries. Although Zanzibar may have been occupied by Arabs
since the eighth century, the first port of major importance in East
Africa appears to have been Kilwa, in control of the trade in gold from
southern Rhodesia from the eleventh century on. Other important depots
were Mogadishu, Kisimani Mafia, and Malindi. As the trade routes
connecting Anatolia with the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean took
precedence in the thirteenth century over the continental routes
sponsored by the Mongols, the East African trade in gold, ivory, copper,
and slaves increased heavily. East Africa thus became part of the trade
network of the southern seas. In return for its exports, East Africa
received Indian beads and cloth, as well as Chinese porcelain (mostly
Ming) and wares from Burma and Vietnam.

   The gold trade had a major impact on the hinterland. By the ninth
century, mining of gold deposits (sometimes more than 100 feet deep) was
in full swing in the area between the Zambezi and the Limpopo. It is
"very probable that immense quantities of gold were exported" (Summers
1961: 5). The miners were iron-using cattle keepers and possibly
cultivators as well. About A.D. 1000 they came under the domination of
newcomers, probably Shona-speakers, who established themselves among the
miners in stone-built headquarters and ceremonial centers, the best
known of which is represented by the ruins of Zimbabwe. Their chiefs
took over the gold trade with the coastal Arabs, and tapped the ivory
and copper of the Limpopo River valley. Their influence in the
hinterland can be seen in the rich burials at Ingombe Ilede on the
Zambezi River, which clearly reveal an extensive trade in copper, iron,
and gold.

   In 1400 the Shona of Zimbabwe were ruled by a Rozwi dynasty, the
Mwene Mutapa, whose polity was described by early Portuguese travelers
and in later oral-historical accounts of the area (Abraham 1966). What
we know of them affords us an unusual glimpse into a case of state
formation predicated upon entry into the hemispheric network of trade,
as well as some insight into the political economy and ideology of a
developing African kingdom. In these accounts the Shona emerge as an
association of patrilineages, organized into a number of “tribes," or
kinship corporations. Each corporation was associated with midzimu, or
ancestor spirits, dominated by one or more mhondoro spirits who
represented and perpetuated the founder of the tribal chieftaincy and
his descent group. Above these spirits of chiefly ancestors stood the
ancestral spirit of the royal clan of the Nembire, who linked the clan
with god, mwari. Zimbabwe was at one and the same time the ceremonial
center dedicated to mwari, the pan-Shona deity, and the political center
of the Mbire ruler, whose praise title was Mwene Mutapa. Ultimate
sovereignty over the land lay with the supreme ruler. He, in turn,
granted rights to land to the chiefs of associations of patrilineages,
who would in time become the senior mhondoro spirits in the mhondoro
hierarchy. In return, the ruler received from the grantees gold, ivory,
weapons, livestock, and hoes. These goods were then used as commodities
in trade with the coast. Although the centralized polity of the Mwene
Mutapa disintegrated in the mid-fifteenth century, the various successor
chiefdoms would play a vital role in the burgeoning Portuguese trade
with the East. “East African gold and ivory," says Malyn Newitt (1973:
32), “purchased the Indian spices which were Portugal's main quest in
the east. Without control of this trade the Portuguese would never have
competed with the Muslims in the Indian market."

South and East Asia

Eastward, across the Indian Ocean and beyond, lay the vast spheres of
India and China and the Southeast Asian archipelago. Ocean-borne trade
in spices and gold between India and the West, which was extensive
during the early Roman Empire, had weakened after the second century
A.D. (see Wheeler 1955). This had reoriented Indian trade toward
Southeast Asia (Coedes 1964: 44-49), and Arabs and Persians had taken
over the routes to the east. In the fourth century and again in the
early seventh century, there were colonies of Arab merchants in Canton
(Leur 1955: 111). Until the tenth century the Chinese shipped their
goods abroad in Arab or Iranian bottoms, and in the ships of non-Han
seafaring peoples of South China and the China seas. Thus, there had
been long-standing connections of trade among the core regions of
southern, eastern, and western Asia.

   Yet the development of both India and China depended, in the last
instance, more on the expansion of cultivation and the surpluses
afforded by it than on any linkages created by external trade. In the
course of this expansion, India and China each developed distinctive
economic and political arrangements linking surplus takers to surplus
producers. Each of these needs discussion in its own right. We shall
then turn to Southeast Asia, an area where the roads between China and
India intersected.

India

  Our observer, traveling through the India of 1400, would have found
many cities in ruin. In 1388 Timur had invaded northern India and
destroyed the armies of the Turko-Afghan sultans. In 1398 he sacked
Delhi, massacred its inhabitants, and carried the treasure of the
sultans home to Transoxeania. Political conditions in northern India
remained chaotic for a long time thereafter, even though a new Afghan
dynasty began to reconsolidate a measure of power in the mid-fifteenth
century.

   If he had moved through the villages of India, our traveler would
have been struck by the enduring division of the population into
hereditary castes. The Macedonian ambassador to the court of
Chandragupta Maurya reported some of the features of caste as early as
300 B.C.; at the beginning of the sixteenth century, the Portuguese
Duarte Barbosa, who accompanied Magellan on his trip around the world,
would describe caste at length. (Indeed, the very word has come down to
us from the Portuguese casta.) Caste has thus had a long history in
India, and it has shaped relationships among the peoples of the
subcontinent, both before and after the advent of the Europeans. We
therefore need to examine caste in some detail—but we need to do so
processually, for if caste has influenced the course of change, it has
also been affected by change in turn.

   The root of the Indian word for caste is jati, from jan, to give
birth; it carries the connotation of descent from a common ancestor.
This notion of common descent can be invoked at various levels—that of
the extended family, the lineage, lineages related at the local level,
the cluster of lineages operating in a region, as well as the
supercategory of varna, which classifies all the units in four
hierarchical ranks, set off from the great negative category of
Outcastes, or Untouchables. The level that will be invoked depends on
the interests at issue in a given context. Levels may be merged to
facilitate commonality and alliance under one set of circumstances;
their separation may be reasserted as circumstances change (Beteille
1969: 157). While segments are continuously dividing and merging, they
are also mutually ranked. The idiom of caste rank is the idiom of purity
or pollution, which renders the caste order “consistent and rational to
those who live in it" (Dumont 1970: 44).

   To constitute a caste, a group of people connected by kinship must
adhere to certain customs, such as food habits and styles of dress, and
perform common rituals. Should one caste segment wish to separate from
another, it must develop distinctive customs and rituals. Should two
segments merge, their merger is announced by a merger of custom and
performance. While the guiding ideology of the system pretends that its
arrangements are static, a great deal of flexibility and mobility is
actually possible within it. Since caste membership is related to
economic and political power, the actions of any segment affect all the
adjacent segments. The mobility of any one caste may therefore be
hindered by the countervailing efforts of other castes. Yet some
segments have demonstrably risen in the caste hierarchy, while other
segments have fallen. Finally, the system allows outsiders to take up
positions in it. Characteristically, new conquerors are allowed to move
in near the top of the hierarchy of segments, as kshatriya, or warrior
castes; and non-Hindu ethnic groups can be brought into the system by
being assigned to a category of caste.

   To understand how caste works concretely, one must, however, look
beyond kinship organization and ritual idiom to the political economy of
caste. In any given province, clusters of lineages hold positions of
command and domination; at the center of these stands a chiefly lineage.
The dominant lineages intermarry, reinforcing their commanding position
throughout the province. Such a cluster of lineages exhibits its
position ritually, but its domination is political as well as ritual. In
each village, segments of the dominant caste control economic and
political life both as landholders and as warriors. At the level of the
province, the dominant caste furnishes the ruler, or raja, constituting
the province politically as a "little kingdom" (Dumont 1957). Such a
little kingdom was often part of a still larger encompassing state. An
increase in the political standing of a provincial raja within such a
state enhanced the influence of the dominant caste in the province; a
decline threatened the standing and solidarity of the dominant caste and
of its segments down to the village level.

   In ideal terms, highest rank in the caste order rests with the
kinship clusters of the priests, or Brahmins. They are the bearers of
dharma, or universal order, values, and norms (Dumont 1970: 68).
Embodying the highest degree of ritual purity, they pollute none below
them but can be polluted by all others. They officiate at religious
events and are arbiters of the proper standards of behavior according to
the ancient Sanskrit texts. Hence castes and caste segments lower on the
ladder of purity but wishing to climb it would model their customs and
ritual on Brahmin patterns and would seek certification of their success
from Brahmin priests. The result was a spread of Brahmin models down the
ranks of caste segmentation (Srinivas, 1961: Chap. 1). Imitation of the
priesthood was not, however, the only means of achieving higher status;
there was also imitation of warrior and merchant models.

   Whereas Brahmin rank certified ritual purity, kshatriya or warrior
rank signified power. In contrast to the priestly dharma, the warrior
realm was that of artha—of force, gain, and self-interested advantage
(Dumont 1970: 66). But since force creates power, it was ultimately
artha that cemented together the order of ranking and segmentation.
Within a village or a cluster of related villages, the locally dominant
caste segment fulfilled warrior functions. In ideological terms, the
dominant lineage represented the royal function at the village level
(Dumont 1970: 66). Thus, kshatriya power was the real linchpin of the
system, and whoever in a given locality was able to exercise or usurp
that power functioned as kshatriya (Jayawardena 1971: 118). Under
certain circumstances, however, where merchant groups became more
important than kshatriyas, lower castes might aspire to merchant status
instead (Sinha 1962). Caste categorization could thus adjust to changed
circumstances of power and influence; in particular, local or provincial
lineages could manipulate it to reinforce or expand their standing over
a wider area. At the level of the state, the king could even reassign
caste statuses himself (Hutton 1951: 93-97). In the towns, caste often
became less significant than membership in artisan guilds (Lehman 1957:
523). Even in the villages, the hold of the dominant caste was not
absolute. Where the dominant caste exhibited special relationships with
service castes through feasting, exchanges, and ritual, other
lower-status castes might counter by emulating Brahmin-like comportment,
thus signifying their opposition to the dominant caste (Heesterman 1973:
101).

   The strongest suit in the hands of the locally dominant caste segment
was its control of village lands. Several forms of landholding prevailed
until the British initiated land reforms in the eighteenth century. One
was bhaiacharya tenure, in which land was held by the segment as a whole
and redistributed periodically among its households according to
fluctuations in household size and need; the segment paid rent to the
raja as a group. Another form of tenure was pattidari: the land was
divided among the households of the dominant caste segment according to
their genealogical position, but rent was still paid as a unit. A third
form was bighadam, in which landholdings were unequal in size and
landholders paid rent according to the size of their holding. In pre-
British India these forms of tenure and revenue arrangements were not
mutually exclusive, but constituted changing points on a continuum.
Continued land fragmentation over time or the pressure of a strong state
could weaken kinship ties, and could lead to a change from tenure based
on genealogical rank to a share-out by household needs. The reverse
could occur if the head of an ascendant lineage became powerful.
Underlying these tenure arrangements were kinship rights and
obligations, including claims to support and leaders' claims to the
labor and loyalty of kinsmen. Hence, rights to land shifted as these
other claims waxed and waned. When the British took over, they
interpreted these fluctuating relationships between people as fixed
types of property on the European model, instituting what they saw as a
liberal regime of property law but in fact abrogating the adaptive
capacity of former arrangements.

   The villages also contained two categories of people without rights
to land. The first consisted of caste groups that furnished services to
the landowning group as artisans or barbers. They could be associated
with a particular landowning household, or they could work in the
service of the landholding caste as a whole. Such village servants owned
the tools of their trade and obtained something of a "guaranteed
living." This distinguished them sharply from a stratum of people who
owned neither the tools of their trade nor any lineage-based claims to
land (Meillassoux 1974: 102-103; Newell 1974: 487). These were either
landless laborers or tenants-at-will of landholders; some might also be
part-time leather workers or drummers. These people constituted a pool
of labor available at the behest of the dominant village stratum (Men-
cher 1974). They made up the so-called Untouchable castes, whose low
position was reinforced by taboos governing their relations with the
higher castes. The distribution of such untouchable castes was related
to ecological factors. Untouchable castes were concentrated mainly in
the densely populated irrigated regions of the Indo-Gangetic Plain of
the north and in the fertile stretches of coast in the south, where they
were mostly agricultural laborers. In drier and more mountainous
districts, the landowners cultivated the land themselves, and artisans
were frequently drawn from the poorer households of the landowning
segment itself. Indeed, with shrinking resources the village landowners
on occasion drove the Untouchable laborers from their villages (Newell
1974: 487—488). Where they remained, they worked primarily at the behest
of village landowners and were subject to their dictation.

   The overall architecture of Indian society—at once cellular and
segmented and yet able to generate links between different cells and
segments—is best understood against the backdrop of India's political
ecology. There are at least three Indias: the India of the plain formed
by the River Ganges; the India of the coastal littoral; and the India of
the Deccan, the central mountain plateau. Gangetic India is an area of
high rainfall and of most intensive rice cultivation. Historically, it
has been the central area of Indian state formation; this is where the
Maurya polity of 322— 185 B.C. had its center and where the Guptas
exercised sovereignty between a.d. 300 and 600. India of the littoral
embraces a series of river deltas and coastlands, such as Andrah and
Tamilnad along the Coromandel coast in the east, and Kerala (on the
Malabar coast), Konkan, and Gujarat in the west. Ports along these
coasts have long been prominent in long-distance overseas trade. The
third India—the Deccan—is separated from the other two Indias by chains
of hills and mountains. It is cut off from the Gangetic Plain to the
north by a mountainous area still inhabited by speakers of
Austro-Asiatic languages and from the coastal lowlands by two mountain
ranges, the Western and the Eastern Ghats. The Deccan itself is a dry
plateau; its natural vegetation is scrubland, and the predominant crops,
such as millet, are adapted to dry-zone conditions. Rice and other crops
can be grown by irrigation with water drawn from scattered ponds or
"tanks," but these tend to go dry when water is most needed, making the
plateau a zone of periodic food shortages.

   The Indian peninsula is today one of the most densely populated areas
in the world, but concentrated settlement and the agricultural
intensification that made it possible advanced only slowly and
discontinuously, leaving intervening districts in the hands of food
collectors and swidden cultivators. When centralized states emerged,
they used their power to sponsor land clearance, irrigation, deep
mining, and frontier colonization by guilds of settlers or Brahmin
organizations. Yet political centralization was achieved only rarely,
under the Maurya and Gupta, and then only in the Gangetic Plain. At
other times and places, the prevalent political unit remained the
"little kingdom," a province ruled by the raja of the ranking lineage,
which generally lacked the power to mobilize its people for agricultural
expansion. In the Deccan, moreover, irrigation was possible only by
scattered tanks, leading to population dispersal rather than
concentration around a hydraulic core. Colonization and the scattering
of settlements into favorable but isolated ecological niches further
intensified dispersal and decentralization. The intervals between
settled areas frequently remained in the hands of kin-ordered groups
hostile to the encroaching states. The expansion of the Indian culture
sphere thus exhibited a quite different modality from that of China.
China advanced by expanding a homogeneous hydraulic core, displacing
slash-and-burn cultivators into the southwestern mountains. India, in
contrast, developed by incorporating diverse populations through
assigning them different positions in the larger network of caste.

   The Brahmins provided a countervailing force to this recurrent
fragmentation. Each separate local unit of landowners, artisans, and
servants was held together by the local rituals and cults of a "little"
tradition, supported by reference to the sacred Sanskrit texts.
Acephalous ethnic groups could become part of the larger cultural
network through certification of their chiefs as warriors, through
giving their women to Brahmins in marriage, and through adoption of
Sanskritic ritual practices—processes that still operate today when
members of "tribes" become Hindus by accepting Brahmin jurisdiction.
(The Aus- tro-Asiatic-speaking "scheduled tribes" of the hilly ranges
are precisely those remaining ethnic groups that have refused, to date,
to grant "to the Brahmin (the priest), rather than to its own members,
primacy as a religious interpreter and instructor" [Cohn 1971: 19].)
Frequently, the Brahmins also introduced new agricultural techniques,
such as plow agriculture and new crops, and furnished links with wider
networks of trade and markets. Kings and aspiring rulers would invite
Brahmins to settle in their villages and would grant them land (Kosambi
1969: 171-172).

   Brahmin dominance and the replication of the caste model throughout
rural districts and villages can thus be understood as a response to
ecological and political decentralization. It simultaneously furnished
organizational links between members of the top castes—priests,
warriors, and merchants—and connected the local caste segments of these
strata to local clusters of artisans and dependents. It was, in Heester-
man's words, "the poor man's solution to empire" (1973: 107). Frederic
Lehman has argued that the caste model served to build organizational
services and cultural skills into the structure of the Indian
countryside, counteracting protracted periods of disorder owing to
"long-term breakdowns in effective central authority" (1957: 151 — 152).

   The rural infrastructure, based on caste, withstood the repeated
onslaught of foreign conquerors over the centuries. One after another,
contingents of prospective rulers descended on the Indian plain from the
belt of steppe to the north of the sheltering mountains, always
following the route that led from Balkh (Bactria) over the passes into
the Punjab. The East-Iranian-speaking Sakas and Kushnan of the first
three centuries A.D. were followed by the Mongol-Turkish Epthalites
(Ye-Tai) in the fifth and sixth centuries, one contingent of which, the
Gujaras, remained behind to become the Rajput (literally, "King's
sons"). They were followed by Persianized Turks (the Ghaznavids) in the
eleventh century, by Afghans from Herat (the Ghorids) in the twelfth, by
a dynasty of Turkish Ghorid bondsmen and Mongol invaders at the
beginning of the thirteenth, by Timur's Persianized Turks in the late
fourteenth, and by Afghans in the fifteenth.

   In 1525 Babur, a descendant of Timur, having abandoned Trans- oxeania
to the conquering Uzbeks, moved to conquer India. Winning out over
Afghan and Hindu Rajput opposition, he established himself as the first
of a line of rulers that would unify most of the Indian subcontinent and
rule it until its takeover by the British. This Mughal (Mongol) dynasty
was, however, but the latest in a series of elites originating in the
pastoral belt of Central Asia. Far from representing "traditional
India," as they have been characterized, they rested their newly won
power on social constellations older and more solid than their own.

China

  At the eastern end of the old Silk Road in China, our voyager would
have witnessed another major phase in the continuing interaction between
the nomads of the north and the settled cultivators to the south of the
Great Wall. In the preceding centuries China had come under repeated
attack by the northern "barbarians." Early in the eleventh century, a
Mongol-speaking elite from Jehol, the Khitan (Liao), had occupied China
north of the Hwai River. Only a few years later, the Khitan were
replaced by the Tungusic Jurchen from the forest belt of what is today
the maritime province of the Soviet Union; these Jurchen pushed the
frontier of their realm to the shores of the Yangtze. By the end of the
century the Mongols of Jenghiz Khan had overrun both the Jurchen in the
north and the Chinese Sung dynasty still ruling south of the Yangtze,
and were riding over the southern mountain ranges to the gates of Bhamo
in Burma and Hanoi in Vietnam. Soon, however, the Mongol princes fell to
attacking each other. By 1370 the Chinese founder of the Ming dynasty
had succeeded in driving the Mongols back into Mongolia, putting a
decisive end to Mongol rule in China. The year 1400 would thus have seen
this Chinese resurgence under the early Ming.

   Although repeatedly invaded from the north, China constituted a
cultural sphere marked by strong continuities—Hegel called it the land
of the recurrent principle. A strategic condition of this continuity lay
in the importance of waterworks to the operations of the Chinese state,
as Karl Wittfogel has demonstrated. These hydraulic works were basically
of two kinds: canals and irrigation ditches to deliver water to the
fields, and great dams and sluices to defend the areas of settlement
against floods. These were supplemented by the development of transport
canals permitting the movement of grain over wider areas. The first
great waterworks known were built in the period of the declining Chou
(ca. 500 — 250 B.C.), when political domains began to compete fiercely
with one another. The most important were the hydraulic complexes that
irrigated the Chengtu Plain in Szechwan (serving 3,500 square miles) and
the Wei-pei Plain of Shensi (serving 1,000 square miles).

Planting irrigated rice, Szechwan province, China. Photograph by Bruno
Barbey, I960. (Barbey, Magnum)

 These complexes predate the rise of the unified Chinese empire under
the Ch'in dynasty (221—207 B.C.), and they may have been instrumental in
furnishing the basis for its consolidation. Transport canals were also
begun under the Ch'in, although their greatest expansion came later, in
the seventh century A.D. The maintenance and expansion of such hydraulic
works came to constitute one of the major tasks, if not the major task,
of the Chinese state. Marshalling labor and taxes for this purpose
remained a primary consideration, and the decline of dynasties is
associated with their inability to channel resources to that end (Wang
1936).

   From the seventh century on, the wealth of China was increased
through further agricultural colonization of the area south of the
Yangtze River. Significant innovations in the growing of irrigated rice—
not only the introduction and expansion of hydraulic works but also
improved tools and techniques for preparing the soil and more intensive
use of fertilizer—took place in southern Kiangsu and Chekiang. Irrigated
rice cultivation spread south from there. This diffusion was sponsored
by the Sung dynasty, which had lost control of the area north of the
Yangtze and therefore had an interest in increasing the productivity of
its reduced land. Greater output led to a vast increase in population,
and output was in turn facilitated by the greater numbers. Population in
the south more than doubled between A.D. 606 and 742, and doubled again
between 742 and 1078 (Elvin 1973: 206,208). In the process, the Chinese
(who referred to themselves as Han, in contrast to other ethnic groups)
absorbed non-Han populations south of the Yangtze, or pushed them into
zones where intensive rice cultivation proved difficult. Thus, the Miao,
once found on the lower middle Yangtze, were pushed into Yunnan,
Szechuan, and Kweichow; the Yao, who once occupied the mountainous east
coast provinces, were displaced into their present habitat in Kweichow.
In these areas, where intensive cultivation and Chinese bureaucratic
organization could not be supported, localized chiefships and
slash-and-burn agriculture prevailed (Fried 1952).

   It must not be thought that all irrigation systems were built under
the auspices of the state. Most of the hydraulic works of the lower
Yangtze region, for instance, were constructed by wealthy landowners.
Nevertheless, it is reasonable to suppose that the specific hydraulic
requirements of Chinese agriculture influenced the development of the
characteristic Chinese bureaucracy. Clearly, many of the tasks sponsored
by the state, including control of the hydraulic complexes, transcended
the ability of local or regional aristocrats or associations. In
creating a manpower pool of potential bureaucrats, the state assured
itself of a supply of functionaries who could carry out state-level
tasks and stave off the centrifugal influence of local power holders.

   This bureaucracy is sometimes referred to as the mandarinate. The
mandarins were selected from the gentry class. Their Chinese title is
shen-shih. or sash-bearing scholar. The sash marked tenure of an
imperial office; scholar meant acquaintance with the Chinese classics.
Tenure in office was theoretically for one lifetime only and could not
be inherited. During that lifetime, however, the incumbent was exempt
from corvée and taxes, was free of judicial control by the local
magistrate, and was permitted to take part in imperial religious
ceremonial. Training in etiquette and ideology was based on the study of
the classics—especially the sayings and writings of Kung-tse
(Confucius), who preached the maintenance of proper social relationships
embodied ultimately in the ideal of the “gentleman.” Written at a time
when the aristocracy was yielding power to rising commoners, the
Confucian texts portrayed an aristocratic style of comportment, which
could yet be adopted by commoners of merit as well as by nobles. Men
trained in such comportment would adhere to religiously sanctioned
custom (li), and would adjudicate conflict by reference to custom rather
than to positive law, fa.

   Although this class of imperial servants goes back to the first Ch'in
emperors and perhaps earlier, it rose to prominence only during the
seventh to ninth centuries under the rule of the T'ang, who used it to
counteract the power of noble lineages. By the year 1000 the sash
bearers were well on the way to gaining economic and political power in
their own right. Many of them became large and powerful landowners,
farming their estates with serf labor, enjoying exemption from taxation,
and handing on their bureaucratic offices to their descendants through
the hereditary privilege of yin. Just as the aristocrats of earlier
periods had fortified their position through the creation of
ancestor-based lineages, so the sash-bearing gentry began to create
powerful lineage domains managed by an elite of successful members.
These patriline- ages controlled ancestral halls, lands, and graveyards,
and adjudicated internal disputes. They defended common interests
against outsiders and enlarged their spheres of influence through
marital alliances and political ties. Such lineages were especially
prominent in the Chinese South, where they often acted as agents of
colonization. Most powerful Chinese lineages, in fact, go back to Sung
times, the strategic period of agricultural expansion south of the
Yangtze River (Hu 1948: 12—13). It is therefore not surprising that much
of the effort of the Ming and Ch'ing emperors, after the restoration of
Chinese rule at the end of the fourteenth century, was directed at
containing and rolling back the increasingly independent power of the
sash bearers. This was attempted first in Ming times through the
revocation of the yin privilege and through the institution of mandatory
imperial examinations for all applicants for bureaucratic positions.
Only in the eighteenth century, however, would the Ch'ing—the Manchu
dynasty—attempt to weaken the gentry's hold over the land by liquidating
serfdom as an institution.

   It should thus be evident that the sash-bearing literati constituted
neither a class of philosopher-kings dedicated only to the higher ideals
embodied in the state, nor simply a class of local landowners. They
served to mesh institutions operating at the level of the state with
local and regional arrangements. Inevitably, their position was
contradictory and subject to change, depending on whether the
encompassing state or local interests gained the upper hand.

   If the role and character of the class of sash-bearing literati
changed over time, so also did the role and character of the peasantry.
The state of Ch'in, which unified China for the first time in 221 B.C.,
also pioneered legislation that made peasants owners of their land, in
return for taxes, corvées, and military service paid directly to the
state rather than to some intervening noble (Wittfogel 1931: 50-51;
Lattimore 1951:441 — 442). Lattimore has pointed out that this also
created a category of landless men, who constituted a body of mobile
manpower always at the behest of the state (1951: 441—442). This policy
of enlarging the free peasantry was continued under the Han, Sui, and
early T'ang dynasties, all of which relied on a peasant militia as the
backbone of the army. Large estates were often confiscated, and
legislation favoring more equitable distribution of land was frequent.

   From the mid-eighth century on, however, such legislation lapsed, and
large estates increased apace. The peasant militia declined, and peasant
exemptions from taxes were lifted. As a result, many peasants either had
to seek protection from taxation by binding themselves to a landlord, or
sell their land to make ends meet. Others became bound laborers through
coercion. While there was also some slavery, it never involved more than
a small percentage of the population (Wilbur 1943: 174; Elvin 1973: 74,
n.l). Bound labor took two forms. First, there were tenant-serfs, bound
to the service of a particular person; their status was heritable, and
they could be bought and sold. In theory only sash bearers were allowed
to own serfs, but in practice landowners without the sash managed to
acquire serfs through the use of the legal fiction of adoption. In
addition, there were tenants who were bound to the soil and subject to
sale along with the piece of land they cultivated. In 1400 the manor
cultivated by bound labor was the dominant form of estate (Balazs 1964:
125; Elvin 1973: 79-80). Only much later, in the 1730s under the Manchu
Ch'ing, would serfdom finally be abolished. Declining returns from
agriculture in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and rising
opportunities for profit elsewhere would cause the landowners to
relocate their investments. As a result, landowning by peasants would
again increase, but under circumstances different from those that had
prompted the establishment of a free peasantry during the early Chinese
dynasties.

   Around 1400 China's relations with the outside world began to change.
At earlier times, links of trade and religion had created connections
between the Heavenly Kingdom and its neighbors. Under the T'ang (A.D.
618 — 906) there had been growing contacts with India, and China had
opened its doors to the influence of Buddhism approaching from the
south. At the time of the Sung (A.D. 960-1279), there had been a great
expansion of trade with the southern seas. Under the Mongols (A.D 1280-
1367) China had made contact with the West by reopening the old silk
routes and bringing Moslem, Christian, and Jewish traders into China.
(The Chinese admiral Cheng-ho, who sailed the imperial fleet into the
Indian Ocean and to the coast of Africa, was a Moslem.) The Mongol
rulers, moreover, preferred Uigur and Nestorian Christians as scribes
and advisors, diminishing in the process the role of the Confucian sash
bearers.

   The expulsion of the Mongols in 1367 and the seizure of power by the
Ming reversed the processes that were tying China more strongly to the
outside. China folded in on itself and closed off external connections.
Perhaps this was due to the nativistic character of the Ming themselves,
who sought a return to Chinese roots after 400 years of foreign
invasion. Such a reaction was favored by the sash bearers, whose
influence had suffered under the Mongols and who stood to gain by a
reversal of foreign policy. Certainly China was experiencing economic
difficulties; the population sank to a low after the high reached before
the Mongol invasions. Perhaps, as Mark Elvin (1973: 298 ff.) has argued,
the reversal was the result of an onset of technological stagnation,
prompted by the fact that techniques and organization had already
reached the limits of productivity possible before the industrial
revolution. Certainly the new dynasty put its efforts into ensuring the
safety of China's northern frontiers, mobilizing huge armies and
constructing the Grand Canal linking south and north to supply the
troops. This strategy emphasized the use of internal waterways to the
detriment of coastal waterways, now also assailed by Japanese pirates
and their Chinese collaborators. Thus, under the Ming China withdrew and
abandoned innovation and exploration in favor of stability. Only in the
seventeenth century would this pattern change. A coalition of Tungusic
Jurchen clans from Manchuria would enlist Mongol help and Chinese
collaboration to establish Manchu rule as the last imperial dynasty, the
Ch'ing.

Southeast Asia

Where the Indian Ocean and the China Seas converge lie the peninsulas
and islands of Southeast Asia, one of the points of intersection of the
Indian and Chinese culture spheres. In 1400 this region showed both
Indian and Chinese influences. These influences had been superimposed
upon an earlier cultural base resting on slash-and-burn or swidden
cultivation of unirrigated, dry rice. Such cultivation is still
practiced by the "hill people" on the mainland of Southeast Asia and by
"tribal" groups in the Indonesian Outer Islands, and it supports their
genealogically related and ranked communities. Our voyager would have
seen such ladatig cultivators, who continued alongside the colonists who
introduced irrigated rice cultivation and Indian or Chinese cultural
forms around the beginning of the Christian era.

   Indian influence in the area preceded that of China. The bearers were
probably Indian traders. They came accompanied by Brahmins who, with
their ritual powers, could induct local chieftains into the caste of
rulers, or kshatriyas. By bestowing such ritual powers, they created a
political infrastructure, much as they had done on the Indian
subcontinent itself.

   From 200 B.C. to A.D 200 such colonizing groups had settled in
mainland Southeast Asia, as well as on the major islands of Sumatra and
Java. They grew gradually into more powerful elites, focused upon royal
courts and drawing resources from intensive rice cultivation or from
trade. The form of the royal court was everywhere quite similar. At its
center stood a divine god-king, housed in a palace that was
simultaneously temple and redoubt. Associated with the palace were the
armed retainers of the king, his kinship group, artisans, and ritual
specialists. The court was at once the apex of power and the symbolic
core of the universe. Beyond the core lay a world of vassals and allies,
contributing the resources that enabled the center to reward its
followers and strengthen its base of support. Surpluses were enlarged
through the construction of hydraulic works, through the marshalling of
labor in corvées, and through colonization. Much of the expanded surplus
was invested in building large temple complexes to reinforce the cosmic
connection between royal power and the supernatural, such as the
Borobudur of central Java (eighth century) and the capitals of Angkor
Thom and Angkor Wat in Cambodia (ninth and twelfth centuries). In spite
of these efforts to strengthen the royal charisma—and perhaps because of
the outlays they involved—such states were frequently unstable and
subject to disintegration through dynastic rivalries, rebellion by local
lords, and decline in royal power.

   The Dutch sociologist J. C. van Leur has contrasted such "inland"
states with what he called "harbor principalities," trading ports
located on seacoasts and at river mouths. These did not depend on
irrigation and labor corvées, but on commerce. Some of their food was
obtained from nearby estates worked by slaves; the rest came from the
slash-and-bum fields of the "tribal" population, who furnished crops to
the commercial emporia through the agency of their chiefs, vassals of
the sea king. Merchants played a strategic role in these principalities.
They were mostly foreigners, who settled in separate quarters according
to their ethnic provenience, each represented politically and
commercially by a spokesman. Although some merchants were influential in
court circles, they did not come to constitute an independent class,
perhaps because of their foreign provenience and cosmopolitan
commitments. They remained subject to the prince and his retinue, and
modeled their comportment on that of the royal entourage.

   The reality was often more complex and hybrid than van Leur's
dichotomous ideal types. At least twice, "inland" kingdoms and harbor
principalities had come to be organized into larger structures that
encompassed both. One such case was the state of Sriviyaya. It expanded
between the seventh and tenth centuries from Palembang in eastern
Sumatra, which faced on the key commercial route leading through the
Straits of Malacca. Clearly a sea power, Sriviyaya occupied Sumatra and
much of Java, and in the eighth century it placed a member of its royal
dynasty on the Khmer throne of Cambodia. A second instance was the
fourteenth-century state of Madjapahit, whose core lay in eastern Java.
This was an inland kingdom in structure, but it was widely engaged in
trade with China, India, and mainland Southeast Asia. In the course of
time it came to occupy Java, Sumatra, the southern Malay peninsula,
Borneo, and much of the Philippines. By 1400 Madjapahit was in full
decline because of dynastic quarrels and popular rebellions against its
exactions, a pattern characteristic of inland states. At the same time,
its maritime endeavors were curtailed by Chinese incursion into southern
waters, and—more significantly—by the expanding influence of Islam in
the commercial world of the Indian Ocean and the China Sea. The
disintegration of Hindu-Buddhist Madjapahit was accompanied by the rapid
conversion of traders and rulers to Islam in harbor principalities all
along the Southeast Asian coasts.

    In 1400 the city of Malacca was in ascendance. It had been founded
around 1380 by a band of pirates from Sumatra led by a prince from
Sriviyaya, who were in rebellion against Madjapahit. Toward the end of
the century, the prince converted to Islam, attracting to Malacca the
rich Muslim trading community of Pasai in Sumatra. His companions became
the chief officials of the new emporium, furnishing the war leader, the
collector of customs, and the joint post of treasurer, chief justice,
and master of royal ceremonies. There were four major trading
communities in the city, each headed by a representative: the Gujaratis,
the Kalingas and Bengalis, the traders from the archipelago, and the
Chinese. The Portuguese Tomé Pires, writing of Malacca a century later,
estimated a population of 40,000 to 50,000, with sixty-one "nations”
represented in its trade. It was, he said, of "such importance and
profit that it seems to me it has no equal in the world. Whoever is lord
of Malacca has his hands on the throat of Venice."

   Islam provided a ready-made ideological link among the Muslim trading
emporia that ranged from the ports of the Indian Ocean to the Sulu
islands of the Philippines. Wandering Sufi preachers carried the message
into the hinterland, where Islamic mysticism entered into a syncretic
mix with the beliefs in personalized forces held by the population.
Above all, Islam imparted ideological legitimacy to the new harbor
princes or pirate chiefs, who, as Muslim sultans, could act as "shadows
of God upon earth." The religious conversion of the ports reopened, in a
new way, the antagonism between inland states and harbor principalities,
this time to the clear advantage of the lords of trade. Eventually Islam
would come to dominate the inland areas as well. Only in Bali would a
group of Hindu-Buddhist refugees maintain intact the older ideological
cult of the island world.

The New World

No Ibn Battuta, Marco Polo, or Cheng-ho has left us a record of travels
in the New World. It is possible, however, to use archaeological,
linguistic, and ethnohistorical evidence to reconstruct what a voyager
might have seen in the Americas in A.D. 1400.

   Such evidence makes interconnections among different cultural regions
of the Western Hemisphere highly probable, and—in some cases—virtually
certain. Archaeologists have come to speak of areas that exhibit strong
internal resemblances as "interaction areas," on the grounds that the
wide diffusion of similar tools, architectural forms, and art styles
within the areas are probable indicators of contact, and hence of social
relationships. In 1400 there were two interaction orbits of "high
contour," as archaeologist Gordon Willey has put it. These two areas are
characterized archaeologically by the remains of intensive cultivation,
including irrigation; large and densely populated settlements, including
cities built around impressive works of architecture, such as temples or
palaces; craft products, such as pottery or weaving, clearly made for
high-status elites; and massive evidence of an ideological
superstructure through which the goals of these elite-ruled orbits were
manifested to the population at large. One such interaction area of high
contour was the Central Andes, in what is today Peru and Bolivia. This
area would form, in the course of the fifteenth century, the heartland
of the Inca empire; but in 1400 the Inca were still a group of rustic
parvenus occupying a small polity whose capital was the highland town of
Cuzco. The other area was Mesoamerica, located in the highlands of
present-day Mexico and Guatemala and in the adjacent lowlands. This was
the area inhabited at the time of the Spanish Conquest by the Aztecs and
the Maya. In 1400, however, our traveler would hardly have noticed the
Aztecs, then a minor group of mercenaries in the service of a larger
state, while the Maya were engaged in internecine quarrels among
epigonal elites disputing the heritage of a more glorious past.

South America

The strategic arena for agricultural intensification and for the rise of
overarching political systems in South America was the Andean belt of
mountains extending along the continent's western flanks. The Andes
consist of great longitudinal ranges, with peaks of 15,000 to 20,000
feet rising above the upland basins, and plains that formed the arenas
of human habitation. From the western cordillera the mountains descend
to the Pacific coast, a narrow desertlike strip transected at intervals
by small river valleys reaching down from the mountain slopes to the
sea. Both the desert and the mountainsides have been in cultivation for
millennia—the desert by means of canal irrigation, the mountains through
the construction of massive terraces and spillways.

   It is characteristic of the Andean area that the coast, the piedmont,
the altiplano highlands, and the tundra steppe (puna) afford very
different environments and resources, and hence require and enable
different human activities. People on the coast could raise cotton in
favored oases and gather the dung of seabirds as fertilizer. The
piedmont could produce maize and peppers. The highlands furnished
potatoes and quinoa. In the puna shepherds herded llamas for meat and
wool and gathered salt. On the eastern vertient of the Andes people grew
coca and could acquire honey, lumber, feathers, and other products of
the forest. At the same time, the activities of different zones often
interdigitated. Thus, the altitudinal limits of crops could be raised by
fertilizing them with dung accumulated by llama herders. Digging ponds
and drainage ditches at lower altitudes not only aided agriculture, but
the increased water supplies and fodder crops also allowed herding to
expand into lower altitudes (Orlove 1977). It has been argued (Murra
1972) that such close proximity of altitudinal levels and their
interdigitation placed a premium on the social organization of
productive activities. This has led Andean populations at all levels of
social complexity—hamlet, village, region, kingdom, empire—to attempt to
control the widest possible range of ecological zones at different
elevations. It has favored, moreover, the systematic concentration of
the resources of these zones by some superordinate authority that could
then reassign them among the zones. This, Murra has argued, underlies
the Andean proclivity to organize exchange systems through reciprocity
and redistribution, rather than through open exchanges by private
parties and markets. Compared to other areas of the world with intensive
systems of cultivation and state systems, where resources were usually
traded in markets, the Andes showed a tendency to channel the movement
of goods through the hands of hierarchically organized representatives
of political groups.

   At the time the Spaniards arrived, the whole area from north of Manta
in Ecuador to the Maulé River in Chile was under the sway of the Inca,
but in 1400 their expansion had barely begun. The period preceding Inca
domination, between a.d. 1000 and 1476, was in fact a period of
political fragmentation. It is classified by archaeologists as the Late
Intermediate, because it occurred between an earlier period of
unification and the later Inca unity. There was an effort at political
consolidation between a.d. 800 and 1200. Archaeological sites show two
widely ranging art styles, each connected with a city: Tiahuanaco in the
southern basin of Lake Titicaca, and Wari in the Ayacucho Valley of the
Central Andes. Tiahuanaco motifs, such as the "gateway god" with jaguar
mouth and serpent-ray headdress (a prototype of the Inca god Viracocha)
and a feline god, dominate in the Titicaca Basin and southward into the
Cochabamba region, as far as the arid southern Atacama rim. Willey has
suggested that this style was carried by actual colonists, perhaps by
colonizing elites. The city of Wari to the north was located in the
basin of the Mantaro River. Its early growth was probably stimulated by
Tiahuanaco. Its sphere of influence was marked especially by
multicolored pottery bearing the emblems of the Tiahuanaco mythological
figures and animals. This style was probably carried by dominant elites
that established themselves in local political and religious centers
reaching from the Urubamba Basin to the middle Mara?ón, and from Ocono
to Chicama on the coast. Later Wari settlements were made up of planned
compounds, a pattern possibly derived from the coast and an early
evidence of the modes of planning that marked later Andean polities.
Such planning involved food distribution from state-managed storehouses
on a territorial basis, as well as the placing of control stations along
highways and near important settlements.

   By A.D. 1250 these two larger political systems had broken up into
several distinct polities. A number of states fought for control of the
highlands. Other states dominated sections of the coast. The most
important of these was Chimu, which ruled the northern coast from Chira
to Supe. Its capital, Chanchan, was located in the Moche Valley;
covering a site of at least six square miles, it was divided into ten
separate walled quadrangles, each containing residential structures,
courtyards, sunken reservoirs, and tombs. Beyond this elite center were
provincial administrative towns and numerous hamlets. There is evidence
of massive fortifications throughout the Chimu domain, and a large
multivalley canal system supplied forts and centers with water. Traffic
moved over major highways, which served to carry on trade and to
reinforce political control over several valleys. It is likely that this
Chimu polity provided or transmitted some of the patterns of control
later utilized by the Inca.

   The Inca in 1400 formed a statelet in the upper reaches of the Uru-
bamba Basin; the Inca dynasty would then have been about 200 years old.
It was only with the ninth dynastic ruler, Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui
(1438—1471), however, that Inca expansion began. Inca expansion would be
spearheaded by a professional army; conquests were consolidated through
the construction of highways and control points.

   Inca society during its phase of imperial growth can be described as
a hierarchy organized into the godlike Inca dynasty, carrier of the
state religion; an aristocracy made up of relatives of the dynasty, as
well as local rulers who submitted to Inca rule; a category of local men
of rank standing at the head of landowning endogamous patrilineal
descent groups (ayllus); and the members of the descent groups
themselves. Men paid tribute through labor on public works, in
agriculture, or in military service. Women spent much of their time
weaving, and the cloth so produced was concentrated in Inca storehouses
and used to remunerate faithful subjects; woven cloth was charged with
extraordinary ritual and ceremonial value. The state undertook to
colonize new agricultural lands, especially in areas lying along the
piedmont of the mountain ranges where maize could be grown. The state
also maintained irrigation works and roads, as well as an extraordinary
postal system, which employed runners to speed messages from one end of
the realm to the other. Anyone who submitted peacefully to Inca demands
was assured of a place within this hierarchical and well-organized
scheme of things; but refusal was answered with war, and rebellious
groups were relocated far from their places of origin.

   North of Peru the Andes continue into Ecuador and then descend in
ramifying mountain chains to the coastal lowlands. The highland basins
of Ecuador are neither as large nor as productive as those in Peru, but
their climate resembles that of the Central Andes, and the major crops
were the Andean potato and quinoa. Further north, however, where the
mountains enter the subtropics and the tropics, the major crop came to
be maize. This zone is characterized by an extraordinary variability in
local microclimates, which were exploited in highly variable ways
through slash-and-burn cultivation, soil selection, terracing, and canal
irrigation. The scale of these activities was always narrow and
environmentally circumscribed.

   This northern rim of the Andean heartland was characterized by
small-scale political domains under local rulers, or by federations of
such domains under a paramount. In southern Ecuador the most important
of these federations was the Canari. The Inca subdued them without
difficulty in the 1450s, but only sixty years later they would ally
themselves with the Spaniards to shake off the Inca yoke. In northern
Ecuador the Cara federation, organized under hereditary chiefs, offered
greater resistance to the Inca.

   On the Ecuadorian coast a league of seagoing towns had formed under a
paramount whose capital was at Manta. A dense population was supported
here by intensive cultivation of the terraced hillsides, as well as by
extensive trade. The people of Manta were excellent navigators, using
balsa and log rafts, and probably entertained important trade relations
with Mesoamerica. The scale of trade in this area is attested to by the
Spanish capture, soon after their arrival, of a large balsa raft
equipped with sails and cabin, manned by a crew of twenty, and laden
with thirty tons of luxury merchandise.

   In Colombia, to the north, the most important polities were those of
the Chibcha and the Tairona. The Chibcha occupied highland basins in the
areas of present-day Cundinamarca and Boyaca. There were two major
Chibcha states, headed by rulers known as the Zipa and the Zaque, and
several minor independent polities. At the time of the Spanish Conquest
the Zipa dominated, having consolidated his own realm against several
rivals in the fifteenth century and established ascendance over the
Zaque in the early sixteenth century. The Zipa domain, controlling a
population of between 120,000 and 160,000 (Villamarin and Villamarin
1979: 31), was organized hierarchically. Groups of households formed
captaincies, which in turn formed semi- autonomous communities each
owing loyalty to the Zipa. The Zipa's capital has been identified with a
large site near modern-day Funza and appears to have been a highly
concentrated town of thatch-roofed temples, palaces, warehouses, and
residences. Economically, the state was supported by the production of
maize, potatoes, and quinoa on ridged fields and hillside terraces. The
aristocracy who managed the state drew tribute in kind and labor from
the population of commoners, and traded produce and textiles to the
lowlands for the gold they needed for ritual and for conspicuous
consumption. There is evidence that the Chibcha elite exercised
wide-ranging cultural hegemony through the development of a religious
cult based on the privileged acquisition of esoteric supernatural
knowledge.

   The Tairona were located to the north of the Chibcha in the Sierra
Nevada de Santa Marta, a block of mountains close to the Caribbean Sea.
Their political organization seems to have resembled that of the
Chibcha, with several semiautonomous communities forming a domain under
a paramount ruler. These rulers lived in large centers, of which the
Buritaca 200 site furnishes an example. The site, which was occupied
A.D. 1360 to 1635, spreads out over a thousand acres along the ridge of
the steep Corea Mountain on the northern slope of the Sierra. The center
consists of elaborate constructions in stairways, ditches, roadways,
retaining walls, and terraces, arranged in different zones for
residential use, work, public functions, and religious ritual. Intensive
cultivation of terraced hillsides, making use of irrigation and crop
rotation, furnished the subsistence base of maize, beans, manioc, sweet
potatoes, and chili. Excavations of burials at the site have yielded
fine pottery and gold work.

   The Chibcha, Tairona, and other populations of Colombia were involved
in incessant warfare. This warfare was ceremonial and a means of gaining
status, but it had economic functions as well. As Reichel- Dolmatoff has
noted, those populations in Colombia inhabiting regions of low rainfall
and producing only a single harvest of maize tended to invade more
fertile territories with two or three annual harvests, making the
eighty-inch isohyet “practically a military frontier" (1961: 86).
Warfare also provided slaves for field labor and domestic service, and
for sacrifice and culinary cannibalism.

   The pattern whereby local communities with their own heads were
organized into larger domains under paramount rulers characterized a
number of other areas: the Caribbean lowlands, the islands of the
Greater Antilles, and the Mojos Plain in southern Bolivia. In the
Venezuelan lowlands and the Caribbean islands, such domains were built
upon the cultivation of maize and bitter manioc, together with maritime
resources. The polities of the Mojos Plain grew sweet manioc and maize
on riverine savannas that were ridged to control flooding. This area was
in contact with the Andean highlands. We know, for instance, that Mojo
merchants traveled to the Aymara country to exchange cotton cloth and
feathers for metal tools and ornaments. It was by this route that Andean
precious metals and copper passed down as far as the upper Paraguay
River, where the first conquistadores learned of a fabulous kingdom to
the west called the Realm of the Great Mojo. Inca gold ornaments also
passed down the Ucayali River as part of intergroup trade in the
tropical Montana.

   East of the Andes lies the tropical rain forest of interior South
America. It was populated largely by slash-and-burn cultivators, who
grew bitter (poisonous) manioc and obtained protein by hunting and
fishing. The population was generally organized into large coresidential
units, which recruited their members through rules of exogamy and
postmarital residence. The network of kin relations thus extended across
local groups. Leaders might organize warfare, redistribute food and
other goods, and aid in the resolution of conflicts through the
management of consensus. They lacked, however, any institutionalized
apparatus for applying sanctions. Relations between humans and
nonhumans, as codified in myth, were conceptualized as relations between
various kinds of forces, and these were managed by shamans who made
contact with the supernatural through the use of hallucinogens. Upon the
arrival of the Europeans, tropical-forest populations would be subject
to decimation by illness, slave raiding, surplus extraction, and
outright genocide; it is therefore likely that in A.D. 1400 their
numbers were considerably higher than in historic times.

   There were apparently important connections between the peoples of
the tropical forest and those of the Andes. The tropical forest was
probably the source of a number of the crops successfully cultivated on
the arid Pacific coast, such as the sweet potato, sweet manioc, and
peanuts. Throughout Andean history, products of the eastern slopes, such
as coca, feathers, jaguar skins, fish poisons, and medicines, were
exchanged for highland produce and crafts. The Inca were, however,
unable to subdue populations in the tropical forest. A war against the
head-hunting Jívaro, whose land was rich in placer gold, failed.
Similarly, Inca efforts to advance southeastward into the lowlands was
halted in the area occupied by the Mosetene.

   Southward from the Central Andes, highland cultural patterns had been
carried into the arid belt of northern Chile and Argentina, first in
Tiahuanaco times and later under the Inca. Llama herding became
extensive in this area, but crops were also grown on terraces and by
means of irrigation. The Atacame?o were known for their far-flung
carrying trade, by means of which coastal products like fish and salt
were exchanged for highland commodities such as llama wool and tobacco.
The Diaguita were renowned for their metallurgy; but what the Inca
sought in their expansion into Diaguita territory, as in Picunche
terrain farther south, were the precious metals themselves—gold, silver,
and copper. The Inca also incorporated the Araucanian-speaking Picunche
into their empire, but the Araucanian-speakers to the south— the Mapuche
and Huilliche—proved unconquerable. These people were potato cultivators
and llama herders organized in autonomous localized lineages loosely
federated under war chiefs. In the wet beech and cedar forests south of
the Bio-Bio River, Andean ecological and political patterns encountered
their southern limit, and Inca attempts to penetrate farther failed.

Mesoamerica

  In Mesoamerica our observer in A.D. 1400 would have encountered a
scene of even greater political fragmentation than in the Andean area at
that time. Teotihuacan, a major center in the Valley of Mexico, had in
the first century A.D. established its hegemony over wide areas reaching
at least as far south as Kaminaljuyu, near present-day Guatemala City,
and Tikal, in the heart of the forested Peten. At its height the city of
Teotihuacan concentrated within its precinct an estimated 150,000 to
200,000 people, nearly depopulating the surrounding areas. The
agricultural technology that supported it probably included canal
irrigation and intensive drainage of the nearby alluvial lakeshores. The
city controlled major obsidian mines and contained numerous workshops
that produced obsidian tools. Yet by A.D. 700 the far-flung Teotihuacano
system had disintegrated.

   The reasons for this collapse are not well understood. It is likely
that the religious and political mechanisms for control of the
population failed as agricultural productivity reached a critical limit
of expansion. Thereafter, people moved back into the rural areas in
large numbers to smaller settlements closer to their home fields. At the
same time, there appears to have been a massive failure in the system of
trade. This is suggested by the outward movement of warlike bands
northward to ward the source of turquoise and southward toward the lands
of precious feathers, gold, and cacao beans, then the major medium of
monetary exchange.

   The fall of Teotihuacan brought in its wake the decline of the Maya
cities in the tropical forests of the Petén. Perhaps they too
encountered some critical limit in the expansion of their drained—field
agriculture. Conceivably, they too had overconcentrated the population
of urban complexes. Or, as Rathje has suggested, the producers of
obsidian and basalt on the periphery of the Maya area may no longer have
been willing to supply these items (which the Maya centers lacked) in
return for religious indulgences; instead, they may have attempted to
take into their own hands the exchange networks involving precious
goods.

   After the fall of Teotihuacan, various warlike elites, flourishing
different symbols of political legitimacy, appropriated the city's
patrimony. These successor states contested one another's spoils and
spread out in various directions in search of new horizons. For a brief
time the center of gravity within the Mesoamerican heartland shifted
northward, apparently to Tula in Hidalgo, outside the Valley of Mexico.
Tula became the capital of a Toltec domain, less an integrated "empire"
than an epicenter of groups of warriors, traders, cultivators, and
priests employing the Toltec name and symbols as charters for conquest
and colonization. Some groups migrated farther northward, expanding
cultivation into the arid zone north of the Mexican plateau. Toltec
colonists or traders in search of turquoise, alum, salt, incense, and
raw copper may have reached as far as the present southwestern United
States.

Mural f rom the Temple of the Warriors, Chichen Itza, Yucatan, c. A.D.
1200, depicting warriors in boats, villagers pursuing daily tasks, and
an offertory (upper right). (Courtesy of the American Museum of Natural
History, New York)

   Other groups moved southward to conquer Nicaragua, highland
Guatemala, and Yucatán. In Yucatan a war band of Chontal-speaking Putún
from lowland Tabasco assumed control in the twelfth century,
establishing a capital at Chichén Itzá. This move may have been an
attempt to dominate the trade that carried salt, cotton cloth, honey,
copal incense, and slaves from Tabasco to Honduras, returning with
cacao, gold, jade, and obsidian from Central America. These Putún appear
to have been allied with the highland Toltecs at Tula. When Tula
declined after A.D. 1200 Putún-controlled Chichén Itzá declined as well.
A Putún splinter group moved to a new center at Mayapan, until that city
too collapsed in the middle of the fifteenth century and gave way to a
multitude of warring statelets.

   In the Valley of Mexico itself, the Mesoamerican heartland, our
visitor of 1400 would have witnessed conflict and strife among five
distinctive city-states, each dominated by an independent ruling elite.
One of these city-states, Azcapozalco, ruled by a group of Otomi-speak-
ing Tepanec, was then clearly gaining in power. It is unlikely, however,
that anyone could have predicted at that time the destruction of that
city only thirty years later at the hands of the Aztec (or, as they are
properly called, Colhua-Mexica), then a mere band of mercenaries in
service to the Tepanec.

North America

Two streams of Mesoamerican influence were carried into North America
after A.D. 1000. One of these may have been brought by "Toltec"
colonists and traders into the arid Southwest. There the newcomers
influenced the Hohokam, who lived on irrigated farmlands in the Gila
River Basin, and the Anasazi of the Colorado Plateau, known for their
large multihousehold complexes supported by intensive cultivation with
irrigation and terracing. Most of the characteristic Southwestern
ceremonial art derives from the end of the Toltec period (about A.D.
1300) and appears to be a fusion of the Mesoamerican cult of the rain
god with local religious traditions (Kelley 1966: 107-108). Soon
afterward, however, the frontiers of sedentary life contracted sharply,
as increasing aridity and warfare made it more difficult to occupy
marginal agricultural areas.

   The extension of Mesoamerican influence northwest into the desert was
paralleled by a spread northeast into the warm and humid woodlands and
riverine embayments near the confluence of the Mississippi, Missouri,
and Ohio rivers. The resulting culture is known as the Missis- sippian.
In contrast to the arid west, where the route of Mesoamerican influence
can now be reconstructed, the route by which Mesoamerican prototypes of
settlement pattern, architecture, and ceremonial art styles reached the
Mississippian coast remains unknown. The great terraced earthen
platforms, arranged around plazas and bearing temples, elite residences,
and other buildings, show a generic relationship to features found in
Mexico, as do the striking artistic depictions—weeping and winged eyes,
human hands with eyes or crosses on them, and human skulls and long
bones—associated with the so-called "Southern cult." Precise parallels,
however, occur only in ceramic techniques and dental mutilations.
Contact with Mesoamerican long-distance traders, like the Aztec
pochteca, has been suggested as an explanation of the Mesoameri-
can-like traits, but it is unclear what such merchants might have been
seeking in the eastern woodlands.

   The Mississippian superseded an older culture complex known as Burial
Mound. Burial Mound takes its name from the practice of burying the dead
under mounds with elaborate, status-ranked grave goods obtained from
regions as widely separated as Wyoming and the East Coast. These grave
goods bespeak the presence of a stratum of high rank, which communicated
over wide areas through a common system of symbols. Despite this
wide-ranging interaction, local food systems were highly variable,
including wild fauna and flora and local cultigens (like sunflower and
sumpweed), as well as maize.

   The Mississippians, in contrast, relied heavily on the cultivation of
maize, squash, and beans. This subsistence base supported a pattern of
settlement focused on large towns with temple mounds and plazas, which
were surrounded by smaller towns with mounds, ringed about in turn by
moundless villages. Colonies of Mississippians moved outward from the
center around Cahokia (near modern St. Louis) as far away as Wisconsin
and Georgia. This migration carried with it the Southern cult, which
like the earlier Burial Mound focused on lavish disposal of the dead,
but gave special emphasis to prowess in warfare. The cult may have had
important political functions. Spiro Mound in Oklahoma, one of its major
sites, seems to have been a "headquarters from which the politically
significant descendants of the honored dead drew their ideological
power" (Brown 1975: 15). The raw materials for this mortuary art, such
as copper and shells, were drawn from a wide radius extending from north
of Lake Superior to the Florida shoals.

   Spreading out centrifugally from the Central Mississippi Valley, the
Mississippians encountered and affected cultures of the Burial Mound
type all around them. When the Mississippian power declined after A.D.
1300, perhaps due to intensified warfare, these regional cultures
reemerged. These cultures were antecedents of several of the groups that
met the incoming Europeans: the Iroquois at the headwaters of the Ohio;
the Cherokee in the southern Appalachians; the Natchez on the lower
Mississippi; and the Pawnee, Mandan, and other "village Indians" on the
Missouri, who combined village-centered cultivation with annual summer
bison hunts. The Iroquois and the "village Indians" would become
conspicuous participants in the fur trade (chapter 6), and the Cherokees
would be displaced in the development of the Cotton South (chapter 9).
The Natchez, however, would pass from  view. Their complex system of
stratification—into a royal lineage of "Suns" pivoted upon a Great
Village, two collateral ranked lineages of nobles, and a category of
commoners called "stinkards"—seems to have been the outcome of contact
between the Mississippians and an earlier Caribbean-like Gulf tradition.
The French would decimate the Natchez in the eighteenth century, selling
many into slavery in the West Indies; remnants would join the Creek and
Cherokee. They would live on in the European imagination, however,
through Chateaubriand's fanciful novel Atala.

   Our voyager of A.D. 1400 would thus have witnessed great political
fragmentation in the two areas of "high contour" in the Americas, as
well as rampant warfare among the polities surrounding the zones of
Andean and Mesoamerican influence. Beyond the belt of war-making
statelets and federations adjacent to the two core areas lay still other
zones of horticultural occupation, in the tropical forests of South
America and in the northeastern woodlands of North America.

   When slash-and-burn cultivators expanded into these zones, they
impinged on hunters and gatherers, who retreated into marginal areas.

 These food collectors varied greatly in their use of resources
available in such environments. Along the ocean shores of both Americas,
such groups as the hunters of the Arctic circumpolar belt, the fishermen
and sea-mammal hunters of the North American Pacific coast, and the
shellfish gatherers of the Chilean archipelago exploited maritime
resources. In the mountains and steppes not utilized by cultivators,
other groups foraged for game and wild plants, as did the hunters of the
northern Boreal forest, the acorn-and-seed gatherers of Arid America
from montane California down to the Mesoamerican frontier, and the
guanaco and rhea hunters of the South American Chaco and pampa.
Sometimes expanding into cultivable zones where they challenged the
cultivators, as in Arid America after the fall of Teotihuacan, sometimes
exploiting zones not amenable to cultivation with the agricultural
technologies then available, they maintained themselves in these
habitats until the advent of the Europeans.

   Everywhere in this world of 1400, populations existed in
interconnections. Groups that defined themselves as culturally distinct
were linked by kinship or ceremonial allegiance; states expanded,
incorporating other peoples into more encompassing political structures;
elite groups succeeded one another, seizing control of agricultural
populations and establishing new political and symbolic orders. Trade
formed networks from East Asia to the Levant, across the Sahara, from
East Africa through the Indian Ocean to the Southeast Asian archipelago.
Conquest, incorporation, recombination, and commerce also marked the New
World. In both hemispheres populations impinged upon other populations
through permeable social boundaries, creating intergrading, interwoven
social and cultural entities. If there were any isolated societies these
were but temporary phenomena—a group pushed to the edge of a zone of
interaction and left to itself for a brief moment in time. Thus, the
social scientist's model of distinct and separate systems, and of a
timeless "precontact" ethnographic present, does not adequately depict
the situation before European expansion; much less can it comprehend the
worldwide system of links that would be created by that expansion.

   In following our traveler on his voyage, we have not as yet taken him
to Europe, which was then about to launch its great expansion overseas.
For a long time Europe was of little account in the affairs of the wider
world, "the land of the Franks on the western seas" to the Arabs. The
Portuguese, the first Europeans to reach Asia, became known as Feringhi
in Malaya and Fo-lang-ki in China. Only gradually did the Chinese learn
to distinguish between the Portuguese and the Jesuits from "I-ta-li" who
were at Portuguese Macao, and between the Dutch (Ho-lan) and the
English. On the other side of the world, the Aztec ruler would wonder
whether the arriving Spaniards were gods or men, although an empirically
minded Tlaxcaltec war leader solved the problem by holding a Spanish
prisoner under water until he died like any other mortal. In the Pacific
the incoming Europeans came to be known as Cookies, after Captain Cook.
The speed and intensity with which these "red-haired, high-nosed
external barbarians" imposed themselves on different parts of the world
demands that we take a special look at Europe. We do so in chapter 4.

3 Modes of Production

In our survey of the world in 1400 we let our imaginary traveler roam
among the populations of four continents. We sketched out, in the
process, the different social systems and varied cultural understandings
that Europe would later encounter in the course of its expansion. To
grasp the strategic features of this variability analytically as well as
descriptively, we will employ the Marxian concept of the "mode of
production." We will first discuss the premises of the concept, and then
delineate the modes that will allow us to point to the central processes
at work in the interaction of Europeans with the majority of the world's
peoples.

Production and Social Labor

In formulating the mode of production concept, Marx began with two
axiomatic understandings of the human condition. Both are also axioms of
modern anthropology. The first sees the species Homo sapiens as a part
of nature; the second defines Homo as a social species, its individual
members always linked to others in social relationships. The human
species is an outgrowth of natural processes; at the same time, the
species is naturally social.

   The human species is, however, not merely a passive product of
natural processes; it has also, in the course of evolution, acquired the
ability to transform nature to human use. If humanity stands to nature
as part to whole, then that part has acquired the ability to oppose the
whole that encompasses it; or, as Marx phrased it, man "confronts the
material of nature as one of her own forces. . . . [By] changing it, he
at the same time changes his own nature" (quoted in Schmidt 1971:
77—78). This active relation of the species to nature, while rooted in
biological characteristics, is put into effect by the exosomatic means
of technology, organization, and ideas. Man rises up against nature by
means of what we would today call culture.

   Marx's second axiom emphasizes the sociality of humankind. Human
beings exist in organized pluralities. Moreover, the way they are
organized socially governs the way they confront and transform nature,
and nature thus transformed affects, in turn, the architecture of human
social bonds. In Marx's words, “the restricted relation of men to nature
determines their restricted relation to one another, and their
restricted relation to one another determines men's restricted relation
to nature" (quoted in Colletti 1973: 228).

   Is there a concept that allows us to grasp this complex connection
between a socially interrelated humanity and nature? Marx found such a
concept in his notion of labor. Humankind adapts to nature and
transforms it for its own use through labor. Thus, “the labor process .
.. is the general condition for the metabolism between men and nature;
it is the everlasting nature-imposed condition of human existence"
(quoted in Schmidt 1971: 136). Yet labor is always social, for it is
always mobilized and deployed by an organized social plurality. Marx
therefore drew a distinction between work and labor. Work represents the
activities of individuals, singly or in groups, expending energy to
produce energy. But labor and the labor process was for him a social
phenomenon, carried on by human beings bonded to one another in society.

   This concept of labor as a social process carried on by an organized
plurality could not be imagined as long as different kinds of work—
cultivating, spinning, praying—were thought of as qualitatively
different. Only when different kinds of work could be subsumed under the
common denominator of money did "labor-in-general" become conceivable.
Marx credited Adam Smith with the first formulation of this concept,
noting that this "immense step forward" occurred precisely when
different kinds of labor had become interchangeable (Gr. 1973: 104),
that is, after the onset of capitalism. The utility of the concept,
however, transcends its particular historical origins. Once one can talk
about labor-in-general, one can begin to visualize how any organized
human society activates this process and shares out its products.

   Understanding how humans transform nature to their use thus does not
stop with the description and analysis of techno-environmental
interaction. The laborer, the direct producer, is never an isolated
Robinson Crusoe but is someone who always stands in relationship to
others, as kinsman, serf, slave, or wage laborer. Similarly, the
controllers of social labor are not to be thought of as technicians who
guide the technical operations of work. They are assigned to their
positions by the system of deploying social labor, which casts them in
the role of elder kinsman, chief, seignorial lord, or capitalist. It is
this conception of social mobilization, deployment, and allocation of
labor that allows us to understand how the technical transformation of
nature is conjoined with the organization of human sociality.

   Marx adopted the term production for this complex set of mutually
dependent relations among nature, work, social labor, and social
organization. We shall use the term in this sense in the present work.
Because modern usage often restricts it exclusively to technology, it is
important to be aware of the background that evoked it. The concept of
production was employed by Marx to contrast his perspective with Hegel's
conception of Geist (“Spirit”). It thus carries overtones of Marx's
confrontation with Hegelian idealism. For Hegel the various human
transformations of nature represented successive concretizations of
Spirit or Mind ("models of" and "models for"). Marx's use of production
also contrasts with Feuerbach's contemplative materialism. Feuerbach had
criticized Hegel for treating thought as transcendental rather than as
an attribute of natural humankind. Yet he took account neither of human
sociality nor of the human confrontation with nature. Marx, in contrast,
stressed the activity of socially organized humankind in a double
sense—active in changing nature, and in creating and re-creating the
social ties that effect the transformation of the environment. The term
production expressed for him both this active engagement with nature and
the concomitant "reproduction" of social ties.

   It is also important to note that Marx's concept of production
incorporates his insistence that the human species produces with both
hand and head. In contrast to other animals, humans conceptualize and
plan the labor process. Labor thus presupposes intentionality, and
therefore information and meaning. Just as labor is always social labor,
information and meaning are always social. As Marx put it, thought does
not descend from on high into the real world; thought and language "are
only manifestations of actual life" (quoted in Coletti 1973: 225).
Social labor with both hand and head is deployed to cope with nature;
the deployment of social labor, in turn, reproduces both the material
and the ideational ties of human sociality.

Modes of Production

The concept of social labor thus makes it possible to conceptualize the
major ways in which human beings organize their production. Each major
way of doing so constitutes a mode of production—a specific,
historically occurring set of social relations through which labor is
deployed to wrest energy from nature by means of tools, skills,
organization, and knowledge.

   What modes of deploying social labor are there? Marx himself spoke of
a number of different modes: an original, primitive, communitarian mode,
conceived after Morgan's model of primitive communism; the slaveholding
mode of classical European antiquity; a Germanic mode, supposedly
characteristic of the Germanic peoples in their early migrations; a
Slavonic mode, said to characterize the early Slavs; a peasant mode; a
feudal mode; an Asiatic mode; and a capitalist mode. Not all of these
are based on equivalent criteria. Some may never have constituted
primary modes in their own right, but may have been only accessory or
supplementary modes; others represent extrapolations from historical
interpretations now adjudged to have been erroneous.

   For the purposes of this book, it is immaterial whether Marx was
right or wrong—whether he should have postulated two or eight or fifteen
modes of production, or whether other modes should be substituted for
those suggested by him. The utility of the concept does not lie in
classification but in its capacity to underline the strategic
relationships involved in the deployment of social labor by organized
human pluralities. Since we want to deal with the spread of the
capitalist mode and its impact on world areas where social labor was
allocated differently, we shall construct only those modes that permit
us to exhibit this encounter in the most parsimonious manner. For this
purpose we shall define but three: a capitalist mode, a tributary mode,
and a kin-ordered mode. No argument is presented here to the effect that
this trinity exhausts all the possibilities. For other problems and
issues it may be useful to construct other modes drawing further
distinctions, or to group together differently the distinctions drawn
here.

   Nor is there any intention, in the present context, to argue that
these three modes represent an evolutionary sequence. While we shall
explore certain historical relations between modes, it is a major
argument of this book that most of the societies studied by
anthropologists are an outgrowth of the expansion of Europe and not the
pristine precipitates of past evolutionary stages. This position extends
the caveats already introduced by other writers against the uncritical
equation of the bands, tribes, or chiefdoms described by observers since
1400 with the societies existing before European expansion and even
before the rise of the state (Service 1968: 167; Fried 1966, 1975).
Fried has stated resolutely that the “tribe" is "a secondary
sociopolitical phenomenon, brought about by the intercession of more
complex ordered societies, states in particular" (1975: 114). I believe
that all human societies of which we have record are “secondary," indeed
often tertiary, quaternary, or centenary. Cultural change or cultural
evolution does not operate on isolated societies but always on
interconnected systems in which societies are variously linked within
wider "social fields." One of the utilities of the concept of mode of
production lies precisely in that it allows us to visualize
intersystemic as well as intrasystemic relationships. We shall use the
concept to reveal the changing ways in which one mode, capitalism,
interacted with other modes to achieve its present dominance. In this
process Iroquois, Asante, Tamil, and Chinese are as much participants as
Barbadians, New Englanders, and Poles. The process linked victims and
beneficiaries, contenders and collaborators.

   The three modes that we employ should not be taken as schemes for
pigeonholing societies. The two concepts—mode of production and
society—pertain to different levels of abstraction. The concept of
society takes its departure from real or imputed interactions among
people. The concept of mode of production aims, rather, at revealing the
political- economic relationships that underlie, orient, and constrain
interaction. Such key relationships may characterize only a part of the
total range of interactions in a society; they may comprehend all of a
society; or they may transcend particular, historically constituted
systems of social interaction. Used comparatively, the concept of mode
of production calls attention to major variations in political-economic
arrangements and allows us to visualize their effect. The use of the
concept enables us, above all, to inquire into what happens in the
encounters of differently constituted systems of
interaction—societies—predicated upon different modes of production.

   We shall begin our exposition with the capitalist mode, despite the
fact that it developed later than the others, in the course of the
eighteenth century. It was in the analysis of this mode that Marx
developed his general concepts, and we follow him in his conviction that
an understanding of how this mode works provides the key to the
understanding of others.

The Capitalist Mode

Marx spent most of his life on the analysis of the capitalist mode of
production. He did so, of course, to understand it in such a way that he
could help put an end to it. What, according to him, were its salient
characteristics?

   For Marx, the capitalist mode came into being when monetary wealth
was enabled to buy labor power. This specific capability is not an
inherent attribute of wealth as such; it develops historically and
requires the installation of certain prerequisites. Labor power is not
in itself a commodity created in order to be offered for sale in a
market. It is an attribute of human beings, a capability of Homo
sapiens. As long as people can lay their hands on the means of
production (tools, resources, land) and use these to supply their own
sustenance—under whatever social arrangements—there is no compelling
reason for them to sell their capacity to work to someone else. For
labor power to be offered for sale, the tie between producers and the
means of production has to be severed for good. Thus, holders of wealth
must be able to acquire the means of production and deny access, except
on their own terms, to all who want to operate them. Conversely, people
who are denied access to the means of production must come to those who
now control the means and bargain for permission to operate them. In
return they receive wages that will allow them to pay for what they need
to sustain themselves.

   Indeed, in the capitalist mode production determines distribution.
Those who detain the means of production can also detain the commodities
produced. Those who produce the commodities must buy them back from the
owners of the means of production. Means of production, in turn,
circulate only among those with capital to acquire them. Those who lack
capital and must sell their labor power also lack the means of
production. Hence, the way in which the mode commits social labor to the
transformation of nature also governs the way the resources used and
obtained are distributed among producers and nonproducers. Streams of
resources, including income, are not—as an ecologically oriented
anthropologist wrote recently (Love 1977: 32)— the human analogue of the
way biological organisms capture energy. Between people and resources
stand the strategic relationships governing the mode of allocating
social labor to nature.

   The holders of wealth who now detain the means of production,
however, would have no reason to hire laborers if they produced only
enough to cover the costs of their wage package. In the course of a
working day, the laborers in fact produce more than the cost of their
wages; they produce a surplus. This surplus, under the conditions of the
capitalist mode, belongs to the holder of wealth, the capitalist, whose
means of production the workers put into operation. The greater this
surplus, the greater the rate of profit obtained by the capitalist when
he measures it against his outlays for plant, resources, and labor.

   There are two ways in which capitalists can increase this surplus.
One way is to keep wages low, or to reduce them to the lowest possible
point that is biologically or socially feasible. The other way is to
raise the level of the surplus produced, above and beyond the amount
that has to be paid for labor power, through raising the output of
workers during any given period of work. Such increases in productivity
require improvements in the technology and organization of production.
These imperatives produce relentless pressures, spurring capitalists to
ever-increased accumulation of capital and renewal of technology. The
greater the capital at their command, the greater their ability to raise
technological productivity; hence the greater their ability to
accumulate additional surplus to further expand production, as well as
to outproduce and undersell competitors who fail to invest in new
technology and who attempt to meet competition through placing greater
burdens on their laborers.

   The capitalist mode thus shows three intertwined characteristics.
First, capitalists detain control of the means of production. Second,
laborers are denied independent access to means of production and must
sell their labor power to the capitalists. Third, the maximization of
surplus produced by the laborers with the means of production owned by
the capitalists entails "ceaseless accumulation accompanied by changes
in methods of production" (Sweezy 1942: 94; Mandel 1978: 103-107).

   These characteristics, however, must be understood not only syn-
chronically but also historically, as developing facets of a mode that
had determinate origins in time and that develops over time. The point
is crucial. Wealth in the hands of holders of wealth is not capital
until it controls means of production, buys labor power, and puts it to
work, continuously expanding surpluses by intensifying productivity
through an ever-rising curve of technological inputs. To this end
capitalism must lay hold of production, must invade the productive
process and ceaselessly alter the conditions of production themselves.
As long as wealth remains external to the process of production, merely
skimming off the products of the primary producers and making profits by
selling them, that wealth is not capital. It may be wealth obtained and
engrossed by overlords or merchants, but it has not yet entered what
Marx called “the really revolutionary road" of appropriating and
transforming the means of production themselves (Cap. Ill, 1967: 334).
Only where wealth has laid hold of the conditions of production in the
ways specified can we speak of the existence or dominance of a
capitalist mode. There is no such thing as mercantile or merchant
capitalism, therefore. There is only mercantile wealth. Capitalism, to
be capitalism, must be capital- ism-in-production.

   The capitalist mode of production, so conceived, is necessarily based
on a division of classes. It initiates a division between segments of
the population who produce surpluses and segments of the population who
control the means of production, and it continuously re-creates that
differentiation. At the same time, it differentiates each class
internally. In the race for higher productivity, the owners of the means
of production are differentiated into victors and losers. In the
continuous movement between the genesis of new sources of surplus
production and renewed recession, the labor force shuttles among full
employment, underemployment, and unemployment. The two processes of
differentiation are in fact linked, as the shareholders in capital are
continuously driven to seek new pools of cheap and tractable labor, or
else to replace costlv or intractable labor with machines.

   The growth of this capitalism-in-production is a historical,
developmental process, originating in certain areas of the European
peninsula. It expanded from there to envelop areas beyond Europe. It
grew through its own internal ability to reproduce itself on an
ever-widening scale; it grew also by entering into working arrangements
with other modes, siphoning off wealth and people and turning them into
capital and labor power. The capitalist mode thus always exhibited a
dual character: an ability to develop internally and branch out,
implanting its strategic nexus of relations across the face of the
globe; and an ability to enter into temporary and shifting relations of
symbiosis and competition with other modes. These relations with other
modes constitute part of its history and development. Indeed, as we
shall see, the internal dynamic of the capitalist mode may predispose it
to external expansion, and hence to interchanges with modes other than
itself.

The Tributary Mode

In the world in 1400 the major agricultural areas traversed by our
imaginary traveler were held by states based on the extraction of
surpluses from the primary producers by political or military rulers.
These states represent a mode of production in which the primary
producer.

80 CONNECTIONS

whether cultivator or herdsman, is allowed access to the means of
production, while tribute is exacted from him by political or military
means. Marx characterized the key attributes of this mode as follows:

It is furthermore evident that in all forms in which the direct laborer
remains the "possessor" of the means of production and labor conditions
necessary for the production of his own means of subsistence, the
property relationship must simultaneously appear as a direct relation of
lordship and servitude, so that the direct producer is not free; a lack
of freedom which may be reduced from serfdom with enforced labor to a
mere tributary relationship. The direct producer, according to our
assumption, is to be found here in possession of his own means of
production, the necessary material labor conditions required for the
realization of his labor and the production of his own means of
subsistence. He conducts his agricultural activity and the rural home
industries connected with it independently... .Under such conditions the
surplus-labor forthe nominal owner of the land can only be extorted from
them by other than economic pressure, whatever the form assumed may be.
[Cap. Ill, 1967: 790-791]

In other words, social labor is, under these conditions, mobilized and
committed to the transformation of nature primarily through the exercise
of power and domination—through a political process. Hence, the
deployment of social labor is, in this mode, a function of the locus of
political power; it will differ as this locus shifts position.

   It is possible to envisage two polar situations: one in which power
is concentrated strongly in the hands of a ruling elite standing at the
apex of the power system; and another in which power is held largely by
local overlords and the rule at the apex is fragile and weak. These two
situations define a continuum of power distributions.

   A ruling elite of surplus takers standing at the apex of the power
system will be strongest when it controls, first, some strategic element
in the process of production, such as waterworks (Wittfogel 1931), and
second, some strategic element of coercion, such as a standing army of
superior military capability. Rulers will then be able to deploy their
own tribute gatherers without need of assistance from local power
holders. They will be able to loosen the grip of local overlords over
resources and hence over the primary producers of surplus, and render
the overlords dependent on revenues tendered by the rulers. If the
rulers are successful in this, they can also induce the local overlords
to fight among themselves for privileged positions at the source of
revenue. Such rulers will also be able to curtail the power of traders,
keeping them from access to the primary producers in the countryside and
preventing them from financing potentially rebellious overlords on their
own behalf. Finally, such a strong central power will be able to place
limits on translocal "grass-roots" organization, be they guilds,
estates, leagues, or religious sects. At the same time, strong central
rule often finds support among surplus-producing peasantries, since
central rulers and peasants are linked by a common antagonism against
power-holding and surplus-taking intermediaries.

   Conversely, the central power will be weak and local power holders
strong where strategic elements of production as well as means of
coercion are in the hands of local surplus takers. Under such conditions
local figures can intercept the flow of tribute to the center,
strengthen their grip over land and the population working it, and enter
into local or regional alliances on their own. Such local alliances,
however, are frequently directed not only against the center but also
against members of their own class, with the result that factional
struggles will ramify throughout the countryside, thus weakening their
class position. Factional struggles, in turn, may allow the elite at the
center to survive by stratagems of divide-and-rule. Paradoxically,
internecine faction fights also weaken the position of the primary
producers, since in the absence of strong central control they must seek
protectors against unrest and predation.

   In broad terms, the two situations we have depicted correspond to the
Marxian concepts of the “Asiatic mode of production” and the “feudal
mode of production." These are usually treated as enduring and
unchanging opposites. One term is usually ascribed to Europe, the other
to Asia. The preceding exposition should make clear, however, that we
are dealing rather with variable outcomes of the competition between
classes of nonproducers for power at the top. To the extent that these
variable outcomes are all anchored in mechanisms exerting "other than
economic pressure," they exhibit a family resemblance to each other
(Vasiliev and Stuchevskii 1967; T?pfer 1967). This resemblance is best
covered by a common term for this mode—tributary mode of production—
used by Samir Amin (1973b).

   Reification of "feudalism" into a separate mode of production merely
converts a short period of European history into a type case against
which all other “feudal —like" phenomena must be measured. The concept
of the Asiatic mode of production, in which a centralized state
bureaucracy dominates unchanging village communities of hapless
peasants, similarly suffers from an ahistorical and ideological reading
of Asian history. It has long been customary in the West to counterpose
Western freedom with Eastern despotism, whether this was done by
Herodotus with reference to the Greek city-states in their struggles
with Persia, or by Montaigne and Voltaire counterposing societies based
on the social contract with societies characterized by multitudes
groveling under despotic rule. Our portrayal should permit us, rather,
to specify the politically relevant variables that distinguish one
tributary situation from another. Thus China, with a strongly
concentrated hydraulic component, clearly represents a set of tributary
relationships different from those in India, with its reliance on
dispersed "tank" irrigation, or in Iran, with its irrigation by means of
underground wells and canals.

82 CONNECTIONS

Moreover, strongly centralized "Asiatic" states frequently break down
into political oligopolies resembling feudalism; and more feudal,
dispersed controls by local power holders yield to more centralized and
concentrated power over time. To reify the weak phases of the Sas-
sanian, Byzantine, or T’ang Chinese states into a feudal—like mode of
production, and the strong phases of these same states into an Asiatic
mode, wrongly separates into two different modes of production
oscillations within the continuum of a single mode.

   If variation within the tributary mode depends on the organization of
power in particular states, the operation of the mode is at least in
part determined by whether that state is weak or strong in relation to
other polities. Shifts of power within the states of North Africa and of
western, central, and eastern Asia, for example, were intimately
connected with the military and political expansion and contraction of
pastoral- nomadic populations, and with the widening and narrowing of
surplus transfer through overland trade. If it is true that
noncapitalist, class- dependent modes utilize "other than economic
means" for the extraction of surplus, it follows that successful surplus
extraction cannot be understood in terms of an isolated society alone;
rather, it is a function of the changing organization of the wider field
of power within which the particular tributary constellation is located.

   Historical societies predicated upon the tributary mode may thus tend
toward centralization or fragmentation, or oscillate between these two
poles. They also exhibit variation in the ways tribute is gathered up,
circulated, and distributed. Only in the rarest cases, where a surplus
taker and his retinue consume all the surplus obtained in situ, is there
no role for processes whereby surpluses are circulated either socially
or geographically. Similarly rare are cases where all surpluses are
siphoned upwards and redistributed downward through the echelons of a
hierarchically organized elite without the participation of commercial
intermediaries or merchants. The Andean Inca polity appears to have
approximated this form most closely, but even there some evidence exists
for the operation of merchants in restricted areas of the Peruvian and
Ecuadorian coasts. Much more frequently, surpluses are transferred and
exchanged through the transactions of commercial intermediaries.

Civilizations

The larger social fields constituted by the political and commercial
interaction of tributary societies had their cultural counterparts in
"civilizations"—cultural interaction zones pivoted upon a hegemonic
tributary society central to each zone. Such hegemony usually involves
the development of an ideological model by a successful centralizing
elite of surplus takers, which is replicated by other elites within the
wider political-economic orbit of interaction. Although one model may
become dominant within a given orbit, as did the Confucian model carried
by the Chinese scholar-gentry, the civilizational orbit is also an arena
in which a number of models coexist or compete within a multiple array
of symbols, which find their differential referents in the shifting
relationships among the tributary societies comprising the orbit.

   A hallmark of these models is that they not only underline the status
of the surplus takers and the social distance separating them from other
people, but they also claim supernatural origins and validation. The
Chinese emperor was the holder of the mandate of Heaven, ensuring the
balance of Heaven and Earth; the Confucian sash-bearing scholars
activated that mandate by enacting the proper hierarchical
relationships. The kraton, or palace, of the Southeast Asian ruler was
more than the center of government; it was also the site of religious
ritual carried on by the king-god and his noble entourage. The Islamic
caliph is emir el-mominin, the Commander of the Faithful, the guardian
of the law,'and the one who "orders Good and prohibits Evil" (Koran III:
106). Among the Shona the ancestral spirits of the royal clan of the
Nembire link the clan with god, mwari. Elsewhere the relation of
superordinate power to the supernaturally instituted order is less
direct, and it may be mediated through priests. The Hindu raja follows
aria, the principle of self-interest and utility, but he requires the
services of the Brahmin to institute dharma, the principle of proper
supernatural order. In Christendom, the king is ruler by divine right,
but he shares rule with the other Coordinate Power, the Church. Whether
monolithic or bifurcate, domination is in all these cases inscribed into
the structure of the universe.

   These ideological models paralleling the tributary mode have certain
common characteristics. Typically they show a hierarchical
representation of the cosmos, in which the dominant supernatural order,
working through the major holders of power, encompasses and subjects
humanity. At the same time, the ideological model displaces the real
relation between power-wielding surplus takers and dominated producers
onto the imagined relation between superior deity and inferior "subject"
(see Feuchtwang 1975). The problem of public power is thus transformed
into a problem of private morality, and the "subject" is invited to win
merit by maintaining order through the regulation of his own conduct.
The displacement also embodies a contradiction. If public power falters
and justice is not done, the ideological ties linking subject and
supernatural are also called into question. The rulers lose legitimacy;
the mandate of Heaven may pass to alternate contenders, or people may
begin to assert the claims of their segmental morality against the
official apparatus of mediation. Yet the arguments proffered in support
of these claims will center upon the nature of the imaginary tie between
subject and supernatural, not upon the nature of domination anchored in
"other than economic means."

Mercantile Wealth

If the tributary mode points to key relationships through which
surpluses are extracted, one must also ask how these surpluses are
distributed after extraction. In nearly all instances some part of the
surplus is placed into circulation and exchanged. Long before 1400
merchants were transferring commodities over wide areas by caravan and
sailing ship, reaping profits from their sale and accumulating great
stocks of wealth. Especially where tributary societies existed in a
wider field created by competition or symbiosis among contending
polities, longdistance trade in elite goods or luxuries was a frequent
and highly developed phenomenon. Such goods embodied the ideological
models through which superiority was claimed, and therefore they had an
important political referent. As Jane Schneider has phrased it:

The relationship of trade to social stratification was not just a matter
of an elevated group distinguishing itself through the careful
application of sumptuary laws and a monopoly of symbols of status; it
further involved the direct and self-conscious manipulation of various
semiperipheral and middle level groups through patronage, bestowals, and
the calculated distribution of exotic and valued goods. [1977: 23]

Yet this trade in luxury goods often went hand in hand with
long-distance transactions in bulky staples, especially where access to
waterways lowered the energy costs of transport, as in the areas of the
Mediterranean, the Black Sea, the Indian Ocean, and the China seas. When
the European sea traders intruded into other continents, therefore, they
often found long-standing networks of commercial relationships that
involved principles and operations with which they were wholly familiar.

   If tributary relationships and mercantile activity have long existed
side by side, often to their mutual benefit, such mutualism also
entailed conflicts. A merchant is a specialist in exchange, buying and
selling goods to obtain a profit. To increase profits merchants strive
to enlarge the sphere of exchange, drawing subsistence or prestige goods
produced within the kin-ordered or tributary mode into the channels of
commodity exchange, the market. This transformation of use values into
commodities, goods produced for exchange, is not neutral in its
consequences. It can seriously weaken tributary power if it
commercializes the goods and services upon which that power rests.
Granted too much latitude, it can render whole classes of tributary
overlords dependent upon trade, and reshuffle social priorities to favor
merchants over political or military chieftains. Thus, societies
predicated on the tributary mode not only gave impetus to commerce but
also repeatedly curtailed it when it grew too strong. Depending on time
and circumstance, they have taught merchants to “keep their proper
place" by subjecting them to political supervision or to enforced
partnerships with overlords; by confiscating their assets, instituting
special levies, or exacting high "protection" rents; by denigrating
merchant status socially, supporting campaigns against commerce as
sinful or evil, or even delegating mercantile activity to despised and
powerless out-groups. The position of merchants is thus always defined
politically as well as economically, and is always dependent on the
power and interests of other social classes.

   While defensive mechanisms were invoked whenever tributary power felt
threatened by mercantile encroachment, it seems that the European
polities that developed after a.d. 1000 granted merchants greater
independence and privileges than did most other political systems. This
may have been due to the very backwardness of the peripheral European
peninsula, as compared to the stronger, wealthier, and more centralized
tributary structures of the Middle East and the Orient. Sovereigns
striving to consolidate power in the European core regions often needed
the aid of merchants to gain access to funds, and they frequently lent
support to merchant groups in order to check the demands of rival power
seekers. Given the political fragmentation of the European periphery,
moreover, merchants were better able to resist political and social
pressures, through the creation of their own wide- ranging networks of
trade and finance.

   The European merchants also enjoyed locational and technological
advantages over merchants on other continents. Europe's proximity to the
sea permitted an early growth of river and ocean shipping. Water
transport not only entailed lower energy costs than transportation
overland; it also permitted a closer integration of local and translocal
commerce, and avoided the heavy protection costs that burdened the
transcontinental caravan trade. An expanding orbit of commercial
transactions deployed over a widening grid of transportation, in turn,
speeded up the turnover time of money-begetting money, allowing a given
sum to earn repeated profits.

   Some scholars have seen in these medieval European merchants the
direct ancestors of capitalism. In this view the change from merchant
wealth to capital is continuous, linear, and quantitative; the
development of capitalism is thus envisioned merely as an expansion of
processes already at work in the tributary mode. This is essentially the
position taken by Weber, Wallerstein, and Frank. If, however, the change
from merchant wealth to capital is seen as entailing not merely
quantitative growth but rather a major alteration in the determinant
processes, then capitalism appears as a qualitatively new phenomenon, a
new mode of mobilizing social labor in the transformation of nature.
That was the position taken by Marx. From this viewpoint the history of
money-begetting money was but "the prehistory of capital." Mercantile
wealth did not function as capital as long as production was dominated
by either kin-ordered or tributary relations. What was not consumed by
producers or tribute takers might be taken to market and exchanged for
surplus products elsewhere, allowing the merchants to feed off the price
differentials obtained in the carrying trade.

   The growth of trade after A.D. 1400 greatly enlarged the scale of the
market, but it did not automatically lead to the installation of the
capitalist mode. The tributary mode remained dominant until the
capitalist mode unfolded and began to threaten it from within in the
course of the eighteenth century. During this long period, tributary
surpluses continued to be the mainstay of a class of overlords, together
with their retinues and servants. Tribute also continued to furnish the
sinews of the state: it paid for its armies and navies, supplied its
quartermaster corps, and remunerated its officials. The continued
extraction of tribute thus set the terms under which mercantile activity
could operate and thrive. Yet, by dint of its very success, mercantile
wealth began to multiply the channels of commodity exchange, rendering
tribute takers increasingly dependent upon it. It generated ever larger
amounts of money-begetting money and invested that wealth so as to
increase the flow of commodities to the market. In the process it drew
producers in different parts of the world into a common web of
exchanges, adjusting existing relations of production to embrace
commodity exchange, or subsidizing coercive arrangements for the
production of commodities.

   The European merchants engaged in overseas operations brought
surpluses into mercantile exchange in a number of different ways.
Sometimes they favored one alternative to the exclusion of the others;
under certain circumstances they utilized all of them together. None of
these ways of turning goods into commodities was new; all had analogues
in other tributary systems. They grew directly out of the operations of
the tributary mode and long remained intertwined with it.

   One way involved the sale of tributary surpluses. Merchants bought
stocks of surplus from tributary overlords and state agencies, and
supplied goods in return. Their commodities underwrote the life-style of
the tributary class; their goods supplied the armies of the state and
stocked its magazines. On occasion the merchants also participated in
booty taking and plunder themselves, and then sold the spoils.

   A second way in which merchants drew goods into the circuits of trade
was to open exchanges with primary gatherers and producers. The
merchants offered goods that were cheap for them yet desirable to the
natives, in return for articles of little value to the producers yet
capable of fetching high prices in distant markets. In the course of
such exchanges, the native producers received use values that they
treasured. If pursued over time, however, such exchanges rendered the
target populations dependent upon the merchant. Intensified production
of the strategic valuable usually entailed diminution or abandonment of
other important economic activities. As producers grew more specialized
in furnishing one kind of object, they came to rely increasingly upon
the merchant for tools, household articles, prestige goods, and even
food. Where the producers proved reluctant to enter or to continue the
exchange, merchants sometimes had recourse to forcible sales of
commodities, which the producers were then obligated to repay. At other
times merchants smoothed the course of exchange with liquor or tobacco,
which rendered the producer somatically dependent on the donor, thus
guaranteeing the resumption of exchange. In time, such unequal exchange,
now extended temporally through a system of advances, could produce a
kind of peonage in which the primary producer was constrained by his
needs to commit himself to production of the same valuable in the
future.

   A similar process of increasing specialization and dependence marked
the development of "putting-out” systems under mercantile control. Such
systems usually originated with the production of specialized
commodities by households, which then sold their product to merchants
for resale. Gradually, however, the merchants extended their control
over the labor process by advancing tools or raw materials, receiving
the finished product in repayment for the factors of production
advanced.

   Both commodity peonage and putting-out bordered on capitalism, but
they were not yet governed by capitalist relations. Both forms of
employing labor developed in mercantile terms, with the merchant as
agent of exchange advancing subsistence and manufactured goods and
receiving specialized commodities. By means of advances the merchant
could develop a long-term lien on labor, be it the labor of a
kin-ordered group or of a craft shop operating on the edges of a
tributary domain. He might even take the further step of advancing tools
and raw materials— powder, shot, and traps, or looms and textile
fibers—and thus outfit that labor with complex tools. Such a merchant,
however, did not yet buy labor power in a market in which workers
compete for available jobs, and he did not yet control the actual labor
process. Surplus was not extracted as surplus value but through unequal
exchange within the framework of monopolistic and quasi-tributary
relationships. The process of production was still governed from the
demand end, from the requirements of merchants exchanging in a market,
rather than flowing from the orchestration of labor power and machines
within the process of production itself. As long as this was the case,
merchants also remained limited in their ability to control the
productive process and to alter it in the face of new demands.

   A third way in which merchants obtained surpluses for exchange was to
expand slavery. Slave labor has never constituted a major independent
mode of production, but it has played a subsidiary role in providing
labor under all modes—kin-ordered, tributary, and capitalist. Slavery
has been employed repeatedly in large-scale agricultural and mineral
production, where output is dependent on a maximization of labor, with
minimal deployment of tools and skills. The use of slaves in such
production has a continuous history in Europe since classical antiquity,
and the option of using slaves to raise commodities for exchange was
thus available from the beginnings of the European expansion overseas.
The later American growth of slavery represents but an overseas
reincarnation of a process already going on in Crete, Sicily, Madeira,
the Azores, the Canaries, and the islands of the Gulf of Guinea.

88 CONNECTIONS

   As in the systems of advances initiated with primary producers and
processors, slavery too required a heavy infusion of commodities to set
it in motion. Merchants advanced commodities to African suppliers of
slaves, thus placing slaves into the circuits of exchange as one kind of
commodity among others. Merchants also advanced money and commodities to
planters who purchased slaves for work on plantations. As a system of
coerced labor, slavery entailed inherent costs, frequently covered
through mercantile advances. Slaves had to be broken in and supervised;
high productivity entailed high costs of coercion. Since most slave
populations did not reproduce, new slaves had constantly to be acquired
and paid for. Slaves had to be maintained by their owners, and the costs
ate into plantation profits. If the slaves were allowed to supply their
own needs on plantation "provision grounds," their increased autonomy
decreased owner control. Effective control thus often depended on the
importation of foodstuffs and other requisites. Merchants were not the
only participants in the system; planters often brought with them
inherited tributary wealth and reinvested profits in their own
plantations. Yet merchants played an ever-expanding role in financing
slavery, in furnishing needed commodities, in providing product markets,
and in repatriating profits to the home country.

   In the process of European expansion, mercantile wealth pioneered
routes of circulation and opened up channels of exchange. Its source of
gain lay in the maintenance of price differentials—enabling it to buy
cheap and sell dear—and it defended itself against price leveling
through alliances with any power that could impede the development of a
"free" market. It relied on political and military power to seize zones
of supply, to gain privileged access to suppliers, to bar interloping
competitors in trade, and to ensure maximal profits through monopolistic
controls over sales. Aiming for power over persons in order to increase
and to diversify output, it did not create a labor market. Thus,
mercantile wealth did not alter the mode of mobilizing social labor and
remained wedded to the tributary mode. That dependence would not be
severed until new political and economic circumstances promoted the rise
of industrial capitalism.

The Kin-Ordered Mode of Production

If the areas of intensive agricultural production in 1400 were occupied
by societies predicated on the tributary mode, on the peripheries of
these areas all around the world were social groups organized
differently. Such populations are usually called "primitive" in the
anthropological literature. The term is misleading if it leads one to
think of Iroquois or Crow or Lunda as one's "contemporary ancestors," or
as people who have not yet aspired to the heights of civilization. It is
also analytically problematical, since it refers to a beginning which it
does nothing to portray. Claude Meillassoux has rightly argued that to
characterize such populations by an absence of features, calling them
"classless,” "acephalous," or “stateless” tells us nothing about what
they are.

   It is common to describe these populations as bound together by
"kinship,” but less common to inquire into what kinship is. Empirically,
populations vary in the extent and intensity of their kinship ties. Some
people have "a lot of kinship," others much less. Coresidence is often
more significant than genealogy; many local groups include people who
are relatives but also others who are not. Tasks may be carried out by
teams of nonrelatives, and products of the hunt or of other activities
may be shared out among nonkin as well as kinfolk. Indeed, many
anthropologists have seen residence as more critical than kinship in
understanding how people organize themselves. Thus, both Kroeber and
Titiev have argued that coresidence underlay the formation of lineages
(Kroeber 1952: 210; Titiev 1943). Leach, similarly, has enjoined
anthropologists to "start from a concrete reality—a local group of
people—rather than from an abstract reality—such as the concept of
lineage or the notion of kinship system" (1961: 104). Even Meyer Fortes,
whose major contribution lies in the analysis of wider kinship systems
and their jural and political implications, has noted:

A lineage cannot easily act as a corporate group if its members can
never get together for the conduct of their affairs. It is not
surprising therefore to find lineage in African societies is generally
locally anchored, but is is not necessarily territorially compact or
exclusive. A compact nucleus may be enough to act as the local center
for a group that is widely dispersed. [1953:36]

   Particular populations also vary greatly in how far they "extend"
patterns of kinship found within familial entities to more distantly
related families. They differ, further, in the degree to which the
extended or replicated patterns of familial kinship are made to bear the
burden of jural and political obligations among groups. In other words,
kinship rules may govern filiation (ties between individual parents and
offspring) and marriage (ties between particular spouses), but little
more. Such rules, moreover, may furnish people with only a vocabulary of
kinship "names," without at the same time involving them in jural and
political obligations. Among other populations, however, kinship looms
large. Patterns of kinship may be used to expand the scope of social and
ideological linkages, and such linkages may become major operative
factors in the jural and political realm.

   Kinship can thus operate at two levels, that of the family or the
domestic group and that of the political order. Yet such statements
still suggest what kinship does and not what kinship is. Indeed, if we
cannot define kinship, by the same token we cannot define nonkinship. It
may come as something of a surprise to the nonanthropological reader
that anthropologists by no means agree about what kinship is. They
divide.

90 CONNECTIONS

generally, into three groups with respect to this issue. First, there
are those analysts who assume that the facts of kinship are an outgrowth
of human biology. Human beings are sexually dimorphous and engage in
sexual relations; as a result, human females bear offspring. The
biological facts of sex relations and procreation are seen as basic to
the human institutions of marriage and descent. In this view kinship is
a matter of tracing pedigrees. Second, taking a stand against this
position, other anthropologists have argued that kinship is not merely a
matter of the social control of sex and procreation, but involves
cultural definitions of the marriage bond and cultural constructs that
allow offspring to be allocated to parental consorts. In this view
kinship is a distinctive cultural domain with its own content, which
consists of symbolic constructs of descent and affinity. These symbols
will vary from culture to culture. Finally, there are anthropologists
who argue from a third position, which holds that kinship is merely an
"idiom" in which economic, social, political, and ritual relations are
discussed. In this perspective kinship is a metaphor; its real content
lies elsewhere. The facts of kinship are explained when the relations it
serves to "express" are explained.

   Those anthropologists who see kinship as the social regulation of
biology (sex and procreation) put their emphasis on the way in which
rights and obligations, including rights to resources and support, are
shared out among biologically produced actors. In their view kinship
forms or patterns are cultural epiphenomena serving the task of such
allocation. Generally speaking, their concept of kinship has been
primarily jural: kinship serves to assign people born into the group to
jural positions. The cultural symbolists, in contrast, see kinship as a
domain of symbolic constructs connected with other symbolic constructs
of the culture. The function of kinship constructs is seen as moral, as
a contribution to the ideological ordering of the symbolic universe of
the culture bearers. In practice, the symbolists view the elementary
family as a kind of storehouse of symbols of the culture and trust that
inquiry into domains other than the familial will reveal identical or
parallel symbolic constructs (see Schneider 1972).

   In a larger sense these two positions are complementary. Given that
people—unlike snapping turtles—are not hatched from eggs, deposited in a
safe spot, and then abandoned, but are born and socialized through the
operations of the incest taboo, kinship names and categories are
symbolic constructions ab ovo. The human institution of the incest taboo
depends for its very operation upon a differentiation between those
people with whom we share some kind of substance, symbolized by a
commonality of blood or bone, with whom we may not mate, and those
people with whom we can mate, who do not share our symbolic substantial
heritage. Although explanations for the origins of the incest taboo are
still incomplete, Claude Lévi-Strauss has rightly made it the point of
departure of his study of kinship. Just as the initial categories of
kinship set up by the taboo are symbolic constructs, so are all the
other basic kinship categories, such as gender, absolute and relative
age, descent, and affinity. Since symbolism thus enters into the very
definition of human sociality, human beings everywhere have also brought
these basic constructs of human "nature" into connection with their
constructs of encompassing nature and supernature. (In view of this, the
third position in kinship studies sketched above, which denies all but
metaphorical status to kinship symbols, appears unsatisfactory,
short-circuiting inquiry into phenomena with which it does not want to
deal.)

   It is possible to combine these two approaches into an operational
view of kinship that allows us to see kinship in the context of
political economy. Kinship can then be understood as a way of committing
social labor to the transformation of nature through appeals to
filiation and marriage, and to consanguinity and affinity. Put simply,
through kinship social labor is "locked up," or "embedded," in
particular relations between people. This labor can be mobilized only
through access to people, such access being defined symbolically. What
is done unlocks social labor; how it is done involves symbolic
definitions of kinsmen and affines. Kinship thus involves (a) symbolic
constructs ('filiation/marriage; consanguinity/affinity') that (b)
continually place actors, born and recruited, (c) into social relations
with one another. These social relations (d) permit people in variable
ways to call on the share of social labor carried by each, in order to
(e) effect the necessary transformations of nature.

   If kinship is a particular way of establishing rights in people and
thus laying claim to shares of social labor, it is also true that the
ways in which such rights and claims are established vary widely among
different culture-bearing populations. Anthropologists have come to
recognize that kinship works in basically different ways in two kinds of
situations, those in which resources are widely available and open to
anyone with the ability to obtain them, and those situations in which
access to resources is restricted and available only to claimants with a
"kinship license." In the first case, the ties of kinship grow out of
the give-and- take of everyday life and link people who are in habitual
interaction with one another. In the second case, the circle of kinship
is drawn tightly around the resource base by means of stringent
definitions of group membership.

   This contrast defines two variants of the kin-ordered mode, for
social labor is deployed differently in the two. The first variant is
best exemplified in the anthropological literature by food-collecting
"bands." Such populations do not transform nature, but gather up and
concentrate for human use resources naturally available in the
environment. The natural environment is not a means for humanly
controlled organic transformations, as in cultivation or herding; it is
"the object of labor" but not its "instrument" (Marx, Cap. I, 1977:
284-285). Under such circumstances the aggregation or dispersion of
people, each embodying a share of social labor, follows ecological
constraints and opportunities. Upper limits to pooled social labor are
set by the interaction of the technology with the local environment, as
well as by the group's ability to manage conflict through consensus
formation and informal sanctions. Kinship then works primarily to create
relations among persons— partnerships among shareholders jn social
labor—through marriage and filiation. Such partnerships extend in
reticulate fashion from particular participants to others. Having no
defined boundary, they can attach newcomers or exclude them, as the
interests of the interlinked partners permit or require.

   The deployment of social labor works differently in the second
variant of the kin-ordered mode. Where nature is subject to
transformation through social labor, the environment itself becomes a
means of production, an instrument on which labor is expended. A segment
of nature is transformed by a set of people—equipped with tools,
organization, and ideas—so as to produce crops or livestock. In such a
society, social labor is distributed in social clusters that expend
labor cumulatively and transgenerationally upon a particular segment of
the environment, accumulating at the same time a transgenerational
corpus of claims and counterclaims to social labor. Where conditions
tend toward ecological closure, relations among these clusters need to
be more closely defined and circumscribed, and the clusters readily
become exclusive groups.

   Under these conditions the idiom of filiation and marriage is used to
construct transgenerational pedigrees, real or fictitious. These serve
to include or exclude people who can claim rights to social labor on the
basis of privileged membership.

   Such groups are typically equipped with mythical charters defining
culturally selected and certified lines of kin connection. These
charters fulfill a number of functions. First, they allow groups to
claim privileges on the basis of kinship. Second, they serve to permit
or deny people access to strategic resources. Third, they organize the
exchange of persons between pedigreed groups through their definition of
ties of affinity; marriage, instead of being a relationship between
bride and groom and their immediate relatives only, becomes a tie of
political alliance between groups. And fourth, they allocate managerial
functions to particular positions within the genealogy, thus
distributing them unevenly over the political and jural field—whether
this be as elders over juniors, as seniors over cadet lines, or as lines
of higher over lower rank. In this process kinship on the
jural-political level subsumes and organizes kinship on the
familial-domestic level, making interpersonal relations subject to
charters for categorical inclusion or exclusion.

   The “extension" of kinship is therefore not the same as kinship on
the level of filiation and marriage; it is concerned with jural
allocation of rights and claims, and hence with political relations
between people. On the level of filiation and marriage, kinship sets up
individuated linkages among shareholders in social labor; extended
kinship, in contrast, organizes social labor into labor pools and places
controls over the transfer of labor from one pool to another.

   The persistence of the idiom of kinship in the jural-political realm,
however, poses a problem. Kinship nomenclature always involves a
symbolic process. In the escalation of kinship from a set of
interpersonal relations to the political order, kinship becomes a
governing ideological element in the allocation of political power. But
why should the language of kinship persist in this different setting?
Meyer Fortes is one of the few to have dealt with this question.

Why descent rather than locality or some other principle forms the basis
of these corporate groups is a question that needs more study. It will
be remembered that Radcliffe-Brown [1935] related succession rules to
the need for unequivocal discrimination of rights in rem and personam.
Perhaps it is most closely connected with the fact that rights over the
reproductive powers of women are easily regulated by a descent group
system. But I believe that something deeper than this is involved; for
in a homogeneous society there is nothing which could so precisely and
incontrovertibly fix one's place in society as parentage. [1953: 30]

   While this explanation is not wholly satisfactory. Fortes does point
to two major sources of power in the kin-ordered mode: control over the
reproductive powers of women, and parentage. Both operate
transgenerationally; both allocate people differentially to positions of
power and influence. The first grants rights over the social labor
embodied in females, offspring, and affines; the second defines not only
descent but also collaterality—the genealogical range of mobilizable
allies. The terminology of marriage and filiation is thus used to convey
information about differential capacities to mobilize labor for work and
support— information that is, about the shifting distribution of social
labor among contending groups.

   Where the symbolic constructs of kinship are thus extended, the
relations among the bearers of social labor in competition for resources
are structured monopolistically or oligopolistically, with social groups
vying for precedence and dominance. At the same time, the tendency to
maximize external oppositions vis-à-vis other groups goes hand in hand
with a multiplication of internal oppositions. First, there are
oppositions between men and women. Some complementary equilibrium
between gender roles can perhaps be maintained as long as kinship is but
one ordering element among others in a situation of open resources. With
the emergence of pedigreed groups into the political field, however,
affinal relations become political relations, and women lose status in
relation to men as they become tokens of alliance. There is also the
opposition of elders and juniors, with elders in characteristic
positions of managerial command inside and outside the group. Some
juniors may come to be seniors and take their place; but others will
never succeed to any position of importance. We know that this
opposition can break out into open conflict. We shall see, for example,
rebellion of “boys" against their elders in the expansion of horse
pastoralism on the Great Plains (chapter 6) and in the formation of
slave-raiding groups in Angola (chapter 7).

   Finally, internal ranking creates oppositions between original
settlers and newcomers, between senior and junior lines of descent from
the same ancestor, and between lines rising to prominence and those in a
state of decline. Oscillations of rise and decline may be due to
demographic ascendancy or failure; to successful or unsuccessful
management of alliances, people, or resources; to success or failure in
war. Leaders effective in contracting politically strategic marriages or
in the judicious redistribution of subsistence and luxury goods to
followers gain at the expense of less apt contenders. With the passage
of time, such gains can be translated into genealogical claims, and
pedigrees modified to exhibit the change.

   The fact that leaders can rise to prominence in this way constitutes
one of the Achilles' heels of the kinship mode, one of its diagnostic
points of stress. For as a chief or other leader draws a following
through judicious management of alliances and redistributive action, he
reaches a limit that can only be surpassed by breaking through the
bounds of the kinship order. He can manipulate bridewealth to acquire
women who will produce offspring owing loyalty primarily to him; he can
invite outsiders to settle in his group's domain, in the hope of
attracting a personal following; he can acquire pawns and slaves to
labor under his personal control. Yet as long as such strategies can be
checked by his kinsmen and their allies, his radius of action is
curtailed. One way in which a chief may try to expand his grasp on
surpluses is by making war. Yet the fruits of warfare remain limited,
since booty may be only occasional and impermanent, and it must be
shared with others. To break through the limitations of the kin order, a
chief must gain independent access to reliable and renewable resources
of his own.

   While kin ordering thus sets upper limits to internal
differentiation, under conditions of closed resources it appears more
likely to produce inequalities than an egalitarian distribution of life
chances. Distinctions of gender, age, and prescriptive and acquired
power work so as to create oppositions that disrupt the kinship order
from within. In addition, disruptions are caused by conflicts between
individuals or groups, by the assertion of conflicting claims over
people on the part of different kinsmen, and by the nonperformance of
normative kinship obligations among close or extended kin. All these
forces and factors threaten the continuance of the kinship order. What,
then, prevents its disintegration? How do kin-ordered units cohere at
all over time?

   The ability of the kin-ordered mode to regenerate itself may lie in
the absence of any mechanism that can aggregate or mobilize social labor
apart from the particular relations set up by kinship. The oppositions
as they are normally played out are particulate, the conjunction of a
particular elder with a particular junior of a particular lineage at a
particular time and place, and not the general opposition of elder and
junior as classes. In everyday life the kin-ordered mode contains its
oppositions by particularizing tensions and conflicts.

   In myth and ritual, however, the very oppositions fraught with danger
in everyday life are dramatized on the level of universality. Whereas in
everyday life generality is dissolved into particularities, in myth and
ritual particularities are dissolved into generalities, conveying
messages about the nature of the universe. Explanations, if offered,
take the form of universalized verities. One may speculate that such
projection of particular conflicts upon the screen of universal mythic
events and meanings can serve to defuse those conflicts. The
effectiveness of such a mechanism would seem to depend on the degree to
which real conflicts can be kept particularized and segmented. A
continuous accumulation of conflicts of the same kind, in the same
direction, may place the myth-ritual system under cumulative stress and
diminish its efficacy.

   Conflicts within and between kin-ordered units may also be dampened
by a fear of the high cost of massing support. Seeking allies means
calling in past promises of aid and pledging support to allies in the
future. Any escalation of conflict thus threatens to extend the conflict
temporally as well as spatially. Nevertheless, when the stakes are high
enough, escalation may well become desirable, with an attendant increase
in gift giving and in exchanges of women to cement alliances. The story
of the North American fur trade can be read as the gradual extension of
supportive alliances among “English Indians" against “French Indians."
Such alliances may also be stabilized and reinforced through the
elaboration of myth and ritual, as in the case of the Iroquois league,
which attempted to curb internal conflicts by directing energies outward
against common enemies.

   Yet conflict resolution in the kin-ordered mode encounters an
ultimate limit in the structural problems of the mode itself. Cumulative
conflict often exceeds the capacity of kin-based mechanisms to cope with
them. Groups will then break up and fission. Such occurrences are not
only frequent but are, in fact, important sources of change. Because we
have tended to conceptualize societies as if they existed in a timeless
ethnographic present and in isolation from one another, we have been
misled into seeing the breakup and fission of kin-ordered groups as
merely replicating the ordering of the parent group. In reality,
fissioning groups can rarely escape into unoccupied terrain to avoid
competitors, and they are likely to experience pressures from societies
in the tributary and capitalist modes. Replication is thus probably
exceptional. It is more likely that fissioning groups began to change as
soon as they encountered limits to free movement.

   Social clusters built up on kinship, therefore, are in no way exempt
from internal differentiation and external pressures for change.
Differential allocation of shares of social labor can favor the
emergence of influential managers; at the same time, contact with other
groups can lend importance to persons able to deal with differences of
interest and with possible conflict. These tendencies toward
inequalities in function are greatly enhanced when kin-ordered groups
enter into relationships with tributary or capitalist societies. Such
relationships afford opportunities for the seizure and transfer of
surpluses beyond those available within the kin-ordered mode. Chiefs can
then employ these external resources to immobilize the workings of the
kinship order. This is why chiefs have proved to be notorious
collaborators of European fur traders and slave hunters on two
continents. Connection with the Europeans offered chiefs access to arms
and valuables, and hence to a following outside of kinship and
unencumbered by it.

The Problem of Chiefdoms

The term chief has come into common parlance to denote the recognized
leader or head (from the Latin caput) of a socially organized
population. In practice, the term was usually bestowed by Europeans upon
any native person of influence who was in a position to forward or to
hinder their interests. As such, references to chiefs cover different
kinds of recruitment and degrees of authority, and are of little
analytic utility. The actual ability of any such personage to command
social labor and to influence the development of intergroup relations
depends upon his assets in the game of power; the size and strength of
the population under his jurisdiction; the nature of the resources held
by that population and their importance to outsiders; and his war-making
potential, his capacity both to defend resources and to interfere with
the operations of opponents. A Northwest Coast tais had less potential
power than a Zulu induna, an induna less than a Mongol khan. These
differences also affected the ability of a chief to break through the
limitations of the kin-ordered mode of production and to become a
partner in tributary or capitalist relations.

   Such variation among "chiefs" throws some light on the longstanding
anthropological problem of "the chiefdom." In efforts to establish an
evolutionary ordering of cultures, the chiefdom was conceptualized as a
type of society intermediate between kin-ordered tribes and
class-divided states. In this view of the chiefdom, status and power are
allocated by differential rank within a common genealogy, yet without
entailing differential access to the means of production. The chief and
his high-ranking lineage are seen as acting on behalf of a social whole
in coordinating specialized activities, planning and supervising public
works, managing redistribution, and leading in war. Chiefdoms are thus
"redistributional societies with a permanent agency of coordination"
(Service 1962: 144). While genealogical rank differentiates people by
the functions they perform, the society as a whole appears to be laced
together through common interests, common descent, and general
redistribution. All are kinsmen, as it were; only some are more so than
others.

   The concept of mode of production, however, shifts attention from the
form and idiom of interaction between high-ranking chiefs and commoners
in a given society to inquire instead into the ways social labor is
deployed. In this perspective the societies classified as chiefdoms
appear to be of two rather different kinds; those based on the kin-
ordered mode, in which the chief and his followers are still embedded in
kinship arrangements and bound by them, and those in which the form and
idiom of kinship may be maintained even as a dominant group transforms
divisions of rank into divisions of class—in fact, using kinship
mechanisms to strengthen its own position. In this second kind of
chiefdom, the chiefly lineage is in fact an incipient class of surplus
takers in the tributary mode.

   The growth of such a class may involve a number of different
processes. Population increase can enhance the relative importance of
the chiefly families. Such growth of the chiefly lineage allows it
"numerous connections of different kinds with other lineages" (Service
1962: 149). The pursuit of affinal strategies requires that the chiefly
lineage concentrate wealth from marriage exchanges in its own hands.
This implies, in turn, control over exchangeable women and the
interdiction of access to elite women by members of the lower ranks.
Such control over women can be expanded downward, so as to widen elite
control over affinal exchanges in general. Affinal strategies,
furthermore, entail strategies of inheritance. Who gets what is
circumscribed by membership in the privileged stratum; goods strategic
in the matrimonial exchanges and in the inherited wealth of the
aristocracy may therefore not pass into general redistribution.

   At the same time, growing chiefly lineages may expand by a "budding
off of families" (Service, 1962: 166), both within the habitual zone of
interaction and beyond it. Such territorial proliferation of
high-ranking personnel may create a plurality of power centers in place
of a single apex of decision making. Members of the chiefly lineage can
become contenders for the chiefship, or create new domains of their own
by separating from the parent body. Competition for power feeds back, in
turn, upon the processes of accumulation and redistribution. Contenders
for power must accumulate adequate "funds of power" and redistribute
them selectively to gain followers, rather than open resources to
general redistribution.

   Seen in this light, therefore, redistribution appears as a set of
strategies in class formation, rather than as a general characteristic
of chiefdoms as “redistributional societies." Polanyi, to whom
anthropology owes the introduction of the concept of redistribution,
allowed us to visualize mechanisms of exchange beyond those covered by
"reciprocity" or "market" exchange. It is, however, necessary to qualify
the concept of redistribution in three ways. First, the different kinds
and spheres of redistribution must be specified. Redistribution through
feasting is not identical with the redistribution of supplies for public
works or warfare, or with the redistribution of specialized resources
through the agency of the chief. Second, it is important to be precise
about what gets redistributed, how much, and—most importantly—to whom.
Feasting with the general participation of all can go hand in hand with
the privileged accumulation of strategic goods by the elite. Banquets
for war veterans can honor the military contribution of the entire army
even as captured people and resources are allocated differentially to
nobles and to commoners. Third, redistribution can also serve to "buy"
allies and to pacify potential rivals by drawing them and their
resources into the hierarchically managed flow of prestations. In this
light, redistribution appears not as a kind of normative altruism
characteristic of a type of society, but rather as a recurrent strategy
in a process of class formation.

   In such chiefdoms of the second kind, therefore, the function of
kinship changes from that of ordering similarly organized groups in
relation to one another to that of drawing a major distinction between
one stratum and another. There is now an aristocracy that utilizes and
exhibits kin-ordered ties as a mark of its distinctiveness and
separateness, leaving to the commoner stratum only residual claims. The
aristocratic class thus constitutes itself by radically altering the
bonds of kinship in order to promote social distance between rulers and
ruled. They may claim differential descent from the gods, or privileged
possession of mana; they may strive to subvert the kin ties of their
subjects through the punishment of adultery and incest (see Cohen,
1969), even while setting themselves off as a separate stratum through
the practice of class endogamy; and they may invoke special rights over
the disposition of war booty, including conquered populations not
included in their charter of kin relationships.

   Aristocracies of the kind just described frequently bud off to
conquer and rule foreign populations. In such fission and spread, the
aristocracy characteristically maintains its separate kinship ties as a
source of class solidarity and as a way of setting itself off from the
body of the ruled. This may conceivably happen peacefully, as it did
when non-Alur ethnic groups invited the members of Alur chiefly
lineages, who were bearers of rainmaking and conflict-resolving powers,
to settle among them as their rulers (Southall, 1953). More frequently,
however, warlike and migratory aristocracies invoke supernatural
entitlements to impose their models of domination upon subject
populations. Examples of such predatory aristocracies are the Toltecs
who spread outward from Tula to the frontiers of Mesoamerica; the Luba
and Lunda elites fanning out from their home in central Africa (see
chapter 7); and the many Mongol, Turkic, and Arab aristocracies that
imposed themselves on agricultural populations along the dry-belt
corridor of the Old World.

   Our discussion should make it clear that the deployment of social
labor has both an economic and a political dimension. The kin-ordered
mode inhibits the institutionalization of political power, resting
essentially upon the management of consensus among clusters of
participants. Moreover, the ties of kinship set limits to the amount of
social labor that can be mobilized for collective purposes. Social labor
can be aggregated through the temporary convergence of many separate
ties, but it is dispersed again when changing conditions require a
rearrangement of commitments. At the same time, the extension and
retraction of kin ties create open and shifting boundaries of such
societies.

   A chief can become a pivot of the power of his kinship group; but if
he is sometimes able to incarnate the kin order, he is also its
prisoner. Chiefs who want to break through the limitations of the kin
order must lay hold of mechanisms that can guarantee them independent
power over resources. Such chiefs must either allocate some of the labor
under their control to another mode, or enter into the relations of that
mode directly, be it as tributary overlords or as participants in
capitalist production. To effect such change requires new political
instruments of domination, whether controlled directly by the chiefs or
applied by others on their behalf. Failing this, the people they strive
to mobilize may well rebel or secede, leaving them as chiefs only “over
the pumpkins."

   In contrast to the kin-ordered mode, both the tributary and the
capitalist modes divide the population under their command into a class
of surplus producers and a class of surplus takers. Both require
mechanisms of domination to ensure that surpluses are transferred on a
predictable basis from one class to the other. Such domination may
involve, at one time or another, a wide panoply of sanctions based on
fear, hope, and charity; but it cannot be secured without the
development of an apparatus of coercion to maintain the basic division
into classes and to defend the resulting structure against external
attack. Both the tributary and the capitalist modes, therefore, are
marked by the development and installation of such an apparatus, namely
the state.

   In the case of the tributary mode, the mode itself is constituted by
the mechanisms of domination that extract tribute from the producers by
"other than economic pressure" (see p. 80). Politics in a tributary
state may affect the concentration and distribution of tribute among
contending categories of surplus takers, but it remains anchored in the
direct extractive relationship, no matter what the organizational form
of the state.

   The capitalist mode, in contrast, appears to be economically
selfregulating. As long as means of production are owned by capitalists
and denied to laborers, the laborers are continuously forced back into
the employment of capitalists after each cycle of production reaches
completion, and the cycle starts anew. Yet the state has a strategic
role both in the genesis of the mode and in its maintenance. To set the
mode in motion it was first necessary to stockpile money-begetting
money, to convert it into capital, and to create a class of laborers
offering their labor power for sale as a commodity. In these twin
processes of "original accumulation," the state played a vital part.
Once the mode was installed, the state had to deploy its power further
to maintain and guarantee the ownership of the means of production by
the capitalist class, at home and abroad, and to support the regimes of
work and labor discipline required by the mode. In addition, the state
had to provide the infrastructure of technical services—such as
transportation and communication—required by the mode. Finally, it fell
to the new state to arbitrate and manage conflicts between competing
cohorts of capitalists within its jurisdiction, and to represent their
interests in the competition between states—by diplomacy when possible,
by war if required.

   The three modes of production I have outlined constitute neither
types into which human societies may be sorted nor stages in cultural
evolution. They are put forth as constructs with which to envisage
certain strategic relationships that shape the terms under which human
lives are conducted. The three modes are instruments for thinking about
the crucial connections built up among the expanding Europeans and the
other inhabitants of the globe, so that we may grasp the consequences of
these connections.

4 Europe, Prelude to Expansion

An observer looking at the world in A.D. 800 would barely have taken
note of the European peninsula. Rome had fallen, and no effective
centralized power had taken its place. Instead, a host of narrow-gauged
tributary domains disputed rights to the shattered Roman inheritance.
The center of political and economic gravity had shifted eastward to the
"new Rome" of Byzantium, and to the Muslim caliphate. Six hundred years
later, in A.D. 1400, an observer would have noted a very different
Europe and a marked change in its relation to neighboring Asia and
Africa. The many petty principalities had fused into a smaller number of
effective polities. These polities were competing successfully with
their neighbors to the south and east and were about to launch major
adventures overseas. What had happened?

   If we want to answer that question, we must consider at least three
interrelated problems. First, there were shifts in long-distance trade,
which changed the position of Europe from that of a dependent fringe of
Asia into a key area of commercial development. What was the nature of
these shifts? Second, the numerous small and scattered tributary
principalities of A.D. 800 had grown into politically and militarily
consolidated kingdoms. What was involved in that consolidation? Finally,
several of the consolidated states sought out new frontiers, in a
collaboration between war-making rulers and the merchant class. What
were the forces driving these states toward expansion, and what was the
nature of the collaboration in each case?

The Shift in Patterns of Long-Distance Trade

  The western Mediterranean region and southwest Asia had longstanding
connections. Periodically the balance of power shifted from the western
sector to its eastern counterpart, and then shifted back again. The
archaeological record supports a picture of Asian preeminence in surplus
production, state formation, craft specialization, city building, and
long-distance commerce. Proliferation of Egyptian and Mesopotamian
development into the Aegean in the second millennium B.C. triggered the
growth of trade with western Europe, which supplied the eastern sector
with needed resources and transferred valued articles to the chieftains
of the West in return. Aegean traders were followed by Phoenicians and
Carthagenians. Then there was a turning of the tide. Greek expansion
opened the doors, in the third century B.C., to “an almost uninterrupted
stream of peoples from southeastern Europe [who] poured into Syria,
Babylonia, and Iran, augmented from Asia Minor and even Syria"
(Ghirshman 1954: 225). Roman expansion followed the same course, turning
Egypt into the granary of Rome.

   Then came the prolonged fall of the Roman Empire. Gradually the
countryside won out over the cities. Economically, the various parts of
the empire grew increasingly self-sufficient after A.D. 100. Food
production could not support the cities, and urban crafts left the towns
to relocate in the hinterland. The remarkable political and legal
structure of Rome, which had “concentrated on organizing overwhelming
power by inexorably exacting order and obedience in a limited sphere of
life" (Deutsch 1954: 10), grew less and less effective. Provincial
armies became nearly autonomous, and the marginal provinces of the
empire gained ascendancy over the imperial center.

   When a minor chieftain, Odoakar the Herulian, delivered the final
blow to a Roman army in the west, Rome “fell," but only in its western
orbit. It survived, indeed, for a thousand years in its eastern
dominions, Byzantium—the new Rome. Byzantium maintained its course on
the grounds staked out by Greek expansion, with Roman institutions and
law, a developed town life, a common religious loyalty to Eastern
Christendom, and gold coinage that remained the envy of the West until
the eleventh century. In the sixth century it also developed a powerful
navy, which sealed off western and southern access to Byzantium and
allowed the state to expand into the borderlands of the Black Sea,
whence it drew ample supplies of wheat, timber, and slaves. It became,
in effect, more a Hellespontine power than a Mediterranean one,
abandoning most of the Mediterranean to other claimants.

   The major part of the Mediterranean region was divided between Islam
and Western Christendom. Islam expanded quickly from its center in the
caravan city of Mecca, and in the course of the seventh century A.D. it
overran North Africa. During the second decade of the eighth century,
Muslim armies occupied most of the Iberian peninsula; in the ninth
century Sicily fell to the Muslims. When the capital of the Islamic
caliphate moved from Damascus to Baghdad in the mid-eighth century,
however, the Islamic center of gravity moved eastward away from the
Mediterranean, in a movement parallel to the eastward shift of
Byzantium. Trade with the Caucasus, Inner Asia, Arabia, India, and China
grew more important than trade connections with the western
Mediterranean. This Mediterranean trade, now marginal, continued to be
carried on by merchants from Syria and—above all—by Jews, such as the
merchants known as Radanites or Al-Radhaniya (perhaps from the Persian
rah dan, meaning "knowing the way"), who connected "the lands of the
Franks" with Egypt, and Egypt with China.

   The economic history of the Muslim world is still poorly known, but
it is possible to outline some of its major aspects. Beginning with the
eighth century, the Islamic countries underwent an agricultural
revolution that entailed changes in plants and plant strains, in farming
practices, and in hydraulic technology. This revolution issued in a
great expansion of colonization and recolonization. The agricultural
sector yielded increasing surpluses, which were plowed back into
agricultural intensification and underwrote an expansion of commerce and
town life. From the ninth century on, the Islamic world achieved a
virtual monopoly over the gold of the Sudan and the treasures of Egypt
and Iran. All this increased enormously the scale of Muslim trade
relations and craft production, both for internal elites and for
external consumers of luxury products.

   Islam and Eastern Christendom had thus parceled out much of the
Mediterranean littoral between them; yet both turned their backs upon
the sea. The shattered inheritance of western Rome fell to Western
Christendom, then a congeries of tributary polities headed by Teutonic
chieftains supported by their bodyguards. No cities survived in Western
Christendom comparable to Constantinople with at least 200,000
inhabitants (Russell 1958), Baghdad with about 400,000 (Adams 1965:
115), or Cordoba with 90,000 (Russell 1972: 178). Although urban crafts
had become established in the countryside, the rural zones of Europe had
relapsed into subsistence agriculture and localized exchange. European
merchants involved in long-distance trade had not disappeared
(Vercauteren 1967), but their activities were overshadowed from the
sixth to the eighth centuries by Syrians and Jews who connected the
Levant with the European peninsula, an area "exploited for the benefit
of Syria, Alexandria, and Constantinople" (Lewis 1951: 14). Europe
furnished mainly slaves and timber, receiving some luxury goods in
return.

   European slaves reached the Near East not only across the sea-lanes
of the Mediterranean but also, along with precious furs and other
products, down the Russian rivers into the Black Sea. They were brought
by the Varangian Rus, a branch of the seafaring and sea-raiding peoples
who had fanned out from their viks, or inlets, in Scandinavia to harass
the European littoral and to carry off slaves to Near Eastern markets.
In the ninth century they also began to subdue and colonize lands in
England and Normandy, in Sicily, in the Baltic littoral, and in Russia.
It is thus possible to conceive of the European peninsula at this stage
as a land area surrounded by water on three sides, dominated by a
long-distance trade whose center was in the Hellespont and the Levant.

The Rise of the Italian Ports

In the course of the ninth century, new competitors intruded into this
commerce. These came from the port cities maintained as Byzantine
enclaves along the coastline of Italy. The most important were Venice,
at the head of the Adriatic, and Amalfi, on the Gulf of Salerno. They
were at first but minor intermediaries in a trade that was of no great
importance to the powers that ruled over the Levant. Building upon their
initial positions as minor middlemen, however, both cities benefited by
the gradual intensification of commerce.

   Amalfi was described by the Arab merchant Ibn Hawqal in A.D. 977 as
“the most prosperous town in Lombardy, the most noble, the most
illustrious, on account of its conditions, the most affluent and
opulent" (quoted in Lopez and Raymond 1955: 54). Nevertheless, it soon
lost out to predatory neighbors. Venice, in contrast, moved increasingly
to the fore, exchanging Western iron, timber, naval stores, and slaves
for Eastern silks, spices, and ivories, to which it added salt from its
lagoons and the products of its glass industry.

   In the tenth century two other Italian Lombard ports embarked on a
career of commercial and military expansion. These were Pisa and Genoa,
on the Tyrrhenian Sea. Reacting to Muslim raiding by converting their
fishing boats into naval craft, they counterattacked successfully in
Corsica, Sardinia, and on the North African littoral.

   Through their success in trade and war, these Italian towns began to
tilt the balance of exchange between the western and eastern halves of
the Mediterranean in favor of the West. Largely deprived of an agrarian
hinterland of their own, their frontier of expansion lay in sea-borne
commerce. They were thus in a position to become the main beneficiaries
of the new conjuncture of power and influence in the Mediterranean after
the year A.D. 1000. By then, Byzantium had initiated a policy of
military consolidation on land, relying on its armed peasantry to defend
it against growing attacks on all sides. Venice became virtually the
commercial agent of Byzantium and engrossed most of its sea-borne trade.

Political Consolidation

While the Italian port towns were assuming increased importance in the
Mediterranean region, the rural hinterlands south and north of the Alps
were independently caught up in processes of economic and political
consolidation. These processes operated on two levels: one local, the
other regional. We have noted that the decline of Rome in the western
Mediterranean involved a collapse and dismantling of the Roman legal and
political superstructure, as well as a simultaneous retreat of urban
crafts into the countryside. Growing ruralization and the diffusion of
artisan technology together provided the technical basis for the
development of a new form of political-economic organization. This form
grouped cultivators around the stronghold of a superordinate "lord"
(from the Anglo-Saxon hlafweard, or loaf warden, one who feeds
dependents). Cultivators were tied to lords in arrangements of
dependency, which varied widely in their origins and precise
characteristics, defining in different ways the transfer of tribute from
surplus producers to surplus takers. Such arrangements underwrote the
political and military power of any given surplus taker in his relations
to his fellows, as well as the power of surplus takers as a class.

   After A.D. 1000 the surpluses so produced grew considerably, as a
result of both intensification and extension of cultivation. This was
particularly true of areas north of the Alps, where the introduction of
triennial rotation by means of the heavy horse-drawn plow resulted in an
absolute increase of the surplus product. Clearing of the dense forest
cover of continental Europe and plowing up of the European plain
expanded the arable from which surpluses could be taken. Both processes
took place under the aegis of tribute-taking overlords, and both, in
turn, increased the political power of the dominant class. Increased
production of surpluses further enhanced the military capability of this
class, which rested upon the ability to sustain the high cost of war
horses and armor.

   The movement toward political consolidation under a central kingship
depended upon the combined ability to extract tribute in order to pay
for war and to develop a war-making potential commensurate with the
scale of the political task. There were, in essence, three ways in which
this could be accomplished. One was to expand externally, against enemy
powers, and seize surpluses from external enemies. Another was to
discover resources, either home-grown or acquired as booty, to sell to
merchants in exchange for needed goods or credit. A third way was to
enlarge the royal domain, the area from which the king could draw direct
support without the interference of intermediaries. The developing
polities of Europe followed all three strategies, in a different mix at
different times, and with different results.

War Abroad

Seizure of external resources was the main strategy followed by the
Iberian powers of Portugal, Leon-Castile, and Aragon in their
Reconquista of Muslim Spain. Another attempt to use this strategy took
the form of the Crusades, carried on by the kings of France and England
not long after their initial consolidation of power (1096-1291). The
announced motivation for the Crusades was the reconquest of the Holy
Land from the infidels. On another level, however, the Crusades were
efforts to consolidate still incipient political systems through an
attack against greatly weakened enemies. Byzantium was withdrawing into
its territorial core area, yielding up its commerce to the Venetians.
The Abbasid caliphate in Baghdad was wracked by internal rebellions and
by nomad attacks from outside, perhaps because the very success of its
long-distance trade had overtaxed its tribute-producing peasantry (see
Anderson 1974: 509). The Crusades failed in the end and, in any event,
did not produce direct benefits for the northwestern European kings.

   The real beneficiaries of the Crusades were the Italian port-cities,
which profited by the carrying services they had performed, marketed
most of the plunder obtained, and were able, in the aftermath of the
wars, to set up extraterritorial colonies in both Byzantium and the
Muslim Levant. As the French and English withdrew, the Italian
merchants—now reinforced in numbers and influence by the growing
participation of the inland cities of Italy as well—were able to launch
their great expansion in commerce and finance “from Greenland to
Peking," as Robert Lopez put it. In expanding, this Italian trade
network also vaulted the Alps, initiating contacts with the South German
towns and, by way of the Rhineland, with Flanders and England.

   Still another attempt at expanding royal resources through external
seizure was initiated by the German Holy Roman Emperor. Hampered within
the original German home provinces (Urdeutschland) by powerful
competitors, the only strategy available to him in expanding royal
resources lay in conquest abroad. This strategy involved, especially, an
attempt to seize Italy for the German imperial crown. The attempt failed
in 1176, when the Italian Lombard city-states leagued together to defeat
the emperor at Legnano. This also put an end to the centralizing
aspirations of the German kings.

Commerce

A second strategy—commercialization of products grown or won in
war—developed alongside the other means of securing surpluses. Trade and
warfare necessarily fed upon each other; at the same time, they involved
different principles of organization. Trade led to the formation of
merchant companies and federations of merchants. Warfare put a premium
on the development of military specialists, who had to be fed and
supplied by a secure base of tribute payers. Sometimes the merchants and
the military cooperated; at other times they were at loggerheads. As
Edward W. Fox had put it:

If feudalism, as a system, was nourished by the agricultural production
of endless individual manors, it was loosely bound together by the
circulation of messages and men in the practice of military protection.
The commercial society depended for its existence on the circulation of
goods, by water transport when possible, and on messages, in the form of
orders and payments. These are really very different operations, and
there is a good deal of traditional evidence to indicate that they do
not ordinarily mix. [1971: 57]

   To some extent, one can visualize the growth of states during the
European Middle Ages as a contest between political blocks that rested
upon agricultural cores and military power, on the one hand, and
mercantile networks along riverine and maritime routes of traffic, on
the other. The fate of the Champagne fairs furnishes a telling example.
These fairs, visited by Italian traders who came to exchange
Mediterranean goods for northern products, were accessible from the
Mediterranean over the trough formed by the Rhone and Sa?ne rivers. They
flourished as long as they remained independent of the Kingdom of France
and the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation. When the French kingdom
took over the region in 1285, the fairs soon declined in the wake of
increased taxation, growing warfare, and restrictions on the importation
of English wool and Flemish cloth.

   Commerce then shifted to the coastwise maritime route and to the
overland routes between northern Italy and the valley of the Rhine.
Along the maritime route there was a growth of autonomy-seeking merchant
corporations and leagues, such as the consolais of Catalonia, the
Brotherhood of the Marismas of the Cantabrian ports, and trading
brotherhoods, or Hansa, which extended from Cologne and the Rhineland
toward Lübeck and Hamburg in the thirteenth century. Along the routes
over the Alps and up the Rhine, there formed pass states intimately
linked with the movement of wares over the mountains, such as the Swiss
Confederation and the Tyrol. Along the Upper Danube and the Rhine, the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries witnessed a burgeoning of merchant
houses in the South German towns and of merchant confederations like the
Swabian League, the Rhenish League, and the Brotherhood of the Seventeen
Towns of Flanders and Brabant. Although none of these mercantile
federations remained independent of land-based military overlords, "the
cities of the trade-route belt from the Mediterranean to the North Sea
and the Baltic were for centuries strong enough to thwart all efforts of
military-administration" (Rokkan 1975: 576).

Enlarging the Royal Domain

The third strategy toward political consolidation, the expansion of a
central domain, was followed in the regions that would become France and
England. This was a very different route from that followed in the
Iberian peninsula. Portugal and Castile were, in the main, predatory
states, living off the resources of Muslim Spain. The embryo of the
Portuguese state was the armed military brotherhood of the Knights of
Aviz, whose Grand-Master became the first Portuguese king in 1384. The
Castilian state rested, similarly, upon the religious-military orders of
Calatrava, Alcántara, and Santiago, all founded in the twelfth century.
In contrast, France and England were formed around the personal domains
of their kings.

   The nucleus of future France was the direct domain of the Capetian
dynasty; this area, called Francia, straddled the valleys of the Seine
and the Loire. Its agricultural importance is attested by the fact that
the first documentary evidence for triennial crop rotation and modern
means of harnessing draft animals refers to this region. From this
initial base, the French kings proceeded to enlarge their direct domain
through war, clerical aid, and matrimonial strategies. By 1328 the royal
domain and the fiefs of the French crown together encompassed nearly all
of France.

   England was formed when a group of Frenchified Vikings from Normandy
created, by force of arms, an "English Normandy" (Douglas 1969: 29)
across the Channel. The core of this English Normandy was created by
William the Conqueror when he shared out fiefs among his followers but
assured to himself a direct domain, within each shire, larger than that
of any vassal. English and French domain building soon collided. The
kings of France and England fought for centuries over possession of
western and southern "France." Until the thirteenth century, the
"English” controlled the better part of "France," and they were not
finally expelled until 1453.

   All the European states grew slowly, as composites of many different
segments and accretions. Their boundaries might well have been drawn
differently, creating a map of Europe quite different from the
arrangement of countries that we think of today as inalienable national
entities. The map might have shown a sea-based empire, comprising
Scandinavia, the northern seacoast of Europe, and England; a polity
comprising western France and the British Isles; a union of eastern
France and western Germany, or a state comprising the valleys of the
Rhone and the Rhine intervening between Germany and France; a union of
Germany and northern Italy; a state uniting Catalonia and the south of
France; an Iberian peninsula divided into a northern Christian tier of
kingdoms and a southern Muslim tier. Each of these represents a
possibility that in fact existed at some time, and each suggests that
the geopolitical boundaries segmenting Europe today require explanation
and should not be taken for granted.

State Making and Expansion

External warfare, trade, and internal consolidation created new states
in Europe and reversed the relationship between dominant East and
impoverished West that had characterized earlier days. Around the year
A.D. 1300, however, the pace of European growth seemed to slacken again.
Agriculture ceased to grow, perhaps because the available technology
reached the limits of its productivity. The climate worsened, rendering
the food supply more precarious and uncertain. Epidemics affected large
numbers of people debilitated by a poorer diet. Yet the ecological
predicament appears to have been but an aspect of a wider crisis,
sometimes referred to as "the crisis of feudalism." To pay for war and
expansion, the military tribute takers stepped up the extraction of
surpluses, producing in turn a rising tide of peasant resistance and
rebellion.

   The way out of this crisis lay in the discovery of new frontiers.
Economically, this was necessary in order to generate additional
surpluses. In practice, it meant moving into still newer areas to grow
more food, as well as finding new food preservatives. It meant the
possibility of luxury goods at lower prices, or alternatively, more gold
and silver to pay for them. It also meant the hope of stanching the
outflow of bullion to the East, a problem that had worried even the
Romans and by A.D. 1200 had become critical. The solution to the crisis
required an increase in the scale and intensity of war: an increase in
the production of armaments and ships, in the training of soldiers and
sailors, and in the financing of military operations and outposts.

   Economically, the crisis of feudalism was solved by locating,
seizing, and distributing resources available beyond the European
frontiers. The movement to the New World, the establishment of forts and
trading posts along the coasts of Africa, the entry into the Indian
Ocean and the China seas, and the spread of the fur trade through the
boreal forests of America and Asia all represent ways in which these
goals were sought and fulfilled. New goods entered the circuits of
exchange: tobacco, cacao, potatoes, tulips. African gold and American
silver, as Braudel has said, enabled Europe to live beyond its means.

   Yet it was not enough to add to the stock of wealth circulating in
Europe and to multiply the variety of its forms. "Primitive
accumulation" required not only the seizure of resources but also their
concentration, organization, and allocation. These operations soon
outgrew the capacity of any single merchant firm or merchant guild, or
of any single body of soldiers and officialdom. Their pursuit favored
the emergence of overarching organizations that could focus such
large-scale expansionist and mercantile efforts, and that could rally
the surplus-producing populace to such goals.

   The overarching organizations that developed were states
characterized by a high degree of concentration of command, whether
placed in the hands of a single ruler and his clientele, as in Portugal
and Spain, or in a committee of the ruling oligarchy, as in the United
Provinces of the Netherlands. Such states can best be understood as a
political coalition between the centralizing executive and the merchant
class. The state bought arms and ships. Goods won by force of arms paid
for the hiring of mercenaries, for the manufacture of guns and cannon,
and for the construction of more ships. The armed merchants foraging
overseas needed the state to shield them against competitors and to
provide the officialdom capable of holding and consolidating the newly
won areas. At the same time, the state needed the merchants to lend
money to the Crown or to the captains of expeditions; to collect, ship,
and sell the goods obtained abroad; and—increasingly—to acquire and
export the goods needed in the far-flung outposts of the realm.
Different authors have stressed now the bureaucratic character of the
expansionist state, now its basis in surplus production by rural power
holders, now its tie to merchants bent on overseas plunder and easy
profits. The emerging states were all of these things, although the
constituent elements were differently combined in each.

   The key states that carried forward the expansion overseas were
Portugal, Castile-Aragon, the United Provinces, France, and England.
Each was the outcome of distinctive circumstances and of distinctive
strategies to meet them. Each developed a variant array of classes
arranged around the pivot of the state. Each committed people and
resources to the task of conquest and commerce, and each set its seal
upon some part of the globe, affecting large populations in turn. Each
sought to oust the others from access to resources at home and abroad,
and to reduce the ability of its competitors to continue in the game of
expansion. We shall take a look at each of these political formations to
show how each developed, used the resources of war and mercantile
expansion, and then reached the limit of a political economy based on
mercantile wealth.

Portugal

Portugal was the first of the European polities to develop into a center
of expansionist activity in the search for wealth. It is also perhaps
the least understood of the polities involved in expansion. It was a
poor country, populated by no more than a million inhabitants at the end
of the European Middle Ages. It soon acquired colonies as far away as
Brazil in the Americas, Mozambique in Africa, and Malacca in Southeast
Asia. In 1725 the Archbishop of Goa could still dream of a Portuguese
empire, built on God's “infallible promises for the subjugation of the
whole globe" (quoted in Boxer 1973a: 376). Yet by 1800 it had declined
to the status of a second-rate power. What seems all the more
extraordinary in retrospect is the power and fervor of its initial
expansion, predicated upon so narrow a base of ecological resources.

   Portugal began as a border fief of Spanish Leon. Like Leon, it grew
gradually, as marauding bands of knights and settlers moved southward
into the lands of Moslem Iberia. Yet, unlike Spain, it achieved
political definition early. In 1147 Lisbon was taken from the Moslems;
in 1249 Silves, the last remaining Moslem stronghold, fell to the
Portuguese soldiery. In 1385 the new kingdom successfully routed the
Castilians, maintaining its integrity under a dynasty founded by the
Grand-Master of the religious-military order of Aviz.

   Although Portuguese were later to sail to the far reaches of the
globe, the country remained heavily dependent on agriculture throughout
the course of its history. This was true even though much of the land is
too steep or stony to be cultivated at all, rainfall is scant and
irregular, and crops are consequently meager. Nevertheless, the bulk of
the population worked the land, most of them under rental agreements
that secured long-term occupance for the cultivators through payments in
kind or money (covering from one-tenth to one-half of the annual
produce), and through the rendering of two or three days per week of
unremunerated labor.

   The reliance on agriculture also oriented the country inland, away
from the sea. There was fishing in the cool current that runs off
Portugal and the west coast of Africa, but it had to contend with
hostile tides and winds and with a lack of sheltered ports. Despite its
maritime exploits, Portugal never had a very large seafaring population
and never enough sailors for its oceangoing ships. Nor did the
Portuguese have many ships. There was little timber within Portugal
suitable for shipbuilding, and much of the timber and naval stores had
to be imported. Even at the height of its power, Portugal possessed only
300 ocean-going ships (Boxer 1973a: 56). After the expansion overseas,
most Portuguese ships were built at Goa in India, where timber was cut
from the teak forests of the western coast, and at Bahia, where
Brazilian hardwoods were used. To make up for the lack of Portuguese
seamen, the Portuguese increasingly recruited other Europeans, Asians,
and African slaves.

   At home, agricultural rents and labor dues supported a military
nobility exempt from taxes and protected against arbitrary arrest, as
well as a large clerical establishment. A decline of population in the
wake of the Black Death in the fourteenth century created pressures for
lower rents in the countryside, but it also drew rural folk to the towns
through the promise of higher wages. The scarcity of agricultural labor
probably prompted the rentier nobility to take up arms in search of
alternative sources of labor abroad. Of the 150,000 African slaves
secured by the Portuguese between 1450 and 1500 (Boxer 1973a: 31), some
were sent to the newly occupied sugar- and wheat-producing islands of
Madeira and the Azores; others were sold in Italy and Spain. Many,
however, were taken to Portugal, where they furnished a new source of
bound labor. At the same time, the military nobility lost a great deal
of its political power after the war with Castile in 1385, when a
majority of the "old nobility" was killed or exiled for having sided
with the Castilians. This made way for "new" nobles who supported the
dynasty of Aviz, and it also increased the relative importance of the
merchant class.

   The merchants grew more prominent in the late fourteenth century,
especially in Lisbon and Oporto. They dealt in agricultural products,
trading first grain and later olive oil, wine, cork, and dyestuffs for
English cloth. From the salt pans of Setubal, they also supplied Europe
with much of the salt it needed to preserve meat and fish.

   Despite these gains, it is doubtful whether one should speak of a
growing emancipation of the mercantile stratum from tributary controls,
as some scholars have done. The greatest merchant of them all was to be
the Crown, set upon this course through the activities of the Infante
Dom Henrique (commonly known as Prince Henry the Navigator). Dom
Henrique has gone down in history for his interest in navigation and
map-making, but he also financed his activities with income from trade
in West Africa and in the Atlantic islands, from fishing rights off the
Algarve, from the importation of dyes and sugar into Portugal, and from
control of soap-making at home—all this in the face of repeated protests
in the Portuguese assembly. He was also the architect of the Portuguese
seizure in 1425 of Ceuta, one of the terminal points in the gold trade
across the Sahara, and he benefited from the capture and sale of slaves
obtained in the course of the voyages along the African west coast.
Subsequently, the Crown reserved for itself the monopoly over the import
of gold, slaves, spices, and ivory, as well as all rights of export and
re-export. The merchants profited from all this activity through
concessions and contracts, but they never gained the power necessary to
alter the class structure of the country in any significant way.

Castile-Aragón (Spain)

The other power in the Iberian peninsula was Spain, which achieved
political unity with the union of the crowns of Castile and Aragón in
1469. When Germanic invasions from the north and Moslem invasions from
the south shattered the administrative unity of the Roman province of
Hispania, small remnant states survived in the north. These consolidated
themselves gradually into the dual polities of the Crown of Castile and
the Crown of Aragón, which included the Principality of Catalonia and
the Kingdom of Aragón.

   In the fourteenth century the union between these two polities was by
no means assured. Castile, advancing against Moslem Al-Andalus, became
locked into a military role, distributing conquered land in large
latifundia to the military nobles who captained the conquest. This
produced in the late fifteenth century a pattern of land ownership in
which two or three percent of the population owned ninety-seven percent
of the land, most of it in the hands of a few families (Elliott 1966:
111). The dominant pursuit in Castilian terrain came to be livestock
keeping, notably the pasturage of sheep for the production of merino
wool, to be finished into cloth in the Netherlands.

   The lands of the Crown of Aragón, in contrast, were colonized
gradually by settlers who created small communities in which the land
was more evenly distributed than in Castile. At the same time, the Crown
of Aragón had brought together the commercially oriented Principality of
Catalonia and a primarily rural Aragón. Catalonia was, in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, a prosperous commercial state with maritime
trade connections far into the Levant. In the fifteenth century,
however, it lost out to Genoese competition. Genoa not only reduced
Catalan influence in the Mediterranean but bypassed it by entering into
commercial and financial relations with Castile. This coalition of
Genoese financiers and noble Castilian wool producers effectively
throttled Catalan mercantile growth and undermined the effectiveness of
Catalan textile production and export. In the late fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, Catalonia was further undermined economically
through a series of fierce uprisings by the peasantry against tributary
("feudal") dues and through open conflicts in the towns between the
mercantile patriciate and the smaller merchants and artisans.

   The union between Castile and Aragon yoked together two very unequal
partners and ensured the dominance of Castile over Aragon, then "a
society in retreat" (Elliott 1966: 42). It granted a leading role in the
new Iberian polity to the noble owners of enormous sheep herds. They
were organized in a powerful sheep-owners' association, the Mesta, which
was able to promote their social and political interests with the state
in exchange for paying taxes to the Crown. The export of Castilian wool
through the northern ports tied this Cantabrian periphery to the
interests of the Castilian military nobility.

   The decisive Castilian shift toward a pastoral economy not only
throttled industrial development in the Spanish realm, but it also
reduced the ability of other classes to challenge the dominion of the
military tribute takers. Warfare and seizure of people and resources,
rather than commercial and industrial development, became the dominant
mode of social reproduction. In this perspective the conquest of the New
World represents but a prolongation of the Reconquista within the
Iberian peninsula itself. The influx of silver from the New World from
the sixteenth century on still further reduced Spanish industrial
development through rising prices and inflation, rendering it
uncompetitive with the industrial products of the Netherlands.

   The silver of the New World, however, also enhanced the revenues of
the Crown. Together, Spanish sheep and American silver underwrote
large-scale Spanish military operations in Europe and the growth of a
royal bureaucracy far beyond the ultimate capabilities of the Spanish
economy. Deficit spending was made up by loans from foreign financiers
only too happy to lend against future imports of silver or against taxes
to be raised on the sale of wool. Spain thus never developed a coherent
economic policy; the imperial bureaucracy acted simply as a conduit of
wealth into Italian, South German, and Dutch coffers. The expulsion of
250,000 unconverted Moslems from southern Spain between 1609 and 1614
further weakened Spanish agriculture by halting rent payments to
overlords, who then could not repay their mortgages. In the
mid-seventeenth century even Spanish wool exports began to lose out to
English competition. Shipping declined, and by the end of the sixteenth
century Spanish shipbuilders could no longer compete effectively with
the new techniques of North European dockyards. Capital began to flow
increasingly into private loans and government bonds, which earned
better rates of interest than investment in direct productive pursuits.
The Spain of 1600 was already that spectral world of decay and
disenchantment which Miguel Cervantes portrayed so masterfully in his
Don Quixote. The Spanish economy had become a mere throughput of
mercantile wealth for other economies, a "mother of foreigners, a
step-mother of Spaniards."

The International Circuits of Mercantile Wealth

In both Portugal and Castile-Aragon, therefore, foreign merchants came
to play a strategic role in managing the economy. Portugal sought and
found needed wealth and mercantile support in the Italian city of Genoa,
then fighting Venice for control of the trade with the Levant and more
than willing to sponsor Portuguese trade as a way of breaking out of the
constraining limits of the Mediterranean. Genoese merchants appeared in
Portugal in the thirteenth century, and by the early fourteenth century
Lisbon had become a major center of Genoese commerce. The Genoese also
settled in Seville in the fifteenth century, where they helped finance
the Spanish voyages to the Western Hemisphere in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries. Major participants in this process were the
families of Spinola, Centurioni, Giustiniani, and Doria. It is surely no
accident that Columbus worked for the Centurioni in Lisbon in 1477, and
in 1478 spent his honeymoon sailing to Madeira to purchase sugar for
them (Pike 1966: 154, n. 58; 206, n. 2). Funds for Columbus's first and
second voyages were contributed by Francisco Pinelo (Italian, Pinelli).
The Genoese financiers were soon joined by the Fuggers and Welsers of
Augsburg in southern Germany, whose growing prosperity from the
mid-fifteenth century drew on South German trade with Venice and on
mining operations throughout the Alps and the Carpathians.

   Genoese and Bavarian financial growth together underwrote the rise of
the city of Antwerp, located on the estuary of the Scheldt River in
Brabant. It was still a minor port in the early fifteenth century, but
between 1437 and 1555 it grew from an estimated 17,000 inhabitants to
more than a hundred thousand (Russell 1972: 117; Smith 1967: 395).
Accessible to the sea-lanes, it was the terminus of the overland route
from Venice to the Rhine and a link in the chain of Hansa cities in the
northern seas. When the Duke of Burgundy, within whose realm Antwerp was
located, became the Emperor Charles V, the city's network grew to
embrace the routes of the silver fleet from the Western Hemisphere as
well. Antwerp thus became, in the first half of the sixteenth century,
the hub of an international system of credit and payments. Genoese and
Bavarian bankers soon held mortgages on the American silver fleet and on
the tax income of Castile, obtained through loans advanced to the
imperial Crown; in this way, silver flowed northward to Antwerp and into
its international conduits.

   Yet the predominance of Antwerp and its sponsors proved shortlived.
The Spanish Crown experienced its first bankruptcy in 1550. Soon after,
in 1566, the Netherlands rose in revolt; the rebellious "sea-beggars"
sealed off Antwerp from the sea, and Spanish troops sacked it in 1576 in
lieu of receiving their back pay. In 1575— 1576 the Spanish Crown
experienced its second bankruptcy, taking the Bavarian merchant houses
with it. The Genoese, however, held their course and tightened their
hold on the imperial resources, which now flowed increasingly into
Genoa. They became, as a result, "the masters of international payments,
of the fortunes both of Europe and of the world, the not unchallenged
but well-entrenched masters of the political silver of Spain, from 1579
and perhaps even from 1577 on" (Braudel 1972: 393).

   But the Genoese too were displaced in their turn, early in the
seventeenth century, by Amsterdam and the Dutch cities allied with it.
Amsterdam now became the center of Europe's international system of
payments, taking in Spanish silver and Portuguese gold in exchange for
goods manufactured in northern Europe. An important role in this
ascendancy fell to Portuguese "New Christians," baptized or crypto-
Jews, who had emigrated to Amsterdam to avoid economic and religious
persecution in Iberia. They had played a leading role in the Portuguese
trade in slaves and sugar in the New World, and they now put their
capital and knowledge at the disposal of the Dutch.

The United Provinces

As Portugal and Spain both wrestled with the problems of their expanded
empires, they encountered a new rival in the shape of the seafarers and
fishermen of the Dutch Netherlands. The Dutch had come to the fore in
the course of the fifteenth century in the sea-borne trade between the
Baltic and western Europe, carrying Baltic grain and timber as well as
Swedish metal on their trips to the west, and taking salt and cloth to
the northern littorals on their trips east. After the herring migrated
from the Baltic into North Sea waters in 1452, moreover, they
intensified their fishing, their "principal gold mine." This Baltic
trade always remained economically more important than the Dutch trade
with Asia and the West Indies. Dutch expansion into other seas continued
this commitment to sea-borne commerce.

   To finance these undertakings abroad, the Dutch at first relied on
foreign capital, provided mainly by Italian and South German bankers.
When Charles V incorporated the Netherlands into his transoceanic
empire, he also granted their merchants the privileges enjoyed by
Spanish merchants in Spanish ports. The Dutch merchants thus benefited
also from the flow of bullion coming in through Lisbon and Seville, and
were amassing sufficient capital to engage in business transactions
independently of foreign financiers.

   The onset of the Reformation and the Dutch conversion to
Protestantism led to a rupture with Catholic Spain, and to an
eighty-year war between the Dutch United Provinces and the Iberians.
Paradoxically, the United Provinces emerged from this prolonged warfare
more powerful not only militarily but also financially. The revolt
cemented an alliance among several Dutch towns, each governed by its
local elite of merchant oligarchs, as well as an alliance between these
maritime elites and the tributary lords of the landward provinces.
Welcoming religious dissenters from Wallonia and Flanders, as well as
Portuguese and Spanish Jews, the new Republic greatly added to its stock
of capital and skills. Whereas before 1585 Dutch ships had appeared but
rarely in the Mediterranean, they were frequent visitors thereafter.
Direct Dutch trade with Brazil increased until the Dutch controlled
between half and two-thirds of the carrying trade between Brazil and
Europe by 1621. Throughout the prolonged war, moreover, Dutch merchants
continued to trade with the enemy. The Spanish and Portuguese navies
needed the timber and naval stores that the Dutch brought from the
Baltic; taxes paid by Dutch merchants for permits to trade with the
enemy were the chief source of Dutch revenue for carrying on the war
(Boxer 1973b: 23 — 24). In the seventeenth century, as a result of such
far-flung trade, Amsterdam became the center of the European trade in
bullion, a role it would retain for 200 years.

   During the second half of the seventeenth century, however, Dutch
hegemony reached its zenith and then began to decline. Baltic grain grew
less important in the markets of Europe; this diminished Dutch influence
(Glamann 1971: 42—44). At the same time, the United Provinces began to
suffer from competition with England, which increased its grain exports
in response to depression and began to tax Dutch goods, thus spurring
import substitution by English industries at home. Costly wars also
affected the Dutch economy, as taxes rose to pay for them.

   Why, then, did the United Provinces not turn toward industrial
development? There are several reasons. First, shipping, shipbuilding,
and the activities connected with them continued to be important and
remunerative. Second, the returns on mercantile activity remained high,
indeed higher than on investment in textile production. Third,
agriculture in the United Provinces was already capital-intensive and
specialized, and it paid high wages; there was therefore no poor rural
populace to furnish industrial labor at low rates, as was the case in
England. Fourth, the entire Dutch development was ultimately predicated
on their ability to capitalize on skills and services, rather than on a
strong resource base of their own. The population of the United
Provinces was small. It had risen from 275,000 in 1514 to 883,000 in
1680; it fell back to 783,000 in 1750. In fact, manpower was scarce even
in shipping, and increasing numbers of Scandinavians and North Germans
were hired to man Dutch ships in the eighteenth century. Moreover, the
United Provinces possessed neither coal nor iron, with which England was
plentifully endowed. Finally, the Republic had always been a polity made
up of nearly autonomous city-states, each with its own mercantile
oligarchy. What had given them a common direction was the predominance
of Amsterdam and their common success during the phase of Dutch
ascendancy. In a period of growing difficulties, intensifying faction
fights interfered with the ability of the various partners to the Dutch
alliance to formulate and carry out common policy. After 1688,
therefore, Dutch capital began to flow increasingly to England, where it
was invested in the English East India Company, the Bank of England, and
the British national debt, as well as in newly developing industries. In
this, the Netherlands paid "the penalty of the commanding lead."
Dominance passed into the hands of her chief rival.

France

The case of France represents still another response to the crisis of
feudalism. This was the home of classic political feudalism, which
utilized the legal form of ties between lords and vassals to build a
vast edifice of graded relationships, with the king standing at the apex
of the edifice. Here the main thrust of political consolidation was to
convert the feudal pyramid, headed by the king, into a network of
patron-client relations extending throughout France and controlled by
the king through his control of superior resources (see Koenigsberger
1971: 6). This transformation was accomplished in France through the
concentration of domestic agricultural surpluses rather than through
expansion overseas. At the same time, the French Crown avoided—to a much
greater extent than did the rulers of Portugal or Castile-Aragon—
dependence on foreign financiers and the resulting international
entanglements.

   We have seen how the France-to-be grew outward from a small but
fertile core region that controlled the rivers of the Seine and the
Loire in their middle courses. At first the king was but primus inter
pares among a number of other powerful feudatories, but he gained
increasing power by expanding the direct royal domain in all directions,
until by 1328 it covered half of what is now France. The other half was
held in fiefs of the Crown. In this process of expansion, however, not
only did the French king oust the English and their feudal tenants, but
he also gained ascendancy over potential rivals in Aquitaine to the west
and Occitania in the south. This put additional agricultural resources
at the disposition of the Crown, and it subjected to the political
center at Paris the maritime margins of the west and south, including
the commercial cities of Nantes, Bordeaux, and Toulouse. From the
fifteenth century on, the economic and political exigencies of the
land-based core of the French monarchy controlled and limited mercantile
activity along the Atlantic fringe, with major implications for the
participation of France in the course of European expansion (Fox 1971).

   Although the king consolidated his control over France, he could not
and did not challenge outright the rights of the nobility to draw
surpluses from the peasantry. The peasantry received the right to pay
rents in money or in kind, rather than in labor on a tribute taker's
home farm or demesne. It was the peasantry who carried on production,
the lords taking their share of the crops as tribute to sell on the
market. In this regard, the king was simply the topmost noble, living
off his own domain. The large extent of his domain made him
correspondingly powerful, but since the nobility remained exempt from
taxation, the financial resources of the Crown were limited. The king
attempted to capitalize on trade and credit relations with the Italian
cities, but their decline affected his ability to obtain funds.

   In the end, the king attempted to solve this problem by creating a
nobility of his own—the nobility of the robe as contrasted with the
nobility of the sword—by selling offices and noble status to merchants
and professionals. Among the new nobility were tax farmers who advanced
money to the Crown in return for the right to collect and retain taxes.
The taxes were paid ultimately by the peasantry and by mercantile and
manufacturing entrepreneurs. Income obtained by taxes was huge—ten
times, for example, that obtained in England (Finer 1975: 128)—but its
very size depressed agriculture and throttled trade and industry as
well. The peasantry was overburdened; the bourgeoisie, too, was under
pressure to survive (Wallerstein 1974: 297).

   This set of relations obtaining between the king, the old nobility,
the new nobility, and the peasantry was shattered in the French
Revolution of 1789. The revolution was made by peasants rising to shake
off their noble rentiers, by poor artisans and journeymen of Paris, and
by bourgeoisie "under pressure to survive." It was a revolution against
the aristocracy in that it freed the peasantry from the payment of
tribute and cleared the road to office for members of the Third Estate.
It was not, however, a revolution that cleared the road toward
capitalist development. The "bourgeoisie" it set free was not a class of
industrial capitalists, but a "petty" bourgeoisie of artisans,
shopkeepers, small merchants, and small-scale entrepreneurs. Heavy
industrialization in France had to await the second half of the
nineteenth century.

The Limits of Mercantile Circulation

We have seen how three European states—Portugal, Spain, and the United
Provinces—underwent a phase of mercantile expansion overseas, only to
experience a downturn in their affairs in the aftermath. A fourth
polity, France, directed its energies toward domestic consolidation,
curtailing the activities of its maritime fringe through the
centralization of power in Paris.

   The alliance of state and merchants that made possible the ascendancy
of Portugal began in the early fifteenth century, acquired momentum in
the sixteenth, and declined in the seventeenth. The Methuen treaty of
1703, which permitted the entry of English textiles into Portugal in
exchange for the import of port wine into England, merely formalized
that decline. Spain, the union of polities led by the rulers of Castile,
expanded in the sixteenth century to create an empire ranging from
Florida to Chile, and from the Caribbean islands to the Philippines. Yet
by the beginning of the seventeenth century, Spain was in decline and
began to live out fantasies of past greatness in the midst of decaying
realities. Even the hardheaded attempts of the Bourbon dynasty, in the
eighteenth century, to stem that decline through measures of an "applied
enlightenment" proved fruitless. The United Provinces, in turn, rose
successfully against Spain in 1566 and expanded overseas in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; but they reached the limits of
their power in the late seventeenth century, when they came under
increasing pressure from the successful English. France attempted in the
course of the eighteenth century to oust England from India and North
America. Having retarded the growth of its industry and its naval
capability, however, it faced this task essentially as a land power
unable to match the navy and industry of England.

   The seventeenth century played a decisive role in these affairs of
state. States that had proved successful in overcoming "the crisis of
feudalism" in the fifteenth century found themselves dragged down by
economic depression and political difficulties in the seventeenth. This
was especially clear in the Iberian peninsula. There, whatever surpluses
had been generated were used up in the military and political activities
of the state and in the conspicuous consumption of the court. Continuous
warfare and pillage favored the persistence of tributary lords and even
a growth in their power. The continuation of the Reconquista in the
Americas strengthened the military and social power of the king and
nobles, while inducing economic stagnation in the towns and countryside.
At the same time, the rising costs of war burned up resources or handed
them over to the creditors of the Crown. In France surpluses were
concentrated in the hands of the king and were used to crush or buy off
opposition at home and to further war abroad, to the detriment of
economic and political alternatives. In the Dutch polity government was
more modest in its demands, and conspicuous expenditures were less
marked. Yet worldwide commercial expansion accentuated the middleman
role of the Dutch merchants, even while it furthered the development of
manufactures accessory to trade and shipping, such as shipbuilding and
the provision of naval stores. The Dutch case demonstrates that it was
not the costly expenditures of war or court life as such that generated
the crisis, but rather the inability to convert the gains of war and
mercantile activity into new surplus-producing activities. This ability
depends on the conversion of mercantile wealth into capital.

   Behind the economic and political crisis of the seventeenth-century
state lay a larger crisis, caused by the inability of mercantile wealth
to alter and transform the ways of committing labor to the creation of
new resources. We have already drawn the distinction between capitalism
and the employment of wealth to gain a profit. The merchants of Europe
did indeed make money and pile up wealth. They traded in furs, spices,
slaves, gold, and silver. They developed regional specialization through
the development of the staple trade, exchanging grain grown here for
salt produced there, cloth woven in one place for iron smelted in
another. They created commercial networks that made it possible to
aggregate men and tools and thus to produce commodities in ever larger
quantities for centralized sales. They affected and transformed the
sites and routes of circulation. They carried on commerce, as understood
by Ibn Khaldun, the Berber sociologist of the fourteenth century, who
wrote:

One must know that commerce is the search for gain by increasing the
initial fund when one buys commodities at a favorable price and resells
them at a higher price, whether these commodities consist of slaves,
cereals, animals, or textiles. This increase is called profit. This
profit is obtained by storing the commodity and awaiting a fluctuation
in the tendency of the market to rise, which produces a great profit; or
by transporting the commodity mentioned to another region where the
demand for it is stronger, which also produces a great profit, [quoted
in Rodinson 1966: 47)

The European merchants even altered, here and there, the organization of
work and the conditions of labor employed in producing a commodity for
sale. What they did not do, however, was to use their wealth as capital
to acquire and transform means of production and set them in motion
through the purchase of labor power offered for sale by a class of
laborers.

England

Only England would take the step from accumulation and distribution of
mercantile wealth to a thoroughgoing capitalist transformation. Yet if
one looks at England before 1400, it would seem an unlikely candidate
for its later predominance. It was eccentric in its geographical
position off the coast of Europe, and the course of its development
appears idiosyncratic when compared with that of the continental states.
Its conquest by the French-speaking descendants of Norwegian Vikings in
1066 had imposed a unified fiscal and judicial system on the island,
under the aegis of the king. This system relied for its operation less
on an elaborate and centralized bureaucracy of the French type, and more
on the cooperation of local notables. The costs of government were thus
reduced. Furthermore, the burdens of taxation were distributed more
equitably than in France. English nobles paid taxes, while the French
nobility remained exempt from taxation until the Revolution of 1789.
Because of its insular position, England was relatively immune to
attacks from the continent, and after the English kings were pushed out
of France the country was spared the large expenditures for war on land
and sea that plagued its later continental rivals.

Until the end of the fourteenth century, England was in the main an
agricultural country, looking inward and not yet drawn to the sea
(Graham 1970: 14). Two characteristics, however, distinguished the
English economy from developments on the continent. The first was the
gradual abrogation, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, of
heritable peasant tenure held from an overlord, in favor of rents
renego- tiable at intervals with terms set by the prevailing economic
situation. This made possible, over time, the conversion of "customary”
dues into variable money rents. In France, in marked contrast, the
peasantry was able to strengthen its grip on the land through increased
guarantees of perpetual inheritance. The overlord could attempt to
increase tribute due him by multiplying dues receivable; but he was not
able to alter in any fundamental way the conditions of land management
and cultivation. Thus, the English peasantry was surprisingly weak in
comparison with that of France. The use of land to yield profit in the
form of variable money rent placed in the hands of the overlord the
power to reallocate land to tenants who could maximize profits. It was,
therefore, easier for the English tribute taker than for his French
counterpart to turn land itself into a commodity. In the course of the
sixteenth century, then, English landowners began to pursue commodity
production as “improving landlords."

   The second important characteristic of the English economy lay in the
early role of England as a producer of raw wool, perhaps the finest in
Europe. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries much of its wool was
sold abroad, especially to feed the woolen industry of Flanders. The
wool trade soon became a mainstay of royal income. The export of wool
turned England into a kind of colony of the Flemings, "content", as
Pirenne says,

to supply them with the raw material. They were to the Flemish cloth
industry what the Argentine Republic and Australia are to the cloth
industry of Europe and America today. Instead of competing with them,
they devoted themselves to producing more and more wool for which there
was always a sale. [1937: 153]

Not only was this wool destined for foreign markets but it was mostly
foreigners, notably the Hansa, who carried it to its destination on the
other side of the Channel.

   Yet at the end of the fourteenth century, the English turned from the
export of wool to the manufacture of cloth on their own account. Several
interlinked aspects facilitated this changeover. As cloth production
increased, it became economically feasible for English woolens to
compete in foreign markets. At the same time, the fourteenth-century
crisis of feudalism rendered such an alternative attractive, especially
in agricultural areas attempting to cope with the prevailing depression.
The manufacture of woolen cloth was thus able to move from the towns
into rural areas, where it could take advantage of water power to run
the fulling mills and where it could find cheap labor untrammeled by the
restrictions on employment maintained by urban guilds. Such alternative
employment of rural labor, together with the expansion of sheep ranges
at the expense of cultivation, intensified the use of land as a
marketable commodity and as an instrument in commodity production.

   Expanding cloth manufacture invited the support of the state. Home
industry was protected against foreign imports. The construction of
English ships was encouraged, and the new maritime technology was used
to build "round" sailing ships equipped with guns. State-chartered
commercial organizations, such as London Mercers' Company in the
fourteenth century and the Company of Merchant Adventurers in the
fifteenth, were created to further the export of English cloth. The
organizations of traders abroad soon multiplied: the Russia Company, in
1553; the Spanish Company, in 1577; the Eastland Company, set up in 1578
to trade in Scandinavia and the Baltic; the Levant Company, established
in 1592; the East India Company, in 1600; the Virginia Company, in 1606;
the English Amazon Company (1619—1623); and the Massachusetts Bay
Company, in 1629. Still later, in 1660, came the Royal Adventurers into
Africa, to be replaced twelve years later by the more efficient Royal
African Company. These companies and their successors soon widened the
scale of English commercial operations. This spurred the development of
crafts and manufactures to supply the new routes and sites of
circulation.

   The path of expansion was cleared by the political upheavals of 1640
and 1688. The Glorious Revolution arrayed profit-taking landlords,
manufacturers, and commercial agents against the privileges held and
defended by the court, the high nobility, and the merchant monopolists.
It destroyed royal absolutism, streamlined the government, and changed
the tax base, doing away with levies on manufacturing monopolies and
royal tributary dues in favor of the excise (a tax on commodities in
general use) and the assessment, a tax on landed estates. It set up a
national army and navy and prepared them for military competition with
the United Provinces and France. It accelerated the growth of
agricultural commodity production by encouraging further enclosures of
land and commons. It supported the development of domestic industry,
employing the labor of displaced cultivators or landless households.

   In the course of the revolution power shifted from one class to
another, from court-based power holders who still relied on the
arrangements of a tributary mode to coalitions of provincial
entrepreneurs. The revolution, however, did not obliterate the losers.
Instead, it took them into partnership (see Hill 1949: 126). Indeed, the
English preserved many institutions of their tributary tradition—such as
monarchy, peerage, church, parliament, and common law—and adapted them
to new functions. They also maintained the ideology and etiquette of
nobility as the form, if not the content, of class rule: the
profit-taking landlord and the rising manufacturer and putting-out
merchant adopted the symbolic forms of traditional squirearchy.

   In many ways, then, the English case appears unique. England began as
a marginal and colonial country, lying off a continent populated by more
powerful neighbors, wealthier and equipped with more elaborate
institutions than its own. Yet it achieved an early unity under the
Norman kings, who unified its administration and obliterated internal
barriers to the circulation of goods and people, barriers that still
bedeviled many of its continental neighbors well into the nineteenth
century. Its peasantry proved surprisingly weak juridically and was
easily uprooted. The growth of its cloth trade—which underwrote its
entry into wider markets and political orbits—proved a success story,
benefiting by a series of fortunate conjunctures. Finally, its mode of
governance—with its mixture of old and new, but above all low in
cost—was remarkably successful in establishing and maintaining the
distribution of class forces upon which successful capitalist
industrialization depended. England, too, would come to pay “the penalty
of the retarding lead," but only a century after it had staged the
breakthrough into a new mode of production.

   The centuries after A.D. 800 saw Europe transformed from a marginal
frontier of the Old World into a hub of wealth and power. The European
thrust was carried forward by two classes in alliance: a class of
military overlords bent on enlarging their tributary domains, and a
class of merchants hoping to convert tributary surpluses into money and
profit. Political and military consolidation gave rise to territorial
states that transferred power from autonomous overlords to paramount
rulers. In the process the tributary aristocracy lost its ability to
form independent alliances across state boundaries and yielded
increasingly to guidance from a political center, gaining in exchange
political guarantees of its tributary rights. At the same time, the
growth of trade multiplied opportunities for the conversion of tributary
surpluses into both strategic and prestige-conferring commodities.
Sponsorship of commerce thus enabled the new political systems to widen
the range of resources at their disposal. Yet commerce also posed a
potential threat: unfavorable exchanges could weaken the state, “consume
a nation's heart," much as favorable exchanges could strengthen it. The
new centralizing political systems had also to define their relation to
trade and to its ambivalent promise.

   Two Iberian powers, Portugal and Castile, emerged as successful
organizations of tribute takers in the course of wars against the Muslim
states of the peninsula. In both kingdoms royal control of commerce
enhanced the power of the kingship and provided a tribute-taking elite
with wealth to purchase goods abroad without altering the tributary
structure at home. Yet in both countries that wealth did not suffice to
cover the costs of administration and war. Royal bankruptcies and debts
transferred control of exchequer and trade to foreign merchant-bankers,
turning the two countries into "the Indies of the Genoese" (Suarez de
Figueroa 1617, quoted in Elliott 1970: 96). France, in contrast, avoided
this fate, achieving political centralization without dependence on
foreign credit. It granted priority to the production of home-grown
agricultural surpluses over the interests of commerce, underwriting, in
the process, the development of "classic" land-based tributary
feudalism. While France thus did not fall victim to foreign
indebtedness, it also curtailed for a long time to come its ability to
compete effectively in commerce abroad.

   While the Iberian powers fell prey to foreign commerce and France
eschewed it, the United Provinces of the Netherlands and England adapted
to it successfully. The United Provinces developed as a federation of
merchant oligarchies. Dependent since early times on sea-borne commerce,
the Dutch maximized its possibilities at the cost of securing a sizable
territorial base in their hinterland. They became the "Italians of the
North," like the trading cities of Genoa and Venice investing their
major efforts in the expansion of long-distance trade. England, in
contrast, was long a territorial power, dominated by a military
aristocracy of tribute takers until the fifteenth century, when it had
to abandon its predilect battlefields in France. Thrown back upon its
island, the English aristocracy destroyed itself in civil wars, clearing
the field for the emergence of a new aristocracy more attuned to the
commercial opportunities of sheep raising, the manufacture of woolen
cloth, and overseas commerce. At the same time, the new English Crown
proved less powerful than its continental counterparts; although no less
bent on centralization than the continental kings, the English monarchy
was successfully checked by both landowning gentry and merchant groups.
Crown, landowners, and merchants were thus forced into partnerships with
one another, producing flexible coalitions that redounded to the profit
of all partners.

   The United Provinces and England differed in their development, but
they shared—in contrast to the other European powers—a willingness to
turn commerce into an outright instrument of political competition.
England had early freed itself from the stranglehold of Italian and
Hansa merchants over its foreign commerce; the Dutch had won
independence from Spain by carrying economic and political war to their
enemies. This common experience led them both to use commerce, rather
than be used by it, as "a politique secret war" (John Hagthrope Gent
1625). In the hands of the Dutch and English ruling oligarchies,
commerce and warfare abroad became alternate means toward the same end,
the successful accumulation of treasure, "thè very body and blood of
kings" (Gerard Malynes 1623).

   In Dutch and English overseas expansion, therefore, the three means
of building state power that had underwritten political consolidation
within Europe were fused into a unitary policy, one aimed at maximizing
the possession of bullion in the hands of the state. To accomplish this
"Sanguinification of the Common-wealth," as Thomas Hobbes called it, it
was necessary to augment the flow of bullion toward the national
treasuries and to impede its outward flow. For the Netherlands and for
England this meant drawing as much gold and silver as possible out of
Portugal and Spain and their American possessions, and using this wealth
to organize and monopolize commerce in the Orient. Asia, since the Roman
era a purveyor of valued goods for the tribute-taking classes of Europe,
had for as long a time drained Europe of precious metals. Expanding
conquest and trade in Asia thus promised to reverse the asymmetrical
relation between debtor and creditor, and to give the European sea
merchants unimpeded access to the treasures of the East. Whoever
controlled that trade, wrote Charles Davenant in the seventeenth
century, would be able to "give law to all the commercial world."

  Washing gold. Copper engraving by Theodor de Bry. 1590. (Courtesy of
the Rare Books and Manuscripts Division. The New York Public Library.
Astor, Lenox, and Tilden Foundations)

Part Two In Search of Wealth

  The expansion of Europe overseas began with a minor event in 1415: the
seizure by the Portuguese of the Muslim port of Ceuta on the African
side of the Straits of Gibraltar. The Portuguese sought only to take
“the key to the Mediterranean" but the invasion of the North African
coast would lead them to the Atlantic islands and the African coast. In
thus opening up the routes of the southern Atlantic to European ships,
the Portuguese acted as an advance guard of the European thrust. We have
seen how diminishing surpluses drove the Europeans to seek resources
abroad, especially as increased wealth was required to finance the
emergent states. Such wealth could be found in the Levant of Byzantium
and Islam, but the road to riches through the eastern Mediterranean was
barred—on the one hand, by Byzantium, the Seljuk Turks, and after 1453
by the Ottoman Turks, and on the other hand, by Venice and Genoa, the
agents of European trade with the Orient. The new Atlantic route opened
by the Portuguese promised to bypass the Turkish roadblock to the
treasures of Asia.

   The Portuguese quickly followed the seizure of Ceuta with settlement
of Madeira in 1420, construction of a fort and warehouse on Arguin
Island off Mauritania in 1448, and a second fort at Elmina (Mina) in the
Bight of Benin in 1482. A year later they reached the mouth of the Congo
River, and in 1487 they rounded the Cape of Good Hope. The road to India
thus lay open, and in 1497 Vasco da Gama initiated his voyage around the
Cape to East Africa and to the Indian Malabar coast. In 1505 the
Portuguese built an advance base at Sofala in East Africa, and four
years later they launched their conquests of the key strong- points of
the south Asian seas. The Portuguese also crossed the Atlantic,
beginning with Cabral's landing in Brazil in 1500. By 1502 a converso
from Lisbon was authorized to ship brazilwood to Portugal. In the 1520s
sugar cultivation began in the Brazilian northeast, and after 1530
African slaves started to arrive in the new colony. Thus, the spice
trade came to link Lisbon with Asia; sugar connected the Portuguese
capital with America; and the slave trade forged a chain across the
southern Atlantic.

   From this time on, all struggles for dominance within Europe would
take on a global character, as the European states sought to control the
oceans and to oust their competitors from points of vantage gained in
Asia, America, or Africa. From then on, too, events in one part of the
globe would have repercussions in other parts. The several continents
would be drawn into one worldwide system of connections.

   The Portuguese expansion was soon followed by Castile-Aragón. In 1492
Columbus, sailing for Castile, reached the islands of the Caribbean.
Penetration of the mainland proceeded rapidly. Balboa crossed the
Isthmus of Panama to reach the Pacific in 1513; Cortés began his
conquest of Mexico in 1519; in 1530 Pizarro set out from Panama to
conquer Peru. A Spanish expeditionary force sailing from Mexico occupied
the Philippines in 1564, extending the Spanish sway into the Pacific. In
1580 the Spanish king succeeded to the Portuguese throne as well, tying
Portugal to Spain until 1640.

   The Dutch, then fighting their prolonged war against Spain, thus
found an excuse and an opportunity to oust the Portuguese from their
holdings in Asia and America. The Dutch East India Company was founded
in 1602 in order to break the Portuguese monopoly over the spice trade.
In 1621 a Dutch West India Company was created as well. Twenty years
later, the Dutch had taken most of the Portuguese strongholds along the
Atlantic coast of Africa, seized Brazil, occupied Curasao and several
other Caribbean islands, and established settlements in North America at
New Amsterdam, on Long Island, and in Delaware. But while the Dutch
seizure of the East Indies proved successful, they were unable to hold
most of their new western possessions. Brazil rose in rebellion, ousting
the Dutch in 1654; the Portuguese regained many of their African
strongholds; and the English captured New Amsterdam in 1644.

   The English expansion overseas was at first in the shadow of Dutch
power. The English East India Company had been chartered in 1600, but it
took second place to the Dutch Company until the latter part of the
seventeenth century. While the English had raided in the Americas during
their struggle with Spain in the sixteenth century, they established
themselves in the Spanish Caribbean only in 1624, with the settlement of
Barbados, followed by the seizure of Jamaica in 1655. They had founded a
number of settlements along the North American coast in Virginia,
Maryland, and New England, consolidating these in the face of Dutch
competition; in the course of the global struggle between the English
and the Dutch in the second half of the seventeenth century, these
English possessions in America gained as Dutch power receded. The
organization of a new English company to trade in Africa in 1660 allowed
England to make further inroads on Dutch trade.

   Yet as the Dutch threat receded, the English found themselves face to
face with French competition in North America. French colonization had
begun there early in the sixteenth century. In 1608 Quebec was founded;
in 1642, Montreal. As the fur trade expanded westward along the St.
Lawrence River into the Great Lakes, it gave rise to a prolonged
struggle in which the English strove to choke off the French advance.
This struggle would end only the capture of Canada by Britain in 1763.
On the other side of the globe, the English East India Company would
face the fierce competition of the French India Company (founded in
1664). This competition, too, was resolved in favor of England, when
ruinous war debts drove the French Company into bankruptcy in 1769.

   In less than two centuries, therefore, the European powers expanded
the scope of their trading activities to all the continents and made the
world their battleground. The quest for American silver, the fur trade,
the trade in slaves, and the search for Asian spices drew people into
new and unforeseen interdependencies and profoundly changed their lives.

5 Iberians in America

In 1493 Columbus returned from his first voyage to the Caribbean, in the
belief—which he maintained until his death—that he had reached islands
lying off the eastern coast of Asia. A year later, Castile-Aragón and
Portugal signed a treaty at Tordesillas staking out their claims to the
newly found lands. They drew a dividing line 370 leagues west of the
Cape Verde Islands. Castile, believing that it now controlled a direct
route to the Orient, claimed all lands west of the line—and thereby
acquired the major part of the Western Hemisphere. Portugal, intent
mainly upon keeping the Spaniards out of the South Atlantic, took all
lands to the east of the line and thus came into possession of Brazil.
Portugal, occupied with establishing its hegemony over the South
Atlantic and Monsoon Asia, was slow to consolidate its claims in the New
World. Castile-Aragón, however, moved rapidly to secure the fabled
treasures of the “Indies."

   Two decades after the discovery of the Americas, the Castilians had
already consolidated their bases in the Great Antilles and along the
Isthmus of Panama. Cortés's conquest of Mexico was completed in 1521
with the destruction of the Mexica capital of Tenochtitlán. Pizarro
captured the Inca capital of Cuzco in 1533. By 1541 the Castilians had
laid the foundations of the new city of Santiago in Chile. These Indies
belonged to the Crown of Castile and were administered by direct
representatives of the Castilian king sitting in Mexico City, center of
the Viceroyalty of New Spain, and in Lima, center of the Viceroyalty of
Peru.

   In this realm created by conquest, the prizes of victory were fame
and fortune—both dependent, it was thought, on the labor of the native
populations. The new society thus came to be divided from the outset
into "the natives of the land” (naturales de la tierra) and Spaniards.
The natives were categorized together under the cover term Indian, in
spite of marked differences in their languages and cultures. Above the
natives stood the Spaniards—the conquerors, their descendants, and all
the later arrivals who aspired to their status—who came to define
themselves as "men of reason" {gente de razón). Not that these men of
reason were all of one kind. The conquerors included nobles and
commoners, rich and poor. After the conquest they rapidly divided
further into various and often antagonistic layers: the captains of real
wealth and power; the men of moderate means, skill and influence; an
array of hungry followers who depended upon others for their "bread and
water" (paniaguados); and hosts of vagrants, who lived along the margins
of the developing networks of social relations. Yet they all shared an
interest in maintaining their common superiority as conquerors over the
conquered. They formed the dominant element in the towns, which enmeshed
the conquered countryside in a network of Spanish control, constituting
the foundation of Spanish power in the Indies. These towns were all laid
out along the same grid-pattern plan, pivoted upon a central square
containing mayoralty and church, site at once of the regular market and
the emergency call-up of military forces. Each town, with its oligarchic
cabildo (town council) of vecinos (citizens eligible to attend council
meetings), represented a microcosm of Spanish control in a sea of
"Indians."

   It was ultimately these Indians whom the colonists hoped to control.
Yet this basic resource underwent an immediate and catastrophic decline.

The Great Dying

  The "great dying” first affected the islands of the Caribbean. It then
spread to the mainland shores and to the Middle and South American
lowlands in general. Finally, it made inroads into the highlands, which
had supported the great polities of the Aztec, Chibcha, and Inca. Thus,
Espa?ola (Santa Domingo) had about a million inhabitants in 1492, when
first contacted by Columbus; by the end of the 1520s only insignificant
numbers survived (Sauer 1966: 65—69, 200—204). A primary cause of the
population decline was the spread of Old World pathogenic organisms to
which New World populations were not immune. The impact of smallpox and
measles, often complicated by respiratory ailments, was perhaps decisive
over wide areas. There were as many as fourteen major epidemics in
Mesoamerica and perhaps as many as seventeen in the Andean region
between 1520 and 1600 (Gibson 1964: 448-451; Dobyns 1963: 494). Other
illnesses had more localized effects. On the Mesoamerican coast,
malaria—probably introduced by Spanish merchants and soldiers from
Italy—caused regional havoc and then spread through the tropical
lowlands.

   The advent of pathogens, however, does not in itself furnish an
adequate explanation of what happened. One must ask also about the
social and political conditions that permitted the pathogens to
proliferate at so rapid a rate. On the islands and in the borderlands of
the Caribbean, these conditions clearly included the profligate use of
Indian labor in the search for gold, and (after 1494) the massive
intensification of slave raiding and slavery. Nicaragua alone lost, in
the first half of the sixteenth century, an estimated 200,000
inhabitants to slave raiders, who sold their prey in the Caribbean
islands, Panama, and Peru (MacLeod 1973: 52). Portuguese settlement in
Brazil also brought large-scale Indian slavery. By the 1560s there were
40,000 native Americans laboring as slaves in the Brazilian Northeast
(Hemming 1978: 143). During the last third of the sixteenth century,
native social relations had grown sufficiently deranged to cause the
Indians of Bahia to rise up in a great millenarian movement, the
Santidade. in which people ceased to grow food for themselves in the
hope that God would free them from slavery and make the Europeans their
slaves instead. In all, the slave- raiding bandeirantes of Sao Paulo are
thought to have furnished the Brazilian Northeast with 350,000 native
American slaves during the period of Brazilian slavery. Since most of
the populations of the lowlands were organized according to kin-ordered
modes, such massive drains of manpower severely curtailed their ability
to enforce and reproduce the rights to people that made their survival
possible.

   In Mesoamerica and in the Andean areas, large-scale populations had
supported complex tributary systems, such as the Aztec confederation and
the Inca domain. In these areas the catastrophic population decline
contributed to the fragmentation of existing polities. The pre-Hispanic
population of Mesoamerica has been estimated at 25 million, that of the
Inca domain at anywhere between 6 million (Rowe) and 30 million
(Dobyns). Whatever the baseline figure, the decline decimated the
population. In Mesoamerica the population count fell to a low point of
1.5 million by 1650, recovering slowly thereafter. The number of
inhabitants of the Spanish audiencias of Lima and Charcas, in Lower and
Upper Peru respectively, declined from 5 million at the time of the
Conquest to less than 300,000 in the 1780s and 1790s (Kubler 1946: 340).

   In these highland areas malnutrition probably increased the virulence
of the new diseases (see Feinman 1978). Food supplies both in
Mesoamerica and the Andes depended, in the first instance, on highly
organized and intensive systems of land use. Any dislocation of these
systems—through warfare, foreign encroachment, or death by illness of
some part of the labor force—threatened the survival of the remaining
population. The disruption of hydraulic works and the interruption of
exchanges between zones specializing in different products set off
ramifying consequences. Both regions were also dependent on a finely
calibrated system of food transfers—through the concentration and
redistribution of tribute in the Andes, through both tribute
redistribution and marketing arrangements in Mesoamerica. When these
mechanisms were destroyed, available surpluses could not reach
populations in need; many undoubtedly died as a result. Finally, these
ordering mechanisms depended, in turn, on the political and ideological
role of the ruling classes; the dislocation of the native elite and the
imposition of Spanish norms of government and religion severely
undermined this role.

   Within a short time the Europeans also began to appropriate land and
water for their own farms, mills, and pasture grounds, and to draft
native populations for work. In many parts of Mesoamerica, as in Spain,
sheep began to "eat” men. In the Andes the parallel development of
European agriculture on the coast and mining in the interior highlands
upset the synchronized ecological relationships between coast, piedmont,
highland, and puna (see chapter 2). The new agriculture and pastoralism
made use of crops brought in from the Old World—such as wheat—in
addition to the native crops of maize or potatoes, and introduced herd
animals that had not existed in the Americas before the Conquest, such
as horses, cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs. Yet the new system of food
production was not as intensive as the hydraulic horticulture of the
pre-Hispanic populations, even where dams were built, canals dug, and
land irrigated. Decreased intensity and integration of cultivation
required a smaller labor force, and thus the decline in population could
be weathered. An agriculture of clean-tilled fields and open pasture
range replaced a horticulture based on the meticulous cultivation,
drainage, and terracing of small plots.

The Wealth of Spanish America

The Search for Silver

  What the Iberians sought in the New World was, above all else,
treasure in the form of bullion. At first this meant gold. Placer gold
was found in the Antilles, but "the productive districts were few, of
small extent, and slight depth" (Sauer 1966: 198). The native population
was soon sacrificed in its extraction. The auriferous deposits of the
Central American isthmus proved ephemeral. Only Colombia—"Castilla de
oro," as it was soon called—became a significant gold producer. It
contributed most of the 185,000 kilograms of gold shipped to Seville
between 1503 and 1660, an amount that increased European gold supplies
by a fifth (Elliott 1966: 180). Yet it was silver production that
finally became the mainstay of Spanish wealth, and thus the major
indicator of the strength or debility of royal control.

   Silver deposits were first discovered by the Spaniards in 1545, when
an Indian prospector located the 2,000-foot-high silver mountain of San
Luis Potosí, in what is now Bolivia. This was followed by a succession
of strikes in the western mountain chains of Mexico: at Zacatecas in
1546, Guanajuato in 1548, Taxco in 1549, Pachuca in 1551, Sombrerete and
Durango in 1555, Fresnillo in 1569. Potosí, especially, became
synonymous with the notion of wealth beyond the dreams of avarice. Its
coat of arms proclaimed it to be "treasure of the world, king of all the
mountains, envy of all the kings." By 1611 it was the largest and
wealthiest city of the Americas, with a population of 160,000
inhabitants. It was located in a high-altitude environment (13,000 feet)
so inhospitable that all food had to be imported, and the wives of
Spaniards had to move to lower-lying valleys to raise their children. To
mine the ores of the magic mountain, the lords of the mines called on
the native American population. At Potosí in 1603, there were 58,800
Indian workers. Most of these, 43,200, were free day laborers; 10,500
were mingas, or contract laborers. The remainder, 5,100, were mitayos,
or labor draftees, most of whom were employed in the perilous work of
carrying the baskets of ore over treacherous ladders to the mouth of the
mine. A rotational, obligatory labor draft (mita) had existed in Inca
times; the Spaniards extended it to service in the mines.
Institutionalized in 1570, it required every village to make available
annually a seventh of its adult male population for work in the mines or
on public projects. The laborers were suppose to work for no more than
eighteen weeks every seven years and be paid wages, working under
conditions to be supervised by royal inspectors. The wages received
would also allow the miners to pay their tribute, now rendered payable
in silver.

   Actual practice, however, proved rather harsher than theory. At the
end of the sixteenth century, for instance, the province of Chuicuito on
the shores of Lake Titicaca sent 2,200 adult males each year to the
mines of Potosí. Since these draft laborers went accompanied by their
families, the 300-mile, two-month-long journey was negotiated by 7,000
people in all, as well as by 30,000 to 50,000 llamas to carry their
belongings and provide sustenance on the way. In Potosí the mitayo spent
four months in the mines and two months in additional compulsory
service. If he survived the six months of arduous labor, the return to
Chuicuito would require another two months. Once back home, he had to
depend on his neighbors until he could again harvest his own crops and
raise a new herd of llamas. At the same time, he was subject in his home
village to other mitas for domestic work, transportation, mail service,
innkeeping (tambos), and road work (Kubler 1946: 372 — 373). In the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, moreover, villagers could be
forced to produce artisan goods and to supply food, fodder, and wood to
the cities (Villamarin and Villamarin 1975: 73). Resident villagers
(hatunrunas) also had to pay tribute.

   During the period of sharp population decrease, service and tribute
quotas remained constant. Local authorities thus had to impress men into
service more often than stipulated by law, exact higher contributions
from those remaining in the villages, or hire contract laborers (mingas)
to stand in for absentees. Many labor draftees refused to return to
their communities when they had completed their turn of duty, attempting
in this way to avoid further tribute and mita obligation. Some remained
in the mining centers, swelling the number of free laborers. Others took
service with Spaniards as serfs, or yanaconas, until there were nearly
as many serfs as tribute-paying villagers (Villamarin and Villamarin
1975: 76; Kubler 1946: 377—378). Still other mitayos became migrants
.forasteros. Although the colonial records do not always distinguish
between village-affiliated cultivators, who migrated regularly between
various ecological zones in traditional Andean fashion, and
nonaffiliated migrants, outright movement was frequent and extensive
(Rowe 1957: 180; Santamaría 1977: 255 — 257). Finally, some highlanders
simply fled into the tropical forest (Rowe 1957: 175).

Iberians in America 137

Wooden beaker (kero) o) pre-Conquest style, Cuzco region, depicting a
hunting scene with Spanish riders. (Photograph courtesy Museum of the
American Indian. Heye Foundation)

   While the mita in Potosí and Upper Peru was not abolished until 1823,
in Mexico the use of rotational labor in the mines disappeared soon
after the beginning of the seventeenth century. On the one hand,
rotational labor was needed for public work projects, such as the
drainage of the Valley of Mexico. On the other hand, by 1600 there
already existed a sizable free, wage-paid labor force in the mining
districts. It was made up of Indians, who quickly lost their cultural
and linguistic connections with their home villages, or poor Spaniards,
and of Africans, both slave and free. Mining was carried out on a basis
analogous to sharecropping. The mine owner would contract with an
independent miner (a buscón, or prospector), who either worked on his
own behalf or hired others to dig for him. The owner furnished the
prospector with implements and powder, receiving one-half of the product
in return. The prospector paid for lighting in the shaft and for
transporting the ore to the mouth of the mine, receiving thereupon the
other half of the product. This he could sell either to the owner of the
mine or directly to the smelter. But, the extraction of silver ore with
mercury, a process entailing the hazards of mercury poisoning and
silicosis, was usually assigned to slaves, first Indians and later
Africans. This labor system—combining free labor in mining and slave
labor in processing—served the Mexican mines until the very end of the
eighteenth century, when the great mines at Guanajuato more than made up
for the decline of silver output in Potosí.

The Flow of Silver

To channel the flow of silver to Spain, the Crown turned travel and
trade with the Indies into a royal monopoly. The agency created by the
Crown to control the flow of specie, commodities, and people was the
House of Trade (Casa de Contratación) in Seville. The Casa licensed both
ships and merchants for the trade, issued permits to move passengers and
goods, and received the precious silver from the Indies. In the second
half of the sixteenth century, a system of regular annual sailings by
massed fleets was organized to safeguard the Atlantic crossing against
external attack. After 1560 two fleets left each year from Cadiz or
Seville to sail to the Americas. The first, the New Spanish fleet,
landed at Veracruz in Mexico. The second, the Peruvian fleet, sailed for
Cartagena in Colombia or for Portobelo on the Isthmus of Panama. From
Cartagena mule trains carried the European goods across Andean paths to
Upper Peru. From Portobelo other mule trains took their cargoes to the
Pacific coast, for coastwise transshipment to Lima. On their return
trips, the mule trains carried silver and American goods to the fleets
wintering in their American ports before the voyage home. The new
Spanish fleet loaded again at Veracruz, the Peruvian fleet at the
Colombian and Panamanian ports. The two fleets converged at Havana,
stopping at Antillean ports on the way, and then set sail for the mouth
of the Guadalquivir in Spain.

   Between 1503 and 1660 more than seven million pounds of silver
reached Seville from America, tripling the European supply of the metal
(Elliott 1966: 180). The Crown received about 40 percent of this amount,
either in settlement of American taxes or in payment of the royal fifth
levied on all silver production. Even so, all the silver of the Americas
could not stave off the bankruptcy of the Spanish Crown, so heavily was
it overextended in its military pursuits in Europe and all around the
globe. Until the 1550s the Emperor Charles V received

200,000 to 300,000 ducats of American silver a year, but he spent about
a million, and in thirty-seven years he ran up a debt of 39 million
ducats, mostly to foreign creditors. Philip II, more parsimonious than
his father, received about 2 million ducats of silver from America by
the 1590s, in addition to almost 8 million in taxes raised from
Castilian and ecclesiastical revenues. Yet by that time he was spending
over 21 million ducats a year (Elliott 1966: 203, 282-283).
Simultaneously, the inflow of silver drove up prices in a home economy
already weakened by a decline in domestic food production, by a rise in
wood exports to pay for cheaper foreign imports, and by a heavy increase
in the importation of foreign manufactured goods for use both in Spain
and in the Indies. The advent of American silver thus did little to
relieve the financial problems of the Crown, while it did much to
exacerbate the decline of Spanish industry in favor of Spain's
competitors.

   Spain witnessed a massive, general rise in prices, which increased
the costs of commodities both to the Crown and to the people.
Contemporary witnesses of this “price revolution" and later economic
historians alike saw its primary cause in the heavy influx of bullion. A
greater supply of money may certainly have played a significant role,
but it cannot account for the economic crisis in its entirety. Increased
demand for European goods in the Americas may have driven up prices in
the sixteenth century; there was also an increased demand for goods at
home. When the American dependencies grew more self-sufficient in goods
and services, this perhaps had an adverse effect on the home country.
Most silver, however, did not stay in Spain: at the end of the sixteenth
century, for instance, three-fifths of all the bullion that entered
Spain went abroad in settlement of royal and private debts. Again, as
the American traffic developed, it absorbed ever larger sums in ships,
supplies, and protection. Spanish reliance on the export of primary
products such as wool, wine, and olive oil in order to acquire naval
stores, tin, linen, fish, and cereals created a balance of payments
problem, which was met, in turn, by larger exports of silver.

Secondary Exports: Dyestuffs and Cocoa

Silver was the main export of the Spanish Americas, but cochineal,
indigo, and cacao all assumed a measure of importance. Cochineal is a
red dye produced from an insect that feeds on cactuses. As many as
70,000 dried insects are required to produce one pound of cochineal dye.
Native American communities, especially in the province of Oaxaca
(Mexico), were pressured into gathering and processing these insects by
encomenderos and royal corregidores. Cochineal grew in importance as an
export in the second half of the sixteenth century, becoming, after
silver, the most significant export of New Spain. Indigo, another
dyestuff, produces a blue dye of great natural fastness. It is obtained
by steeping the leaves of a shrub and allowing the resulting sludge to
settle into cakes. It was first produced through the use of seasonal
native labor, on the same Pacific coast of Central America that had
first produced cacao. In the seventeenth century, increased
transportation costs favored the relocation of the indigo industry to
the Mexican lowlands, where Yucatan in particular remained a significant
producer until the nineteenth century.

   Cacao had been grown in pre-Hispanic times along the Pacific vertient
of Central America. Under the Spanish, the native American population
was forced to pay cacao in tribute and to settle advances in goods
extended by royal officials. Officials and encomenderos even demanded
cacao deliveries from highland cultivators, who had to descend to the
coast to labor in the cacao stands in order to pay their tribute. High
mortality rates, however, limited the production of cacao, and Central
America increasingly yielded priority in its production to slave
plantations of the tropical shorelands of Ecuador and Venezuela.

The Siphon of External Trade

Spain took silver, gold, cacao, cochineal, and indigo from the New
World, and returned high-priced manufactured and luxury goods. A large
share—perhaps most—of these goods originated outside Spain, mainly in
northwestern Europe; they were priced to yield taxes and customs duties
to the state, as well as to produce monopolistic profits for the
sellers. Exchange was in the hands of merchants who were organized at
the European end in the merchant guild, or consulado, of Seville and at
the American end in the twin guilds of New Spain and Lima. On the
European side the guild dovetailed with the royal House of Trade, the
major government agency charged with supervising ships, people, and
goods traveling to and from the Indies and with collecting taxes and
customs for the royal coffers. The trade was purposefully confined to
narrow channels, intended to be carried on exclusively by monopolistic
agencies using Spanish ships and Castilian agents. It was not created by
the free working principles of demand and supply; it was rather—in
Carmagnani's phrase—"constrained trade," constrained by demand on the
European side (1975: 31).

   This constrained trade involved, in fact, two different cycles of
transactions. One was transatlantic, the other intra-American. To
activate the transatlantic cycle, European merchants bought commodities
with money and sent them to their factors or agents (habilitadores) in
the New World, in the hope of getting repaid with American commodities
that could be sold at high monetary profits. There was an investment of
money at the European start of the cycle of transaction, and a
conversion of commodities into money and profits in Europe at the end of
the cycle. Within the Americas, however, there was no exchange of money
for money, but only an exchange of commodities for commodities. The
American factors advanced European commodities to mine owners or
cochineal entrepreneurs, who had to settle their accounts with their
factors by delivering American commodities. As prices for manufactured
goods rose in Europe, the exchange values of American silver and other
commodities declined. This disproportion then put pressure on American
producers to keep down or to reduce the costs of production. We shall
see how this cycle contributed to the resurgence of tributary domination
in New World agriculture and livestock ranching. It also led to a great
deal of fraud and coercion in the putting-out systems through which
cochineal and indigo were obtained from the native producers.

New Systems of Supply

As silver mining assumed a pivotal role in the economy of the Castilian
Indies, it came to dominate and reshape the structure of the Castilian
domains of the New World. Reliance on mining shifted the key economic
areas of the realm away from the zones of intensive pre-Hispanic
horticulture and settlement to the silver veins of the arid Sierra Madre
of New Spain and of the forbidding Bolivian altiplano. It produced major
changes in the production of foodstuffs and raw materials. It entailed a
shift in government policies from an initial concern with ensuring royal
control of both conquerors and conquered to policies aimed primarily at
maximizing mining and securing its supplies. These shifts created a new
geography and altered the ecological, economic, and political conditions
of the conquered populations.

   These changes were closely interconnected. The diminution of the
native American population and the destruction of the political controls
basic to intensive native horticulture called for new ways of producing
foodstuffs and livestock products for the mines and towns. Mining
created a heavy demand for food and drink to supply men and working
animals, skins and hides for ropes and containers, tallow for candles
and fatwood torches to light the mine shafts, mercury for the extraction
of silver from ore, blasting powder, wood to fuel smelters, and large
numbers of draft animals for work and transportation. The new
agricultural economy also had to feed the Spanish towns, which supported
the grid of Spanish control, the ecclesiastical establishments in towns
and countryside, and the stopping places along the traffic routes
linking mining locations, towns, and ports of call. The needs of the
mines and the requirements of urban conspicuous consumption demanded,
moreover, that products be made available as cheaply as possible.

   The Crown assisted the growth of this support system in a number of
ways. Since mercury was an essential ingredient in the processing of
silver ore, and constituted a major cost in mining, the Crown strove to
guarantee the supply of the metallic element at low prices. Mercury
production and sale was a royal monopoly; Peruvian miners received it
from the royal mine at Huancavelica, the miners of New Spain from the
Spanish mine at Almadén. The Crown also pursued a policy of ensuring
food supplies to the mines and towns at regulated prices through public
granaries. Above all, royal policy increasingly transferred both land
and labor to agricultural entrepreneurs, thus abandoning early attempts
by the Crown to maintain its own sovereign control of the Indian
population.

   It had been the initial intention of the Crown to deny the incoming
conquerors any direct control of land and of Indian hands to work it. It
wanted to inhibit the development of an independent class of tributary
overlords in the Indies, and thus insisted at first on granting the
services of native Americans only on its own terms. This was done by the
issuing of temporary grants of trusteeship (encomienda). An encomienda
permitted the recipient to employ stipulated amounts of Indian tribute
and labor in his own service, in return for Christianizing their pagan
souls. A grant of encomienda did not, however, bestow on the encomendero
(trustee) rights over Indian land or unlimited rights to Indian
services. These rights the Crown reserved to itself. The Crown hoped for
the emergence of a society dichotomized into a sector of conquerors and
a separate Indian sector. Thus, it strove to interpose its royal
officials between Spanish employers of Indian labor power and the
Indians themselves.

   After 1542 encomenderos were required to petition a royal official if
they wanted to have native laborers assigned to them for specific tasks.
The official was supposed to receive such petitions, establish
priorities among them, assign laborers on a rotational basis, and ensure
that they be paid wages at a stipulated rate. This mode of labor
allotment came to be known officially as the repartimiento. In
Mesoamerica, however, it continued to be referred to by the Aztec word
for obligatory labor on public works, cuatequitl, and in the Andes it
continued to be called by the Quechua term mita.

   Another means used to cut off the Spaniards from the Indian
population was the formal abolition of Indian slavery in 1542. Indian
slavery was declared illegal everywhere, except in frontier zones where
rebellious populations refused to accept Spanish sovereignty. This meant
that Araucanians from southern Chile could be taken prisoner and
enslaved until the 1680s. This was also true on the northwestern
frontiers of Mexico, where Apache, Navaho, and Shoshoni continued to be
enslaved well into the nineteenth century (Bailey 1966). Yet in the core
areas of Spanish occupation, Indian slavery was abolished, or at least
significantly curtailed. This prohibition of slavery did not extend,
however, to Africans, who were imported in large numbers to replace the
declining native American population, particularly in the lowlands.

The Hacienda

Gradually the trusteeships were superseded by haciendas, landed estates
worked by laborers settled upon them and directly dependent upon the
estate owners. The Crown did not possess enough personnel or resources
to stem their growth, while agrarian entrepreneurs in full control of
land and labor were better able than trustees, dependent on royal
officialdom, to respond to the demands of town and mine. Yet the
development of haciendas did not everywhere take the same form or follow
the same rhythm. They appeared earlier in underpopulated areas where
livestock could be raised with few hands. They developed later where
either native villages or royal corregidores interested in native labor
and tribute opposed hacienda claims to land and manpower. Thus, in the
Peruvian highlands hacienda building appears to have been a phenomenon
of the eighteenth century, not before. Elsewhere, encomenderos who
obtained their grants in the sixteenth century became owners of
haciendas only a century later. Legally, a grant to an encomienda could
not produce a hacienda: encomienda grants were royal donations that
neither gave rights to land nor permitted the grantee to set the terms
of native labor services or tribute. The hacienda, in contrast, rested
squarely on the legal ownership of land, and upon the ability of the
owner to negotiate the terms of the laboring contract directly.

   Most of the hacienda workers were recruited among native Americans.
Sometimes hacienda owners obtained workers by depriving native
settlements of their land. At other times they attracted migrants who
had left their tribute-laden villages to settle elsewhere. The hacienda
owners also offered to pay the tribute on their workers' behalf, or to
extend credit in other forms. Outright enserfment through debt,
including the establishment of heritable debt, seems to have developed
in later centuries.

   Usually the worker was given access to a portion of hacienda land in
return for stipulated services and crop deliveries to the owner. The
owner reserved for himself the casco (center) with the processing
machinery, the strategic supply of water, and the land most suitable for
growing the major commodity crop, leaving to his laborer-tenants the
poorer and more peripheral lands of his estate. The hacienda thus came
to be based on a dual structure of commercial crop farming and predial
servitude by serf-tenants. Over time there was an alternation between
direct management by the owner and cash cropping by serf-tenants. An
enlargement of the market favored expansion of the owner's sector at the
expense of the serf-tenants; a decline of the market favored the
tenants.

   Haciendas could serve different purposes. Those held by owners of
mines or workshops provided the necessary products for these operations
at little or no cost. Other haciendas produced for a regional market
created by the demand of nearby towns, mining centers, or ports. Some
geographical zones became specialized in producing food for such
markets. The Central Valley of Chile grew wheat for Peru; the
agricultural valleys of Cochabamba and Sucre fed Upper Peru (Bolivia);
the Valley of Mexico and the Bajío region provided Mexico City and the
mining centers with grain. The dry Mexican northland raised cattle for
towns and mines, as did the drainage of the Rio de la Plata. Some
lowland zones specialized in the production of sugar and distilled
liquor for internal markets; the Mexican uplands grew century plants and
manufactured agave beer (pulque); the tropical vertient of the Andes
produced coca leaf. Everywhere there were also haciendas that were owned
by ecclesiastical establishments or upper-class family clusters, which
included clients and dependents. Sometimes haciendas changed their
function, shifting from supplying a town granary to supplying a mine, or
changing from a marketing orientation to subsistence. They were also
responsive to changing markets and could grow or contract their
operations as demand fluctuated.

   Despite the adaptability of the haciendas, their potential growth was
limited by the size of effective demand as much as by difficulties of
transport. They seemed to function most profitably where they could sell
in a secure but restricted local or regional market, in which relative
scarcity guaranteed price levels. This was true, for instance, of
haciendas producing a European staple like wheat, for which there was a
small but secure market of European consumers. It was also the case in
those situations where obligatory sales to the public granary
forestalled price competition from native American communities that
could often produce more cheaply.

   In general, haciendas were not very profitable enterprises. Most of
them incurred debts and then often passed into the hands of new owners,
among whom ecclesiastical organizations were the most frequent and the
most successful. David Brading probably described general conditions in
the Hispanic Americas when he characterized the Mexican hacienda as

a sink through which drained without stop the surplus capital
accumulated in the export economy. The fortunes created in mining and
commerce were invested in land, there to be slowly dissipated or to be
gradually transferred into the coffers of the Church. In consequence, a
continuous replacement in the hacendado class occurred. [1977: 140]

Indian Communities

Towns and mines came to be ringed about by haciendas; the haciendas were
in turn surrounded by settlements of the surviving native populations.
This settlement pattern was oriented toward the mines; yet it was not
merely geographic or ecological. It was organized by the political
economy it embodied, in which each lower level yielded surplus to the
level above it. Miners sold to merchants, who extracted high prices for
European manufactured goods. Mine owners then pressed upon hacienda
owners or managers to supply them with foodstuffs and raw materials at
low prices. Hacienda owners and managers pressed upon the native
communities, drawing their members either into dependent serf-tenancy on
the estates or into seasonal employment at low wages. Within this
hierarchy, the emerging Indian communities came to occupy the lowest
rung.

   These repúblicas de indios, as the Spaniards called them, have often
been treated by anthropologists as if they were repositories of a pre-
Hispanic past untouched by three centuries of Castilian domination. Yet
these communities were given organizational form by the colonial
bureaucracy, as integral components of the Hispanic state and its
economic system. In setting up these units, the Crown followed a double
purpose: to break up the pre-Conquest apparatus of power, and to ensure
the separation and fragmentation of the resulting jurisdictions. While
the destruction of the overarching Inca, Mexica, or Chibcha polities
permitted the re-emergence of some older claims to rule and loyalty, in
general the outcome was the replacement of pre-Conquest states by small
tributary lordships and local communities.

   The higher Indian nobility was formally assimilated into the Spanish
nobility and confirmed in their claims to tribute, property, and
pensions, but they were deprived of any access to the commanding levers
of power. Conversion of this stratum to Christianity also ensured its
severance from pre-Conquest sources of ideological influence and
integrated it into the ongoing activities of the Church. The lower
orders of the Indian nobility—principales in Mesoamerica, kurakas in the
Andes— were charged with the supervision of local communities. Like the
African chiefs installed three centuries later by the British to rule
over African populations in "indirect rule," this local nobility came to
mediate between conquerors and conquered. They represented their
constituencies to the external authorities, while striving to maintain
their jurisdiction internally through the exercise of traditional claims
and loyalties.

   The communities over which they were installed were not the same as
those that had existed before the Conquest. Many pre-Conquest
communities had been nearly wiped out by the ravages of the Great Dying,
and new communities were formed through the aggregation of population
remnants brought together for closer administrative and ecclesiastical
control. This general Spanish policy of resettlement and concentration
redefined the nature of local constituencies not only demographically
but also economically and administratively. Each new community was given
legal identity, with its own administrative local council, or cabildo,
and ecclesiastical identity, with its local chapel or church dedicated
to a patron saint. It was also redefined economically, receiving rights
over village lands and resources, as well as obligations to furnish
tribute. These exactions included tribute in specie to the Crown,
tribute in goods and services to the Spanish trustee, or encomendero,
tribute to the recognized Indian lord, and obligatory labor on
government projects, such as the construction of dams or roads.

   Royal officials, corregidores de indios, watched over the Indian
administrative sector made up of these communities. Special Indian
courts were set up to attend to legal cases brought by local
representatives. This administrative structure was inspired by the
original intention of the Crown to keep Indians and Spaniards separate.
Yet the Indian courts were soon swamped by complaints against Spanish
conquerors and entrepreneurs who strove to incorporate native lands and
water courses into their haciendas. Moreover, the local Indian elite of
principales or kurakas, charged with managing community resources and
obligations, often enlarged the scope of their own power in the villages
by entering into collusion with outside Spanish power holders. The
corregidores, in turn, were in a privileged position to benefit
commercially from their administrative offices. They could, as in Peru,
collect tribute, sell it at auction, buy it back at half its market
value up to the amount due for tribute, and then resell it at the market
rate (Rowe 1957: 163). They could buy goods cheaply from merchants in
town and force their Indians to buy them at high prices., or they could
buy products from the Indians to sell more dearly elsewhere. They could,
finally, become entrepreneurs in their own right. Thus, in western
Guatemala a corregidor could buy raw cotton on the coast, force Indian
women in his district to spin and weave it, and then sell the cloth back
to the Indians or to colonists at a handsome profit (see MacLeod 1973:
316).

   Such Indian leaders and royal officials rallied to the defense of the
native communities if they saw their own sources of power and profit
threatened by outside interests. At the same time, confronted with an
increasing demand for labor by industrial and agricultural entrepreneurs
in the face of a decreasing native population, many were persuaded to
reduce the level of their zeal as public defenders. The Crown, too,
discovered that its interest in maximizing monetary returns through
taxes or emoluments often ran counter to its role of protecting the
native Americans. If a colonist used labor and resources in some
combination that promised to yield surplus for the Crown, political or
moral considerations were frequently set aside. This was especially true
as entrepreneurs shifted from stocking up the goods that were valued in
the pre-Hispanic past—such as cacao, precious feathers, and cotton
textiles—to rearranging land and labor in order to grow wheat, mine
silver, produce woolen cloth, collect cochineal, or raise sheep for
wool. When money began to talk, it spoke Spanish rather than Nahuatl or
Quechua.

   Finally, this rearrangement of resources to produce goods for mines
and towns gave rise to new groups who were not part of Indian
communities. These included artisans, laborers, and servants who worked
in or about the new settlements, and middlemen who moved goods from one
location to another. This growing population of Indians and mestizos
soon filled the social and economic interstices between the communities
and the formal tributary pyramid, and began to connect people in
localities with activities and interests beyond. Repeated complaints by
royal officials that outsiders were entering Indian communities in
pursuit of their own interests, and that members of Indian communities
were leaving their assigned jurisdictions to join the mestizo or cholo
outsiders, demonstrate that community boundaries were often permeable
and negotiable.

   The communities, moreover, were not internally unitary and
undifferentiated. At one point in time, a community might unite under a
principal of its own against the encroachment of Spanish hacienda owners
or entrepreneurs. At another time, that principal—having become like a
hacienda owner or entrepreneur himself in his dealings with the people
entrusted to him—might join the Spaniards or be accused of doing so by
his followers. Elsewhere, merchants and cultivators grown well-to-do
within a community might enter into conflict with superordinate
authorities, including their own Indian overlord, and represent
themselves as spokesmen for their community against tyranny. These same
merchants and cultivators, drawn into the market through the production
of cochineal or cotton cloth, might then close off the community against
the outside, in order to maintain an internal monopoly of jurisdiction
over labor.

   In both viceroyalties communities were allowed and expected to manage
their internal affairs through a hierarchy of local officials, endowed
with Spanish titles and based on Hispanic prototypes. At the same time,
the Church installed ecclesiastical organizations, on the pattern of
Spanish sodalities, to stage the rituals connected with the annual
Catholic calendar. In the larger Spanish and Hispanicizing settlements
these two sets of organizations, civil and religious, remained quite
distinct, but in the Indian communities they were generally merged into
common civil-religious hierarchies, in which tenure of a secular
political office alternated with sponsorship of a religious event. Such
sponsorship usually involved large outlays for fireworks, decorations,
incense and candles, musicians, and for food and drink to be distributed
among the participants. This usually meant that only the better-off
members of a community could advance to the higher and more costly
positions of religious and political authority, which demanded a great
deal of economic redistribution. Conversely, such redistribution came to
play an important part in the economy of recipient households, rendering
them economically as well as politically and religiously dependent on
the operations of the sacralized officialdom. The civil-religious
hierarchies thus installed a system of elite domination within the
communities, while at the same time allowing that elite to represent the
community as a whole before external power holders and authorities.

   The hierarchy also carried on the rituals relating the community to
the supernatural. These rituals characteristically came to bear a dual
character, part Christian and part pagan. Christianity is less concerned
with defining sacred space than sacred time; while it takes cognizance
of sacred sites, such as Jerusalem, Rome, Assisi, or Lourdes, it places
central emphasis upon the cumulation of time through the Fall,
Redemption, Judgment, and Resurrection. In contrast, the pre-Hispanic
religions were strongly organized in spatial terms, using segments of
space to demarcate segments of time, attributes of social groups,
aspects of nature, and cohorts of supernaturals. The fusion of the
Christian liturgical calendar with pre-Hispanic devotions connected the
time frame of Christian salvation with the ecological referents of pre-
Christian traditions. In pre-Hispanic times these local ecological
referents formed part of an encompassing ideological organization of
sacred space, organized and maintained by the overarching Inca, Mexica,
or Chibcha polity. The Conquest destroyed this larger ideological
framework and substituted the Christian economy of salvation for it. At
the same time, this dominant liturgy was joined to local belief and
practice by missionaries attempting to anchor it in local understandings
and by local practitioners striving to render it expressive of local
interests. The outcome was the development of religious structures that
varied from community to community and that paralleled in their
ideological localocentrism the political separateness of communities.

   The Indian communities were thus dependent parts of a larger
political and economic system, and changed as that system changed. They
constituted neither "tribal” remnants of the pre-Hispanic past, nor a
static type of peasant community characterized by a set of fixed
attributes. They grew up in the tug of war between conquerors and
conquered, and were subject to the interplay of external and internal
interests. The Hispanic state granted them rights to land and revenue,
yet obliged them to deliver tribute and labor as part of their political
obligations. Often they proved defenseless against predatory landowners,
officials, and churchmen. At times, heavy exactions drove them to
rebellion, noncooperation, or flight. The communities were allowed to
govern themselves through their civil-religious hierarchies. These local
officials might defend the community against external authorities and
competitors, but they might also aggrandize themselves at the expense of
their fellow villagers or betray their interests to outside power
holders.

   From the perspective of the larger Hispanic colonial order, the
Indian communities did not constitute its primary foundations but rather
its secondary, lateral supports. The center of the order consisted of
the mining economy and the activities that supplied it. The Indian
communities, in turn, acted as reservoirs of labor and as sources of
cheap agricultural and craft products. Where the Indians had to pay
tribute in money, they had to hire themselves out for wages or produce
for a market. Alternatively they worked off tribute obligations through
payments in kind. Subject to labor drafts by the public authorities,
moreover, they could be made to work on public-works projects or for
private interests that the royal corregidores deemed of public
importance. They thus paid with their poverty for the system of imperial
extraction.

Brazil and the Caribbean

While the Spaniards were erecting their realm of the Indies upon a
highland base of silver, the Portuguese initiated the production of
sugar on plantations set up in the tropical lowlands of the Brazilian
littoral. Hispanic agriculture in New Spain and Peru was geared to
supplying the internal needs of the colonies, but the new Portuguese
enterprises were organized from the start to raise a crop for export.
What silver was to Spanish America, sugar would long to be to Brazil and
Portugal. Yet in the course of the seventeenth century, sugar growing
also spread to the islands of the Caribbean, and the Dutch, English, and
French came to rival Portuguese production of the crop. Whereas the
agriculture of the Hispanic mainland faced away from Europe toward the
towns and mining camps of the interior, the developing plantation belt
of tropical America was linked directly to European markets.

   In planting sugar on the clayey black soil (massapé) of the Brazilian
Northeast, the Portuguese transferred to the New World an agricultural
complex of long standing in the European Mediterranean, where the Arabs
had introduced it toward the end of the first millennium a.d. During the
centuries preceding the conquest of the New World, sugar growing had
diffused steadily westward across the Mediterranean islands. In the last
quarter of the fifteenth century, the Portuguese began to grow sugar on
Madeira, and soon afterward on Sao Tomé in the Gulf of Guinea, using
slaves purchased on the nearby West African coast. In 1500 an
India-bound Portuguese fleet first sighted The Land of the True
Cross—soon to be called Brazil after the red dyewood that grew along its
shores. A quarter-century later, duty was being paid on Brazilian sugar
at the Lisbon customs house. Portuguese plans to expand sugar production
in Africa were thwarted by African resistance, which restricted the
Portuguese to the coast; instead, they intensified production in Brazil.
By 1570 there were already sixty mills in Brazil producing

180,000 arrobas of sugar a year, and in that same year production in the
Brazilian regions of Pernambuco, Bahia, and Rio de Janeiro matched the
levels of Madeira and Sao Tomé. After 1570 Brazilian sugar production
increased exponentially, reaching more than a million arrobas after 1627
(see Barrett and Schwartz 1975: 541).

   The focus of production in the Brazilian countryside was the grinding
mill, the engenho. It ground both sugar produced on its own land and
sugar raised on freeholds by lavradores de cana, the latter accounting
for perhaps half the crop. Slave labor, first by Brazilian Indians and
later by Africans, was important, but free wage labor was also
significant. The largest mill in Brazil in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, Sergipe do Conde in Bahia with a grinding capacity of about
180 tons of cane, owned 259 workers in 1600, but it also paid wages to
270 laborers. It is estimated that the 20 freeholders delivering cane to
Sergipe may have owned another 200 slaves (Barrett and Schwarts 1975:
547).

   While production was in Portuguese hands, processing and financing
came to be controlled by Flemings and Dutchmen. From the beginning, much
of the sugar produced by the Portuguese was shipped to the Low
Countries. First Antwerp, and after 1590 Amsterdam, became the main
center for sugar refining as well as for financing of the Portuguese
sugar trade. Even during the period from 1580 to 1640, when the kingdom
of Portugal was joined to the Crown of Castile, the Dutch managed to
retain their Portuguese contacts through Portuguese intermediaries. The
Dutch made an abortive attempt in 1624—1625 to seize Bahia outright;
simultaneously they moved in central Africa, to take hold of the
profitable source of slaves in Luanda. In 1629 they invaded Pernambuco,
occupying the sugar districts for fifteen years. In 1645, however, the
population of Dutch Brazil, led by the debt-ridden Luso- Brazilian
planters, rose against their overlords. Although the Dutch had native
American allies in some groups of Potiguar and Gé-speaking Tapuia, other
Potiguar and the Maranhao Tobajara backed the Portuguese. In the ensuing
guerilla warfare, the Luso-Brazilians came to control the countryside,
and the Dutch were increasingly forced into the coastal cities. They
held on to Recife until 1654, when they were forced to capitulate there,
too. The guerilla tactics used against them had taken their toll. At the
same time, the Netherlands had become embroiled in their first
commercial war with England. The decisive factors, however, were that
much of the sugar industry of Brazil had been physically destroyed, that
the effort of founding an enduring Dutch sugar colony in Brazil had cost
too much, and that the stockholders of the Dutch West Indies Company
were beginning to grumble about costs and losses.

   Beset by difficulties in Brazil, the Dutch shifted their activities
to the Caribbean. English-owned islands like St. Kitts, Nevis, and
Barbados had begun to grow tobacco on small farms in the second quarter
of the seventeenth century. By 1639 the European markets were glutted
with the leaf, and many islanders migrated elsewhere in search of better
opportunities. In the early 1640s, Dutch from Brazil introduced English
settlers in Barbados to the raising of sugar cane. They extended the
English credit so they could acquire African slaves, as well as the
boiling pans and cooling pots needed to transform cane juice into sugar,
and they offered to sell the product in Europe. Sugar quickly
transformed the economic and political scene of the islands. The
tobacco-raising small holders became “poor whites" and, rapidly
displaced by the large plantations worked by African slaves, they
migrated elsewhere. In 1655 the English invaded Jamaica, driving out the
last Spaniards five years later.

   Cane cultivation in the islands grew rapidly thereafter. It soon
surpassed in scale the Luso-Brazilian sugar industry and proved able to
accumulate capital even in the face of ever-declining world sugar
prices. The rate of profits on known sugar plantations was continuously
positive—perhaps as much as 20 percent on capital invested before 1700,
at least 10 percent between 1750 and 1775, and about 7.5 percent around
1790 (Craton 1974: 139). Much of the life of Bristol and Liverpool in
England came to depend on Jamaica and Barbados; at the end of the
eighteenth century, William Pitt the Younger estimated that four-fifths
of the British incomes drawn from overseas derived from the West Indies.
Nantes and Bordeaux in France were similarly supported by the
productivity of French-held Saint Domingue (Haiti). When the Haitian
slaves rose in rebellion against their overlords in 1791, they
demolished a structure that had absorbed two-thirds of French foreign
commercial interests.

Contraband

One of the consequences of the spread of sugar cultivation to the
Caribbean islands was to create a series of advance bases for the
European Atlantic powers at the very gates of entry into the Castilian
realm of the Indies. This Dutch, English, and French advance came at a
time when Spanish power was on the decline. While the remittances of
silver to Spain rose steadily throughout the sixteenth century, they
peaked in the century's last decade and declined thereafter. Yet
although the amount of silver shipped to Spain decreased, the production
of silver in the New World did not fall appreciably. The silver now
stayed in the Americas, or it sought outlets through other channels.
Some of it paid for better defenses against foreign encroachment and
 competition. Much of it, however, went into contraband dealings with
the enemies of the Spanish Crown—the Dutch West Indies Company and the
English sea traders.

Europeans building a caravel on the Caribbean shore of Panama (Veragua).
Copper engraving by Theodor de Bry. 1590. (Courtesy of the Rare Books
and Manuscript Division, The New York Public Library. Astor, Lenox, and
Tilden Foundations)

   As Spanish power grew weaker, these competitors and antagonists
increasingly sought access to the riches of the Spanish possessions in
the New World. Growing numbers of foreigners bought the privileges of
naturalization, which allowed them to trade with the Indies. The number
of foreign vessels taking part in the transatlantic fleets rose, until
they comprised one-third of all craft crossing the Atlantic in 1630.
From then on, contraband increased to unprecedented heights.

   Cut off from access to Iberian salt by Spain's occupation of Portugal
and by the Spanish seizure of Setubal, the Dutch initiated regular
voyages into the Caribbean in 1594, seizing the salt island of Araya in
1599. They began to trade directly with the Spanish colonists of the
Venezuelan and Colombian coast, exchanging North European merchandise
and African slaves first for salt, later for tobacco and hides, and then
for ever larger quantities of cacao. The English seizure of Jamaica
opened another lucrative trade in slaves and European contraband with
the Spanish possessions. As Venezuela increased its production of cacao,
it also began to exchange cacao for Spanish silver from Mexico. The
Dutch and the English were thus able to tap the flow of Spanish silver
through the open veins of the Caribbean. At the end of the seventeenth
century, the amount of Spanish silver drawn off through the Jamaican
trade alone is estimated at 200,000 pounds sterling a year, or about
half the amount of bullion exported annually to the Far East by the
British East India Company (Lang 1975: 57). Goods from northwestern
Europe also entered the Western Hemisphere through Brazil, where the
Portuguese traded overland with the Spanish holdings in Potosí and Upper
Peru. To pay for these goods the Spaniards used silver, and it is
estimated that this Brazilian trade succeeded in drawing off as much as
a quarter of Potosi's silver production during the seventeenth century
(Lang 1975: 56). When England gained the right to supply the Spanish
colonies with African slaves as a result of the Treaty of Utrecht in
1730, the flow of contraband to the Spanish Caribbean increased along
with the sale of slaves.

   Yet Spanish silver did not go only toward Europe; it also moved
westward, across the Pacific. In the second part of the sixteenth
century, a multilateral trade network—much of it in contraband—grew up
around the main commercial axis connecting Acapulco in Mexico with
Manila in the Philippines. In 1564 the Spaniards—taking advantage of
diminishing Portuguese strength in the South Asia seas—had initiated
their conquest of the Philippine Islands. Yet even after Portugal lost
its claim to the islands, the Portuguese merchants of Macao on the China
coast continued to trade at Manila. In 1573 the first Manila galleon
carried Chinese silks, satins, porcelain, and Far Eastern spices to
Acapulco, returning to Manila with Spanish silver from the New World.
From then on, Manila became the hub of a trade network that drew the
Chinese into the Philippine orbit and that created a commercial circuit
in which Chinese textiles were exchanged for New World silver. Manila
became not only a Spanish city but a Chinese one as well. In the last
two decades of the sixteenth century, the Chinese became so numerous in
Manila that a special quarter (Parian, i.e., market) was created for
them. By the middle of the seventeenth century, Manila boasted 42,000
inhabitants, supported by rice, timber, and labor furnished as tribute
by the inhabitants of neighboring Luzon and Pampanga through the
intermediation of native principales.

   At Acapulco goods were loaded on muleback for transshipment to Mexico
City. Peruvian merchants, however, also arrived in large numbers,
bringing Peruvian silver to exchange for Chinese goods. This illegal
Peruvian trade in Acapulco and along the coast of Nicaragua soon became
a source of great concern to the Spanish Crown, which tried to limit it.
Yet the trade continued, despite governmental prohibitions and despite
increased Dutch raiding in the South Asian seas; in the eighteenth
century it attracted not only increasing participation of the Chinese
through Canton but also Indian traders via Manila (Chaunu Acapulco.
Copper engraving by Theodor de Bry, 1590. (Courtesy of the New York
Public Library, New York)

   1960; Bertin et al. 1966). In the course of the eighteenth century,
in fact, there developed two circuits of Chinese trade: one moving in a
westerly direction and exchanging Chinese tea for Indian opium, and
another in the opposite direction, exchanging Chinese textiles for
American silver. This Chinese—South American trade lasted until the end
of Spanish rule in South America (Cheong 1965).

   The scale of this commerce was large indeed. In 1597, admittedly an
exceptional year, the bullion sent from Acapulco to Manila reached 12
million pesos, a sum larger than all that involved in transatlantic
shipments. In the last decades of the sixteenth century, bullion exports
usually ran between 3 and 5 million pesos, of which two-thirds probably
came from Peru (Parry 1973: 119). Between 1570 and 1780 an estimated
4,000 to 5,000 tons of silver were exported to the Far East (Konetzke
1971: 310).

Pirates, "Colonial Tribes," and Maroons

In the wake of contraband, slave raiding, and slaving, there grew up—in
the borderlands of the Caribbean—a number of populations that inhabited
the margins of constituted society and lived off the flotsam and jetsam
of its resources. The mountainous and dissected Caribbean environment,
its many islands and inlets, and the density of cover provided by its
tropical vegetation furnished hide-outs for smugglers and runaway
slaves, and commercial or military opportunities for the allies of both.

   One element in this unstable world were the buccaneers. The majority
were French; some were English. They began as hunters of feral cattle
left behind by the Spaniards on Santo Domingo, taking their name from
the boucan, the wooden grill used to dry meat by smoking; they sold meat
and hides to the crews of passing ships. Ejected by the Spaniards, they
began to combine their hunting with piracy. When the Spaniards attempted
to stop their activities, they expanded their free- booting, allying
themselves alternately with the English governor of Jamaica and the
French governor of Saint Domingue, first against the Spaniards, later
against the Dutch. Half pirates, half mercenaries, they launched attacks
on major Spanish towns and ports, while trading with people along the
coast and in the hinterland. In the last quarter of the seventeenth
century, their activities became so threatening to the growth of
commerce in the area that the major European powers in the Caribbean
took serious steps to oust them from the region. Some of them thereupon
took up slaving and logwood cutting along the coast of British Honduras.
Others moved their base of operation to Sierra Leone in West Africa, and
from there to Madagascar. In Madagascar they set up the Pirate Republic
of Libertalia, a veritable “market of the Jolly Roger" (Toussaint 1966:
p. 146). Dispersed by a powerful French fleet, they then sought refuge
with the slave-trading state of the Betsimisaraka on the eastern coast
of Madagascar, continuing their piracy in alliance with the native
population until the beginning of the nineteenth century.

   A second element in the circum-Caribbean mix were the groups that
Mary Helms has dubbed "colonial tribes." The best known of these are the
Miskito of the Mosquito shore in Honduras and Nicaragua, and the Cuna of
Panama and Colombia. The Miskito were a kin-ordered native American
population that absorbed large numbers of runaway African slaves and
buccaneers. Equipped by the buccaneers with guns and ammunition, the
Miskito began to raid and trade with their neighbors inland. They
obtained cacao, gold, tobacco, indigo, and—later—cattle from the inland
producers and then traded these goods, along with their own canoes,
paddles, tortoise shells, skins, gum, and hammocks, to the incoming
English for manufactured goods. The Miskito also raided for slaves, and
they were used by the English to hunt down the rebellious rnaroons in
Jamaica (Campbell 1977: 395,411-412).

   The Cuna were a Chibchan-speaking population that had sustained,
before the advent of the Europeans, a much more complex technology and
organization than the Miskito. The Cuna were organized into
class-divided tributary polities with ruling dynasties, and they were
known for their elaborate metallurgy and for their specialization in
long-distance trade. In the wake of the conquest, they lost their
complex social and political organization, gave up metalwork, and turned
increasingly to food collecting for subsistence, thus becoming one of
Steward and Faron's classic cases of "historic déculturation." Like the
Miskito, they proved hospitable to runaway slaves and allied themselves
with the buccaneers, from whom they received guns and ammunition. Using
their newly acquired weaponry, they began in the seventeenth century a
fierce expansion across the Atrato River into Colombia, burning Montería
on the Sinu River in 1779 and forcing the Spaniards to secure passage on
the Sind with flotillas of dugouts (Fais Borda 1976: 18). They were not
brought under Colombian control until the nineteenth century.

   The prominence of runaway slaves among the Miskito and Cuna calls
attention to a third population element in the circum-Caribbean vortex,
the runaway slaves, or maroons. The term maroon comes from the Spanish
cimarrón, initially applied to escaped feral Spanish livestock, then to
runaway Indian slaves, and finally—in the 1530s—to African runaways.
Frequently the runaways joined together for mutual support, defense, and
raiding. They formed bands and, where environmental conditions aided
them, more enduring communities. Marronage, as the French called this
phenomenon of escape, proved to be a constant and significant feature of
plantation life, a kind of slow and ongoing hemorrhage of the plantation
system. Rebel communities of runaway slaves sprang up everywhere. One of
the first was the rebel community formed at the Bursia mines near
Barquisimeto (Colombia). Other early ones appeared in Cuba in the 1530s.
Eventually there were many such groups in out-of-the-way recesses of the
Caribbean and Isthmian littorals, along the Pacific coast of Colombia
and Ecuador, and in the mountain fastnesses of some Caribbean islands.
Such groups frequently engaged in smuggling and piracy to supplement
their subsistence agriculture, and they often lent their support to
armed raiders probing the defenses of the Spanish Main.

   Thus, the "inland sea" of the Caribbean constituted the soft
underbelly of the Spanish dominions in the New World. Here passed the
strategic lines of transport connecting the dominions with the
metropolis in Spain, but it was an area of military vulnerability, the
point of entry for the enemies of Spain. It was also a region of
political and economic weakness, where contrabandists, cash-cropping
plantation owners, and free-lancing entrepreneurs of violence penetrated
the monopolistic structure of the Spanish empire and drained its
strength to the benefit of the external international economy.

   The beginning of the sixteenth century saw the expansion of the two
Iberian kingdoms into the Americas, the Spanish conquering Nuclear
America and consolidating their hold over the mainland, while Portugal
occupied the Atlantic littoral of Brazil.

   In the highlands of Hispanic America, the Castilian Crown erected a
new colonial order upon the ruins of the pre-Hispanic tributary
polities. That order was based upon the extraction of precious metals,
and a new European-run system of food production was called into being
to furnish the mining enterprises with needed supplies. Lines of
constrained trade linked the silver economy with the outside world, but
the system supplying foodstuffs and raw materials faced inward, away
from the sea, toward the mining locations of the hinterland. To control
the native American populations, the new order fashioned their
communities into institutions of indirect rule, their autonomy always
determined by the workings of the Spanish sector. To that sector the
Indians supplied cheap labor and commodities, and from it they purchased
goods, often under duress. Within their own communities, the Indian
populations were permitted to build up their own hierarchies of
officeholders. These officials represented the communities to the
outside, while ordering their internal affairs through the operations of
civil-religious ranking, through economic redistribution, and through
the management of religious symbols that combined Christian and local
cultural forms. Within the larger Hispanic system, the Indian
sector—broken up into a multitude of local entities—constituted a
reserve of labor and products.

   In the plantation belt of the lowland littorals and islands, European
planters and their descendants broke the resistance of the pre-existing
kin-ordered and tributary societies and replaced them with platoons of
African slaves working under a system of forced regimented agriculture.
The system operated to produce a cash crop for export, but it also
cordoned off the plantation frontiers against native American intruders
from the interior and against escape to the frontier by laborers on the
littoral. The production of export crops tied the zone firmly to
European markets, while the constant need for new slaves integrated
Plantation America directly with the expanding tricontinental commerce
in slaves. Thus, African slaves and their descendants became the
dominant population along the Atlantic coast of Brazil, on the Caribbean
isles and littoral, and along the coast of Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru.
Here they wrought, on the plantations and in the redoubts of runaway
slaves, their own modes of adaptation and rebellion, in a history that
is just beginning to be explored.

6 The Fur Trade

Until the end of the sixteenth century, Iberian fleets dominated the
Atlantic, curtailing the expansion of other Europeans into North
America. As Iberian power waned, however, northern European settlement
along the coast proceeded rapidly, and along with it came the unfolding
of the North American fur trade. In the European search for wealth, furs
were not items of highest priority: gold, silver, sugar, spices, and
slaves were all more desirable and profitable. Nevertheless, the quest
for furs was to have a profound impact upon the native peoples of North
America and their modes of life, constituting one of the most dramatic
episodes in the history of European mercantile expansion.

History of the Fur Trade

The fur trade already had a long and remunerative history in Europe and
Asia at the time that the first European fur traders began their
activities on the North American continent. Scandinavia had provided
ancient Rome with furs, along with amber, sea ivory, and slaves,
receiving gold, silver, and treasures in return (Jones 1968: 23). In the
late ninth century A.D. seignorial traders, such as Ottar from the
Norwegian fjords near modern Tromso, took marten, reindeer, bear, and
otter furs in tribute from Lapp hunters and sold them in Norway,
Denmark, and England (Jones 1968: 161 —162). In the early tenth century,
the Viking Rus delivered sable, squirrel, ermine, black and white fox,
marten, beaver, and slaves to Bulgar on the bend of the Volga; in A.D.
922 the Arab Ibn Fadlan described graphically the voyage of the Rus
merchants down the Volga with sables and slave girls for the markets of
the Islamic Levant. After the Vikings, the North German League of the
Hanse tapped the fur trade in the northland. From a trading post at
Bergen they mercilessly exploited the Norwegians, forcing them to
deliver and clean large quantities of fur and fish in return for
payments advanced, thus operating a kind of "international debt peonage"
(Wallerstein 1974: 121).

In what is today Russia, the operations of the Viking Rus prompted the
development of the polities of Kiev and Novgorod in the ninth and tenth
centuries. For these states, as for all their successors, fur became
"the most valuable single item of trade from the very earliest
beginnings to the eighteenth century and beyond" (Kerner 1942: 8).
Indeed, the entire course of Russian expansion has been portrayed as one
extended quest for "domination of successive river basins by the control
of portage between them, the speed of expansion being determined by the
exhaustion of fur-bearing animals in each successive basin" (Kerner
1942: 30). The Russians, like Ottar before them, collected furs through
tribute (iasak) imposed on native populations as a body, and through a
tithe on all furs obtained by individuals. Indeed, furs so obtained
later constituted a major item in the income of the Russian state,
rising from 3.8 percent of all state revenues in 1589 to 10 percent in
1644. Only when Peter the Great launched Russia on its road to
industrialization did the fur tribute decline in importance. Even so, it
remained the main contribution of Siberia to the Russian economy until
the nineteenth century.

   The fur trade was thus not a North American but an international
phenomenon. The connecting link between the Old and the New World was
the Dutch West Indies Company. Until the British conquest of Canada,
Amsterdam received a large percentage of furs obtained in North America,
and it re-exported beaver fur to Russia for further processing as part
of its Baltic export trade. The international network of re-exports
often prevented gluts on European markets, especially during the wars of
the seventeenth century, and kept prices steady throughout the
international system (see Rich 1955). In the nineteenth century, beaver
grew less important, and it was replaced by sea otter and seal exported
mainly from North America to China. Russia, too, lost its dominant role
in the European fur market by the end of the seventeenth century, and
sought outlets for its furs in China and elsewhere in Asia (Mancall
1971: 12).

   The main target of the North American trade was the beaver,
especially after the decline of the animal in Europe by the end of the
sixteenth century. It was sought not for the pelt but for fur-wool, the
layer of soft, curly hair growing next to the skin, which had to be
separated from the pelt and from the layer of longer and stiffer guard-
hairs. This fur-wool was then felted for cloth or hats. The use of
beaver fur-wool for hats became especially important. In England, for
example, Spanish and Dutch immigrants popularized the habit of wearing
hats in place of woolen caps early in the sixteenth century. Thereafter,
no amount of sumptuary legislation could stem the decline of cap making.
Wearing caps became a hallmark of the lower classes. For those of higher
status, shape and type of hat became a barometer of political
allegiances. The Stuarts and their followers favored the high-crowned,
broad-brimmed, and squarish "Spanish beaver." The Puritans introduced
the plain conical felt or beaver hat. The Restoration fancied the
broad-brimmed, flattish, slouch hat of the French court, decorated with
a feather. The Glorious Revolution brought on the low-crowned, broad-
brimmed "clerical shovel,” which yielded to the three-cornered cocked
hat. This style held out until the French Revolution, which produced the
"high hat.” Only in the early nineteenth century did the beaver hat go
out of fashion, in favor of hats made of silk and other materials.

Small copper beaver effigy Jrom Hudson s Bay. used as a token in the
early Jur trade, its value was one beaver fur. (Photograph courtesy
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation)

   Initially, however, it was not the search for fur but for fish that
drove European sailors to move into the waters of the North Atlantic.
Fish was' one of the strategic commercial items in medieval Europe:
dried and salted, it furnished essential proteins during the days of
obligatory fast and through the bitter winters. In the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries the harvests of herring in the Baltic declined, and
fishermen began to explore the cod-filled banks off Labrador,
Newfoundland, and New England. Portuguese fishermen were perhaps the
first, and they laid official claim to the entire coastline, although
they could not defend that claim against the ever-growing number of
competitors from Normandy, Brittany, and the English West Country. At
first, landfalls were sporadic, and sailors would return to their home
ports with fresh fish ready for the market. Later, however, the
fishermen began to go ashore for the summer, to mend their nets and to
preserve their fish by drying and smoking. Thus, "the beaches of the
Newfoundland coast became the regular seasonal camp-sites of a tough and
independent cosmopolitan fishing community” (Parry 1966: 69).

   The North American fur trade began when these fishermen started to
barter for fur with the local Algonkins. The possibility of exploiting
the "new-found lands” for fur was not lost on the royal agents and
settlers who explored the coasts of North America. Effective
colonization of the coast by northern Europeans, however, had to await
the demise of Iberian maritime hegemony in the Atlantic, which came with
the death of Philip II in 1603. Soon thereafter several settlements were
established: Jamestown, founded by the English-based Virginia Company in
1608; Quebec, base of the Company of New France established in the same
year; Fort Nassau at Albany in 1614, and New Amsterdam in 1624, both
founded by the Dutch West Indies Company; New Plymouth in 1620; and
Massachusetts Bay in 1630.

   Among these settlements Quebec and New Amsterdam would play a pivotal
role in the growth of trade. Each of these towns was located athwart a
major route to the inland riches of the fur country. Quebec controlled
the course of the St. Lawrence River, which led to the chain of the
Great Lakes and their successive portages. New Amsterdam controlled the
Hudson River to Albany and the route westward to Oswego on Lake Ontario.
Thus, the northern route was long controlled by French interests, while
the southern access was held first by the Dutch and—after 1644—by the
English. From the beginning, therefore, the fur trade was carried on in
the context of competition between two states. This competition affected
not only the European traders but also the native American populations
that provided them with fur.

   One of the signal features of the trade was its rapid movement
westward as one beaver population after another was hunted out, and the
fur hunters had to push farther inland in search of untapped beaver
grounds. This meant, inevitably, that people who had felt the first
impact of the fur trade were left behind in its wake, while new groups
sought to enter it. Everywhere, the advent of the trade had ramifying
consequences for the lives of the participants. It deranged accustomed
social relations and cultural habits and prompted the formation of new
responses—both internally, in the daily life of various human
populations, and externally, in relations among them. As the traders
demanded furs from one group after another, paying for them with
European artifacts, each group re-patterned its ways around the European
manufactures. At the same time, the demands of the Europeans for fur
increased competition among the native American groups— competition for
new hunting grounds to meet the rising European demand, and competition
also for access to the European goods, which soon became as much
essential components of native technology as markers of differential
status. The fur trade thus changed the character of warfare among
Amerind populations and increased its intensity and scope. It led to the
decimation of whole populations and the displacement of others from
their previous habitats. Nor were furs the only item furnished by the
Indians. The growing trade also required supplies, and as the commerce
in furs expanded westward it altered and intensified the patterns
through which food was produced for hunters and traders alike.

   A consideration of the fur trade as a whole, therefore, entails
several dimensions. Frenchmen and Englishmen interacted with one another
and with various groups of Indians. Successive Amerind populations, in
turn, found themselves under pressure to make new adjustments to the
Europeans, and to one another. The target of all these conflicts and
accommodations was the profit to be made from trapping a small
fur-bearing animal weighing about IV2 pounds.

Routes of the North American fur trade.

Northeastern Populations

Abenaki

Among the first native American populations with whom the Europeans
entered into sustained trading for furs were the Algonkin-speak- ing
Eastern Abenaki of the Maine coast. Their case demonstrates two
recurrent effects of such contact. One was the precipitous decrease of
the native population. The other was a shift in the mix of economic
activities carried on by the indigenous groups, and the resultant
changes in their social relations. In the first years of the seventeenth
century, the Eastern Abenaki occupied more than twenty villages, each
under a chief, with a total population of 10,000 people. By 1611 only
3,000 survived, the others succumbing to European-borne diseases to
which the native Americans were not immune. The survivors became more
involved in taking beaver for exchanges with the Europeans. They
continued to grow some maize, but with the short growing season and
frequent crop failures they were eager to trade furs for food, as they
did with the Plymouth Colony after 1625. They abandoned the coast, where
they had previously fished and hunted waterfowl, and carved out small
family hunting territories inland, making hunting by small family groups
a mainstay of their new adjustment (Snow 1976).

   In this development of the family hunting territory, the Abenaki are
by no means alone. It is quite possible that before the advent of the
Europeans native hunters favored particular hunting grounds where they
hunted in the winter. Yet the hunting territory, held and defended
exclusively by small family groups against other possible users, was a
consequence of the new individualized exchange relationship between
trapper and trader (see Leacock 1954). The Catholic missionaries who
followed in the wake of the first explorers also benefited from this
splitting up of larger groups, since it made conversion easier as each
family took "its own territory for hunting without following in the
track of its neighbors" (Jesuit Relations 1632, quoted in Bailey 1969:
89).

Huron

Traveling up the St. Lawrence, the French explorers and traders soon
established relations with the Iroquoian-speaking Huron. The Huron
(French from hure, meaning boar, ruffian, savage), who called themselves
Wendat, formed a confederation of 20,000 to 30,000 people of multiple
origins, established perhaps as early as the fifteenth century.
Originally strongly committed to horticulture, they had settled on the
shores of Georgian Bay in Lake Huron and opened trade with the
hunters-and-gatherers to the north of them; they exchanged maize,
tobacco, and Indian hemp for furs, skin clothing, fish, copper, and
hunting and traveling gear. The Huron were thus in a strategic position
to carry the expanding fur trade to the inhabitants of the north woods.

   As their commitment to the trade grew, they also lessened their
involvement in horticulture, drawing ever larger supplies of maize from
their allies, the Petuns (Tiontati), to the west of them and the
Neutrals (Attiwandaron, meaning "those who speak a slightly different
language") on the land bridge between lakes Ontario and Erie. From the
inhabitants of the north woods they took over the efficient birchbark
canoe, which became the preferred means for transporting large
quantities of furs downriver to annual fairs at Montreal. For a time the
Huron language became the lingua franca of the Upper Great Lakes and the
Canadian Shield. Until their destruction by the Iroquois in 1648, they
were the main agents and beneficiaries of the French trade with the
interior, and the mainstay of French military operations in the area.

   There were several reasons for Huron success in this role. They
occupied a strategic location for exchanges between the biotic zone to
the south, which favored crops like maize, beans, squash, and tobacco,
and the zone to the north, occupied by hunters and fishermen. These
exchanges predate contact with the Europeans by several centuries,
perhaps dating back to the stimulus provided by horticulture around A.D.
1200 (McPherron 1967). When the fur trade entered the area, there
already existed mechanisms that permitted and facilitated exchanges of
goods, to which beaver and other furs could now be added. Father Jean de
Brebeuf, writing in 1636, suggests that certain circuits or lines of
exchange were held by particular family lines and had to be activated by
a "master," whose role was heritable.

   Transactions of all kinds were accompanied by exchanges of gifts as
tokens of friendship, and gift giving was a part of curing ceremonies
and diplomatic feasts (see Wright 1967). Most notably, large-scale gift
exchanges accompanied the Feast of the Dead, which was held every decade
or so to bury the remains of those who had died since the last feast. On
such occasions the successors to the dead chiefs were installed, and the
names of the dead transferred to them. The rituals thus served to ensure
continuity in the leadership of local descent groups, while at the same
time providing occasions for gift exchanges between the chiefs of such
groups. They underlined the separate identity and distinctiveness of
such groups, while simultaneously establishing links of alliance between
them. These occasions could bring together members of different
linguistic and political groups, as in the feast witnessed by the French
missionary Lalemant in 1641 at Georgia Bay, when the local Nipissing
invited 2,000 people from as far west as the Sault and as far east as
Huronia. The quantity of valuables offered in furs, robes, beads, and
hardware was considerable. On that occasion, Lalemant says, "the
presents that the Nipissirians gave to the other Nations alone would
have cost in France forty or even fifty thousand francs" (quoted in
Hickerson 1960: 91). Such gift exchanges, incarnating ties of alliance
and recognition of chiefly status, became a widespread concomitant of
the fur trade as it spread inland from the Huron. Adopted first by the
Algonkin speakers of the Great Lakes, it spread from them to the Cree
west of Lake Superior, and from the Cree into the Great Plains at the
end of the seventeenth century (Nekich 1974).

Iroquois

The Dutch at New Amsterdam, and the English who took over from them in
1644, encountered in the upper drainage of the Hudson River another
Iroquoian-speaking population of horticulturalists, who came to be known
to Europeans as “Iroquois"—the French version of an Algonkin word
meaning “real adder.” The Iroquois were organized into a confederacy,
which they called Ganonsyoni (“The Lodge Extended Lengthwise"). The five
“nations"—or named clusters of matriline- ages—comprising the
confederacy were: the Mohawk (from an Algonkin word for "cannibal"), who
called themselves Ganiengehaga. or "Flint People"; the Oneida; the
Onondaga; the Cayuga; and the Seneca (after Sinneken, a mistaken Dutch
rendering of a Mahican version of the Iroquoian name for the Oneida).
Early in the eighteenth century, the Oneida permitted entry into the
confederacy by the Tuscarora. To outsiders the confederacy became known
as the "Six Nations," although the Tuscarora never had the right to sit
in confederate councils. The available evidence indicates that the
Iroquois have long resided in this region. In historic times, each of
the five nations controlled its own settlement cluster, fields, forests,
and hunting territories. Though linked in one political organization,
there were cultural and linguistic differences among them. The languages
of the various clusters were mutually unintelligible, and the business
of the confederacy was carried on by multilingual chiefs.

   The Iroquois confederacy had probably come into being in the course
of the fifteenth century, as a means for reducing conflict and warfare
among the clusters. Soon, however, the growing fur trade gave the
various clusters an overriding convergent interest. While the beaver was
uncommon in Iroquois country and quickly grew even scarcer in response
to increased hunting, the Iroquois soon realized that their separate and
collective future depended on the beaver. To increase their own access
to furs, however, they had first to reduce or eliminate the competition
of their neighbors. Backed by the Dutch, and later on by the English,
they unleashed a series of destructive wars against their French-backed
rivals. After an epidemic of smallpox weakened the Hurons in 1640, the
Iroquois attacked and destroyed Huronia as a separate entity in 1648. In
1656 they destroyed the Neutral Nation and the Erie. In 1675 the Mohawk
fell upon the Algonkin confederacy, which had formed to oppose the
English colonists in New England. In the same year the Seneca, in league
with the English settlers of Maryland and Virginia, ended the threat of
the Susquehannock, who controlled the central valley of Pennsylvania. In
1680 the Five Nations opened war on the Illinois to prevent French
contact with them.

   Despite the scale of Iroquois military operations, the actual number
of warriors fielded in the course of these actions was not very great.
In 1660 a Jesuit father estimated that the Mohawks could mobilize 500
warriors, the Oneida fewer than 100, the Onondaga 300, the Cayuga 300,
and the Seneca less than 1,000 (quoted in Trelease 1960: 16). What lent
the Iroquois their military capability was increased access to firearms,
traded to them mainly by the Dutch and the English. By 1660 each warrior
probably had his own musket, and superior firepower, together with
reliance on individual prowess in guerilla-like warfare, granted them
superiority over their neighbors (Otterbein 1964).

   Entry into the fur trade and intensified warfare brought on other
changes in Iroquois ecology and social organization. The economic basis
of Iroquois life before the growth of the fur trade was horticulture and
the hunt. Horticulture was largely in the hands of women, although the
men helped in clearing land during the slash-and-burn cycle. The social
composition of the clearing group remains unknown, but other tasks of
cultivation were carried out by the women of the village as a whole,
under the guidance of the head matron of the dominant lineage and with
the matrons of other family lines acting as lieutenants. Rights to use
land, as well as the tools used in cultivation and food processing,
passed through the female line. Distribution of produce was similarly in
the hands of women. The weight of these economic roles granted women
considerable authority, since they could use their ability to provide
food and moccasins to exercise a veto over the activities of war parties
of which they did not approve (Randle 1951: 172). It also placed in
their hands the dispensation of hospitality in feasting, an important
activity in cementing alliances within and among the clusters (Brown
1975: 247-248; Rothenberg 1976: 112). Furthermore, women owned the
multifamily dwellings and exercised the right to nominate councilors to
sit in the Council of the Lodge Extended Lengthwise.

   Hunting and warfare, in contrast, were the work of men, and these
activities grew increasingly important as the Iroquois became more
involved in the fur trade, and more dependent upon it. European trade
goods, presumably exchanged for fur, appear in Iroquois sites as early
as 1570, and a century later the Iroquois had come to rely almost
completely upon trade and diplomatic gifts in order to obtain arms,
metal tools, kettles, clothing, jewelry, and liquor. The beaver was
largely extinct in Iroquois country by 1640, and the Iroquois thus had
to range farther and farther into the lands of neighbors and enemies to
obtain the resources that paid for the European commodities, or to carry
on warfare in order to recompense diplomatic gifts made to them. The
separation of male and female roles increased with the growth of the fur
trade and the intensification of foreign involvements; the men were
often away for years in pursuit of fur and enemies, while the women were
tied more closely to the sites of their fields and gardens. It is
possible that the Iroquois became increasingly matrilocal after the
early seventeenth century (Richards 1957), in response to this growing
bifurcation of activities.

   It also seems likely, as Richards argues, that women gradually
assumed the right to adopt captives into the local matrilineages, a
function that grew vital as the Iroquois sought replacements for men
killed in warfare. In 1657 the Seneca were said "to contain more
foreigners than natives of the country." In 1659 the Jesuit Lalemant
said: "If one should compute the number of pure-blooded Iroquois, he
would have difficulty in finding more than 1,200 of them in all the Five
Nations, since they are, for the most part, only an aggregation of
different tribes whom they have conquered." Two-thirds of the Oneida
were Algonkin and Huron in 1669. The Jesuits even complained that it
became difficult to preach to the Iroquois in their own language. (See
Quain 1937: 246-247.)

   This evidence has some striking implications. It points to the
possibility that in the course of fur trading and enhanced warfare the
forms of kinship affiliation remained the same, but their meaning and
function underwent a major change. When the Europeans first arrived, the
Lodge Extended Lengthwise was primarily a league of local groups
adjudicating local interests in cultivated land and other resources, as
well as impeding the escalation of local quarrels into feuds and
warfare. Yet increasingly the Iroquois confederacy found itself acting
as an association of fur traders and warriors, sometimes of quite
different origins, in relation to the translocal imperatives of the fur
trade and of the political struggles between rival European state
systems. William Fenton has spoken of the League as a “kinship state,”
thus linking two concepts that are often treated as incompatible. The
Iroquois confederacy is perhaps better characterized as an association
that tried to use the forms of kinship in the pursuit of associational
functions. It might even be seen as a native American parallel to the
structure of the European trading companies, which also combined
economic and political functions. In this characteristic the Iroquois
invite comparison with the Aro in the area of the lower Niger in West
Africa, who also utilized kinship mechanisms and ritual to organize and
dominate the local slave trade (see chapter 7). Like the Aro, the
Iroquois were not a state but an association predicated on kinship
affiliations that developed in response to translocal political and
economic pressures.

   The continuing kinship basis of the confederacy was the source at
once of its strength and of its weakness. We have seen that the Iroquois
women held the right to nominate male members of their matrilineages to
positions on the Council at Onondaga. These positions were associated
with fifty titles or names, which were owned or controlled by
matrilines. It is important to note that the councilors always gave
strong voice to local interests and sentiments, and that when they spoke
in Council they spoke not in their own names but in the interest of
their local kin-based constituencies. The confederacy was thus never a
monolithic political instrument. It functioned mainly to reduce
infighting and feuds among the constituent village clusters and gained
some jurisdiction over negotiations with foreign ambassadors and agents.
It could declare war on behalf of the confederacy as a whole, but
decisions had to be unanimous. A case over which there was disagreement
had to be set aside and resolved by the actions of one or another
cluster. Many of the activities of the confederacy were ceremonial, such
as the condolence councils during which dead councilors were mourned and
new councilors installed. Through such ritual the titles and the unity
of the Council were perpetuated on the ideological plane, even when
divergent interests came to divide the constituents over economic,
social, political, and religious issues.

   Divisiveness within the Council increased as warfare grew more
intense. As Quain noted,

when warfare, under the stimulus of European contact, became a part of
the daily routine, war leaders turned military popularity to their own
political advantage and assumed the principal governmental role. The
balance of power between sachems and war chiefs, which seems formerly to
have been strongly weighted in favor of the sachems, was shifted so that
the cooperative motives of sachem government were no longer significant.
[1937: 267]

Ultimately, no mechanism existed to cancel out actual or potential
dissidence. Thus, relations between the Mohawk in the east and the
Seneca in the west were often strained, even to the point that warfare
between the two threatened in 1657. The Seneca and the Onondaga often
cheered on French attacks on the Mohawk, and the Mohawk in turn
refrained from aiding the Seneca and Cayuga in their wars with the
Susquehanna. One or another group of villages would on occasion sign
agreements with French or English representatives separately from the
others in the cluster. Only rarely was there any united action by the
confederacy, and for this reason it could not play a unified game of
balancing off the French against the English. As Allen Trelease has said
(1960: 342), the difficulty was that the councilors "lacked either the
decision or the power to follow it consistently." The same inability to
formulate and to follow a common policy also bedeviled the Iroquois
during the American Revolution. The Mohawk and the Onondaga split
internally, some throwing their support to the American rebels, others
to the pro-British loyalists. The Cayuga and the Seneca supported the
British, while the Oneida and the Tuscarora aided the Americans, in
spite of official declarations of neutrality.

   One must not, therefore, overemphasize the political unity of the
Iroquois confederacy, or assign to it any concerted strategy for
monopolizing the fur trade. Access to beaver was, of course, of primary
importance to the Iroquois, but they gained this access either by
occupying the hunting grounds of their neighbors or by capturing peltry
collected and transported by others. Although they ousted the Huron from
their middleman position in the trade, they were unable to prevent the
passage of that role to the Ottawa, the Hurons' western neighbors. Their
military potential was considerable, but it might not have sufficed to
stem a European invasion had not the French and the English shared a
strong interest in allowing the Iroquois to play the role of a buffer
between them. By arming the Iroquois, the English could impede access of
the French to the Ottawa and to the hunting grounds of the Great Lakes.
In turn, the French saw that it was to their interest "to weaken the
Iroquese, but not to see 'em entirely defeated," as Baron de Lahon- tan
said around 1700 (quoted in Trelease 1960: 246, n. 44). The relation
between the French and the Iroquois was richly paradoxical in that

although the Iroquois constituted the greatest economic and military
threat to Canada they were also the only factor keeping Albany from
opening direct relations with the Ottawa and thus crippling the Canadian
fur trade. [Trelease 1960: 246]

   Indeed, had a direct route opened up between Albany and the west. New
France could not have competed with New York. The English had the
advantage of lower manufacturing and shipping costs, lower rates of
taxation, higher-quality merchandise, and access to cheap rum from the
West Indies. In 1689 it took five beaver skins to obtain a gun at
Montreal, but only one beaver skin to get one at Albany; two beaver
skins to get a red or white blanket at Montreal, but only one at Albany.
One beaver skin sold in Albany got an Indian six full quarts of rum,
while in Montreal that skin would fetch not even a quart of brandy
(Trelease 1960: 217, n. 27). The same differential was still at work in
the eighteenth century, when Cadwallader Colson summed it up by saying
"that the Traders of New-York may sell their Goods in the Indian
Countries at half the Price the People of Canada can, and reap twice the
Profit" (see Washburn 1964: 153). The Iroquois presence thus protected
French commerce with the West, despite the fact that they were usually
enemies.

   Conversely, the Iroquois could play off the French and the English
against each other. Yet this diplomatic game rarely took place at the
level of the confederacy. Rather, some clusters backed now the French,
now the English. Only the Mohawk consistently supported the English
cause. Others, like some of the Seneca, even fought for the French in
the mid-eighteenth century and took part in the French-supported rising
of Pontiac against the English (1763-1764).

   These differential foreign involvements, however, took their toll on
Iroquois unity. The American War of Independence set cluster against
cluster. Factions within each cluster also opposed kinsmen to one
another. This left the confederacy weak and divided; it continued on a
ceremonial basis, but with the American victory it lost its major
military and political functions. The pro-British Iroquois moved to
Canada, where their descendants still reside.

   The Iroquois confederacy thus revealed its essential weaknesses. It
was able to adjudicate conflicts among clusters only as long as these
did not grow insurmountable. It was able to play off the interests of
contending foreign powers and their Indian allies against one another,
but it could not develop a concerted strategy in the face of a dominant
adversary. The bonds that tied it together were those of kinship and of
ceremonial. In installing the ritual of the condolence councils it made
use of the pattern—widespread among neighboring tribes—of celebrating
the demise of dead chiefs and announcing their successors. For the
Huron, the Feast of the Dead served this same purpose, tying the
participants into relations of alliance. We shall meet this pattern
again among the Ojibwa and allied groups. In all such cases, cohesion
was created by ritual means. Ritual could create politically viable ties
as long as political interests worked in a common direction. It could
not, however, furnish these populations involved in the contradictions
of fur trade and politics with any mechanism for making the temporary
consensus binding for all parties. Sophisticated as they were in council
and warfare, the Iroquois had not succeeded in creating a state, and in
competition with more centralized political entities they found
themselves at a disadvantage.

Populations of the Great Lakes

Although the Iroquois were never able to monopolize the fur trade west
of the lower St. Lawrence, they had an enormous effect on the
populations of the Great Lakes region. The Hurons who were not killed or
absorbed by the Iroquois fled westward. The Iroquois also drove the
prairie-dwelling, corn-planting Potawatomi, Sauk, Fox, Kickapoo,
Mascouten, and sections of the Illinois from their lands. These
populations were pushed from the area of lower Michigan and Ohio north
of the Ohio River to the western side of Lake Michigan. There they
entered the fur trade through Potawatomi and Ottawa middlemen at the
French trading post established at Green Bay in 1634. None of these
people were native to this area, nor did any settle there (as has been
suggested) primarily to take advantage of the occurrence of wild rice.
The magnet that drew them to Green Bay was the fur trade; the force
pushing them out of their original habitat was the Iroquois (Wilson
1956).

   The middleman role of the Huron, however, was taken over mainly by
the Ottawa, so-called after the Algonkin term adave. This term, familiar
to many Algonkin-speakers of diverse affiliation, served as a cover name
for a congeries of Algonkin-speaking groups who abandoned their own
subsistence activities for involvement in trade, moving westward to the
fur-trapping grounds as far as Chequamegon Bay by 1660. By 1683
two-thirds of all peltries reaching the French passed through Ottawa
hands (Peckham 1970: 6).

   Other groups also began to move westward after fur. As early as 1620,
groups of Algonkin speakers bearing animal names like Bear or Crane
began to converge upon the Sault Sainte Marie River, which links Lake
Huron with Lake Superior over rapids. The French called these rapids the
Sault, and the people of the rapids the Saulteurs or Salteaux. The
region was an ideal meeting place for fur traders, since it furnished an
abundant and easily accessible food resource, the whitefish. Soon the
Saulteur groups were joined by refugees from the Iroquois and by
contingents of people identified variously as Potawatomi, Cree,
Algonkin, and Winnebago. Gradually the term Salteurs yielded to the name
of one of the local groups, Outchibous, or Ojibwa.

   These fusions and changes of identity are instances of a more general
process set off by the intensification of the fur trade in the eastern
subarctic. Small local groups, with localized names,

became dislocated, mostly westward, in their search for furs; intergroup
conflicts increased, and groups became intermixed. In time they lost
their identity and became subsumed under larger group names. The names
for these larger groups sometimes seem to have been derived from one of
the former small local groups such as Saulteurs (Salteaux) or
"Outchibons" (Ojibwa). There was no large group known as Ojibwa or
Saulteaux at the time of the French. Furthermore, the establishment of
trading posts in place of mission stations perhaps encouraged the
formation of larger groups of diverse origins from the surrounding
areas. [Rogers, 1969: 38]

One such point of fusion was the village of Chequamegon on the southern
shores of Lake Superior. This village was occupied by Ojibwa in 1679,
when they entered into an agreement with the Dakota—who hunted and grew
maize west of the lake—to allow them access to their hunting territories
in exchange for trade goods obtained from the French. Chequamegon,
producing maize and other crops, attained a population of about 750 to
1,000 by 1736, when the arrangement with the Dakota was abrogated and
gave way to violent war between the former treaty partners.

The Midewiwin

Such processes of fusion and alliance among groups that had previously
entertained separate local identities had important ideological
repercussions. The Feast of the Dead was replaced as the major ritual of
exchange and alliance by new religious forms, the best known of which is
the Midewiwin. This cult probably originated at Chequamegon around 1680.
The Feast of the Dead had celebrated local group identity and succession
to local leadership, at the same time that it strengthened alliances and
exchanges among similar local groups. The Midewiwin, in contrast, was
directed more toward the individual and his integration into a
hierarchical association that transcended locality and descent group.

   In the ceremony of the Midewiwin, individual power gained through
direct contact with the supernatural was conveyed by a white shell, or
megis. Each member of a Mide lodge owned a "medicine" bag of religious
artifacts which contained such a shell. A person was initiated by being
"shot" with "rays" emanating from these shells. Each megis was a
repository of supernatural power, and it replicated within each
settlement the power of the association as a whole. At the same time,
the founding myth of the association declared that it was formed before
any of the descent group emblems or totems, and thus had priority over
any particular local descent group. The association itself was graded,
and members advanced from lower to higher grades and from lower to
higher levels of sacred knowledge by paying the officers in charge.

   Wealth was thus a prerequisite for advancement in the association;
ascribed leadership yielded to achievement in war and fur trading.
Moreover, the society was translocal in scope. The leaders and priests
of the association were at once the bearers of the highest kind of
sacred knowledge and the arbiters of social and jural relations in the
newly compounded settlements. They also dealt with outsiders—traders,
government officials, and missionaries. In the wake of the fur trade,
the distinctive symbols of descent groups thus yielded to the
development of a translocal "church," providing a mechanism for the
social and ideological control of large aggregate populations that
congregated during the winter months.

Expansion Westward

Up to the final third of the seventeenth century. North American furs
reached Europe primarily over the two routes of the St. Lawrence and the
Hudson. In 1668, however, a new trade route opened up—this time through
the north—when The Governor and Company and Adventurers of England
trading into Hudson's Bay built a fort at the estuary of Rupert's River,
which flows into James Bay. The fort came to be known as Rupert's House,
the company as the Hudson Bay Company. Other posts quickly followed,
attracting the Cree and the Siouan-speaking Assiniboin, who had
previously been at war with the Cree but who now threw their lot in with
them against their own kin, the Yanktonai. The great attraction offered
by the Hudson Bay Company was guns, more than 400 of which were traded
annually between 1689 and 1694 (Ray 1974: 13). Even though many of the
weapons proved useless once they broke down, their possession gave the
Cree and the Assiniboin a decided advantage over their competitors—the
Dakota Sioux to the south, the Gros Ventre and the Blackfoot to the
southwest, and the Athabascan speakers to the north.

   The French, now fearing encirclement from Hudson's Bay as well as
from New York and New England, began a fierce war for possession of the
forts along the bay and tried to set the Dakota against the English
trading posts. In 1713, however, the Treaty of Utrecht granted the bay
to England, and equipped with English guns the Cree and Assiniboin now
increased their pressure on the Dakota. The French, in turn, began to
push their trading posts and missions westward, as much to enter into
direct contact with native American populations in new hunting
territories as to counteract the advance of the Hudson Bay Company from
the north and the movement of traders from the Louisiana colony to the
south. In this, however, the French merely aroused the suspicions of the
Ojibwa that they were about to lose their role as middlemen for the
Dakota. The Ojibwa, including those from Chequamegon, thus joined the
Assiniboin and Cree in sanguinary warfare against the Dakota, driving
them from their area of settlement in Minnesota and northern Wisconsin.
The Cree and Assiniboin, in turn, expanded into Athabascan territory as
far as the Churchill River, until the opening of Fort Churchill in 1717
allowed the Athabascans access to guns of their own.

   The conflicts between the Dakota and the Ojibwa, Cree, and Assiniboin
were not merely disputes among native American populations but were a
North American manifestation of the global conflict between France and
England. In India the French East India Company and the English East
India Company carried on undeclared war, until the outbreak in 1756 of
the Seven Years' War (known in America as the French and Indian War)
brought outright confrontation between the two states and their allies.
In the Treaty of Utrecht England had retained Hudson Bay, but in the
interval between 1713 and 1756 the French had strengthened their
position by cementing alliances with native groups, founding New Orleans
to open the Mississippi River to shipping by sea, and building Fort
Duquesne at Pittsburgh to consolidate their hold over Ohio. An attempt
by the English in 1755 to take the fort failed miserably. During the
ensuing seven years of war, however, the English decisively defeated the
French on three continents. In India, Clive routed the French and their
allies at Plassey in 1757. In 1758 the English took Fort Duquesne,
calling it Fort Pitt after the British prime minister. In 1759 the
British navy crippled the French navy off the coast of France. In 1760
the English took the city of Quebec. In the Treaty of 1763 France
yielded Canada to Britain and the Upper Missouri region to Spain.

Changes in the Fur Trade

In the course of the second half of the eighteenth century, the fur
trade spread into the drainage of the Saskatchewan. This brought on a
series of linked changes. There was a change in the logistics of the
trade itself.

There were, in consequence, changes in the internal structure of the
native American groups involved in the trade, and changes in the
relationships between traders and trappers. Before this time, the routes
of the fur trade had followed the natural lines of penetration from the
eastern coast up the rivers, along chains of lakes, and over inland
seas. The major inland trading posts and forts had been set up at the
head of these maritime or riverine routes. Now there were efforts to
drive routes overland beyond the divide between the Atlantic and Pacific
drainages. These attempts also left behind the supply bases of the lower
St. Lawrence and the fishing grounds and maize-producing littorals of
the Great Lakes, to enter country that required new sources of
transport.

   Along with these new ecological exigencies came organizational
changes in the trade. Until the middle of the eighteenth century, the
trading companies had been content to rely for the delivery of furs on
the cooperation of native American middlemen. This cooperation, however,
only partly met the needs of the companies, for as long as the middlemen
groups were autonomous the companies could exercise only marginal
control over their social and political relations, including their
alliances and conflicts. The companies thus sought to remove the
middlemen by going directly to the primary "producer," the hunters and
collectors of the furs themselves. Increasingly, therefore, the traders
penetrated directly into the hinterland to tap the supply of furs at its
source.

Pontiac's Revolt

These changes in the trade, coinciding with the French-English war,
issued in a major native American uprising, Pontiac's revolt in 1763.
Pontiac was an Ottawa, a member of the leading middleman group on the
Great Lakes. By the mid-eighteenth century, the Ottawa had come to
depend heavily on the European traders for the continuation of their
role as intermediaries and for their supply of European manufactures. At
the same time, the direct penetration of the hinterland by European fur
traders was threatening their privileged position. It was becoming clear
that the Europeans were there to stay—no longer as guests of the native
Americans but as permanent lodgers ready to take over the entire abode.
This "double-bind," dependence on the very agents who were also
undermining their chances of survival, produced among the native
American populations of the eastern woodlands strong currents of
ideological resistance. Prophets preached moral reform, coupled with
appeals to drive out the encroaching colonizers. The Pontiac uprising
was at once a mystical response to the message of the Master of Life and
a military response to the decision of the English that the Ottawa would
from then on "have to support their families by an 'industrious way of
life' without other assistance" (Jacobs 1972: 81; see also Peckham 1970;
Wallace 1970: 120-121). The revolt was joined by Shawnees, Ojibwa,
Huron, Miami, Potawatomi, and Seneca. After initial successes, the
movement failed when the rebels were unable to take the major British
forts at Detroit, Niagara, and Pittsburgh. Insufficiently provided with
arms and ammunition, and deserted by the French, who made a separate
peace with England that year, the rebellion fell prey to internal
dissension and defections.

Northwestern Athabascans

While middleman groups were being excluded from their strategic role in
the fur trade, new populations living west of Hudson Bay were drawn
directly into the trade. The fur traders contacted the
Athabascan-speaking Chipeweyans between Fort Churchill and the Great
Slave and Athabasca lakes. Chipeweyan bands, now armed with guns, began
to drive Beaver and Slave populations from the region of Lake Athabasca
and the Slave River, and to exact furs from the northern Yellowknife and
Dogrib. There was also friction between the Chipeweyans and the woodland
Cree to their south and east; the Cree, previously middlemen, were now
losing that position. Some Cree and Assiniboin bands gradually moved
into the border zone between the subarctic forest and the prairie, where
they began to hunt the bison. They acquired horses after 1730 and became
fully specialized horse pastoralists thereafter.

   The fur traders now attempted to carry the trade to the trappers,
rather than letting the trappers carry the trade to them. The demands of
hunting caribou and fishing were at odds with the tasks of trapping
beaver. The fur traders, therefore, tried increasingly to convert
"caribou eaters" into "carriers" (the distinction drawn by the
Chipeweyans) by advancing food, guns and ammunition, traps, cloth,
blankets, liquor, and tobacco both to "chiefs" and to individual
Indians. In the course of the eighteenth century, advances of food
staples such as flour, lard, and tea led to a decline in the autonomous
hunting activities of the trapping populations. As people came to rely
less on the large-scale caribou drive and on group fishing, the "great
man whom we all follow," who organized the large caribou-hunting bands,
lost his function. The fur traders now hired hunters to provide their
forts with meat, or dealt with "trading chiefs," who gained a measure of
influence over their followers by drawing on advances of hunting
equipment and staples from the trading posts. Some kin-based groups
began to hunt and trade on their own, especially when competition among
traders for furs multiplied both the number of chiefs eager to enter
into alliance with them, and the conflicts between such chiefs. Thus the
relationship of trader and trapper became individualized, favoring the
formation of small bands, based on interlinked conjugal pairs, over the
larger hunting aggregates of earlier times.

New Companies

In 1797 the Hudson Bay Company faced a new competitor in the Northwest
Company, which was sponsored by displaced fur merchants from Albany who
had remained loyal to the British Crown during the American War of
Independence. It built upon the expertise acquired by the French fur
traders, and employed mostly French-Canadian voyageurs and Scottish
veterans who had fought in the British conquest of Canada or against the
Americans. The new company promoted exploration and trade with great
vigor all across the lakes and portages to the Rocky Mountains and
beyond. Its men were often the first Europeans in the new territories of
the interior Northwest.

   The westward expansion of the two Canadian-based companies spurred
competition from the Americans, who wanted to assure control of the
continent for the newly formed republic. In 1803 the United States
acquired the Louisiana Territory, and in 1804—1806 Lewis and Clark
explored the West on behalf of the U.S. Congress. In 1808 John Jacob
Astor incorporated the American Fur Company with President Jefferson's
tacit approval, and in 1811 the company established Fort Astoria at the
mouth of the Columbia River. Although Astoria was surrendered to the
British two years later, the American Fur Company was able to displace
the older French companies operating out of St. Louis and to compete
successfully with the Canadian companies until it went bankrupt in 1842.

Horse Pastoralists on the Plains

Throughout the areas west of the Great Lakes, the fur traders relied
increasingly for their food supplies on meat furnished them by the
horse-riding buffalo hunters of the Plains. The development of horse
pastoralism in this area was a recent historical development, following
upon the introduction of the horse by the Spaniards during the conquest
of Mexico in 1519. The first native Americans to mount horses were the
food-collecting "Chichimecas" on the northern frontiers of New Spain,
who captured or stole them from the Spanish outposts. Successive
populations then obtained horses, using them to raid weaker neighbors
for prisoners to sell to the French and Spaniards as slaves.

   The Apache acquired horses from the Chichimecas around 1630; the Ute
and Comanche got them from the Apache around 1700. The eastern Shoshoni
of eastern Wyoming and Montana—including the Snake— became mounted in
the first third of the eighteenth century, and the Snake soon became the
main traffickers in horses and the leading slave catchers in the
northern plains. The Shoshoni, in turn, supplied horses to the
Blackfoot. Another route in the diffusion of the horse led
northeastward. The Comanche supplied them to the Kiowa to their north
around 1730; the Kiowa were probably the main source of horses for the
horticultural Pawnee, Arikara, Hidatsa, and Mandan.

   The horse endowed its new owners with enhanced military capabilities.
It also improved their capacity to hunt the buffalo and to transport
gear and supplies. Greater mobility, in turn, permitted increased
involvement in the widening trade networks, and trade soon brought
access to a new military resource, the gun.

   The first native Americans to combine horse riding with the use of
the gun were the Dakota. As we have seen, the Dakota had been pedestrian
horticulturalists and hunters in the woodland and prairie west of Lake
Superior until the 1730s, when they were faced with the advance of Cree,
Assiniboin, and Ojibwa, who were supplied with guns by the Hudson Bay
Company. The Dakota, in turn, obtained guns from the French, who wanted
to hold back the allies of the English. Still on foot, they used these
guns to ward off attacks from the north, to displace other people (such
as the Cheyenne), and to raid the horticultural villages along the
Missouri River for slaves to sell to the Europeans. The villagers,
however, who had acquired horses from the Kiowa, turned cavalry on the
Dakota, until the Dakota were able to obtain horses of their own from
the Arikara around 1750. By 1775 the Dakota were the horse-riding and
gun-toting lords of the northeastern plains. They opened direct trade
relations with the European merchants at St. Louis, thus bypassing the
Mandan who had come to engross much of the trade between the Plains and
the towns on the Mississippi River. The Dakota defeated the Cheyenne,
cut off the Kiowa from the Arikara, and interrupted contacts between the
Crow and the Mandan.

   In the northwestern plains a similar role came to be occupied by the
Blackfoot. Food collectors who had been pushed out of their former
habitat to the west of Hudson Bay by advancing Cree and Assiniboin, the
Blackfoot obtained horses around 1730 and guns in the second half of the
eighteenth century. They were soon successful in rolling back their main
competitors, the Snake, as well as the Kutenai and Flathead—none of whom
had access to guns.

   The advent of the horse not only altered military patterns and
increased mobility; it also permitted far more effective access to the
buffalo, which could now be hunted in large numbers in tribal surrounds.
The lure of the new life led many populations to become full-time
buffalo hunters. Marginal horticulturalists abandoned their fields; some
examples are the Gros Ventre, the Dakota, the Cheyenne, and the Arapaho.
In other instances, splinter groups broke off from horticultural
populations, as did the Crow, an offshoot of the Hidatsa.

   Even the permanent horticultural villages of the Mandan, Arikara,
Hidatsa, and Pawnee along the Missouri and Platte rivers felt the impact
of these new opportunities. These large villages were based on the
cultivation of maize, carried on by women on lands held by matrilir e-
ages. The men made war and hunted, but gardening and horticultural
ritual dominated the annual cycle, which included an annual bison hunt.
The matrilineages were stratified into elite and commoner households.
One lineage furnished the village chief, another the ceremonial leader.
The village chief kept order within the village and controlled warfare;
the ceremonial leader, together with other members of the elite, cared
for the sacred bundles of the matrilineages, keeping them in a lodge
that occupied a central place in each village. The elite drew surpluses
from the highly productive horticulture; they also received gifts
offered during ceremonies, fees paid for entrance into the
hierarchically graded men's associations, and goods from the surrounding
food collectors in exchange for horticultural products. Wealth so
obtained was redistributed according to the differential statuses of the
recipients. The general configuration appears to have been predicated on
the kinship mode. While the prestations were based on kinship and
ceremonial participation, it is possible that they were taking on
tributary characteristics, as the elite began to use surplus maize to
enter into widening exchanges with the Assiniboin (who traded firearms
and manufactures obtained from the Hudson Bay Company) and with European
traders.

   The new opportunities for individual enterprise offered by the bison
hunt had the effect of calling into question elite control over warfare,
associational activity, and the acquisition of supernatural powers. As
young male warriors or “boys" attempted to hunt, trade, and carry on
warfare on their own, they began to challenge the authority of their
village leaders. Thus, when members of the Young Dog Society among the
Pawnee stole sacred meat while policing the village, they defended their
action by saying that they had been out west where people shared alike
(Holder 1970: 133). Among the Arikara, "bad young men" who sided with
the Sioux had to be expelled (Holder 1970: 129).

   Most importantly, the enhanced ability to kill buffalo furnished a
major new article for trade with the Europeans. When the fur trade
expanded into the Mackenzie Basin in the second half of the eighteenth
century, fur traders could now obtain a new source of food from the
horse pastoralists. This was pemmican—bison meat cut into slices, dried
in the sun or over a fire, pounded with a maul, and mixed with melted
fat, marrow, and a paste made from dried chokecherries. The mixture was
packed into hide bags weighing about 90 pounds. It has been estimated
that a voyageur in the fur trade required an average of 1 Vi pounds of
pemmican per day; thus each bag was capable of supplying a French
voyageur for 60 days (Merriman 1926: 5, 7). In 1813 the Northwest
Company required 58,059 pounds of pemmican, or 644 bags, to supply its
219 canoes (Ray 1974: 130, 132). The Plains nomads became the chief
purveyors of pemmican for the posts of the Woodland, the Barren Grounds,
and the Churchill, Columbia, and Frazer rivers. They also began to
supply them with horses, needed for transport in the north country
beyond the canoe anchorage at Fort Edmonton. The buffalo yielded other
commodities as well. There developed a lively trade with St. Louis in
buffalo tongues and tallow, and—as the beaver declined in importance
after the first quarter of the nineteenth century—buffalo robes became a
major article in the fur trade. Between 1841 and 1870, 20,000 buffalo
robes were gathered at Fort Benton in the Blackfoot country alone (Lewis
1942: 29).

Nez Perce woman preparing pemmican. Photograph by William Henry Jackson,
1871. (National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution)

   Thus, the combination of horse and gun, in the context of expanding
relations of commerce, set the stage for the emergence of the Plains
Indian configuration in the course of a few brief years. This
configuration was adopted in short order by pedestrian
hunters-and-gatherers and cultivators alike. Moreover, these diverse
populations came to resemble one another socially and culturally,
despite their varied origins. Some of the reasons for this convergence
inhered in the new mode of ecological adaptation. The bison herd
dispersed during the winter, moving in small groups to shelter in the
mountains; in spring the animals moved back to the grassy plains,
massing again in a large herd during their mating season in July and
August. Bison hunting had to accommodate itself to this rhythm. People
dispersed in small bands or family groups during the winter, then massed
again for the great annual summer surround. Camp sites also had to be
chosen to meet the needs of the horse herds for pasturage and for
protection.

   Other reasons for the convergent development of Plains culture
stemmed from the requisites of large bands, which had to be brought
together and held together for hunting and raiding, while retaining
flexibility in adapting to changing seasonal demands. The great annual
surround required that dispersed and often distinct groups come together
in a common camp circle. In response to this requirement, the horse
pastoralists borrowed organizational forms with centripetal functions
from adjacent sedentary horticulturalists such as the Mandan and the
Pawnee. Among such forms were male sodalities, which served as dancing
clubs, military associations, and "buffalo police" coordinating the
annual bison hunt. Another unifying mechanism lay in the use of symbols
that could bind together the different bands, such as the tribal
medicine bundle of the Pawnee, the sacred arrows of the Cheyenne, and
the sacred pipe and wheel of the Arapaho. Of particular importance in
this regard was the great annual Sun Dance ceremonial, which originated
among previously horticultural groups such as the Arapaho, Cheyenne, and
Dakota. Particular elements of this ritual have prototypes or analogues
among the Mandan, Arikara, and Pawnee, but in its adoption by the horse
pastoralists the unifying functions of the collective ritual were
combined with the pattern of individual merit making. The event was
usually held in conjunction with the annual bison hunt. It centered upon
individual self-torture, but it invoked a promise of world renewal for
all. This new ceremonial spread from the northeastern Plains to
virtually all the populations that moved into the Plains.

   Whereas in the villages land, privileges, and medicine bundles had
been owned by matrilineages or clans, on the Plains corporate kinship
units became attenuated or disappeared altogether. Ownership of means of
production, such as horses and weapons, as well as rights to medicine
bundles, song, dances, and names, was individualized. Kinship
terminology associated with descent lines gave way to a more bilateral
emphasis, stressing filiation through both parents of an individual;
moreover, the extension of terms for brother to nonrelatives
strengthened the egalitarian unity of the warrior set at the expense of
the unity of descent lines. In the villages, leadership had been the
hereditary prerogative of elite households who exacted obedience from
the entire village population. Among the horse pastoralists, however,
leadership came to depend primarily upon achievement in war and trade,
and the leader now received his major support from his own band rather
than from the tribe as a whole. Thus, while the Plains configuration
drew centripetal elements from the horticultural villages, it also
loosened the bonds of kinship and authority.

   The decentralization of decision making and the enhanced mobility of
mounted groups on the Plains also had their roots in the requisites of
expanding trade. To obtain more guns and ammunition, kettles and metal
tools, woolens, tobacco, and liquor, the horse pastoralists had to
obtain more pemmican and horses to sell to the fur traders. There was
thus a rising demand for horses and a concomitant increase in horse
raiding and rustling. This, in turn, intensified the need for horses to
use in both offense and defense. The number of horses required in bride
price grew, further increasing the demand for horses, since access to
horses permitted men to acquire more wives and thereby to enlarge the
work force for preparing pemmican.

   The greater the amount of pemmican a man could funnel into trade, the
greater was his ability to acquire the weapons and gear to equip a war
party, and the greater also his ability to free his male kin and
dependents for warfare. Thus, the more successful entrepreneurs and
chiefs—those who had links to trading posts—also became successful war
leaders. The result was a concentration of horses and valued goods in
the hands of the wealthy and successful, producing a differentiation
between richer and poorer, between chiefs and their dependents. Since
the achievement of social position required liberal distributions of
wealth, fees for entry and advancement in associations, payments for
medicine bundles and dance prerogatives, and expenditures of bride
price, access to horses and guns ultimately spelled success in social
and supernatural relations as well. Even the development of graded
associations among the Blackfoot, Arapaho, and Gros Ventre may not have
been the result of borrowing old elements from the village tribes. This
development was probably late, dating from around 1830. The associations
provided "an ideal mechanism for expressing and channelizing the
vertical mobility which came with the increase in wealth" (Lewis 1942:
42).

The Red River Métis

The Plains Indians did not long remain the only providers of pemmican to
the fur trade, nor did the Plains Indian ecological adaptation remain
exclusive to Indians. At the beginning of the nineteenth century,
Scottish immigrants settled in the Red River country in Manitoba and
soon turned to hunting to supplement a meager agriculture. They were
joined, in turn, by so-called métis—mixed European and native Americans,
many of whom were displaced as trappers and middlemen by the
rationalization of the fur trade—as well as by Cree and Ojibwa bands.
When the Northwest Company sought to equip its Saskatchewan and
Athabascan brigades, they turned to these Red River hunters and trappers
as suppliers of pemmican. Along the Red River, therefore, there arose a
cycle of activities not unlike that of the Missouri villagers. The Red
River people would live in stable settlements, in log cabins near their
farms, for most of the year, drawing advances from the companies. In the
running season they would move into tents, riding out after the buffalo
and bringing back their kills in two-wheeled carts capable of bearing
900 pounds of buffalo meat. On occasion they would fight the Dakota.
During a two-month hunt in 1840, the Red River métis obtained nearly a
million pounds of buffalo meat. It was sold to the Company to settle
debts and to buy household goods; but many hunters had to go out again
for a second or third time that year to obtain enough meat to last their
own families throughout the winter. When the Canadian government granted
reservations to native American groups and to half-natives affiliated
with such groups, the métis were excluded. Their dissatisfaction issued
in two major rebellions, in 1869 and 1885, under the leadership of Louis
Riel.

Northwest Coast

In the last quarter of the eighteenth century a new frontier opened up
for the fur trade on the Northwest Coast of North America. Captain
Cook's ships, the Resolution and the Discovery, landed in 1778 at Nootka
Sound, where they acquired several sea-otter skins. When these were sold
in China, the best skins fetched $120. News of this spread, and by 1792
there were twenty-one European vessels engaged in the effort to obtain
more sea-otter pelts. The maritime trade reached its apogee between 1792
and 1812. Soon after its beginnings, fur traders of the Northwest
Company reached the coast overland, and the first fur-trading post west
of the Rockies was established in 1805. By the end of the
British-American War of 1812, the Northwest Company had full control of
the Pacific slope. Only when the Northwest Company merged with the
Hudson Bay Company in 1821, however, did systematic land- based trading
begin. The most important forts of the Company came to be Fort Simpson,
built among the Tsimshians near the "grand mart" at the mouth of the
Nass River in 1831, and Fort Rupert, established among the Kwakiutl in
1849.

The Siberian Fur Trade

As the Europeans entered the waters of the Northwest Coast, their
trading ships encountered the Russians, who had begun to explore the
coast in the 1730s. We noted earlier that the Russians had begun to
search for furs as early as the tenth century. Their search gained
momentum with the Russian victories over the Mongol-Turkish khanates of
the Volga Basin in the mid-sixteenth century. By 1581 a host of Cossacks
in the employ of the merchant house of Stroganov crossed the Urals and
destroyed the khanate of Sibir. From there the Cossacks pushed on until
they reached the Pacific shore in 1638. By 1690 there were permanent
settlements in Kamchatka, and in the 1730s and 1740s the Kuriles and
Aleutians were explored. In 1797 a state trading company was organized
to explore the fur resources of the Far Northeast; it set up a base on
Kodiak Island and founded colonies along the coast as far south as
California. In 1839 the Hudson Bay Company leased the mainland coast
from Mt. Fairweather to the Portland Canal, in exchange for providing
supplies to the northern Russian forts. Alaska passed into the hands of
the United States through purchase in 1867.

   In contrast to the North American trade, which involved the exchange
of commodities for fur, the Russian fur trade relied mainly on
tribute—that is, payments in fur made as tokens of political
subjugation. Thus, when Sibir was conquered, an annual tribute was
immediately imposed, which was to be paid in sables and silver foxes.
Boris Godunov, better known as the czar who inflicted serfdom on the
Russian peasants, set the terms of the fur tribute at ten sables for
each married man, five sables for each bachelor, plus one-tenth of all
other skins hunted. The Rusian term for the fur trade was iasak, from a
word common to both Mongols and Turks, meaning "to regulate" or "to fix"
(Grousset 1970: 586 n. 106)—a legacy of Mongol state making. The
imposition of fur tribute went hand in hand with expansion in Siberia.
The ethnographic map (Remezoff Atlas) made for Peter the Great in 1673
showed the distribution of iasak in relation to settlements and social
groups (Baddeley 1919,1: cxxxvi). The furs were initially collected by
military commanders; later this became the task of "sworn men" who
received no salary but were licensed to distill alcohol and operate
taverns, and who often took furs in payment for drink. While private
merchants had only a restricted role in earlier periods, in the
eighteenth century they increasingly came to the fore, as they began
trading furs to China in exchange for Chinese tea, silks, linen, and
rhubarb. In these endeavors the merchants were backed by Buriat, Tungus,
and Yakut clan and tribal chiefs, whom the Russians coopted by turning
them into hereditary nobles. They were given Russian titles and
privileges, and— after the 1760s—the right to collect the iasak
themselves (Watrous 1966: 75).

   As in North America, however, the expansion of hunting in order to
meet the requirement of the iasak led to wholesale decimation of
fur-bearing animals. In the fifteenth century, sables had roamed as far
west as Finland; by 1674 they were limited to Siberia, and by 1750 to
southeastern Siberia. In the eighteenth century, the focus of trade
shifted from sables to the sea otter, which was prized in China,
especially among the Manchu nobility. Russian expansion into the north
Pacific was prompted by the search for sea otters.

   The spread of the Russian trade into the Pacific orbit required a
major logistic effort. The center of the trade was in Irkutsk; supplies
had to be drawn from as far west as Yeniseisk. The local Yakuts were
called on not only to provide cattle but also to furnish horses to
transport grain and other supplies to the seaboard and peninsulas. Large
numbers of horses with Yakut guides were brought together by chiefs
(toions) who acted as outfitters; individual Yakuts were subject to
requisition. The small and sturdy animals they used were the famous
“fish-eating" horses of the Yakut; they were fed on fresh fish in
addition to pasture, bark, and willow twigs (Gibson 1969: 191). During
the winter, transportation was by dog team, and local fishing had to be
intensified greatly to provide the large amount of fish needed to feed
the six dogs required by each man.

   Just as the Russians had to rely on the local population to supply
them with fish, they also needed their maritime skills to hunt the sea
otter. They first employed Kamchadal, but the sea otter was hunted out
in Kamchatka by 1750. In the 1750s the Russian traders moved on to the
Aleutians, imposing compulsory service in sea-otter hunting on the
Aleut. The Aleut population was reduced to a twentieth of its number in
the course of seventy years, and the sea otter grew rare in the Aleutian
Islands by 1789. Most of the sea-otter trade shifted thereafter to the
Northwest Coast of North America, a trade that was mainly in the hands
of British and Boston-based American ships, and from which the Russians
were largely excluded.

Populations of the Northwest Coast

In reaching the coast, the Europeans entered an environment very
different from that of boreal North America. The climate is temperate;
warm moist air rises from the Japanese Current and condenses as rain and
fog on the coastal ranges. The heavy rainfall supports thick stands of
conifers—fir, spruce, cedar, yew, and redwood. The inhabitants of the
Northwest Coast were primarily fishermen, depending in large measure on
ocean-living salmon and herring, harvesting them during their annual
runs upriver in search of fresh-water spawning grounds. The harvest was
supplemented by fishing in coastal waters, by hunting wild fowl, and by
gathering shellfish and edible roots. One group, the Nootka, specialized
in whaling. Food resources on the coast were plentiful, although spells
of bad weather and annual fluctuations in the number of spawning fish
caused occasional shortages.

   The first recorded meeting of European navigators and the inhabitants
of the coast took place in 1774, when the Spanish ship Santiago traded
with a group of Haida, giving them clothes, beads, and knives in
exchange for otter furs, blankets, and carved wooden boxes, and other
artifacts. It was four years later that Captain Cook's ships landed and
traded for sea-otter pelts at Nootka Sound.

   The newcomers quickly realized that they were dealing with trade
partners as astute and calculating as any they had encountered on their
voyages. They had, in fact, entered an area of extensive native trade.
Since resources in the Northwest Coast area were often localized, there
had long been trade between islanders and mainlanders, as well as
between coast dwellers and inland populations. Thus, olachen ran only in
restricted areas, such as the Nass and certain rivers and inlets along
Queen Charlotte Sound; people came from far away with goods to trade for
olachen oil, a monopoly held by the groups with rights over the fishing
tracts. Hunting for land animals was especially important in the upriver
communities. The northern Tlingit made the Chilkat blankets woven with
mountain-goat wool and cedar bark, but since cedars do not grow in their
habitat, bark and cedar wood had to come from the south. Copper was
brought from the Copper River area to the Chilkat, and taken south from
there. The Haida and the Nootka were known especially for their fine
canoes, and yellow cedar-bark robes produced by Nootka and Kwakiutl, as
well as Salish robes of mountain-goat wool, dog hair, and the down of
wild fowl, were traded up and down the coast. The islanders supplied the
mainlanders with dried venison, seal oil, dried fish, shellfish,
greenstone for tools, cedar bark, cedar-bark baskets, cedar wood for
ceremonial artifacts, and yew wood for bows and storage boxes. The
mainlanders furnished the islanders with hides and furs, cloth and
clothing, olachen and olachen oil, cranberries, horn spoons, baskets of
spruce roots, and Chilkat blankets.

   Although the native trading voyages did not involve travel on the
open ocean but mainly hugged the coast, they sometimes covered great
distances. Tlingit groups traveled 300 miles to trade with Haida or
Tsimshian. The mainlanders also traded with the Athabascan speakers of
the interior, bringing cedar-bark baskets, fish oil, iron, and shell
ornaments to them and returning with hides, moccasins, thongs, and
placer copper (Drucker 1963; Oberg 1973; 107- 108). One population
located along the lower Columbia River, the Chinook, filled an important
role as middlemen in the trade along the coast and between coast and
interior. They traded slaves from California down the Columbia to the
coast (see French 1961; 363 — 364), in exchange for Nootka canoes and
dentalium shells. Their language, incorporating Chinook and Nootka
structural features and English vocabulary, became the Chinook “jargon,”
the trade language of the Northwest Coast.

   What the Europeans sought on the coast was, above all, sea-otter
pelts. Between 1785 and 1825, some 330 recorded vessels visited the
coast, nearly two-thirds of them trading in two seasons or more (Fisher
1977: 13). Sea-otter skins were obtained, at first, in return for iron
and other metals; later for cloth, clothing, and blankets; still later
for rum, tobacco, molasses, and muskets. The native American traders
were mostly "chiefs” who mobilized their followers and personal contacts
to deliver the otter skins, and whose power grew concomitantly with the
development of the trade.

   These chiefs occupied the apical positions in the kinship units of
the area. Among the populations north of the Douglas channel—the
Tlingit, the Haida, and the Tsimshian—the basic units were
matrilineages. South of the channel—notably among the Nootka and
Kwakiutl—the units were ambilaterally extended families, or "houses."
Each of the lineages or clusters of houses formed a local grouping that
held rights, as a body, to resources such as fishing grounds, hunting
territories, shellfish beds, and berry patches, as well as possessing
ceremonial prerogatives. The rights to manage these resources were
vested in certain titled positions; the occupants of these positions
were chiefs, called tais by the Spaniards and tyee in Chinook jargon. As
organizers of group resources, these chiefs also became the main agents
of the fur trade. The best known of them is the Nootka chief bearing the
title of Maquinna, who was first contacted in 1791. He controlled a
trade network of populations living on the east coast of Vancouver
Island, and he soon became recognized as the leading trader in the area.
By 1803 he was wealthy enough to offer in a giveaway 200 muskets, 200
yards of cloth, 100 shirts, 100 looking glasses, and 7 barrels of
gunpowder (Jewitt 1815, quoted in Fisher 1977: 18). There were other
such chiefs as well. They not only committed their own people to
intensified sea-otter hunting but drew into their trade networks groups
of people elsewhere, whose furs they re-exported.

   Entry into the fur trade must have appealed to these men, because it
offered an immediate way of enlarging the scale of resources at their
disposal. As Joyce Wike has pointed out (1957: 309), "In most sectors
the more accessible resources of importance or value seem already to
have been owned or divided up to such an extent that it may have been
impossible for one group to expand except at the expense of others." The
increasing availability of European arms prompted a rise in warfare,
both for territorial acquisition and for slaves. At the same time, the
local chiefs must also have seen the new trade as a way of enhancing
their position within their societies. Since their accession to office
was not automatic but required the expenditure of resources in public
giveaways, participation in the fur trade promised to enlarge the stock
of wealth on which their status depended.

   Where people were grouped into matrilineages, each such group shared
a common genealogy and a stock of ceremonial titles. The incumbent to
the chiefship was supposed to derive from the senior line of descent,
yet the rule specified only those eligible, not the actual heir.
Selection of the successor depended upon a man's ability to validate the
inheritance through giveaways, in which gifts were presented to guests
drawn from actual or potential affinal lineages. Such giveaways were
known as potlatches, from a Chinook word meaning "to give." While the
assumption of all titles involved some form of giveaway, the strategic
potlatch among the northerners was the one that announced succession to
the chiefship (a function reminiscent of the Feast of the Dead among the
Huron and the Great Lakes Algonkin). As a result of the fur trade, the
scope of these giveaways was greatly enlarged. Before the advent of the
Europeans, the items given were mostly food and skin clothing. After the
onset of the fur trade, they ran the gamut of imported European
commodities, as well as native foods and artisan products obtained
through trade in such commodities.

Walrus-hide armor decorated with Chinese coins, Tlingit. (Photograph
courtesy Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation)

   Among the southern groups, the ambilateral extended "houses" were
ranked with respect to one another, but claimants to high rank had to
develop a "portfolio" of titles on both their father's and their
mother's side. The road to success among these people was therefore not
heirship in the senior line of descent, but the accumulation of titles
bilaterally through various rites of passage. The most significant of
these was marriage. Each rite of passage was accompanied by a giveaway,
with potlatches at marriage playing a determinant role in setting up the
title portfolio for a would-be chief.

   The members of a matrilineage or an ambilaterally extended house
were, of course, linked by kinship, yet they were divided by rank. In
the north, descendants of the senior line, and in the south, the
"well-born” incumbents to titles, formed a distinctive stratum of
“nobles” distinguished through dress, comportment, and ritual
prerogatives from a stratum of “commoners."The northern nobility
reinforced their special position through cross-cousin marriage, thus
keeping purity of descent and potlatching wealth within restricted
lines. In the south, where status climbing and potlatch giving were more
open in theory, the strategic high-ranking titles were in fact preempted
by each generation of title holders for the benefit of their immediate
descendants. Possession of titles carried advantages: the nobility
received between one-fifth and one-half of the food produced by the
commoners (Ruyle 1973: 615). The noble stratum furnished the
administrators of lineage resources, the war leaders, the entrepreneurs
in trade, and the organizers of ceremonial exchanges, and received all
the prerequisites that attended such offices.

   The nobility, furthermore, owned and traded slaves. Slaves were
mainly war captives, or men and women traded in from Puget Sound or
northern California. The percentage of slaves in different groups is
variously estimated at one-seventh to one-fourth of the population
(Ruyle 1973: 613-614). The Nootka chief Maquinna had nearly 50 slaves,
according to Jewitt (1815), who was Maquinna's slave for three years.
Roderick Finlayson, clerk to the Hudson Bay Company, says that two
Tlingit chiefs at Fort Stikine had 90 to 100 slaves each, mostly
purchased from the Haida (Hays 1975: 45). Slaves could be ransomed by
their kin groups, an option likely to be taken up if the captors lived
close by or if the captive was an important person. Among the Tlingit in
the first decade of the nineteenth century, the ransom consisted
primarily of sea-otter skins (Langsdorff 1817, quoted in Gunther 1972:
181). The more distant the captive was from his group of origin, the
less likely it was that he would be ransomed.

   Slavery was hereditary. Slaves were tied to their owners and could
not leave, unlike commoner lineage members who might break away to form
new settlements. Slaves could be sacrificed or given away in gift
exchanges. They could also be put to work. They often did menial
household work, and as the fur trade intensified, they were put to the
arduous labor of drying and stretching sea-otter pelts in preparation
for the market. We do not know how much a slave was worth in contact
times. The Tlingit chiefs at Fort Stikine around 1840, however, were
willing to sell slaves for $10 apiece. In the 1870s the Chilkat Tlingit
rented their slaves to the whites at $9 to $12 a load (Hays 1975: 96).
Oberg's old informants reported in 1931 that when they were young
(presumably in the last quarter of the nineteenth century) one slave was
worth four Chilkat blankets or one breech loading gun; ten to fifteen
slaves could buy a large canoe (1973: 111-112).

   The chiefs thus used their pivotal positions in the fur trade to
accumulate potlatch wealth, to augment their affinal connections through
auspicious marriages, to extend their trading networks, and to reinforce
their social prerogatives. Some chiefs used the labor of their slaves to
increase the production of wealth objects. The basic deployment of
social labor in the societies of the Northwest Coast nevertheless
remained predicated on the kinship mode. The chief occupied his leading
position as the executive of his kin group. Households contributed goods
for his prestations by virtue of their kin connections, and in the
expectation of returns through redistribution. The frequency with which
"worthless people" appear in ethnographic accounts makes it likely that
the contributions of kinsmen to a chief—in the form of labor or potlatch
wealth—were not always automatic. If dissatisfied with the chief, people
could and did secede and move elsewhere. Finally, if a chief mismanaged
the resources of the group, he could be killed.

   As the civil authorities of Columbia began to interfere with native
warfare, the political functions of the potlatch in rivalry and alliance
making probably intensified, "stopping up rivers of blood with rivers of
wealth." The growing economic utility of slaves diminished ceremonial
killing, while contributing at the same time to the successful rise to
prominence of parvenu entrepreneurs. The chiefs, however, could not make
themselves independent of the potlatch system. If the potlatch
constituted a kind of banking, as suggested by Chief Maquinna of Nootka
in 1896 in a letter to the Daily Colonist (Hays 1975: 88), it consisted
in the banking of kin-ordered relations, not of tributary wealth or
capital.

   By the 1830s the sea otter had become scarce, and trade shifted from
the islanders to the mainlanders, whose main concern was to establish
and maintain control over fur supplies from the mountainous hinterland.
The Tlingit at Wrangell, under Chief Shakes, monopolized the trade with
the Athabascans at the head of the Stikine River. The Tlingit at Taku
controlled the trade up and down the Taku River, the Tlingit at Chilkat
the valley of the Chilkat River. The inhabitants of Milbanke Sound
dominated the routes between Ft. McLoughlin and the interior Chilkat.
The Tshimshian under Chief Legaic at the Hudson Bay Company's Fort
Simpson engrossed the trade on the upper Skeena with the Gitskan, who in
turn controlled trade with the Sekani; the Bella Coola played the same
role in relation to the Alkatcho Carrier. When the Hudson Bay Company
established Fort Rupert in 1849, the Kwakiutl who moved there controlled
the trade with other populations.

   In these relations between coastal groups and groups in the
hinterland, kin ties often structured the partnership of asymmetrical
trade. The Bella Coola, for example, integrated the Alkatcho Carrier
into their network of trade partners by accepting Alkatcho men as
sons-in-law. These Alkatcho affinals were recruited from "the successful
hunters, the shrewd and energetic traders, the lucky gamblers" (Goldman
1940: 344)—those who were able to furnish their Bella Coola
fathers-in-law with furs. In turn, they obtained noble Bella Coola
wives, as well as titles and big names from the wife-giving lineage. As
a result, there developed an Alkatcho "aristocracy," which became
enmeshed in the Bella Coola potlatch system. The most important Alkatcho
"noble" of a village became its potlatch chief and its agent in
inter-village potlatches. The real authority of such figures remained
limited, however. The Alkatcho subsistence base was too restricted to
permit any but minor potlatch exchanges; "an ordinary exchange involved
some ten blankets" (Goldman 1940: 347). Property was destroyed among the
Bella Coola, but among the Alkatcho it was only symbolically "thrown
into the fire." Potlatching increased the productivity of the extended
families that participated and led some Alkatcho entrepreneurs to
collect furs from neighboring Carrier and Chilcotin, but the restricted
productive base ultimately set limits to the escalation of potlatching.
The Alkatcho, furthermore, did not take over the elaborate secret
society complex of their wealthier affinals. The failure to adopt these
forms may have been, in part, the result of difficulty in supporting
such events with the humble resources of the Alkatcho villages. At the
same time, the Bella Coola guarded these ceremonials and the associated
ritual prerogatives as ways of impressing their neighbors, who also
remained fearful of Bella Coola sorcery.

   The dominant trading populations were not loath to defend their
monopolies. In 1834, when the Hudson Bay Company wanted to build a fort
on the Stikine to intercept the Tlingit fur trade with the Russians the
Tlingit threatened to destroy it. (It was, in fact, built in 1839 with
Russian consent.) In 1854 the Chilkat Tlingit sent a war party 300 miles
inland to the Yukon Valley to destroy the Hudson Bay Company's Fort
Selkirk, which they felt interfered with their trade.

   Such forceful control over the channels of trade benefited the
coastal intermediaries at the expense of interior groups. In the 1930s
some Tlingit still recalled with pleasure how they acquired flintlock
rifles from a European trader in return for a pile of furs equal to the
height of a gun, and then traded the same gun to the Athabascans for a
pile of furs twice its height (Oberg 1973: 10). There was also a great
increase in raiding for slaves and in slave trading. Early possession of
guns by the people to the north of Puget Sound gave them an advantage
over the coastal Salish, who were still fighting with bow and arrow.
Slave raids became so prevalent that up river people were soon afraid to
come down to the ocean front in the course of their annual cycle
(Collins 1950: 337). Fort Simpson, as well as The Dalles, became a major
market for slaves.

   At Fort Simpson and at Fort Rupert, moreover, significant new
political developments took place among the Tsimshian and Kwakiutl. Fort
Simpson was set up in Tsimshian country. Nine of the fourteen Tsimshian
groups or clusters, with salmon-fishing tracts on the lower Skeena and
olachen grounds on the Nass, formed a common winter settlement at
Metlakatla Pass (near modern Prince Rupert). These groups had already
developed a system of ranking the lineages within each cluster, granting
top rank to the chief of the highest lineage. In forming a confederacy,

Counting blankets in preparation for a potlatch, Fort Rupert. Photograph
by Franz Boas, 1894. (Courtesy of the American Museum of Natural
History, New York)

 they faced the problem of ranking the nine lineage clusters with
respect to one another. The four groups of Kwakiutl that moved to Fort
Rupert in 1849 formed a confederacy, in turn, and came to be known as
the "Fort Ruperts." These are the people first described in detail by
Franz Boas; they were characterized by an extraordinary efflorescence of
their potlatch. Far from constituting an area-wide precontact
phenomenon, the competitive potlatch "properly belongs to the realm of
acculturation studies, not primitive economics" (Ruyle 1973; 625).
Philip Drucker has pointed out (1955: 137-140) that the competitive
potlatch is especially marked among these two groups, which faced
identical problems. The Fort Ruperts had no precedent for ranking the
chiefs of the four constituent groups of the new confederacy, and
competitive potlatching developed as a way of establishing their rank.
The Tsimshian at Fort Simpson did the same, using the potlatch to rank
the nine clusters within the confederacy. In these two places,
therefore, the competitive potlatches "reached their highest
development—or perhaps one should say their peak of bitterest rivalry"
(Drucker 1963: 137).

   Competitive potlatching involved not only an escalation in bitterness
but also an increase in the quantity of goods given away. Helen Codere,
writing of the pre-1849 potlatches, points out that

   during the six generations before 1849, each of about twenty years
(there  is no record of the potlatches many years before this or until
the fabulous first three generations of the account), five of the ten
potlatches mentioned are 170—220 blankets in size, in a size range of
75—287 blankets, and there is no trend toward increasing the size; the
two relatively small potlatches of the account were given in the later
years. [1961: 443]

Thereafter, the number of blankets distributed increased by leaps and
bounds. A potlatch held in 1869 featured 9,000 blankets, one in 1895
over 13,000 blankets, and the last Kwakiutl potlatch in 1921 over 30,000
blankets (1961: 467), as well as other goods.

   Some of this wealth was derived from the fur trade; Fort Rupert
earned an estimated 6,000 pounds sterling through fur trading in 1850
(Codere 1961: 457). But from 1858 on, the boom town of Victoria offered
opportunities to Kwakiutl men as day laborers, and Kwakiutl women began
to earn money as laundresses and prostitutes. A growing number of
canneries also employed men in fishing and women in canning. At the same
time, there was a catastrophic decrease in population, much of it
brought on by European diseases such as syphilis and smallpox. The
Southern Kwakiutl, who numbered 7,500 to 8,000 in 1835, declined to
2,300 in 1881 and to 1,200 in 1911, a sixth of their number only 75
years before (Codere 1961: 457). Thus, as the volume and circulation of
money increased, the number of incumbents to crests, titles, and
prerogatives decreased. This furnished novel opportunities to the
socially and economically mobile. A commoner was able to take advantage
of the demise of houses and heirs in the late nineteenth century to
acquire high titles by employing money drawn from prostitution and
informants' fees (Wike 1957: 311; see Boas 1921: 1113-1117).

   In 1858 the native American populations of the area received a final
setback when the news that gold had been discovered in the Fraser River
reached California. Within months thousands of gold miners arrived, to
be followed soon afterward by settlers eager to establish themselves on
land they claimed was "lying waste without prospect of improvement”
(quoted in Fisher 1977: 104). The consequences were clear to a native
Vancouver Islander when he said, in 1860, "that more King-George-men
will soon be here, and will take our land, our firewood, our fishing
ground; that we shall be placed on a little spot, and shall have to do
everything according to the fancies of the King-Georgemen” (quoted in
Fisher 1977: 117).

   For more than three centuries the fur trade thrived and expanded in
North America, drawing ever new native American groups into the widening
circuits of commodity exchange that opened up between the incoming
Europeans and their native partners in trade. The trade first touched
the food collectors and horticulturists of the eastern woodlands and
subarctic. Then, with the expulsion of the French and the partition of
the north country between British Canada and the United States, it
reached beyond the Great Lakes into the western subarctic, creating at
the same time a new zone of supply in the area of the Plains. Finally,
at the conclusion of the eighteenth century, the trade established a
beachhead in the Pacific Northwest, eventually linking up, across the
coastal mountains, with the advancing inland trading posts.

   Wherever it went, the fur trade brought with it contagious illness
and increased warfare. Many native groups were destroyed, and
disappeared entirely; others were decimated, broken up, or driven from
their original habitats. Remnant populations sought refuge with allies
or grouped together with other populations, often under new names and
ethnic identities. A few, like the Iroquois, expanded at the expense of
their neighbors.

   Some groups, strategically located or strong militarily, became
primary beneficiaries of the trade in furs. They prospered, and
elaborated new cultural configurations that combined native and European
artifacts and patterns. Such cultural elaboration was made possible by
the flow of new and valued European goods into a still self-regulating
native economy. As long as the native Americans were able to direct most
of the social labor available through kin-ordered relations to the task
of guaranteeing their subsistence, the goods attained by part-time fur
hunting supplemented rather than replaced their own means of production.

   Until the end of the eighteenth century, moreover, native American
groups were sought as allies by the rival European powers engaged in
political and military competition. The Indians were still independent
military and political agents—"nations," in the parlance of the time—
whose support had to be gained with supplies of goods, including
weaponry. As a result, the exchange of goods and services between
Indians and Europeans resembled the giving of gifts more than an
exchange of commodities, signaling relations that transcended the merely
material. As Marcel Mauss pointed out, the exchange of gifts embodied an
invitation to friendship and alliance, or the cessation of feuds and
war.

   Access to European goods and gifts soon altered patterns of
interaction both within and between groups. In kin-ordered social
groups, an increased ability to obtain such goods and to distribute them
among kinsmen and followers gave prominence to salient "big men" or war
leaders, or enhanced the influence and scope of redistributing chiefs.
Gifts and goods phrased as gifts also created alliances between Indian
groups, as well as between Europeans and Indians. Such exchanges played
an important part in the formation of new groups anu in the development
of wider-ranging ethnic identities. Sometimes such larger ethnic
entities or confederations grew out of the amalgamation of previously
distinct local groups around a European stronghold or trading emporium.
At other times, such alliances or confederacies were formed in an effort
to gain control of new hunting grounds or strategic routes of access to
the trade. Many of the Indian "nations" or "tribes" later recognized as
distinct ethnic entities by government agents or by anthropologists took
shape in response to the spread of the fur trade itself, a process in
which the native Americans were as much active participants as the
traders, missionaries, or soldiers of the encroaching Europeans. Thus,
the history of these supposedly history-less peoples is in fact a part
of the history of European expansion itself.

   To bind these new ethnic entities together, the native Americans
developed overarching collective forms and rituals. Sometimes they
imparted new functions to traditional cultural forms, as in the
transformation of the Algonkin Feast of the Dead into the "trade
ritual," in the elaboration of shamanic contests into the Midewiwin
"church," or in the use of the Northwest Coast potlatch to cement trade
partnerships or to coordinate competing groups. At other times, wider
solidarities were created through novel combinations of cultural forms
of diverse origins, as when the peoples of the Plains developed in the
Sun Dance a group ritual suited to their more mobile way of life.

   Yet as the European traders consolidated their economic and political
position, the balanced relation between native trappers and the
Europeans gave way to imbalance. The decline of international warfare
diminished the politically motivated flow of goods from European
authorities to native American allies. The native Americans themselves
came to rely increasingly on the trading post not only for the tools of
the fur trade but also for the means of their own subsistence. This
growing dependence pressured the native fur hunters and pemmican
suppliers to commit ever more labor to the trade in order to repay the
goods advanced to them by the trader. Abandoning their own subsistence
activities, they became specialized laborers in a putting-out system, in
which the entrepreneurs advanced both production goods and consumption
goods against commodities to be delivered in the future. Such
specialization tied the native Americans more firmly into continent-
wide and international networks of exchange, as subordinate producers
rather than as partners.

7 The Slave Trade

In South America the search for wealth centered on gold and silver. In
North America it was the beaver that was sought, "the beloved" of the
Europeans, as the native Micmac called the animal. In Africa the main
commodity came to be "black ivory"—people, to be sold primarily in the
Americas.

   Trade in people was not a new phenomenon, nor was it confined to the
Americas. The European peninsula had long supplied slaves, first to
Byzantium and later to the Islamic world; in the Mediterranean, in
Cyprus and Sicily, slave labor was employed to grow sugar cane and to
work in the mines as early as the twelfth century. At that time slavery
was clearly color-blind. The Europeans also made use of slaves in Asia.
In the seventeenth century the Dutch, for instance, drew slaves from as
far away as Madagascar and Mindanao to work in the settlements on the
Cape of Good Hope in Africa and in the nutmeg groves of the Banda
Islands. The town of Batavia in Java, newly established by the Dutch,
was peopled with slaves brought from the Bay of Bengal (Boxer 1973b:
268-269). As the slave trade unfolded during the fifteenth century,
however, slaves were increasingly drawn from Africa, and as time wore on
they were destined in ever larger numbers for transportation to the
Americas. America provided the major demand, Africa the major supply.

The Course of the Slave Trade

This American demand underwent various changes of phase. It grew
gradually, during the sixteenth century, in response to a Spanish demand
for labor in the silver mines and on plantations, and a Portuguese
demand for cutters and millers of sugar cane in the Brazilian Northeast.
Some 275,000 slaves were sent to America and Europe between 1451 and
1600. In the course of the seventeenth century, slave exports from
Africa quintupled to an estimated total of 1,341,000, primarily in
response to the development of sugar cane cultivation on the islands of
the Caribbean. (This Antillean boom compensated to some extent for the
economic depression of the seventeenth century in Western Europe.) The
middle of that century marks a watershed in agricultural production in
the Caribbean islands. Before 1650 most of the islands grew tobacco, a
crop then mainly in the hands of European settlers working small farms.
After 1650 the islands turned to sugar production on slave plantations,
while tobacco, too, came to be raised increasingly with slave labor on
large estates on the North American mainland, mainly in Virginia and the
Carolinas.

   The eighteenth century proved the golden age of slaving, with over 6
million people being forcibly exported from Africa between 1701 and
1810. The principal centers of production were British-owned Jamaica and
French-owned St. Domingue; two-thirds of the slaves shipped to the
Caribbean worked on sugar plantations. In 1807 Britain abolished the
slave trade; yet almost 2 million more slaves were transported from
Africa between 1810 and 1870, many of them destined for Cuba, the major
Caribbean sugar producer in the nineteenth century. Clearly the
eighteenth century and the first half of the nineteenth century
witnessed the height of the slave trade; 80 percent of all slaves to
reach the New World came between 1701 and 1850.

   The initiators of the trade along the western coast of Africa were
the Portuguese, who had extended their colonization of the Atlantic
islands southward. Madeira, already known to map-makers in the
fourteenth century, was settled by Portuguese in 1402. The Canary
Islands had been seized by Castile in 1344, but in the second quarter of
the fifteenth century Portugal began to settle some of the islands,
fighting—as had their Castilian counterparts—against the Guanche, the
white natives of the islands. The Portuguese enslaved the Guanche and
took them to Madeira, using them to construct the irrigation works that
soon transformed Madeira into "a veritable agricultural paradise" of
wheat and sugar-cane fields (Greenfield 1977). The Azores were first
occupied by Portuguese in the 1430s. The first Portuguese trading post
(feitoria) was established at Arguin off the coast of Mauritania in
1445. There followed the discovery of the islands of Sao Tomé and
Principe in the Gulf of Guinea in 1470, and of Fernando Po at the mouth
of the Niger in 1471. Soon afterward, in 1482, the second major coastal
trading post was established at Elmina in the Bight of Benin, followed
by one at Axim in 1503. In 1483 Diogo Cao sailed up the mouth of the
Congo River and initiated a period of "friendly relations" between the
kingdom of the Congo and the king of Portugal.

   Early Portuguese commerce in West Africa did not concentrate on the
recruitment of slaves. It was the search for gold and spices that
prompted the early Portuguese voyages, and the traders shipped home
gold, pepper, ivory, dyewoods, gum, beeswax, leather, and timber, as
well as slaves. During the reign of Don Manuel I (1496-1521), the gold
shipped to Portugal from Elmina alone amounted to an annual average of
170,000 dobras, or gold coins (Boxer 1973a: 29). In return, the
Portuguese brought to Africa textiles from England, Ireland, France, and
Flanders; wheat from Morocco, the offshore Atlantic islands, and
northern Europe; brass utensils and glass beads from Germany, Flanders,
and Italy; and oyster shells from the Canaries. They were thus mostly
re-exporters of other peoples' goods. Brazilian tobacco, however, soon
became famous in Africa and gained the Portuguese a commodity that
continued to be marketable for the duration of the African trade.

   While the Portuguese thus carried on commerce in many commodities,
the trade in slaves proved lucrative from the beginning. Between 1450
and 1500 the Portuguese may have acquired as many as 150,000 slaves,
shipping many of them to Portugal (Boxer 1973a; 31). The slave trade
escalated further when it was discovered, around 1500, that Sáo Tomé and
Principe, previously uninhabited, were ideal for growing sugar cane.
Thereafter the influx of African slaves increased, although other
people—such as Jewish children deported from Portugal—were settled there
as well. Sáo Tomé became one of the sparkplugs of the burgeoning trade
in sugar and slaves. Between 1500 and 1530 its production of sugar
increased thirtyfold. By 1520, however, sugar planting had begun in
Brazil, which soon became the greatest consumer of slaves.

   If the Portuguese were the major purveyors of the slave trade in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the Dutch West Indies Company began
to encroach on Portuguese preserves, and soon they dominated the trade.
The advent of the Dutch on the African shores must be seen in
conjunction with their attempt to wrest control of the Brazilian sugar
coast from the Portuguese between 1624 and 1654. Moving into East
Africa, the Dutch attacked the Portuguese in Mozambique in 1607 and
1608; in West Africa, they captured Elmina, Axim, and Shama on the Gold
Coast in 1637, and occupied the coast of Angola between 1641 and 1648.
By 1654, however, they lost their last stronghold in Brazil and
thereafter abandoned the effort to obtain outright territorial control
both in Brazil and in Africa. They did, however, maintain their grip on
the offshore islands of Curasao and Aruba in the Caribbean.

   Instead of carrying on primary production of sugar themselves, the
Dutch turned to supplying Caribbean sugar producers with capital and
skills, and to trading in slaves. Much of the Brazilian sugar destined
for Europe would still reach Amsterdam, since the Portuguese processed
their sugar in Dutch mills. By 1660, however, the Dutch faced the first
organized English competition, in the shape of the so-called Royal
Adventurers into Africa and their more efficient successors, the Royal
Africa Company. Beginning in 1664 the French also chartered a number of
companies to trade in the South Atlantic.

   Like the Portuguese before them, the English did not at first come to
Africa to trade only for slaves. Gold was the most important item of the
goods handled by the Royal Africa Company at the end of the seventeenth
century. Indeed, it is estimated that the Gold Coast exported gold
amounting to a value of 200,000 pounds sterling per year between 1500
and 1700 (Bean 1974: 353). Yet from the beginning of the eighteenth
century slaves constituted the main commodity of the African trade, and
the English dominated that trade. Between 1701 and 1810, England
exported from West Africa over 2 million slaves, about two-thirds of the
total number shipped by the three major powers in the slave trade; the
other two, France and Portugal, transported about 600,000 slaves each
during the same period. By 1710 the Royal Africa Company, based in
London, had given way to private merchantmen operating out of Bristol,
and by mid-century Bristol yielded predominance to Liverpool. Liverpool
became the leading slave port in Europe until the trade was abrogated in
1807; that city was favored in this role by its close connection with an
increasingly industrial hinterland, which furnished capital and cheap
industrial goods for exchanges with the suppliers of slaves in Africa.
The main French slaving port was Nantes, which after 1763 was joined by
other French ports trying to compensate for the loss of the Canadian fur
trade to the English.

   While the number of slaves transported to America grew steadily, the
rate of profit obtained in the slave trade is a matter of dispute.
Individual traders earned profits of up to 300 percent (Craton 1974:
120); many others, however, went bankrupt. Slavers had to pay fees and
taxes to local African authorities, hire local labor, absorb the costs
of delays in loading, and face losses of crews and slaves in Middle
Passage. Overall, however, the trade was certainly profitable. Malachy
Postlethwayt, the British mercantilist who wrote in defense of the
interests of the Royal Africa Company, claimed that "the Negroe-Trade
and the natural Consequences resulting from it, may be justly esteemed
an inexhaustible Fund of Wealth and Naval Power to this Nation" (quoted
in Davis 1966: 150). The slave trade, he wrote, was "the first principle
and foundation of all the rest, the mainspring of the machine which sets
every wheel in motion" (quoted in Craton 1974: 120). In 1700 the Royal
Africa Company expected to sell slaves at four times the value of trade
goods paid for them, while private traders expected a return of six to
one. Craton estimates the total return between 1620 and 1807 at
approximately 12 million pounds, with perhaps half that sum accruing
between 1750and 1790(1974: 117). Klingberg estimated the annual
profitofthe trade in the eighteenth century at 24 percent (in Davis
1966: 155, n. 60); according to Anstey, however, between 1769 and 1800
profits were lower, ranging from 8 to 13 percent annually (1977: 84).

   The trade had indirect effects on the European countries engaged in
it. The commodities traded for slaves on African coasts had to be
produced or paid for in the home country. Thus, between 1730 and 1775
the value of British exports to Africa rose by some 400 percent.
Manufacturers, provisioned, and sailors all benefited by the trade and
at various times petitioned for its continuance. Moreover, the
plantations worked by slave labor were profitable, and much of the
profit returned to the home country. West Indian sugar plantations
earned approximately 20 percent annual profit before 1700, at least 10
percent between 1750 and 1775, and about 7.5 percent in 1790 (Craton
1974: 139). Craton concludes that

it is thus quite reasonable to assume that profits on all West Indian
plantations were never lower throughout the eighteenth century than the
rate of 8 to 12 per cent of the market value of the slaves deduced from
sugar plantations. [1974: 140)

In his book Capitalism and Slavery Eric Williams argues that the slave
trade and its adjuncts, in fact, provided the capital that allowed
England to take off into the industrial revolution. Williams probably
underestimates the growth of the domestic market and overestimates the
role that Africa and the Americas played in generating capital for
English growth. The home market was important, and English exports to
Europe exceeded in value those going to Africa and the Americas in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Yet the growing demand of the
English plantations in the second half of the seventeenth century did
furnish “a market in which English manufacturers were protected, in
which they had little native competition, and which had an absorptive
capacity rapidly expanding as colonial exports grew” (Davis 1954: 154).
Moreover, English exports to Africa and the Americas increased tenfold
during the eighteenth century, while the amount going to Europe remained
stationary. "The principal dynamic element in English export trade all
the middle decades of the eighteenth century was, therefore, colonial
trade" (Davis 1962: 290). The Williams thesis may thus be rephrased to
suggest not that English industrial development was predicated mainly on
the Atlantic trade, but that the Atlantic trade furnished English
industrial development with a "principal dynamic element."

   Over the course of the trade, the source of demand for slaves
changed, as old plantation areas and mining districts were superseded by
new ones; the zones providing slaves shifted, too, with the changing
fortunes of traders and suppliers. During the initial period of
Portuguese ascendancy in the trade of the fifteenth century, slaves came
predominantly from the region extending south of the Senegal River to
Sierra Leone, an area easily reached from the Cape Verde Islands and
called by the Portuguese Guinea of Cape Verde (Curtin, 1969: 96). In the
sixteenth century, Senegambia remained a major area of supply,
furnishing numerous captives taken in the wars that followed the
collapse of the Jolof state. At the same time, the area south of the
Congo River grew more important, with Portuguese penetration of the
kingdom of Ndongo (Curtin 1969: 101 —102). By the mid-seventeenth
century, the great majority of slaves exported into the Iberian sectors
of the New World were “Angolas.”

   During the seventeenth century, Brazil received 42 percent of the
slaves shipped and Spanish America received 22 percent, but the British
Caribbean now took 20 percent of the supply and the French Caribbean
another 12 percent. The slaves bought by the English, however, came
increasingly from a new area of supply—from West Africa between Cape
Mount and the Gap of Benin, comprising the Grain Coast, the Ivory Coast,
the Gold Coast, and the Slave Coast. Around 1675, 64 percent of all
slaves traded by the Royal Africa Company came from this region (Curtin
1969: 122). This change in distribution probably had its effects on the
new Afro-American cultures of the Western Hemisphere.

   During the eighteenth century, Senegambia and Sierra Leone receded
further into the background, while West Africa became the major source
of supply. In this period, about 60 percent of the slaves exported by
Portuguese, English, and French traders were drawn from West Africa
(some 3,234,000), while 40 percent (2,228,000 people) came from central
Africa and southeastern Africa (Curtin 1969: 211). Within West Africa,
the number of slaves supplied from different areas varied with changing
circumstances. During the first decade of the century, the Bight of
Benin, or Slave Coast, played a major role in the trade through the
strategic port of Whydah. From 1730 to 1750, a period marked by the rise
and consolidation of the Asante polity, the Gold Coast was a prominent
source of supply. In the 1740s and again in the 1760s, slaves came in
large numbers from the Windward Coast, especially from the area of
modern Liberia, where the Kru began to play a role as slavers and
seafarers. By 1740 the Bight of Biafra—the region of the Niger Delta—
also began to furnish slaves in large numbers. From then until the end
of the century, this area exported more than 100,000 slaves in each
decade; in the 1760s and again in the 1790s the number rose to about
140,000. This increase in slave exports is related to the growth of
efficient slave-capturing and delivery organizations in areas previously
marked by kin-ordered populations. In the 1780s the Slave Coast again
became an important source of supply, exporting more than 120,000
slaves; this was the time when the kingdom of Oyo intensified its
participation in the trade.

   During the eighteenth century, the slave trade went on apace in
central Africa as well. Although in the 1710s and 1720s the Portuguese
drew the majority of their slaves from the Bight of Benin, in each
decade from the 1730s until the end of the slave trade they never
exported fewer than 120,000 slaves from central Africa and Mozambique,
and the number from this area exceeded 180,000 in the last decade of the
century. The British also relied on this region, receiving from it over
100,000 slaves during each of the decades between 1781 and 1810 and the
French bought some 130,000 slaves from this region during the 1780s
(Curtin 1969: 211). These figures bespeak a vast expansion of the trade
in central Africa, with major sociopolitical implications for this area.

   Although the British decision to abolish the slave trade in 1807
ended the flow to the British Caribbean and greatly reduced slave
imports into the United States, more than 600,000 slaves still went to
the Spanish dominions of the New World in the nineteenth century,
550,000 of them destined for Cuba. The French Caribbean acquired almost
100,000 slaves between 1811 and 1870, and Brazil as many as 1,145,000.
The Brazilian supply came mostly from the catchment area in the Congo
and in Angola. Ever larger numbers, however, came from Mozambique in
East Africa, where the Yao operated at the eastern end of the great lane
of slave traffic that had been forged through the middle of central
Africa.

Why Africa?

Why did Africa become the main source of slaves for the Western
Hemisphere? Indeed, why did Africa become the source of slaves for
Europeans rather than Europe itself? The answer is by no means clear,
but some pieces of the puzzle are becoming apparent. We have seen that
in the first millennium A.D. Europe did indeed furnish slaves to the
Moslems and the Byzantines. During the centuries of the Crusades,
Moslems enslaved Christians and Christians enslaved Moslems, a pattern
that continued in the Iberian peninsula until the end of the fifteenth
century. In the thirteenth century the Genoese and the Venetians began
to import Turkish and Mongol slaves through Tana on the Black Sea, while
most of the slaves imported into Europe during the fourteenth century
were Slavs and Greeks. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries slaves
from these areas formed a significant proportion of the population of
Tuscany and of Catalonia-Aragon. Much of the wealth of Venice came to
depend on the trade in slaves. Although slaves could not be sold at
public auctions in Venice after 1386, they continued to be sold by
private contract throughout the sixteenth century. Slave trading also
formed a large part of the activities of pirates on both sides of the
Mediterranean well into the seventeenth century. Slavery in Europe,
however, was not entirely a Mediterranean phenomenon. Coal miners and
saltpan workers in Scotland were still enslaved in the seventeenth and
the eighteenth centuries, some even made to wear collars marked with
their owners’ names (John Millar 1781, quoted in Davis 1966: 437;
Mantoux 1928: 74-75). In addition, Scottish and Irish prisoners of war
were sent into servitude (though not lifetime slavery) in the New World.

   The English, furthermore, relied heavily on indentured servitude to
provide labor for the New World colonies. Indenture was a contractual
relationship in which "parties are upon certaine termes or conditions
for a certaine time onely under the power of a man" (Baynes 1641 — 1643,
quoted in Jordan 1968: 62). In practice, indentured servitude differed
little from slavery. Indentured servants were often bought and sold
while contractually bound; they were harshly punished for breaches of
discipline, and many did not outlive the period of their bondage—much
like the African slaves imported into the Caribbean area, who had a
notoriously short life span. Of every ten indentured servants in English
North America between 1607 and 1776, only two attained the status of
independent farmer or artisan after their term of servitude. Most of
them died before their contracts expired; the rest became day laborers
or paupers (Smith 1947: 297-300). Indenture in North America reached its
high point at the end of the eighteenth century. Indentured servitude
may have offered certain advantages to employers, for the cost of an
indentured servant was less than that of a slave. At the same time,
indenture was limited in time, hedged about with customary and legal
restrictions, and subject to the relative ease with which servants could
escape. In any case, the force of legal or ideological constraints upon
the enslavement of Europeans should not be overestimated. The question
of why Europeans were not legally enslaved still remains open. Perhaps
mercantilist notions about conserving domestic manpower played a part,
whenever appeals to Christian equality proved insufficient. In the
context of the New World, the distinction between European limited-time
bondservants and African lifetime slaves separated Whites from Blacks in
numerous legal and social contexts.

   Why, then, did the Europeans not make more extensive use of native
American slaves? The Spaniards had no compunctions about enslaving
Indians, especially during the first phase of their colonization in the
Caribbean. They raided not only the Central American mainland for
slaves, but also the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of North America. In 1520
Lucas Vasquez de Ayllon carried off fifty Indians from the North
American mainland to the West Indies (Nash 1974: 110). In Brazil the
Portuguese began in the sixteenth century to use native labor in the
sugar districts of Bahia, and in the course of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries slave raiders operating out of Sao Paulo are said
to have enslaved as many as 350,000 Indians (Curtin 1977: 6).

   In North America, in what was later South Carolina, English settlers
obtained Indian slaves—captured in war—as well as deerskins from the
native populations, rewarding the slave-hunting groups with European
commodities. As Gary Nash has put it, the English "subcontracted war" to
Indians (1977: 117). They set the Westos against the people of the
interior; the Shawnee against the Westos; the Creek against Timucua,
Guales, and Apalachees (10,000 people of these groups being exported as
slaves in the year 1704); the Catawba against the Shawnee; the Catawba,
Congarees, and Shawnee against the Cherokee; and the Cherokee against
everybody else. The Indian slave trade in the Carolinas reached its peak
in the Yamasee war of 1715—1717 and declined thereafter.

   A reason often given for the preference for African slaves over
native Americans is the claim that Africans were better and more
reliable workers. By the 1720s Africans fetched higher prices than
Indians (see Perdue 1979: 152 n. 5). The main factor, however, seems to
have been that Indian proximity to their native groups encouraged
rebelliousness and frequently, escape. The English colonists also feared
that Indian slavery would alienate native American allies in the wars
against the Spaniards and the French. Finally, native American groups
could be enlisted to aid in returning runaway African slaves to their
masters. In 1730, for instance, the Cherokee signed an agreement to
seize and return runaway slaves, upon the promise of a gun and matchcoat
for each slave delivered (Perdue 1979: 39).

   Whereas white bondsmen and native American slaves were able, to some
degree, to enlist the aid of their own groups, African slaves were
forcibly deprived of such support. Sale or capture at the African
terminus of the trade divorced them from kinsmen and neighbors; upon
arrival in American ports, slaves of different ethnic and linguistic
origin were then deliberately mixed to inhibit solidarity. Once assigned
to owners, their segregation from white bondsmen and native Americans
was confirmed by legal discrimination and fostered by the growth of
racist sentiment. If they ran away, their skin color served as a mark of
identification for every "patroller" bent upon reaping a reward. The
enslavement of Africans thus offered the possibility of a labor force
that could be set to work in arduous and continuous operations under an
owner's direction, with restraints of law and custom reduced to a
minimum. It foreclosed alternatives open to the other laboring
populations in the New World.

   Why then Africa? In the Mediterranean there was a high level of trade
in slaves at the time of the Portuguese and Spanish exploration of the
Atlantic. The western Mediterranean, however, was soon cut off from the
source of slaves in the eastern Mediterranean and around the Black Sea
by the Ottoman seizure of Constantinople in 1453 and the ensuing Turkish
blockade of trade routes to the east. Portuguese slaving along the
western coasts of Africa had already begun by then; the Dutch, French,
and English merely followed in the wake of Portuguese pioneers. On his
first voyage in 1562, John Hawkins heard in the Canaries “that Negroes
were very good merchandise in Hispaniola" (quoted in Jordan 1968: 59).
The notion that “some gaines" could be obtained in this trade
undoubtedly inspired his crest, which featured a “demi-Moor captive and
bound.”

The African Background

While Hawkins was informed that "store of Negroes might easily be had
upon the coast of Guinea," Africa was not, in fact, an area burgeoning
with population. The population of West Africa, from the northern
boundaries of Senegal to the eastern border of modern Nigeria, is
estimated at about 11 million in 1500; west-central Africa (Equatoria,
Zaire, and Angola) had about 8 million inhabitants at that time (McEvedy
and Jones 1978: 243, 249). The introduction of American food crops, such
as maize and manioc, probably contributed to an increase in the
population of these regions to about 20 million and 10 million,
respectively, by 1800. The ability of this area to sustain a large-scale
trade in people thus seems surprising, as does the rapid development of
the delivery system that linked European demand and African supply. This
development combined European initiative with African collaboration.
Europeans financed and organized the trade. Capture, delivery, and
control and maintenance of captives while waiting for ocean transport
remained mostly in African hands. Ocean transport, "seasoning"—the
process of habituating the captives to their new conditions—and sale at
the point of arrival, in turn, were carried out by Europeans.

   This new trade was engrafted upon societies with a similar ecological
base in slash-and-burn cultivation of tubers, bananas, millets and
sorghums, and—where possible—in livestock raising. (The raising of
cattle and horses was inhibited in much of the forest belt by the
prevalence of the tsetse fly.) Ironworking craftsmen furnished
iron-headed hoes and axes, as well as spearheads and swords. There was
much interchange of craft products and localized resources—such as iron
ore, copper, salt, and palm products—through extensive networks of
exchange and market places. Access to land and other resources was
controlled by lineages, which represented continuous corporations of
ancestors and descendants. These lineages were managed by elders, who
were also charged with implementing alliances among lineages through the
exchange of bridewealth for rights over the reproductive capabilities of
women and over their offspring. The scarce factor in this adaptation was
not land but labor; rights to labor were locked up in kinship
arrangements manipulated by the elders as lineage representatives.

   While such interacting lineages tended to form autonomous social and
economic systems, overarching polities sometimes came into being under
the rulership of "divine kings," who embodied in their person and status
the attributes of the supernatural. Where such ritual kingship came to
be combined with royal control over strategic resources—such as gold,
iron ore deposits, salt, and slaves—and with jurisdiction over
long-distance trade, more complex "pyramidal" political structures
emerged. These polities trace their origins through mythical charters
that derive their ruling lineages from major centers of supernatural
power, but their formation is probably closely connected with the
shifting political relationships among the populations that lived along
the trade routes from the forest zone of Africa to the Mediterranean
littoral (see chapter 2). Political consolidation through warfare and
involvement in long-distance trade underwrote the development of warring
and trading elites, which could draw together a number of local lineages
around a royal center. The resulting political "pyramids" rested upon a
relatively autonomous agricultural base, but a ruling stratum aggregated
military and economic resources, concentrating them at a royal court.
The localized kin-organized lineages retained a large measure of control
over land and labor, while yielding to the royal center in matters of
war and trade. This distribution of power also allowed the interests of
the "elders," who operated the local economy of land and bridewealth, to
fuse with the wider-ranging concerns of the ritual and trading elite of
the royal lineage. (This convergence is perhaps reflected in the regnant
ideology, according to which authority is not so much delegated as
participated in and shared.) The development of key monopolies, the
intensification of warfare, and the expansion of longdistance trade
could enlarge the sociopolitical pyramid; foreign encroachment or
secession could reduce it again. Alternatively, such pyramidal systems
were subject to conquest or to infiltration from the outside.

   Contact with the Europeans, bringing in metal, hardware, firearms and
powder, textiles, rum, and tobacco, affected such pyramidal systems at
two points: first, in the circulation of prestige goods governing
marital alliances and the allocation of offspring; second, at the point
of elite consumption—the apex of relationships involving long-distance
trade. One might say, therefore, that European expansion dovetailed with
pre-existing African circuits of exchange, not altering their basic
structure but merely adding to the flow of goods through them. There is,
however, another aspect to this encounter, and it soon affected not only
circulation as such but also the allocation of labor power. As long as
the Europeans wanted only pepper or gold or alum, the issue of slavery
remained secondary; but soon the demand for people in return for imports
affected the very nature of productive relations.

   Inevitably, the burgeoning slave trade had political repercussions in
the areas of supply, especially since only in the rarest of instances
did the Europeans engage in hunting slaves themselves. They relied
instead, as the French factor Jean Barbot wrote in the late seventeenth
century, on African "kings, rich men, and prime merchants" (quoted in
Davidson 1966: 213). African collaboration, in turn, strengthened
existing states and spurred state formation in areas where no states had
existed before European impact.

   Two areas that would play an important part in the slave trade were
already under the command of African states upon the arrival of the
Europeans. The first of these was the Kingdom of Kongo, said to have
been founded in the second part of the fourteenth century, when several
ranked kinship groups originating from north of the River Congo
superimposed themselves upon populations to the south. The second area
of pre-European state formation was Benin, in southern Nigeria. The
rulers of Benin, like those of the later states of Oyo and Dahomey in
this area, traced their genealogical origins to the sacred Yoruba city
of Ile-Ife, which may have had ties to the area of the Niger farther
east and north.

   In two other areas, state formation postdates European contact. One
of these, to the east of Kongo, had its center around Lake Kisale, in
the region of the Upper Congo River. This was the heartland of
Luba-Lunda expansion after the beginning of the seventeenth century,
which was probably set in motion by "the economic stimulus provided by
the Portuguese opening of the Atlantic coast" (Oliver and Fage 1962:
129). The second area of state formation postdating the European arrival
was the Gold Coast, where a number of smaller polities gave way to the
growth of the Asante power in the late seventeenth century.

Mechanisms of Enslavement

Who were the slaves, and by what means were they drawn into slavery?
Before the advent of the Europeans, there existed three mechanisms that
might turn a free man into a potential slave: the institution of
pawnship, the judicial separation of a person from the protection of his
lineage, and warfare for captives.

   The first of these mechanisms, pawnship, was widespread. It was used
to settle debts, placing a person in the possession of another in
payment of a debt. This transferred to the receiver all rights over the
person's labor, reproductive activities, and progeny for the period of
the pawn. People might also pawn themselves or their relatives in case
of famine, exchanging rights in persons for access to food.

   The second mechanism for creating potential slaves operated through
the judicial process. In brief, infractions against the kinship order
and the lineage structure were seen as directed not merely against
living people but also against the ancestors, and hence the
supernatural. When a crime was punished by severing a person from his
lineage, not only was such an individual cut off from the support of his
kin but he was declared to be at odds with the supernatural order. In a
sense, the kinship order protected itself by putting persons who
challenged it outside its domain. Such people could be sold as slaves.
Sometimes such a slave might be blamed for crimes when either the
owner's lineage or his affinals wielded enough power to avoid standing
accused themselves (Balandier 1970: 338-339).

   A third mechanism was capture in war. In effect, like the other
mechanisms, this meant the victim was severed from his native lineage
and deprived of supporting kin. Thus, potential slaves in general—
whether pawns, criminals, or captives—were all obtained by cutting their
ties from kin and transferring the victim to the owner's kinship group.

   It is important to recognize that once in the possession of his
owner's lineage, a pawn or slave could become a functioning member of
the domestic group, even if denied linkage with the owner's lineage.
Pawnship and slavery could thus have relatively benign consequences,
without any of the attributes of chattel slavery, which became
characteristic of the Western Hemisphere. Nevertheless, both pawns and
slaves lacked the rights of lineage members and were thus open to
manipulation by their owners. Mary Douglas has pointed out how this
capacity to manipulate pawns was especially significant in matrilineally
organized social constellations:

A pawn woman produces lineage segments of other clans who can be
expected to reside in his [the owner's] village and remain under his
control. He can offer her daughters to his young clansmen as wives and
so build up his local clan section. Her sons, who will also be his
pawns, he can persuade to live in his village. By offering them wives
from his own clan he can counteract the tendency for men to join their
mother's brothers. Pawn owners can also make elaborate alliances between
their pawns of different clans. [1964: 303]

Under conditions of polygyny, moreover, pawnship could put additional
power into the hands of lineage elders, who controlled the allocation of
women and bridewealth (see Douglas 1964: 310).

   All of these mechanisms worked differently at the level of the
cultivating domestic group and at the level of elite management. Pawns,
criminals, and captives acquired by chiefs and by the paramount ruler
did not become members of domestic groups, but instead were put to work
in the chief's gardens, in the royal gold mines, or in the transport of
goods in long-distance trade. Merchants also used slaves to raise food
for the caravan stops along trade routes and to act as bearers. For the
military, judicial, and commercial elites, therefore, slave labor
furnished a considerable proportion of the surpluses on which they
relied for their support, as well as the goods and services commensurate
with elite status. Hence, warfare and judicial control together were
used to enlarge the class whose labor underwrote elite privileges
(Terray: 1975).

   All three mechanisms were employed to furnish slaves for the trade.
In this way, pre-existing institutions were placed in the service of
European mercantile expansion. African societies became specialized in
the delivery of slaves, and in the backward and forward linkages that
the trade carried with it. To examine the ramifications of the trade and
its impact on local populations, we shall focus on the two areas that
furnished the bulk of slaves exported to the Western Hemisphere: West
Africa (particularly the Gold Coast, the Slave Coast, and the Niger
Delta) and central Africa, the source of the "Angolas” and the "Congos"
of the slave registers.

Areas of Supply: West Africa

The Gold Coast

The advent of the slave trade immediately unleashed a series of
political upheavals on the Gold Coast. During the second half of the
sixteenth century, a number of small states emerged along the tropical
forest belt, taking advantage of the new commercial opportunities. Some
of these formed around "big men," men powerful enough, in fact, to
switch their support from one group of European traders to another as
their own interests demanded. Examples of such big men were the Akrosan
brothers, who wielded power at Fetu in the mid-seventeenth century.
After the death of the elder brother in 1656, the younger one—known to
Europeans as John Claessen—became "the most powerful man on the whole of
the Guinea coast" (Daaku 1970: 109). His power was reinforced by his
possession of a fleet of war canoes and 2,000 soldiers armed with
muskets. Maneuvering between the Dutch at Elmina and the Swedish
Company, he was in a position to turn down the bribes of both. Although
offered the kingship of Fetu, he turned it down, because ritual
prohibitions against the king coming into contact with the sea would
have kept him from his negotiations with the Europeans. Another such big
man was Akomani of Akwamu, whose possession of cannon allowed him to
take and hold Christiansborg Castle at will.

   The most famous of these coastal entrepreneurs, however, was Johnny
Kabesof Komenda. Born around 1640 or 1650, he died in 1722. Johnny Kabes
became one of the main middlemen between the English and the Asante,
while maintaining his independence of both. He controlled vital salt
pans and maize plantations that furnished food for the slavers setting
out on the Middle Passage, provided labor and raw materials for the
construction of forts and trading posts, and maintained flotillas of
canoes for hire. Although acknowledging the sovereignty of the ruler of
Egufo, he kept his own army. A contemporary of Johnny Kabes was Johnny
Konny of Pokoso in Ahanta. He also acted as an intermediary with the
Asante, expecially in their trade in gold. AntiDutch, he favored the
Brandenburg Company. The Dutch and English actually made an alliance to
rid themselves of him, but they failed in the effort (see Daaku 1970;
Henige 1977).

   That such early entrepreneurs maintained their own military forces
signals the advent of a new political factor, firearms. The impact of
firearms as such should not be overestimated, since in the tropical
forest environment early forms of firepower were often not fully
effective. These new weapons acquired momentum only when they came into
the hands of organizations that could make effective use of them. The
state of Benin developed in this area before European arms were
introduced; the dynasty ruling this forest state had come into existence
in the early fourteenth century, before the advent of the Portuguese
(Bradbury 1964: 149; Kea 1971: 185-186).

   The use of firearms and the skills associated with them were not
introduced into this area exclusively by Europeans. In the belt of
savanna to the north of the forest, the use of guns and gunpowder
followed Near Eastern models rather than European ones. While metal guns
came into use first in Western Europe and in Scandinavia in the early
fourteenth century, by the end of that century cannon had spread to the
Balkans and reached the Ottoman Turks. Hand guns became widespread in
the early fifteenth century, and by the middle of the fifteenth century
cannon and arquebus had wrought a revolution in Ottoman warfare. In 1590
Moroccan troups—consisting of arquebus- carrying Spanish Muslims and
Portuguese and Spanish prisoners of war—destroyed Songhay; and by the
end of the sixteenth century, the ruler of Bornu was training a corps of
musketeers with Turkish instructors imported from Tripoli (Goody 1971:
52; Davidson 1966: 139). Guns were therefore already known on the
northern fringes of the forest zone at the time of European contact.

   It is clear, however, that the large-scale possession of firearms by
people in the forest greatly altered the balance of political power and
speeded up the formation of new polities. The Portuguese, to protect
their forts, distributed firearms to “friendly natives" around Elmina,
and in 1610 the English began selling firearms. By 1660 there was a
thriving trade in guns with "Akany" (Akan) traders. The quantity of
firearms in the area increased sharply after the middle of the
seventeenth century, when the English East India Company began to sell
arms freely. Between 1658 and 1661, the East India Company sold 5,531
muskets and powder on the Gold Coast. In 1700 the Dutch trader William
Bosman wrote from Elmina:

The main military weapons are muskets or carbines, in the use of which
these African are wonderfully skillful.... we sell them very great
quantities, and in doing so we offer them a knife with which to cut our
own throats. But we are forced to do this. For if we did not do it. they
would easily get enough muskets from the English, or from the Danes, or
from the Prussians. And even if we governors could all agree to stop
selling firearms, the private traders of the English or the Dutch would
still go on selling them, (quoted in Davidson 1966: 217]

By 1730 the annual imports of guns into West Africa had reached the
figure of 180,000; between 1750 and 1807 gun imports oscillated between
283,000 and 394,000 per annum (Inikori 1977; Richards 1980). In meeting
the heavy demand for arms, the flintlock proved crucial. It enhanced the
military capability of its owners and furnished the means of violence
for political organizations capable of utilizing it.

   The new opportunities for trade and warfare prompted the emergence of
small states, all of them based—as Kea has said (1971: 201)— “on the
firearm." One of the earliest of these states was Denkyira on the Oda
River. Drawing strength from the Dutch at Elmina, who furnished them
with firearms, Denkyira was able to shake off its former overlord,
Adanse, and become an independent state. Farther east, the Akwamu
federation along the Birim River broke through to the coast in 1677,
subduing the Ga towns—especially Great Accra—and establishing direct
contact with the English, Dutch, and Danes. Aided by the Europeans,
Akwamu expanded farther until it included the Fante polity of Agona in
the west and all of the eastern Gold Coast up to Whydah (1702). In 1729—
1730, however, Akwamu was destroyed by its northern neighbor, Akyem,
which controlled rich gold mines and organized the short-lived state of
Akyem Abuakwa.

   The maneuvers of all these groups were cut short by the rapid
expansion of Asante. The Asante, who dominated the Gold Coast in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, emerged as a distinct political
entity only toward the end of the seventeenth century. In the earlier
decades of that century, some Twi-speaking matrilineages began to move
out of the Adanse region. By mid-century, some of these—notably the
Ekuono and Oyoko mmusua—came into political prominence, probably in
connection with the acquisition of guns through the coastal trade in
firearms (Wilks 1975: 110). In the 1660s and 1670s these lineages
engaged in a struggle for control of the Kwaman area around the old gold
mart of Tafo. At first they were subject to the state of Denkyira, which
exacted gold and slaves from them to pay for guns and other goods at
Elmina. They rose against Denkyira in 1699, however, destroyed its power
in 1701, and then took its place in exchanges with the Europeans.

   The power of the royal stool, which became the symbol of Asante
kingship, seems to have been based squarely on the ability of the
Asantehene (the Asante ruler) to acquire guns from the Europeans and to
control trade—that is, on a centralization of military and commercial
functions. The golden stool of the Asante also symbolized judicial
sovereignty, as well as the common tie of all the Asante with the
supernatural. At the same time, matrilineages under their chiefs
remained quite autonomous, even in military organization; and the Asante
state was more a compound of lineages than a centralized polity.

   The district of Kumasi was the locus of the Asantehene, seated on his
golden stool; it was also a region of dense settlement, containing a
sizable town (12,000- 15,000 in 1817) and large numbers of cultivators
who raised food for the chiefs and their families. It constituted the
most powerful military unit within the Asante army. It furnished 60,000
soldiers in 1817; the next largest district, Dwaben, furnished 35,000,
while three other districts provided 15,000 men each. As long as the
slave trade prospered, however, all the territorial clusters within the
state had a common interest in the expansion of Asante overlordship, for
it furnished access to new trade routes and to slaves.

   Equipped with muskets furnished initially by the Dutch, the Asante
expanded in all directions. They overran Western Gonja (1722— 1723),
Eastern Gonja (1732-1733), Accra (1742), Akyem Abuakwa (1744), and
Mamprussi (1744—1745). At the beginning of the nineteenth century, they
broke the alliance between the coastal Fante and the English. The dates
of the military successes of the first half of the eighteenth century
are mirrored in the large number of slaves exported from the Gold Coast
at that time. With each victory, the Asante acquired slaves in the form
of war captives and tribute. In 1751 the king of Kpembe acknowledged
Asante overlordship and promised to pay an annual tribute of 1,000
slaves. When in 1772 the Asante seized the ruler of Dagomba, his sons
ransomed him with 1,000 slaves (Wilks 1975: 22). It would seem that as
long as the slave trade prospered, the military orientation of the
Asante state received strong reinforcement. Merchants remained under
state control, and an independent class of traders was not allowed to
develop.

   The decline of the slave trade in the nineteenth century weakened the
influence of the military, producing in turn a new political coalition.
It linked the commercial entrepreneurs (asikafo) with the lower class
(ahiafo), which was composed of slaves (mostly of northern origin),
Asante pawned in payment of debt, and officials stripped of their
position. This coalition took form specifically around the issue of
military conscription (Wilks 1975: 701-720).

Oyo and Dahomey

The Asante polity had expanded from a core in the forest country to
embrace provinces both on the southern coast and in the inland savanna.
Another polity, the Yoruba kingdom of Oyo, expanded from a core of open
parkland both northward, to draw tribute from Nupe on the Niger River,
and southward, to make contact with the Europeans in the new ports.
Between the western forest country of the Asante and the eastern forests
extending to the Niger River, a broad band of open savanna reaches down
to the coast. Here the Oyo state was able to deploy cavalry in ways not
possible in the forest zone. Buying horses from the Hausa to the north
of them, the rulers of Oyo began around 1550 to expand militarily and
politically, coming to dominate the savanna corridor.

   The Oyo rulers, or alafins, were members of a Yoruba-speaking
dynasty, which traced its genealogy back to Odua, believed to be the
creator of the earth and the first king of the holy city of Ile-Ife.
Even today, this belief serves as a mythical charter for the kingship
among most Yoruba subgroups, and the order of precedence among the kings
is argued in terms of genealogical connections with the sixteen sons of
Odua (see Bascom 1969: 9-12). While the alafins were endowed with divine
descent, in practice they faced the power of the Oyo nobles, all of whom
controlled cavalry. They sought to check the nobles through the
recruitment of court officials from former slaves. Reliance on the horse
proved a source at once of strength and of weakness for Oyo. Local horse
breeding was hampered by the prevalence of the tsetse fly, and horses
had to be imported continuously from the north, along with grooms to
take care of them. To pay for the horses, the alafins had to ensure the
flow of goods northward. With the advent of the Europeans, the items
most desired were trade goods brought by the sea merchants, who in turn
had to be compensated in the form of slaves. The Oyo kingdom, therefore,
became a major purveyor of slaves. Diminution of the slave trade in the
nineteenth century eventually upset this pattern of exchange, bringing
on endemic conflicts between nobles and king.

   Oyo, however, did not cover its requirements of slaves solely from
its own resources; it also received slaves and trade goods as tribute
from other states. One such state was Dahomey, organized by the
Alladaxonu clan among the Fon in the second half of the seventeenth
century. The Alladaxonu, like the alafins of Oyo, claimed descent from
Odua. Like other branches of the descendants of Odua, they had assumed
control over local populations, establishing themselves on the Abomey
plateau (whence the name Dahomey) within the savanna gap.

   The Dahomey polity, ruled over by the Onidada, or king of the Fon, is
often represented as if it were a wholly autonomous state, carrying on
slave raiding and trading on its own account. It was, in fact, a
tributary of Oyo, following its defeat by Oyo in 1712. Oyo reinforced
this claim by sending its cavalry against Abomey at least five times
between 1724 and 1730. The annual tribute, the agban, was paid almost
continually for a century. Among the items tributed were some 1,700 guns
per year. The attacks of Oyo upon Abomey were directed not only at
obtaining tribute but also at interdicting Fon control of the coast. In
1725 the Fon had attacked Ardrah, then a kingdom under Oyo hegemony
controlling a number of coastal ports. The Fon seized some of these
ports themselves, such as Whydah (1727), Savi (1728), and Jakin (1732);
but they soon relinquished control of Ardrah and Jakin (or Porto Novo)
to Oyo. After trying to interest the English in taking over Whydah on an
exclusive and permanent basis (see Polanyi 1966; 29—30), the Fon acceded
to an agreement made between the ruler of Savi and the Europeans in 1704
to open the port to all comers thereafter. By seizing Whydah the Fon
were able to systematize the slave trade. Until 1772, however, they
faced numerous local rebellions, aided either by Oyo or by various
foreign agents and companies. Thus Whydah, far from being an asset to
Dahomey, became "an open wound to the body politic" (Polanyi 1966: 33).
.

   Despite its external difficulties, which continued until Oyo
disintegrated around the beginning of the nineteenth century, the
Dahomey state was highly centralized and cohesive internally. The basic
units of the state were landholding patrilineages, headed by elders. A
number of such patrilineages formed a village, which maintained its own
organization for communal labor, the dokpwe. The village headmanship was
subject to certification by the king. The new state, however, was more
than an organization in which a royal patrilineage ruled over other
patrilineages. It possessed a standing army equipped with muskets,
including a royal bodyguard of 2,500 women soldiers. In addition, there
was general conscription in case of war. The state also had an efficient
tax system, collecting a basic tax on agricultural produce assessed
against each village; taxes on livestock, salt, and artisan products;
and tolls on goods taken to market. Censuses of people and production
were kept and checked by ingenious methods. The kingship exercised
strong judicial control. If a chief committed a crime, his compound was
destroyed, his property confiscated, the female members of his household
sold as slaves, and his male descendants impressed into the army. Secret
associations, which were common in the West African forest belt, were
outlawed in Dahomey to inhibit countervailing sources of power. Instead,
there was a state cult run by priests who controlled initiation. To
further inhibit challenges to the state, members of the royal
patrilineages were not allowed to hold public office, and only sons born
to the king by commoner women could accede to the kingship. State
officials were usually commoners, drawn into state service with the
offer of gifts and with permission to wed females of the royal clan.
They were kept from consolidating any power because they served at the
behest of the king, their positions were not heritable, and their work
was closely supervised by a female of the royal clan, called "mother" of
the official in her charge.

   External trade was also strongly controlled by the state. Whenever a
ship arrived at Whydah, it would be greeted by the king's
representatives, and local porters would be assigned to carry trade
goods to the depot in town. The Europeans would reside in town while
conducting their business, and they would be given servants and
attendants. Trade was under the direction of a royal official. Prices
for goods and slaves were set by the king. The Europeans were not
allowed to leave Whydah, except with permission of the king. At the same
time, slave traders from the north were not allowed to visit Whydah and
deal directly with the Europeans, but had to sell their captives to
Dahomean factors. No guns or ammunition were allowed to pass beyond
Dahomey to the states to the north.

   Possession of slaves was permitted only through a public grant of
slaves from the king; no one was allowed to own or trade in slaves
independently. However, certain officials could hunt for slaves with
armies of their own, and they were allowed to keep the slaves taken by
their soldiers upon payment of a tax to the state. When a town was taken
in war, the victorious officer was entitled to monopolize the town's
trade, subject to taxes. He was required, however, to work through
licensed trading officials who were independent of the military.

Benin

Probably the only state in coastal West Africa that preceded European
control was Benin, in eastern Guinea. Like the alafin of Oyo and the
onidada of Abomey, the rulers, or obas, of Benin also traced their
descent back to Odua of Ile-Ife, the holy city of the Yoruba. This
dynasty established control over the Edo-speakers of the Benin area in
about 1400, perhaps in connection with trade on the Niger River. In
contrast to Oyo, where the alafin had to contend with a hereditary
nobility, the Benin state was marked by a plethora of associations that
allowed commoners to advance in status. These associations, which
resemble those found in the Niger River region to the east, were
organized bodies of titleholders and traders (Bradbury 1964). While
Benin prospered, these associations probably amplified the basis of
support for the kingship among the native population.

   Selling first pepper and then slaves to the Portuguese, Benin was the
first power on the Slave Coast to obtain firearms. The rulers of Benin
employed muskets to expand as far as Bonny in the east and Eko (Lagos)
in the west. During the seventeenth century Benin became a major source
of slaves. By the end of the century, however, intensified competition
from other Yoruba towns raised the cost of slaves shipped out of Benin,
and caused the Europeans to seek cheaper slaves in Whydah and Calabar.
As Benin's economic decline continued, internal conflict increased. The
oba continued to serve as the sacred center of Benin, but around him
swirled conflicts among hereditary noblemen, men holding titles in the
different association of palace retainers, ritual representatives of the
commoners, and members of the trading associations that controlled
routes between the Slave Coast and the inland markets. Such divergent
interests led to internal revolt, until by the end of the eighteenth
century Benin had lost much of its power.

The Niger Delta

The states of the Gold Coast and the Slave Coast—Asante, Oyo, Dahomey,
Benin—had their bases inland, from which they reached out to the coast
to take control of the vital points of embarkation and import. In the
region west of Benin, comprising the delta of the Niger River, centers
of the slave trade developed instead along the coast and waterways.
Great ports like Bonny, New Calabar, and Old Calabar arose, serving as
points of entry for European goods and influence and as embarkation
points for slaves from the hinterland. In contrast to the Gold and Slave
coasts, where the commerce in slaves was carried on by tributary states,
in the Niger Delta the trade took root in a social context dominated by
kinship corporations.

the Niger Delta. (Aro trade routes after Ottenberg, 1958: courtesy of
the author)

   Benin had already pioneered in the Niger Delta, sending out colonists
led by relatives or retainers of the oba. These colonist had formed
small satellite kingdoms with variable ties to Benin. One such kingdom
was Aboh, located strategically at the point where the Niger forms three
branches on its way to the sea. Another satellite of Benin was Idah, to
the north, in the kingdom of the Igala. From Idah, the Igala ruler, or
ata, sent out titled chiefs to colonize still farther inland, tapping
this tributary region for slaves, ivory, and other products, which they
traded downriver to Aboh in exchange for salt and European
manufacturers.

   The mangrove swamplands of the delta below Aboh were inhabited by
Ijaw-speaking people, organized in autonomous villages made up of
extended-family "houses" (wari). The Ijaw fished and collected salt,
exchanging their products for the crops, poultry, and livestock of the
satellite kingdoms to the north. Ijaw-produced salt and fish was then
traded farther along the Niger for yams, palm products, livestock,
camwood, ivory, and potash.

   When the Europeans contacted the coast, the Ijaw were in a strategic
position to exploit the routes that led from the new ports, over the
creeks and branches of the delta, to the cities upriver. In the early
sixteenth century, the northern kingdoms began to trade with the Ijaw
villages giving them—in return for salt—slaves, produce, and livestock,
which the Ijaw in turn sold to the Europeans for copper bracelets. By
the end of the seventeenth century, the Ijaw communities of Kalahari,
Andoni, Bonny, Okrika, and Brass (Nembe) had become important centers in
the exchange of slaves for European manufactured goods. In the
eighteenth century, as firearms became generally available, Ijaw war
leaders armed their fifty-man canoes with cannon and competed for
control of the growing trade. In the course of trading and fighting, the
Ijaw extended-family houses turned into "canoe houses"—corporations made
up of kinsmen and assimilated slaves, which engaged in extensive
commerce and warfare geared to obtaining slaves.

   By the eighteenth century, canoe houses armed with large numbers of
cannon-equipped canoes had developed in Aboh as well. Aboh, in fact,
became the major source of such canoes for the delta as a whole. Most of
the slaves acquired by Aboh came, in turn, from the Igala of Idah to the
north, who drew slaves and ivory from the region where the Niger and
Benue rivers converge, and traded them southward in exchange for salt
and European goods. These slave-trading activities polarized the
populations of the area into olu and igbo—slave-hunting riverine
populations headed by kings (olu), and upland people who were raided for
slaves (igbo). The term igbo thus was originally applied to the victims
of the trade; only gradually did it become the name of an ethnic
category, the present-day Ibo (see Henderson 1972; 40 -41). As a result
of these struggles. Brass, Kalahari, and Bonny emerged as the major
centers of the eastern Delta.

   

A party of Englishmen being escorted to Aboh. Sketch by William Allen,
who surveyed the Niger for the British Admiralty, 1832- 33. from his
Picturesque Views of the River Niger, 1840. (Courtesy of the General
Research Division. The New York Public Library. Astor, Lenox, and Tilden
Foundations)

  Another such center of the slave trade grew up in Old Calabar on the
Cross River, among the coastal Ibibio-speaking peoples. Here, too,
populations lived primarily by fishing, salt making, and trading their
products northward to Ibo areas in exchange for yams. In the late
sixteenth century, a group of Ibibio-speaking fishermen and traders
moved from their home village to what came to be known as Creek Town
(Etunko). At the beginning of the seventeenth century, a segment of the
Creek town dwellers hived off, forming Old Town (Obu- tong); then, in
the 1620s or 1630s, a lineage section breaking off from Old Town
established Duke Town (Atakpa). These several towns constituted Old
Calabar. The trade in slaves began here in the middle of the seventeenth
century; an estimated 250,000 slaves were exported between 1650 and
1841, when the external slave trade ended (Latham 1973: 22—23). The
European goods received in return were at first iron, copper, hardware,
and cloth; firearms were added in 1713.

   Soon slaving became big business in Old Calabar. As among the
Ijaw-speakers, where slaving had transformed the extended-family houses
into "canoe houses," so also among the Ibibio-speaking Efik did the
slave trade undermine the patrilineages and the councils formed of
lineage chiefs. Taking the place of the patrilineages were seven wards,
each made up of various extended families and lineage segments grouped
around an important trader and his slave following. Some of these wards
prospered and grew at the expense of others. "It was those wards," says
A.J.H. Latham,

most successful in trade which expanded fastest because they accumulated
most retainers. Certain wards grew more quickly than others, for the
Europeans traded and gave credit to those who paid their debts promptly
and honestly. In the course of time, bad debtors lost their access to
credit, and only the credit-worthy were supported. The more trust they
were allowed, the bigger their organizations and reserves became, and
the more they were able to justify being given further credit. [1973:
51]

   In contrast to the Ijaw-speakers, the Efik did not incorporate slaves
into their extended families and lineages. They maintained and
intensified their solidarity as an upper stratum, in part through the
cult of a common tutelary deity, Ndem Efik. They did, however, open the
road to entrepreneurs of non-Efik ancestry by allowing them to
participate in the secret Ekpe sodality, named after a forest spirit.
Ekpe (known to the Europeans as Egbo), which came to the fore early in
the eighteenth century, was open to all males, free and slave.
Membership was by purchase. The sodality was graded, the top four grades
theoretically attainable only by freemen, although a man born as a slave
is known to have become a vice-president. Each grade had a master
(obong); at the head of Ekpe stood a president (eyamba) and a
vice-president (ebunko). Masterships, the presidency, and the
vice-presidency usually went to members of the dominant wards. The
members of the top grade made up the decision-making council; the second
grade carried out the decisions.

   This sodality had various functions. On one level, it was a social
club where the men of important wards could meet to talk or feast
together. On another level, it exercised legal authority; it made and
enforced the law. It could fine people, arrest them or order
houseiarrests, and execute offenders. It could declare boycotts. It
could confiscate or destroy a man's property, or place a taboo on its
use. Most importantly, the sodality had an economic function. It had the
power to enforce the repayment of debts. It was "this power to insist on
the repayment of credit which lay behind the spread of the Ekpe
societies among the other peoples further inland up the Cross River, for
by adopting Ekpe they made themselves credit-worthy in the eyes of the
Efik, and therefore could avail themselves of Efik credit" (Latham 1973:
39). As a result, several European traders joined Ekpe.

   While the Efik took charge of the slave trade at the point of
embarkation, most of the slaves in their markets were supplied by an
inland group known as the Aro. The Aro consisted of people of diverse
origins, who were brought together by Okoyong mercenaries from Akankpa
near Creek Town. The pattern of hiring mercenaries for trade or war was
common, but the Aro represent a special development of this pattern.
They first established themselves near the Cross River, just to the east
of the major slave market at Bende. Their settlements consisted of nine
primary villages, each housing an original patrilineage, and ten
secondary villages, made up of segments of these lineages. The head of
the central patrilineage in the village of Otusi was also head of the
Aro chiefly lineage. The nine patrilineage heads, together with
representatives of the secondary villages, made up the Aro council.
Following a pattern widespread among Ibo populations, they set up at Aro
Chukwu an oracle and pilgrimage center (later to be known among the
British as Big Juju).

   From their center at Aro Chukwu, the Aro sent out colonies among
other peoples, which ranged from small posts along Aro trade routes to
major settlements dominating a market or village cluster. These colonies
often housed a local oracle to which people could bring trouble cases—
disputes over land and inheritance, feuds, theft, witchcraft, sorcery,
and murder. Those disputes that could not be resolved locally were
referred to the major oracle at Aro Chukwu for resolution. Any
individual Aro was empowered to refer people to an Aro oracle. In doing
so, he would also collect information for the oracle keepers, to be used
in making judgments. People found guilty by the oracles could be fined,
killed, or sold into slavery.

   The Aro also advanced credit to non-Aro individuals, gaining their
gratitude or, in case of inability to pay, forcing them to sell
themselves or a member of their family into slavery. The Aro also
acquired slaves by buying them in local slave markets or by hiring
mercenaries to catch them. Backing up Aro judicial, supernatural, and
economic functions was their control of firearms, obtained in quantity
through their connections in Calabar.

   The Aro did not establish a true state. They never developed a
centralized hierarchy of command, nor were they interested in political
domination as such. Nevertheless, they came to carry out some of the
functions associated with states, as a kind of economic mafia with an
aura of religious legitimacy. In these characteristics they bear closer
resemblance to the Iroquois confederacy, and to the Varangian Rus who
came down the Volga with slaves and amber in the ninth century, than to
the centralized West African states of Asante, Dahomey, or Benin.

Areas of Supply: Central Africa

The Kingdom of Kongo

When the Portuguese sailed up the Congo River in 1483, they came face to
face with one of the largest African polities, the kingdom of the
Bakongo, whose capital was at Mbanzakongo (the later San Salvador).

Mbanza or Salvador, chief city of the Kingdom of Congo. Copper engraving
published by Olfert Dapper, 1676. (Courtesy of the General Research
Division, The New York Public Library. Astor, Lenox, and Tilden
Foundations)

This Kongo kingdom had grown to be among the most important of a number
of states along the upper Congo River and its two tributaries, the Kasai
and the Sankuru. All of these states appear to trace their origin to a
founding kingdom north of the area of Stanley Pool. Farther east, above
the impenetrable Stanley Falls, lay a second area of state formation, on
the upper reaches of the Congo River and its tributaries. Its center was
located around Lake Kisale. This was the point of origin of the Luba and
Songye elites that became increasingly active in state building, as the
influence of the slave trade penetrated inland to the shores of the
Lualaba River (see Vansina, Mauny, and Thomas 1964: 96-97).

   The Kongo kingdom was large, covering an area of about 60,000 square
miles extending from the Congo River southward to the River Dande and
from the Atlantic coast eastward to the Kwango River. This area was
inhabited by an estimated 2.5 million people at the time of European
contact. The social organization of the kingdom was based on matrilineal
descent, coupled with avunculocal residence. The basic social units were
matrilineages; these were ranked, with the royal matrilineage at the
apex. Each matrilineage gave its women in marriage to the next
higher-ranking one, receiving in return bridal compensation and gifts.
It also received from the wife-taking matrilineage any sons born to
these marriages. The sons would take up residence with the wife-giving
matrilineage in the compounds of their mothers' brothers. The royal
lineage did not exchange women but retained them. Their women could
marry commoners and slaves; both the women and their offspring stayed
within the royal lineage. A corollary of this system was that the royal
lineage was also the initiator of the chain of bridewealth and gifts
moving to lower-ranking matrilineages (Ekholm 1977). Since the royal
matrilineage did not receive gifts but only made them, one of the basic
prerequisites of the entire set of marriage exchanges was royal access
to resources not available to any other groupings.

   In pre-European times, these resources were copper, salt, and nzimbu
shells from the royal fishery of Luanda Island, which Pigafetta called
“the money mine used by the king of the Congo and the people of the
surrounding regions" (quoted in Balandier 1968: 130). Units of this
shell money were standardized: one kofo (20,000 big shells) represented
twice the value of one lufuku (10,000 big shells), and one lufuku was
equal to tenfunda (1,000 big shells). Nzimbu shells formed the main part
of pre-European tribute payments and constituted the coin of the realm,
the chief instrument of public finance. For private transactions, the
use of standardized sizes of cloth was common; toward the end of the
seventeenth century 100 napkin-sized mpusu corresponded to 4,000
Portuguese reis or one slave (Balandier 1968: 129-132). It thus seems
clear that the royal power would have welcomed the advent of new
resources from abroad so as to extend its fund of power at home.

   The Portuguese were therefore eagerly received by the mani kongo, the
ruler of Kongo. Yet they demanded slaves and ivory in exchange for their
goods. Hence, any increment in exchanges with the Portuguese also
increased slaving and intensified pre-existing forms of slavery. For a
time, indeed, the Kongo kingdom was an ally of the Portuguese. The
Portuguese sent missionaries to instruct the Bakongo court in
Christianity and to baptize its members. King Nzinga Nvemba (1506-1543)
converted and became Dom Afonso I, abandoning in the process the
sanctions of divine kingship as understood by Bakongo. The Portuguese
offered what we would today call technical assistance, perhaps because
their supply of manufactured goods was quite limited. Skilled laborers,
artisans, and even instructors in domestic economy were sent from Lisbon
to Mbanzakongo to teach their skills to the Bakongo. Some young Bakongo
were also sent to Portugal for study abroad.

   Yet the expanding slave trade increasingly subverted these efforts.
By 1530 the annual export of slaves from the Kongo was estimated at
between 4,000 and 5,000 peqas de Indias. Onepeqa (or piece) was equal to
a young able-bodied male, with females and slaves of other ages counted
at less than a pet^a. At first the slaves were obtained from regions
beyond the Bakongo kingdom, by barter from the Teke and Mpumbu to the
northeast, or by warfare or trade with the Mbundu to the south. As time
passed, however, the Portuguese increasingly sought slaves from Kongo
itself. Portuguese artisans, merchants, priests, ship's officers and
sailors, and royal officials entered the slave trade on their own
behalf. This wholesale participation by the Portuguese also meant that
European trade goods and guns no longer flowed only through the hands of
the royal lineage but became available to local chiefs or strongmen who
could deliver slaves. Thus, the sociopolitical organization of the Kongo
kingdom collapsed, along with its hierarchical arrangement of
matrilineages and its flow of women and prestations. With this collapse
went the power of kingship itself. Furthermore, as local chiefs began to
raid for slaves themselves, matrilineal reckoning gave way to
patrilineal clusters, because chiefs needing manpower to field a
slave-hunting force began to claim the children they produced with their
own slave women.

   To enlarge their area of capture, the Portuguese extended their trade
to the Mbundu kingdom of the Ndongo, south of the River Dande, setting
up Kongo chiefs as overlords over Mbundu chieftains and exacting slaves
from them. This trade was initiated by private entrepreneurs from Sáo
Tomé, who shipped out slaves from the mouth of the Kwanza River despite
attempts by the Crown to channel all slave traffic through the Kongolese
port of Mpinda. After the mid-sixteenth century, however, the Crown took
an increasing interest in intensifying its control over the state of
Ndongo and in containing, on the eastern fringes of the area, raiders
who had been taking advantage of the weakness of the Kongo state to
engage in slave hunting on their own account. Toward the end of the
sixteenth century, Portuguese royal troops advanced systematically into
Angola, taking slaves as captives, imposing tribute in the form of
slaves on Mbundu chiefs, and sending out Euro-African traders, or
pombeiros, to buy slaves in the pombos, fairs of the hinterland. The
term pombo stems from the name of one of the most important of these
fairs, held among the Hum at Stanley Pool. Gradually this term was
extended to African captains of slave-buying expeditions. Slaves were
bought and sold for Portuguese wine and brandy, Brazilian rum and
tobacco, European and Indian cloth, and fine African palm cloth, which
was obtained from the forest dwellers along the northern border of Kongo
in exchange for salt and sea shells from the coast. Asa result of this
expansion of the slave trade, 13,000 to 16,000 slaves were shipped out
of Angola by mid-seventeenth century. The decline of the kingdom of the
Kongo itself was demonstrated by Portuguese seizure of the nzimbu
fisheries in the mid-seventeenth century. The act, in effect,
transferred the royal treasury of the Kongo to the authority of King
Joáo of Portugal.

   Whereas the slave trade, coupled with trade in commodities, had first
attracted populations to the coast, now the ravages of the trade caused
people to move eastward away from the coast. This withdrawal was in part
an attempt to escape the slave hunters. In part it was prompted by the
desire of slave-hunting chieftains to improve their own terms of
exchange with the Portuguese by monopolizing the trade farther inland.

Imbangala

The decline of Kongo hegemony and the expansion of the trade inland
unleashed a chain of events in areas far removed from direct Portuguese
influence. One locus of these new developments was in the savanna
between the Upper Lualaba and the Kasai rivers, where major political
shifts occurred after 1500. The changes may have owed little to external
influence at the outset; yet they soon became enmeshed with processes
originating in the slave trade.

   These changes were first felt within the area of Portuguese influence
when slave hunters appeared on the eastern confines of Kongo and Ndongo.
Taking advantage of the increasing disorder in Kongo, which set
subchiefs and chiefs against one another in contests for the kingship,
armed bands from farther inland overran tributary groups of the larger
kingdoms and established slave-trading polities of their own. For two
centuries the rulers of these polities played an important role as slave
raiders and traders for the Portuguese, while at the same time impeding
further European advances inland. They generally go by the name of
Imbangola or Imbangala, although some Imbangala segments have gone down
in history as the Jaga—people depicted in fictitious Portuguese tales as
cannibals who killed their own children when they proved a hindrance
(Miller 1973). The appearance of the Imbangala on the eastern borders of
Kongo and Ndongo may have resulted, in part, from the expansion of the
Luba and Lunda farther to the east; it no doubt also resulted from the
potential for slave trading. A string of states was set up by the
Imbangala in the regions of Kwango, Ambaka, Kasanje, and the Benguela
highlands; Kasanje soon became the most important slave market for the
coast (Vansina 1968: 145,202). Farther to the north, the Yaka kingdom of
Kwango terrorized the people of the middle Kwango-Kasai river basin. The
major Yaka trading center was Matamba, whose trade was in the hands of
local Ambaka, other Africans, and Portuguese. The kingdoms that the
Imbangala set up among the Ovimbundu in the Benguela highlands also
began to raid inland, selling captives to traders from Ndongo. In the
eighteenth century, all these kingdoms were major participants in the
slave trade (Vansina 1968: 199).

Luba-Luttda

The appearance of the Imbangala along the frontiers of Kongo and Ndongo
may have been the product of a wider political process, whose roots were
farther to the east, around Lake Kisale. This process, a radiation of
political-military aristocracies, resulted in the development of the
Luba and Lunda kingdoms.

   The Luba emerged initially as a set of patrilineages that imposed
domination over a large number of local groups. These Luba patrilineages
thus became an elite of invaders, the balopwe. This elite furnished the
king, whose rule was conceptualized as the exercise of bulopwe—a
supernatural power transmissible in the male line. The elite also
provided the chiefs who supervised the conquered groups. Native chiefs
were retained, their power conceptualized as that of the "ritual owners
of the land." The Luba then expanded farther by sending out colonies
under chiefs, answerable to the center, who would settle among adjacent
populations. Luba sovereignty, however, remained limited, in that the
balopwe elite and the "owners of the land" were kept as distinct
categories. The owners of the land did not fuse with the Luba ruling
elite but remained only tribute collectors, and hence often became
sources of local dissidence. At the same time, the power of the kingship
was checked by the power of balopwe patrilineages who had furnished
wives to the royal line, and who could throw their support to competing
royal heirs. This pattern appears to characterize the main Luba kingdom
between the Lwembe and Lualaba rivers, as well as the smaller Luba
kingdoms of Kikonja to the east and of Kalundwe and Kaniok to the west.

    Some lineages of Luba balopwe settled in the valley of the Nkalaany
River, becoming the core of the Lunda kingdom. In contrast to the Luba,
among whom the balopwe lineages always remained apart from the native
groups, the Lunda developed a political model that maintained kinship
ties among the Lunda elite while permitting the incorporation of
non-Lunda through kinship fictions. This model involved the twin
principles of positional succession and perpetual kinship (Vansina 1968:
80—83). Positional succession meant that the incumbent to an office
inherited not only the office but also the resources and social identity
of his predecessor, including his name and kinship connections. Thus,
genealogical descendants of two brothers, separated by great kinship
distance, could be identified with the two ancestors and conceptualized
as brothers. Successive incumbents to offices would assume the identity
of the original ancestors present at the founding of the kingdom. At the
same time, non-Lunda local chieftains could be assimilated by
appointment as village headmen and given social identities within the
scheme of Lunda perpetual kinship.

   According to the Lunda model, villages were governed by such headmen,
whose position was hereditary within the matriline, and who were backed
by a council of elders. The headmen of the fifteen oldest villages held
special ritual positions at court. The villages were grouped together
according to the ties of perpetual kinship recognized among their
headmen; groups of villages formed districts supervised from the center
but ruled by chiefs nominated by the headmen. The main function of such
chiefs was to collect tribute.

   At the center of this hierarchy stood the king, Mwaant Yaav.
Surrounding him were religious titleholders, including the headmen of
the oldest villages; "father" officials, whose "sons" collected the
tribute paid by the district chiefs; and the representatives of
non-Lunda chiefs in the countryside, who were "children" of the king.
"Traveling chiefs" went out to the non-Lunda periphery of the kingdom to
gather tribute and to execute orders.

   The Lunda kingdom was not a bounded entity but a sphere of power,
most strongly concentrated at the center and diminishing outward from
the capital. The capital, Mussamba, was supported by tribute and trade.
Tribute flowed toward it in the form of salt, copper, food, and slaves.
A major center of commerce, its main trade partner from the seventeenth
century on was the Imbangala kingdom of Kasanje to the west, which was
linked to the Mwaant Yaav by ties of kinship and ritual. Slaves and
ivory moved from Mussamba to Kasanje and then to the coast, while guns
and cloth traveled in the reverse direction. This was also the route by
which American food crops diffused inland. Maize had arrived on the
coast in the second half of the sixteenth century, and manioc was
introduced around 1600 (Vansina 1968: 21). These crops may have
contributed to the consolidation of Lunda power. Slaves were used at
Mussamba to work in manioc gardens, which probably strengthened the
productive base of the kingdom. Clearly the Lunda structure rested on
slaving and on the ability of the warrior aristocracy to deliver slaves
to the center (Vellut 1972: 77, 83-84).

   Lunda warrior elites also carried this political model toward the
south and east. Among those who moved southward toward the headwaters of
the Zambezi River was a warrior chief, Kanongesha. He divided his newly
won lands among relatives and members of his retinue, in return for
tribute that was passed on, in part, to the Mwaant Yaav. In time, the
chiefs of the new lands became increasingly autonomous and were joined
by other newcomers with their retinues. Among the people brought under
Lunda hegemony through this process of elite colonization were the
Ndembu, known to anthropologists through the work of Victor Turner.
Although the tie between the rulers of the Ndembu and the Lunda center
at Mussamba grew increasingly tenuous over time, they still identified
themselves to Turner in the 1950s as the "people of Mwaant Yaav" (Turner
1967: 3).

   Other Lunda chiefs moved eastward into the area between the Luabala
and the Luapula rivers. This time the extension of the Lunda domain was
rapid, supported by the possession of guns. Again, a ritual tie with the
Mwaant Yaav was maintained, as the chiefs of the new domain grew
increasingly independent politically. Toward the end of the eighteenth
century, one of these Lunda chiefs with the title of Kazembe became
dominant, and he organized chiefships owing tribute payments to him over
a wide area extending beyond Lake Mweru. He opened trade on his own
account with the Portuguese at Tete, and his capital became a regular
stop on the route to Lake Nyasa and on to Kilwa. Nevertheless, the
Kazembe never relinquished trade relations with the Mwaant Yaav, sending
slaves to Mussamba in return for fine woolens, cowrie shells, necklaces
of blue pearls, velorio beads, looking glasses, and tea sets (Cunnison
1961: 65). Maize, manioc, and the raffia palm also traveled this route
eastward (Vansina 1969: 173).

   Thus, by the end of the eighteenth century a major transcontinental
trade route linked the Atlantic shore with the littoral of the Indian
Ocean. It operated through the Ibangala middlemen of Kasanje in the
west, and through the Bisa in the east. The Bisa—whose home lay in the
area between Lake Bangweulu and the Bemba plateau—had been organized by
Lunda chieftains who acknowledged Kazembe hegemony. They were famed as
long-distance traders. A Portuguese visitor to Kazembe's capital on the
Luapula River in 1806 met a Bisa who was familiar with Angola (Cunnison
1961: 65).

Ivory and Slaving in Eastern Africa

In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the eastern
borderlands of the Kazembe domain experienced the pressures caused by a
rising demand for ivory and slaves. East Africa had long furnished
elephant tusks for Asian markets, but the eighteenth century saw the
Europeans introduced to Chinese and Indian tastes in art and their
desire fanned for ivory carvings, inlay work, fans, billiard balls, and
piano keys. At the same time, there developed a new demand for slaves.
The French sought slaves for their new plantations on the Indian Ocean
islands of Réunion and Mauritius; they bought them in rising numbers
from the slave-hunting kingdoms of Madagascar and from slave traders in
the Muslim ports of the East African coast. British interference with
West African sources of supply after the abolition of the slave trade in
1807 led Brazilian and Cuban slave traders to look to East Africa for
new slaves. At the same time, Omani Arabs set up clove plantations in
Zanzibar, purchasing slaves for their new operations on the African
coast nearby.

   The dual demand for ivory and for slaves was met by a number of
populations in the East African interior that had already begun to carry
ivory to the coast by 1700. A major group of such traders were the Bisa,
who linked Kazembe's capital on the Luapula with Kilwa on the coast;
alternatively, they traded with the Yao, the main suppliers of ivory to
the Portuguese. The Yao, who occupied the area east of Lake Malawi
(formerly Lake Nyasa), now began to expand their trade network northward
to include Kilwa and Zanzibar, as well as the Portuguese settlements
along the Zambezi River. As Kazembe and the Bisa lost their former
dominance over the trade, the Yao intensified their involvement in
slaving, as did another group of people, the Chikunda, who began to raid
westward along the Zambezi River. These Chikunda were of mixed ethnic
origins, but they grew into a "new" tribe—with a distinctive language
and ethnic identity—in the course of their involvement in the trade. In
the area north of Lake Malawi, the slaving and trading role was assumed
by the Nyamwezi, organized into distinct groups under ntemi
(decision-making) chiefs who combined ritual and judicial functions with
entrepreneurial roles in the caravan trade between the interior and the
coast.

   These new commercial opportunities not only spurred the entry of
interior groups into the trade in ivory and slaves; they also attracted
Omani Arabs from Zanzibar and Muslim Swahili traders from the coast.
These newcomers organized armed caravans and set up forts and trading
stations in the interior. Increasingly equipped with firearms, they set
themselves up as local potentates, sometimes in alliance with African
chiefs, sometimes in open conflict with them. Growing political
competition, along with the ever-expanding slave trade, brought on a
rising tide of armed conflict. As some polities declined, others—more
attuned to military escalation—came to the fore. Among these ascendant
groups was one known as the Bemba.

The Bemba

The Bemba define their identity through common recognition of a line of
chiefs drawn from the crocodile clan and bearing the perpetual title of
chitimukulu. They think of themselves as descendants of the followers of
the first Luba balopwe, who founded the Lunda kingdom. (Chitimu-
kula—Chiti the Great—is the praise title of this Luba—Chiti Maluba, or
Chiti the Luba.) The Bemba reached the Upper Lualaba River around the
middle of the eighteenth century, following the Lunda pattern of setting
up chiefships among the local populations they overran. By the end of
the eighteenth century, they had begun to collect tribute in ivory and
to hunt elephants themselves. From 1800 to the 1830s, they gradually
subjected the Bisa. Now strategically located between Lake Nyasa and
Kilwa on Lake Meru, the Bemba were able to control the growing trade in
ivory and slaves with the Swahili coast.

   Around 1840 a Bemba district chief, who had grown rich in the ivory
trade through control of Bisa middlemen, seized the Bemba kingship and
centralized control in his hands. He organized a standing army, and at
the same time made ivory trading a royal monopoly. Exchanging ivory for
guns, he expanded his sway over the ivory trade and raided his neighbors
for slaves. Allying himself with the incoming Arabs, this Bemba
paramount was for a time able to ward off all competitors, even the
Ngoni, thus establishing the Bemba reputation for military prowess,
which still persists. Once again, then, we witness the rapid development
of a predatory and militaristic state in connection with the external
trade in slaves, ivory, and guns. When the British abolished the trade
in slaves and brought elephant hunting to an end, the Bemba were forced
into shifting cultivation on poor land, and into labor migration to the
mines of the copper belt (see Stevenson 1968: 114).

   For 500 years, from Senegambia in the west to the Swahili-speaking
coast in the east, the slave trade sent millions of people coastward for
transport overseas, principally to the New World. Slaving gave rise to a
division of labor in which the business of capture, maintenance, and
overland transport of slaves was in African hands, while Europeans took
charge of transoceanic transport, the "seasoning" or breaking in of
slaves, and their eventual distribution. Responding to American demand,
the trade rested upon the active collaboration of buyers of people with
their suppliers, and upon a sophisticated orchestration of activities on
both sides.

   This basic point needs emphasis because a history written by slavers
and their beneficiaries has long obliterated the African past,
portraying Africans as savages whom only the Europeans brought into the
light of civilization. That history denied both the existence of a
complex political economy before the advent of the Europeans and the
organizational ability exhibited by Africans in pursuit of the trade
once begun. More recently, another approach to African history—with the
signs reversed—has been put forward to deny the participation of African
military and commercial elites in the enslavement of their fellows. Yet
the task of writing a realistic account of African populations is not to
justify one group as against another, but to uncover the forces that
brought Europeans and Africans (and others) into connection with one
another in the construction of the world. The human costs of the slave
trade remain incalculable; but the economic and political causes and
consequences for all participants are ascertainable.

   In West Africa the trade strengthened some existing states, such as
Benin, and prompted the emergence of others, such as Asante, Oyo, and
Dahomey. In the Niger Delta, it underwrote the transformation of
kin-ordered patrilineages into fighting and trading organizations
captained by entrepreneurial figures. Along the shores of the Niger, the
trade augmented the power of local tributary rulers who became engaged
in slaving, while in the hinterland it led to the formation of the
slave-hunting lineage federation of the Aro. In the Congo, the slave
trade weakened an earlier state structure and produced throughout
central Africa a proliferation of tributary military and commercial
elites that fanned out eastward in trade and war.

   In these commercial and military operations there were victors and
losers; the losers were frequently enslaved or pushed into fringe areas,
where some of them have survived to the present day. Such was the case
with LoDagaa, "Grunshi," Tallensi, and Kokomba in the borderland between
the Upper Volta and Ghana. The Tallensi, of anthropological fame, were
formed from a fusion of original inhabitants of the country with
immigrants headed by slave-taking chiefs, who were part of a hierarchy
of chiefs tributing slaves to the Asante. Another shatter zone created
by slaving was the Nigerian Middle Belt, a favorite slaving ground both
for the Islamic emirates to the north and for slave traders from the
coast who sought slaves among its kin-ordered populations. To the
southeast of this belt lay igbo country, where common subjection to
slave raiding from the coast imparted an "ethnic" commonality to the
localized kin-based clusters that became the modern Ibo. Still another
target zone of slave raiders was the borderland between modern Angola,
Zaire, and Zambia, inhabited by the Southern Lunda, of whom the Ndembu
have become best known in the anthropological literature. Here epigonal
chiefs of a Lunda elite gained new economic and political life in the
second half of the nineteenth century by becoming slave- raiding agents
for Ovimbundu slave traders.

   While Africa had long formed an integral part of the political and
economic system of the Old World, European expansion after 1400 drew the
continent into a traffic of global scale. The demand for African slaves
reshaped the political economy of the entire continent. It gave rise, in
one common process, to new tributary states and specialized
organizations of slave hunters, and it turned societies described by
anthropologists as "acephalous, segmented, lineage-based" into the
predilect target populations of slavers. These different configurations
cannot, therefore, be understood as typologically separable states or
"tribes” of people without history. They are, rather, the variable
outcomes of a unitary historical process. Nor can one understand Europe
without a grasp of the role Africa played in its development and
expansion. Leading participants in that growth were not only the
European merchants and beneficiaries of the slave trade but also its
African organizers, agents, and victims.

8 Trade and Conquest in the Orient

The voyages of European explorers and merchants to America and Africa
grew out of the search for routes to Asia, the imaginary treasure house
of unlimited wealth. In 1291, the year that Marco Polo returned to
Venice to tell of his travels to the Orient, the Vivaldi brothers set
out from Genoa to seek a "westward" sea route to the "Indies." They were
never heard from again, but attempts to reach Asia by the western ocean
never ceased. Columbus thought he had embarked for Marco Polo's Cipangu
(Japan). The Venetian Giovanni Caboto (John Cabot) believed that by
sailing westward in high latitudes, where the world might be narrower,
he could reach Cipangu from the north. Even the fur trader Jean Nicolet,
upon contacting the Winnebago Indians on the western shore of Lake
Michigan in 1638, donned a Chinese robe he had brought with him in
expectation of meeting the Great Khan of China.

   Overland routes to China were known to the Europeans from the time of
Marco Polo's voyages. In the early fourteenth century the Tuscan
Pegolotti wrote, in his Practice of Commerce, detailed instructions for
making the journey from Azov to Cathay. The possibility of an eastern
sea route to Asia—contrary to Ptolemy's declaration that the Indian
Ocean was landlocked—was suggested by a map of the Venetian Fra Mauro in
1459, a copy of which came into the hands of the Portuguese Prince Henry
the Navigator. Portuguese mariners soon turned that possibility into
reality. They followed the African coastline, not only in quest of
Guinea gold but also to search for Prester John, a mythical potentate
ruling somewhere in the fabled Indies. In 1487 Bartholomeu Dias proved
Ptolemy wrong by sailing around the Cape of Good Hope. Ten years later,
Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape, picked up an experienced Arab navigator
in Malindi, and reached Calicut in India. The eastward route to the
Orient stood open.

   When the European sea merchants began to expand trade in Asia during
the sixteenth century, the landmass was in the hands of big and powerful
tributary states—larger, more densely populated, and often more
productive than their European counterparts. The sea-lanes around Asia,
however, lay open to intruders able to marshall sufficient military and
organizational resources to push aside the Turkish coastal fleet and to
penetrate the waters of the Indian Ocean. The Portuguese, trading for
their king and on their own behalf, were the first to accomplish this
feat. The Dutch East India Company followed soon after, disputing
primacy with the Portuguese in the southern seas. Next came the English.
The East India Company licensed by the English Crown challenged its
predecessors for control of sea-lanes and trade. For the better part of
three centuries, these European powers could not engage the Asian
territorial polities outright. They established "factories”— points of
settlement and commerce—around the maritime periphery of the continent,
thus confining themselves "in most of Asia to precarious footholds on
the tidal margins" (Murphey 1977: 13). Only in the late eighteenth
century did England move to take over a land-based empire, the Mughal
polity, and begin to combine tax revenues with the profits of commerce.

   Superior naval power and commercial organization allowed the
Europeans to seize the sea-lanes, dominating ocean-borne traffic and
encroaching on the extensive and lucrative carrying trade operated by
Arab, Gujarati, Malay, and Chinese merchants among the coastlines and
islands of the Indian Ocean and the China Sea. Yet the Europeans were
unable to dominate production and commerce as decisively as they had
done in the Americas and, through the slave trade, in Africa. The
different European trading groups remained long dependent on the good
will of local rulers and subject to shifts in political alliances. They
fought one another for control of naval stations and markets but could
not establish clear hegemony over major polities. At the same time, they
found themselves engaged in a struggle with rivals from another cultural
realm—that of Asian Islam, created by an earlier Muslim expansion.

Islam in South Asia

In the ninth century A.D., ships from the Persian Gulf had begun to
range up and down the East African coast, tapping the hinterlands of
"Zenj" through trading posts established on offshore islands. The Muslim
traders imported cloth, pottery, and glass, and they exported ivory,
ambergris, leopard skins, turtle shells, gold, and slaves. The number of
slaves obtained must have been large, judging from the scale of Zenji
slave revolts in Iraq during the ninth century. Many of the luxury goods
were re-exported to China, where Arab trading colonies had been set up
as early as the seventh century, possibly before.

   Around the end of the eleventh century, the first stable Muslim
polities were established in northern India. After 1200 Bengal and
Gujarat, both with important ports opening on the southern seas, were in
Muslim hands. Late in the thirteenth century, the pivotal area of
Southeast Asian trade along the Malay Straits became Muslim, with
Malacca established as the major trade emporium and stronghold on the
northern side of the straits. By the beginning of the fourteenth
century, India was under Muslim control, with the exception of the
southernmost Hindu kingdom of Vijanagar. With the straits in Muslim
hands, the rest of the ports and harbor principalities of the islands
followed suit. In adopting Islam, they took over a cultural model that
preached religious egalitarianism in the face of the inherited
distinctions of rank and caste; Islam carried, at the same time, the
appeal of cosmopolitan trade connections. At the beginning of the
sixteenth century, the rulers of inland Java adopted Islam as well,
perhaps to keep control over the peasantry, to which Islam had begun to
spread (Wertheim 1973: 13). Only Bali, located on the periphery of the
trade routes, remained staunchly Hindu. Islam and trade thus went hand
in hand in the Asian seas. When the Europeans entered these seas,
therefore, they also entered the domain of hegemonic Islam.

The Portuguese in Asia

   The market and merchants' houses in Portuguese Goa. Copper engraving
by Theodor de Bry. 1598. (Courtesy of the General Research Division, The
New York Public Library. Astor, Lenox, and Tilden Foundations)

The Portuguese arrival on the Swahili coast of East Africa brought them
into immediate contact with this expanding Muslim trade network in
southern Asia. Alffonso de Albuquerque, the Portuguese admiral, quickly
grasped the nature of this network and located the strategic pressure
points within it. In rapid succession, the Portuguese seized the major
Muslim strongholds along the Asian shores. These were Goa, on the Konkan
coast of India in the kingdom of Bijapur; Hormuz, a wealthy point of
transshipment between India and Persia, located on a barren island at
the entrance to the Persian Gulf; and Malacca, the opulent city of
50,000 inhabitants and emporium of the spice trade with the Moluccas.
Goa was taken in 1510; Hormuz in 1515; Malacca in 1519. Occupation of
these key bases was followed by the construction, all along the coasts
from Sofala in Southeast Africa to Ternate in the Moluccas, offeitorias,
Portuguese forts and trading posts. Finally, settlements were planted in
zones controlled by other sovereign powers, such as Sao Tomé de Meliapor
on the Coromandel coast, Hughli in Bengal, and Macao on the China coast.

   The instrument that enabled the Portuguese and other Europeans
thereafter to expand into Asia was the gun-bearing sailing ship. Around
A.D. 1400, European shipbuilders had begun to combine the square rig of
their own traditional models with the lateen rig of the Arabs. The
square rig on the foremast gave the ship an advantage when sailing
close-hauled; the Arab-style lateen sail on main and mizzen masts
granted it speed when running. A further achievement was to equip ships
with cannon. Cannon had come into wide use in both Europe and Asia
during the fourteenth century, but in the fifteenth century European
gunsmiths began to out-produce Asian competitors in both the quantity
and quality of their weapons. After 1500, moreover, it became common in
Europe to install guns not only on the upper deck and castles but also
on the main deck, by cutting gun ports in the ship's hull. The result
was the galleon—half warship and half merchantman—a powerful sailing
vessel equipped with guns. The prizes in naval war no longer went to the
captain who rammed or boarded his opponent, but to the naval
artilleryman who knew how to maneuver his ship into position and to fire
broadside. Thus at Diu, in 1509, Albuquerque destroyed the joint
Egyptian Mamluk and Gujarati fleet and opened the sea routes of the
southern seas to Portuguese expansion.

   What the Portuguese sought was mainly spices, especially pepper, “the
substance of the Indies," as the Viceroy was reminded by Lisbon in 1587.
The demand for pepper grew out of a European need for spices of all
kinds. Spices were necessary as preservatives for meat and fish, in part
because European cattle could not be kept stall-fed over the long
winters, and the meat of animals slaughtered in the fall had to be
salted and pickled for adequate storage. Another factor was the
influence of Eastern cooking, which introduced Europeans to unfamiliar
spices. Pepper became the most important spice; ginger was a close
second. A great deal of the European demand for pepper was supplied by
the Portuguese trade in malaguette from West Africa. Large quantities of
this product were traded, but the profits it yielded could not match
those for pepper from South and Southeast Asia. Indeed, pepper came to
serve as money in parts of Europe. Like gold, it was durable and easily
divisible, and it was often demanded in payment of taxes.

   The spice trade from Asia to Europe has an ancient history, going
back to classical times. At the time of Portuguese intrusion, the
eastern terminals of the trade were in the hands of Chinese, who
collected the cloves, nutmeg, and mace of island Southeast Asia and
brought them to Malacca. From Malacca, Muslim merchants added Ceylonese
cinnamon and Indian pepper, and carried the goods to the ports of the
Malabar coast and Gujarat. Here they were received by the factors of
Muslim merchants based in East Africa, Arabia, or Egypt and transported
to the ports of the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. From there the spices
traveled overland to ports in the eastern Mediterranean. In Alexandria
and along the Syrian coast, Venetian traders would then buy the produce
at high prices for resale throughout Europe. The Portuguese effectively
cut into this trade and for a while dominated it by offering pepper at
lower prices. Yet they never achieved a complete monopoly over the
trade. Instead, they chose to control shipping in the Asian seas, by
making ship captains carry a Portuguese license, or cartaz, and pay
customs at Portuguese strongholds. Consequently, "Portuguese shipping in
this region was merely one more thread in the existing warp and woof of
the Malay-Indonesian interport trade" (Boxer 1973a: 49). When the
Portuguese attempted to expand their beachhead in China by force in
1521, they were decisively defeated by the Chinese coastguard fleet.
From then on, they made use of their foothold in Macao to acquire a
share of the China trade, but it was on the terms of the Chinese
emperor.

   Thus, there were limits to Portuguese power. The Portuguese had
succeeded against politically and militarily disunited sea kings and
merchant colonies because they followed a unified political strategy,
opening up economic opportunities to their friends and agents and
denying them to their enemies. They laid hold of the major sea-lanes and
tapped the networks of the Asian carrying trade, but they never
established domination over any continental hinterland. They organized
maritime ports of call and used them to increase their participation in
trade between various Asian shores. They profited from access to pepper
and other spices, as long as they remained unchallenged in their control
of the Indian Ocean. Yet by the 1630s it was clear that they were not
strong enough to blockade the Persian Gulf against competitors who
wanted to ship spices through the gulf, now guarded by the increasingly
powerful Turks. As a result, the Portuguese settlements in the East
began to see the prospects for their survival as resting in Asia rather
than in relations with the home country, "encrusting themselves," in the
phrase of Godinho (1969: 783), "in the world of the Orient."

The Dutch in Asia

By 1600 the Portuguese began to feel the competition of the Dutch. The
Dutch effort in the Indies at the close of the sixteenth century was
initially carried forward by separate and competitive companies, but in
1602 the States-General chartered the Vereenigte Oost-Indische Compagnie
(VOC), the Dutch East India Company. It differed markedly from its
Portuguese counterparts. The Portuguese king maintained a monopoly over
the spice trade, but private individuals could invest in the trading
effort. Private trade in nonmonopolized commodities was carried on
alongside the spice trade, making use of Asiatic traders. The Dutch
Company, in contrast, gained a complete monopoly over the entirety of
Dutch trade. It received the right to make war against local sovereigns
and to conclude peace; to build forts and to organize local
administration. While its home office was run by a board of directors,
the Gentlemen Seventeen, the governor-general who represented the
Company in the East had a great deal of latitude in formulating tactics
and in carrying out decisions on the spot. The principal goal of the
organization was to establish an early and complete dominance over the
production and distribution of spices.

   Dutch attacks on Portuguese strongholds in the Asian ocean began with
the capture of Tidore and Amboyna in the Moluccas in 1605. Realizing
that these forts were too remote from the hub of Asian trade, the Dutch
Company attempted to seize Malacca in 1606, but—failing in this
attempt—instead wrested the little Javanese port of Jakarta from the
Sultan of Bantam. Here they constructed their main stronghold of
Batavia, which they successfully defended from an attack by the Javanese
state of Mataram in 1628—1629. In 1638 they initiated their campaign
against the Portuguese in Ceylon, winning by 1658 control of the island
and of its cinnamon production. In 1641 they dislodged the Portuguese
from Malacca, and in 1662 they drove off the Spaniards, who had come to
aid the Portuguese. Their conquest of Malacca granted the Dutch a whip
hand over the kingdom of Mataram, which exported rice to the Malay
peninsula. By 1677 they had defeated that state, following this up in
1684 with the conquest of Bantam in Java. Since the Portuguese had
already lost Hormuz to the Persians in 1622, only Goa and Macao remained
in Portuguese hands.

   Among the most prized possessions in the southern seas were the
Moluccas, the source of cloves, nutmeg, and the nutmeg fleece called
mace. The main producer of cloves was the island of Amboyna; mace and
nutmeg were produced on the island of Banda. The formal ruler of these
islands was the Sultan of Ternate. From him the Dutch Company obtained
the right to exercise monopoly control over these spices, in return for
a promise to protect him from the Spaniards in the Philippines. The
Dutch then entered into formal contracts for exclusive deliveries of the
spices with local headmen in both Amboyna and Banda, the so-called orang
kaya (literally, "rich men").

   Neither the sultan's formal grant nor the contracts with the local
headmen, however, could prevent other traders—both Asian and
European—from buying the commodities, or the natives from selling them.
To ensure control, therefore, the Dutch proceeded to limit competition
ruthlessly. In 1621 the people of Banda were killed or deported to
Batavia, to be replaced by Dutch colonists (perkenier) who were granted
land tracts planted with nutmeg trees, together with the services of
Company slaves for cultivation. Control of clove production was achieved
by destroying all clove tree plantings except on Amboyna and a few
neighboring islands. The Sultan of Ternate was compensated for his loss
of income by payments that appear as "extirpation money" on the Company
books. From 1625 on, periodic expeditions of armed outriggers began to
visit unauthorized clove-producing areas to cut down unlicensed clove
trees. The labor supply in Amboyna was increased further by the forcible
relocation of 12,000 people from West Ceram in 1651. With the final
subjugation of Macassar in 1669, the Dutch put an end to all illegal
transactions in spices. They also gained control of a harbor that had
become a refuge for disgruntled Muslim traders from other areas.

   Various factors account for Dutch superiority over the Portuguese in
the battle for the Indies. First, the United Provinces possessed vastly
larger numbers of ships than did the Portuguese; these were lighter,
better built, and more maneuverable than Portuguese craft and were
equipped with better long-range cannon. With bases in the islands, the
Dutch could stay out at sea longer and could more easily undertake local
initiatives than could the Portuguese based at Goa. Second, the Dutch
had no difficulty finding sailors and soldiers for their undertakings,
if not at home, then by hiring French, German, Scandinavian, and—before
1652—English mercenaries. The Portuguese were hampered by a paucity of
seagoing mariners; they were so hard-pressed for men to become soldiers
in the Indies that they recruited prisoners from Portuguese jails.
Third, the Dutch commanders had better mastery of naval tactics, relied
more on a trained soldiery, and had greater leeway in deploying their
ample resources than their Portuguese counterparts. The Portuguese still
carried on naval warfare by boarding and entering; still charged to the
cry of "Santiago e a ellesV (“St. James and at them!”) in land battles;
and were subject to an inefficient and centralized command in their
operations. In addition, the Portuguese depended heavily on religious
motivations, while the Dutch understood that their main concern was
trade and "knew better than to endanger it through the preaching of
their doctrine" (Meilink-Roelofz 1962: 181). Yet the major factor was
undoubtedly that the Netherlands were rich, while the Portuguese were
growing increasingly poorer. The difference in their wealth was, in
turn, the outgrowth of the wide-ranging mercantile activities of the
Dutch commercial oligarchy, whereas Portugal soon fell prey to the
poverty of its home base and to its need to import cereals, cloth, and
manufactured goods. In the contest between the Dutch and the Portuguese,
a mercantile bourgeoisie defeated an elite of sea-trading aristocrats.

   Yet in spite of Dutch successes against the Portuguese, their victory
in the East proved hollow. The Company made profits but at heavy costs,
the chief of these being the cost of war. Moreover, just when the Dutch
consolidated their hold over the spice trade, the spices themselves
began to lose their market appeal in Europe. Attempting to hold on to
its monopoly at great expense, the Dutch Company throttled the
activities of Asian merchants and deranged the trade of kingdoms and
harbor principalities. Malacca never regained its former position.
Mataram on Java, which had supplied rice to Malacca, consequently lost
its connection with the island trade. The trade of Bantam in
northeastern Java— once a great emporium supplying rice and slaves to
the spice islands as well as to the ports of Malaya and Java—was
redirected toward Batavia. The harbor principalities fell into decline;
the rice-producing kingdoms became Company satellites. The inhabitants
of the islands where clove trees had been extirpated turned to sago as
their main source of food. Thus, the activities of the Dutch Company
upset the trade networks of the southern seas in favor of a narrow
commitment to the production of a few valued commodities for a distant
market.

The English in India

The English, like the Portuguese, initially were at a disadvantage in
relation to the Dutch; yet they were soon able to turn this disadvantage
to their favor. The English East India Company was not as tightly
centralized as the Dutch Company. Its monopoly was always less stringent
than that of the Dutch Company, and many private British "country
merchants" traded alongside the Company. The English also had less
capital and less ready money than the Dutch; the Dutch Company started
out with a stock of capital eight times larger than that of the English
Company. In fact, the English often had to borrow money from native
princes and notables (Meilink-Roelofz 1962: 194). The Dutch also had
nearly twice as many ships at the beginning of the seventeenth century.

   The English soon conceded the Dutch hold on the spice trade,
especially after an English attempt to seize Banda forcibly failed in
1619. Having set up trading posts in Siam and Japan in 1612 and 1613,
they closed them down again in 1623. The execution of English merchants
by the Dutch on Amboyna further hastened the English retreat from
overextended positions. Indonesian trade remained important to the
English until the last third of the seventeenth century, but they
gradually shifted their attention from Indonesia to India.

   In entering the Indian subcontinent, the English came neither as
religious crusaders,like the Portuguese, nor in search of outright
political power, like the Dutch. Theirs was not a moral or political
choice, but an economic one. They had neither the organization nor the
capital to build new forts and to man warships. Moreover, they were well
aware of Dutch superiority at sea. Making a virtue of necessity, they
accepted the sovereignty of local rulers. They relied on negotiations to
win advantages in trade, and often used their host governments to
protect them against their Portuguese and Dutch rivals. Thus, they
established a factory at Masulipatam in Golconda (1611), and one at
Surat on the western frontiers of the Mughal polity (1612). They
acquired Madras in 1639 from a minor Hindu chief, and administered it as
the representatives of Indian rulers. Not until 1665 did Bombay become
an English colony, passing to Charles II as part of the dowry of the
Portuguese Catherine of Braganza. Charles, in turn, ceded the colony to
the East India Company in exchange for a loan. In 1690 the Company
established a modest settlement at Calcutta.

   For the better part of a century, the English traders depended on the
good will of the Mughal rulers. Their early settlements at Surat, at
Madras, and elsewhere on the coast had to be accommodated to preexisting
conditions. The English could strive to alter these conditions through
economic or social manipulation, but not by means of force. Trading at
Surat, they made use of the chief port of the Mughal state, which
exported textiles and indigo drawn from a wide hinterland. Surat was
also the chief port of embarkation for the haj, the pilgrimage to Mecca.
Shipping was in the hands of Muslims who traded with the Arab ports on
the Red Sea; brokerage, commerce, and money lending were dominated by
powerful lineages of Hindu merchants. The brokers, in turn, were in
contact with village headmen in the areas of primary production. Each
broker drew produce from his own zone of supply. These tight controls
left the English little room for maneuver. Only in the eighteenth
century, when the power of the Mughals waned and the warlike Marathas
seized much of Surat's hinterland, did some of the local merchant
families seek the protection of the Company. At that point, rebellion
and political disorder began to interfere with trade from Surat to the
West, and the English, followed by their Parsi trade partners, removed
to Bombay.

   As Surat and the Western trade declined, commerce with the East—
China, the Philippines, and Indonesia—increased. The English traders
were especially welcome on the Coromandel coast of southeastern India.
On this coast, which was beyond Mughal range, they were not blocked by
powerful merchant clans as in Surat, and they could enter into relations
with many small merchants to tap the flourishing textile production of
the hinterland. In addition, mutually beneficial arrangements allowed
Englishmen to serve as naval officers on Indian ships, and Indian hiring
agents and freight masters to work for the British.

   Madras, which became the main British base, affords us a glimpse into
the ways that relations between the foreign traders and the local
population were structured. The town, dominated by the British-built
Fort St. George, consisted of a “White" town and a "Black" town. White
Town housed fifty European employees of the East India Company,
twenty-five European free merchants, and sixty European sea captains,
along with nine Armenian and six Jewish households, three or four
upper-class Eurasian households, and an occasional Indian merchant.
White Town was garrisoned by 200 European private soldiers and 400
non-European foot soldiers and artillerymen. Black Town, with more than
10,000 inhabitants, sheltered the local population. In the port of
Madras, ships from Europe brought in silver and coral jewelry produced
especially for the Eastern trade by Jews in Leghorn; they took away
Chinese tea, Indonesian pepper, Spanish silver dollars from the
Philippines, and textiles from Coromandel. By the end of the seventeenth
century, however, Madras in turn lost out to Calcutta with its rising
export trade to China.

The Mughal Empire

At Calcutta the English again faced the Mughals. They were subject to
Mughal dominance when the Mughal empire was at its height, and they were
caught up in the vicissitudes of its decline. It has become common to
speak of Mughal India as "traditional" India, but the Mughal polity was
itself but a recent political phenomenon. It was created by Timurid
Turks from Turkestan, who had begun to raid into India at the beginning
of the sixteenth century and who, in 1527, made their chief, Babur, the
first Mughal emperor. As the Mughal system crystallized under Babur's
grandson Akbar, it institutionalized a Turkish Central Asian pattern
that granted predominant positions of power to soldiers, who were ranked
according to the number of troops under their command. This military
elite, the mansabdars, also furnished the top bureaucrats. At the time
of Akbar, about a third of these military officeholders were recruited
from the original force that had crossed from Turkestan into India; a
third was made up of Persian, Jagatai, and Uzbek Muslims; and another
third comprised local Hindu (mainly Rajput) and Muslim chieftains. In
time, the proportion of local chieftains increased.

   These mansabdars formed a cosmopolitan elite and created a
cosmopolitan court culture, exemplified by fine armor and weaponry,
costly textiles and carpets, and palaces with luxurious gardens and
interiors. Their artistic tastes, their styles of dress (trousers,
shirt, and a coat prototypic of the modern "Nehru jacket"), their
penchant for poetry, calligraphy, and miniature painting, and their use
of Persian and a Persianized Hindi (Urdu) served as models for the lower
orders of power holders within the realm. Court and palace life, in
turn, generated artisan and craft production in palace towns and in
whole regions that became specialized in crafts. Since they received
their emoluments in money, the members of the elite also furthered
commerce both in subsistence goods and in luxuries. This, in turn, gave
rise to a class of merchants, who also lent the money the elite needed
to pay for its luxurious way of life.

   The members of this mansabdar elite were rewarded with grants
(jagirs) to tribute drawn from particular areas. These grants were held
during the lifetime of the grant holder, or jagirdar. and were not
heritable. In this they followed the pattern of the Turkish iqta and the
Spanish encomienda. Moreover, the area from which revenue was drawn
would often shift during a jagirdar's lifetime as he moved to serve as
mansabdar over different areas of the realm.

   Between the mansabdar elite and the population at large stood the
zamindars. These were usually chiefs of leading lineages, who held
hereditary patrimonial rights to receive tribute from given areas. The
lineages from which zamindars were drawn belonged to the dominant caste
of the region. As heads of the central lineage, they drew tribute from
other lineage members and passed on some of the surplus obtained in
money payments to the Mughal government. As intermediaries between the
central power and their lineages, the zamindars gained or lost in
influence as the tie between state and lineages grew stronger or weaker.
When the tie was weak, the chieftains of the central lineage, backed by
their multitudinous kin, became more powerful and rose in influence with
the state bureaucracy. When the state was strong, it would expand its
tribute-taking power so as to bypass the central lineage and collect
directly from local lineage segments, or it would create new settlements
entirely by mixing lineage segments from different lineage systems. The
distribution of power was thus fluid. Moreover, zamindari rights were
transferable through sale (Habib 1964: 43). Jagirdars converted their
jagirs into zamindari tenure when the central state was unable to
interfere. Conversely, zamindari rights could be converted into jagirs
through coercion when the state was strong. A potential conflict thus
existed between the state and the zamindars, a conflict that constituted
a major weakness in the edifice of the Mughal polity.

   Another source of weakness in the Mughal polity was religious
dissent. Anti-Muslim opposition was maintained in part by the Hindu
kingdom of Vijayanagar, which had been founded by refugees from the
Deccan who had fled from Muslim incursions in the early fourteenth
century; the kingdom survived into the seventeenth century. Another
source of opposition were various eclectic cults that drew on Hindu
mysticism and Muslim Sufism, preaching bhakti, the participant devotion
of the individual to one god, and turning against ritual and caste. The
teachers of the cults addressed their followers in the vernacular. Many
of these leaders were artisans and even low-caste; the most famous of
them, Kabir (1440-1518), was a weaver. Another leader, Nanak (1469—
1539), the founder of Sikhism, preached the unification of religions and
the abolition of social distinctions among the Jat cultivator castes of
the Punjab. Still another sect was the Satnamis, who attracted peasants,
artisans, and petty traders.

   The Mughal rulers were at first accepting of religious differences,
since a dead infidel paid no taxes. In time, however, they grew
increasingly intolerant. Aurangzeb, who ascended to the throne in 1658,
was a fanatic who destroyed Hindu temples and imposed special taxes on
non-Muslims. His religious persecutions drove many zamindars and their
peasant followers into open rebellion, which became ever more serious as
the regime weakened. In 1647 the Marathi-speaking populations of the
western Deccan, under their leader Sivaji, rose against the Mughals in
an attempt to restore the Hindu faith violated by the Muslim rulers.
Organized as the Maratha confederacy, these people became a dominant
influence in the Deccan. Similarly, the Mughals lost the support of the
Hindu lineages of the central Gangetic Plain (the area that is today
known as Uttar Pradesh). Finally, as Mughal rule waned, Mughal officials
in outlying areas began to expand their own power and to trade with the
incoming Europeans on their own behalf. By the end of the seventeenth
century, the stage was thus set for the intrusion of the English into
Indian affairs.

The Development of English Rule

The settlement of the English at Calcutta (1690) was strategically
placed to benefit from Mughal decline. The province of Bengal,
relatively isolated from the wars and crises that beset the rest of
India, now entered a period of commercial florescence, exporting not
only fine silks and cottons but also sugar, rice, saltpeter, indigo, and
opium. Although the French and the Dutch also had trading stations in
the area, the English East India Company soon carried on trade in more
than 150 “factories." Dealing through powerful Indian merchant-bankers
who tax farmed for the navab (the semi-independent Mughal provincial
governor or ruler, anglicized as “nabob") and who often advanced huge
credits to the English, the Company was able to expand its contracts
with weavers who produced textiles for its trade. Bengal now witnessed a
growing struggle between the navab and the zamindars, many of whom were
colonizing new land without passing on the obligatory revenues to the
ruler. In this conflict, the English supported the zamindars against the
navab. Backed by the merchant-bankers and in secret alliance with many
zamindars, the Company provoked the navab into open warfare. Supplied
with funds advanced by the chief bankers of Bengal, it defeated the
navab's troops conclusively at Plassey in 1757.

   In the wake of its victory, the East India Company plundered the
state treasury of Bengal to the tune of over 5 million pounds sterling.
It also set up a monopoly over export and import trade. Setting prices
to its own benefit, it ousted the local mechant class and reaped,
between 1775 and 1780, another 5 million pounds in profit. Using Indian
go- betweens, who often bought their positions from the Company, it
gained direct control over 10,000 Bengali weavers, whose contracts
forced them to deal exclusively with the Company. By 1765 the Company
had also become the official diwan, or civil administration, in Bengal.
It quickly moved to rationalize the taxation system, increasing the
direct yield in land revenue from nearly 15 million rupees in 1765 to 30
million rupees in 1776—1777. The increased tax burden proved ruinous to
large numbers of Bengali cultivators and artisans. There were major
famines in 1770 and 1783.

   Having gained a foothold in Bengal and aided by increasing political
strife, the East India Company was able to expand its territorial sway
rapidly and effectively. Continuous warfare required the Company to
develop an ever more effective army; continuous "intervention” in the
civil affairs of territorial rulers furthered the development of a
territorially based Company bureaucracy. The Company took over some
areas of India directly, leaving others to be administered through local
rulers under its sponsorship. In the years after 1765, therefore, the
Company changed its character from that of a chartered trading
organization, operating under the rules set by another government, to
that of a military and bureaucratic arm of the British government.

   This transformation in the character of the Company, and hence in the
nature of English rule in India, also entailed a major change in English
aspirations. Before the victory at Plassey, the characteristic
Englishman in India was a merchant who, through life in his "factory"
and trade dealings in the hinterland, acquired a sense of equality with
the members of the Indian elite with whom he dealt. The merchant, or the
Company merchant acting as official, often lived like the Indian
notables, with an Indian mistress, or zenana, and surrounded by Parsi or
Muslim servants, Portuguese or Goanese cooks, and Malabari or Mala-
gassy slave butlers. Paradoxically, as Spear has noted,

the days of corrupt Company officials, of ill-gotten fortunes, of
oppression of ryots [peasants], of zenanas and of illicit sexual
connexions, were also the days when Englishmen were interested in Indian
culture, wrote Persian verses, and foregathered with Pandits and Maulwis
and Nawabs on terms of social equality and personal friendship. [1963:
145]

   Whereas before Plassey the English merchant dealt with Indian
merchants on an equal footing, after their victory the English began to
use their newly gained political power to control their Indian
competitors along with the traders of other European companies. Before
Plassey the English had worked through local intermediaries, called
dubash or modeliar in Coromandel and Malabar, and dadni in Bengal. The
term dadni (sing., dadan) stood for advances at interest made to
merchants in the interior who, in turn, made advances to local
cultivators or artisans against future deliveries. Such intermediaries
not only fulfilled a financial and organizing function; but they also
dealt with local political authorities and craft organizations and were,
at one and the same time, "courtier, negotiator, interpreter, formulator
of contracts . .. serving also as guarantor and expert" (Dermigny 1964,
I: 783). These intermediaries were now replaced with gomastas, or
salaried clerks, who handled the Company's business, issuing trading
permits. At the same time—as we shall see below—this did not make the
English independent of Indian capital. The thrust of English activities,
both by the Company and by private entrepreneurs, was to use Indian
resources and labor to produce goods for the trade with China. Much of
the wealth that financed this growing trade came from Indian bankers and
moneylenders.

   The role of.the English trader underwent an essential change, from
that of a trade partner of Indians to a socially distant superior. This
paralleled the change in the political realm, as the establishment of
order and the routinization of administration gave precedence to the
soldier-administrator, who tended to despise “the soft Bengalee," and
who looked down upon Indians from a pinnacle of moral righteousness,
wishing to rule them by English example and to reform their un-English
habits.

   The English success at Plassey opened the door to a takeover of the
Indian peninsula. The moves towards English domination did not follow a
master plan, but occurred as successive responses to regional crises and
wars. The Mughal polity disintegrated into a number of warring successor
states, such as the Maratha federation in the western Deccan, Hyderabad
in the uplands between the Krishna and Godavari rivers, and Mysore,
uniting the inland plateau with the coastal area north of Kerala. These
new polities constituted a real threat to the English presence in
Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta. They also enlisted French or Afghan help
for their shifting alliances, thus tending to escalate regional wars
into international conflicts. At the same time, their internal disunity
and their inability to forge a common alliance allowed the English to
divide them from one another and to defeat them separately. The English
defeated Hyderabad in 1789, Mysore in 1799, and the Maratha federation
between 1816 and 1818.

   These many-sided wars for control proved enormously destructive of
wealth and resources. For half a century, all sides taxed and pillaged
to obtain funds for sustained political and military competition.
English success in war, however, granted the East India Company and its
officials the means to subordinate Indian resources to the process of
accumulation in the home country. Large private fortunes, obtained by
plunder, were repatriated and invested in England. Tribute that had
previously sustained local rulers could now be “transferred to
stockholders in Europe through the medium of unrequited exports" (Field-
house 1967: 159). Conquest of political sovereignty also allowed England
to reorganize Indian land tenure and land taxation to make India pay for
the expenses of warfare and to cover the cost of continued English
occupation. Finally, land and tax reform could be used to reorient
Indian agriculture toward the production of profitable commodities, such
as raw cotton and opium, as strategic means for enhancing England's
commerce with China.

New Patterns of Land Tenure and Taxation 

The Mughal polity had operated essentially in the tributary mode,
allowing jagirdars and zamindars to pump surplus out of cultivators over
whom they exercised either personal domination or domination by virtue
of their office. The critical difference from the later English practice
was that these rights were not, properly speaking, rights of property in
land, but rather claims on people's labor and the products of that
labor. In the Permanent Settlement that the English introduced in Bengal
in 1793, however, the zamindars were turned into outright property
owners, required to turn over to the British administration nine-tenths
of the tribute received from their peasants, and retaining one-tenth for
their personal use. The English thus created, at one stroke, a class of
3,000 Indian landlords who held the same property rights as English
landlords, including the right to sell, mortgage, and inherit land.

   As a result of the work of Bernard S. Cohn, a great deal is known
about the impact of the new English land law and tax assessment in one
region affected by the Permanent Settlement, the region of Benares.
Cohn's studies furnish the historical background to the work carried out
by American anthropologists in the 1940s and 1950s in Jaunpur district,
which formerly constituted a part of the Rajadom of Benares. In this
region in the eighteenth century, rights over people and tribute were
held by corporate lineages, mostly Rajput, by petty chiefs or rajas, and
by holders of service grants, or jagirs. All these local tribute takers
owed obligations to the Raja of Benares, himself subordinate to the
Navab of Oudh, who in turn owed loyalty to the Mughal ruler. The holders
of service grants received tribute but paid no taxes. All others owed
tribute to their several superiors, although actual tribute payment
varied with the political and military capability of tribute payers and
receivers. There were numerous conflicts over resources among the
various groups through arbitration and compromise.

   English rule at one fell swoop converted all of these group and
status rights over persons and tribute into rights to private property.
Landed estates became the properties of registered tribute payers, who
undertook to pay the taxes stipulated in return for private rights of
ownership, inheritance, and disposal. Since taxes were fixed
permanently, they were not affected by changes in land prices or in the
value of crops grown. Underassessed estates became especially valuable
as sources of and authorities, which were settled by force or mediated
profitable investment. The actual work of assessing and collecting taxes
was delegated to a body of Indian officials, who found themselves in a
position to benefit from fraudulent assessments and forced sales of
estates that defaulted on their taxes. Some of these officials doubled
as money lenders, merchants, or bankers, or entertained relations with
such money-managing notables.

   Such officials benefited further by their knowledge of English legal
procedure. English law superseded Indian legal practice, which was based
on considerations of what Sir Henry Maine called "status," as opposed to
"contract." Indian legal procedure considered that contesting parties to
a dispute were not discrete individuals but were connected to others by
complex and multiple social, political, and ritual ties. It recognized
the existence of socially, politically, and ritually unequal corporate
lineages and castes, and understood cases of conflict as moments in
ongoing relations among such groups. Now, however, members of corporate
lineages were to be treated as individuals. English law insisted on
defining plaintiffs and defendants as equal and individual partners to a
contract, and on dealing only with the case before the judge, to the
exclusion of the social matrix that had spawned the case. Indian legal
practice had avoided final decisions and solutions, in favor of
continuous negotiation. English legal procedure, in contrast, insisted
on resolving a case brought before the court by a clear-cut decision.
The result was that Indian plaintiffs and defendants conspired to
circumvent the British process of legal adjudication by ingenious means,
illegal in the eyes of the court but practiced in self-defense by the
contestants. "It is likely," concludes Cohn (1959: 90), "that most of
the cases that went into courts were fabrications to cover the real
disputes." The imposition of the new legal codes, intended to be just
and fair, thus favored those best able to take advantage of the law.

   As a result of the new systems of landed property, tax assessment,
and legal procedure, a new class of landlords arose in the Benares
region, recruited mainly among Indian civil servants, bankers, and
merchants. These new landlords were often absentee, managing their
estates through agents rather than through the older system of rights
over persons and tribute. By the middle of the nineteenth century, this
class would control nearly half of all the land in the region, while
many unsuccessful zamindars declined to the status of peasants.

   In still other areas, as in parts of northern and western India, a
reform settlement was put into effect in 1833, which ousted
revenue-collecting overlords and—in the belief that Indian villages were
egalitarian republics of co-sharers in a corporate body—granted the land
to corporate village groups or "cultivating brotherhoods."

   Throughout India, all the new property holders came under stronger
pressure to produce crops for the market, whether sugar, tobacco,
spices, cotton, jute, or indigo. Although there developed a few monocrop
plantations under European auspices, much of this agricultural output
was obtained through a kind of agrarian putting-out system in which
crops were passed from producer to buyer through a chain of middlemen
(Moore 1966: 356). Everywhere moneylenders—already well-established
figures in the Indian countryside—enlarged the scale and scope of their
activities, advancing money at high interest rates to help peasants make
their crop and meet the demand for revenue. Everywhere, also, zamindars
who could not compete with their more affluent fellows, local notables
who had revenues taken away from them, and chieftains who had fought
English encroachment combined to form cliques of disgruntled critics of
the new order, which had stripped them of their resources and titles and
destined them to downward social mobility. The number of landless
laborers also increased, especially when English machine-produced
cottons began to flood the Indian market after 1814, effectively ruining
the high-quality textile crafts of the Indian towns and their suppliers
in the countryside.

   The new situation also reinforced the position of a stratum of rural
power holders who were able to withstand and even benefit from the
radical and destructive changes that had occurred. These were the
"strong men" (Thorner and Thorner 1962: 16-17; Thorner 1964: 64-66), who
used the mechanisms of local lineage and caste to maintain and expand
their hold over agricultural laborers and tenants forced by hunger to
work for a minimal livelihood. At the same time, these power holders
used local ties of kinship and marriage to deflect the power of absentee
zamindars and state officials. Legal claims against them could not be
enforced effectively, and even powerful zamindars and merchants were
forced to enter into bargains with them in order to obtain revenue and
produce. Such strong men, powerful within local lineage segments, kept
control in their hands through advances of credit, seed, and food to
their fellow villagers, through their role in the management of
conflicts within the village, and—in the last instance— through their
control of the means of local violence, ranging from physical
intimidation of their opponents to the destruction of crops and the
denial of land and housing in the village (Srinivas 1959: 15; Cohn 1971:
85). The outcome was the development of a rural oligarchy mediated by
kinship and caste constraints. Such rural oligarchs maintained tributary
relationships in the countryside even when, in relation to the market,
they filled the role of entrepreneurs.

A New Army and Bureaucracy

The English dominion had two other consequences for the conquered
population. One was the creation of an army under English jurisdiction,
officered by Englishmen and staffed by Indian sepoys—Brahmins, Rajputs,
and Muslims—who were hired as mercenaries and paid by the English
government. This effectively ended the Mughal pattern in which
tribute-taking notables also had the right to maintain troops and the
obligation to furnish them to the ruler. It placed the means of violence
in the hands of the new European rulers. Another consequence was the
creation of an officialdom exclusively European at the highest levels,
which worked through a vast and growing army of subordinate clerks.

   These subordinate officials were recruited mostly in Bengal, among
the numerous interpreters, brokers, junior administrators, and small
traders and landholders who had served as junior partners with the
English Company and with private merchants (Mukherjee 1970: 48). Many of
them had served the Mughals before the English. They now switched their
allegiance and took advantage of the new political and economic
opportunities created by the English presence. Most of them had their
origins in the Brahmin, Baidya, and Kayastha high castes, and they used
their appointments to strengthen their position as bearers of an elite
culture pattern; yet they also permitted recruitment of the lower-caste
men.

   These new professionals called themselves bhadralok ("respectable
people"), substituting for an identity defined in terms of caste new
criteria, such as English language education, control of a literate
Indian tradition, and professional and clerical employment. They were
thus not just Westernizers but also innovators of a distinctive pattern
of their own. They combined skills sought by the Europeans with a strong
sense of their own mission. They envisioned a return, under their own
auspices, to a great Bengali past before the true Brahmanic virtues had
become corrupted by Buddhism and by the emotional Hinduism of the bhakti
movement (see Broomfield 1966: 63-64). Similar regional elites developed
in Madras in the southeast and in Maharashtra in the west; and the
English recruited employees from such groups for service up- country, as
new areas came under their control. Inevitably, such supporters of
English rule encountered the hostility of previous elites. As English
and literate education spread to other segments of the population, such
as Muslims and low-caste Hindus, the bhadralok came under increasing
pressure even in their home regions.

   In southern India, as in Madras in 1812, there were no zamindars, and
a different model was put into effect. In the hope of creating a
vigorous self-reliant peasantry, the English granted land in ryotwari
tenure to individual peasants, who were required to pay revenue directly
to the state. One example of the changes wrought by the new rules of
property and taxation is furnished by Kathleen Gough's study (1978) of
Than- javur District (called Tanjore by the British) near Madras, now
part of Tamil Nadu. Before the advent of the British, each Thanjavur
village was dominated by a managerial Brahmin or Vellala caste. Such a
caste acted collectively to distribute fixed shares of the grain harvest
among village cultivators, sharecroppers, and servants, and was
collectively responsible for paying tribute to the state. The new
English administration made each household individually responsible for
its cultivating tenants and for the payment of taxes, and after the
middle of the nineteenth century issued individual title deeds to shares
of village lands. The cultivators, required to pay taxes in cash,
increasingly became indebted to money lenders, who previously had been
allowed to take only houses, crops, and jewelry as collateral for loans
but now were enabled to attach land as well. As a result, many people
lost their land, while the properties of some grew in size. Agriculture
shifted from a main emphasis on provisioning household needs to the
production of rice for export to the plantations of South Asia, while
the hereditary share-tenants of the past became increasingly insecure
tenants working on annual contracts. Thanjavur District thus became one
of the main supply zones of indentured laborers seeking employment
abroad (see chapter 7).

Rebellion

As the nineteenth century approached the halfway mark, English policies
affected ever-widening geographic areas. The various land settlements
and tax reforms altered the nature of economic and political
hierarchies. Indian textiles, until the end of the eighteenth century a
major export, were banned from British markets, while India was required
to admit the entry of English manufactures duty free. This led to the
rapid destruction of specialized Indian textile handicraft production.
The spread of machine-made goods disrupted village crafts, reducing the
number of artisans who derived their living from producing pottery,
tanned skins, dyed cloth, oil, and jewelry. Shipbuilding and railroad
construction in the 1840s and 1850s speeded up the growth of commercial
crop production in the countryside, prompting exports of wheat from the
Punjab, cotton from Bombay, and jute from Bengal, as well as a shift
from the production of food crops to industrial crops such as cotton,
peanuts, sugarcane, and tobacco. Moneylending at high interest rates
expanded steadily as peasants began to buy foodstuffs on the market, as
money was needed to spur cash-crop production, and as land prices rose
after mid-century. There was a rising tide of dissatisfaction, fanned by
former power holders and their retinues, who were increasingly edged out
and threatened by English land and tax reforms. That discontent became
manifest in violent outbreaks in northern India, which the English
designated as the Great Mutiny of 1857.

   The ostensible reason for this outbreak was word that the cartridges
for the new Lee-Enfield rifle had to be heavily greased with tallow made
from cow and pig fat. To load the cartridges they had to be bitten open
at the end, releasing the powder. Killing cows was anathema to Hindus,
contact with pork products taboo to Muslims. In May the sepoys mutinied,
touching off armed rebellion over wide areas. The mutiny was only the
spark that ignited the tinder, which had long been fueled by discontent.
Former dignitaries now relegated to the margins, local notables hoping
to restore Mughal or Maratha power, villagers under economic and
political pressure, adherents of religious causes opposed to the
intrusive Christians—all of these and more rallied to the cause of
rebellion. The mutiny was defeated, at a great cost in human life. For
the English, the sudden realization that India could slip out of their
control altered their attitudes toward their subjects. After the mutiny,
the English rulers abandoned the idea of reforming India through the
application of English liberal ideas, and strove instead to strengthen
what they regarded as Indian traditions. There arose what Hutchins has
called the myth of the "real India."

This "real India" consisted of the ancient India of the countryside; and
of retainers and dependents of British power, of princes, peasants, and
minority groups. Indians who lived in cities, engaged in business and
the professions, who were not dependent on British favor, without an
interest in preserving for themselves a privileged position guaranteed
by British might, were designated "unrepresentative." [1967: 156]

The English paid renewed attention to the distinctions of caste,
separating regiments from one another on the basis of their religious
and caste status and shoring up the privileges of kshatriya groups. At
work was undoubtedly a desire to divide and rule and to reinforce the
constraints of caste and privilege against the mobility and
assertiveness of "new" men, both as individuals and as groups.

   The members of the English community drew together as a new
quasi-caste of rulers, separate and distinct from the inhabitants of the
country. There was a growing tendency to call Indians "niggers"
(Hutchins 1967: 108), indeed to see the lower classes at home and the
Indians as similarly inferior. There was a growing tendency, also, to
live up strenuously to an ideal of hard work, masculinity, authoritative
bearing, denial of comfort, and the pursuit of sports in order to
develop moral qualities; and at the same time to project upon the
Indians the opposites of these traits—to see them as slothful,
physically weak and cowardly, effeminate, deceitful, wasteful, and
immoral (Hutchins 1967: 29 — 78). Their new role as rulers—guardians, as
Woodruff has called them—also justified their pursuit of an elite life
well above the manner to which they were accustomed in England. "India's
function was to turn Englishmen into 'instant aristocrats' " (Hutchins
1967: 107—108), and the adherence of Englishmen to these new standards
was in inverse proportion to the realities of their station at home.

From India to China

Political and economic consolidation within India went hand in hand with
England's expansion of trade with China. The resources of India were
mobilized to gain entrance to the treasure house of the East.
"Everything took place," says Louis Dermigny of the English, "as if they
had made the peninsula into a vassal in order to orient it towards
China" (1964, I: 781).

   In gaining access to the markets of China, however, the English faced
a formidable obstacle in the unwillingness of the Chinese state to
engage in any trade with the "red-haired barbarians." With the advent of
the Tungusic Manchu dynasty to rule in Peking as the Ch'ing (1644),
imperial control over foreign trade was tightened. Such renewed control
served both to stamp out the protagonists of the preceding Ming dynasty
and to contain foreign influence on the China coast. The major Ming
supporter in the south was Chen Ch'eng-kung (Coxinga), who came to
dominate Fukien province and who nearly conquered Nanking. He
entertained extensive contacts with the Europeans, having worked in
Macao and Manila for the Portuguese and Spaniards, in Taiwan for the
Dutch, and in Japan, where he married. When he was driven from the
mainland, he sought refuge in Taiwan, where he held out until 1683.
Although Coxinga was the best-known and most powerful of the challengers
to Manchu rule, there were others as well (Dermigny 1964, I: 97, 132).
On the advice of a former lieutenant of Coxinga's, the Manchu emperor
cleared the coast entirely, hoping through the creation of a no-man's
land to diminish the possibility of uncontrolled contact between
seafarers and the inland population.

   With the re-establishment of imperial control, foreign traders were
again welcomed at Chinese ports. The English East India Company was the
main beneficiary of this renewed opportunity. From 1685 to 1760 the
English were allowed to trade a number of ports in Fukien and Chekiang
provinces. However, they increasingly took their trade to Canton, where
they found a foreign trade guild (the Cohong), which was wealthy enough
to stock large supplies of goods in advance, and where the customs
official (the Hoppo) acted in direct representation of the emperor,
independent of the local gentry. When the emperor again restricted
foreign trade in 1760, Canton remained the only port open to foreign
trade.

   During the first years of their China trade, the English bought
silks, porcelain, and medicines. They tried to pay in English woolens,
but found no takers among the Chinese. They sold some English lead, used
to line chests, some tin, rattan from the Malay Straits, and pepper,
saltpeter, and rice from Java and the Philippines; but as the Chinese
emperor wrote to George III in 1793, "there is nothing we lack . . . nor
do we need any more of your country's manufactures" (quoted in Teng and
Fairbank 1961; 19). Ultimately the English had to pay in silver,
payments that constituted a continuous drain on their supply of bullion.
The payment deficit increased even further when, in the course of the
eighteenth century, the Company added to its list of desired commodities
the serrated leaves of the tea shrub.

European trade headquarters at Canton, seen from the harbor. Oil on
canvas by George Chinnery (1774-1852). (Courtesy of The New York
Historical Society, New York City)

Opium for Tea

Tea drinking, introduced into Europe by the Dutch, had begun in England
in 1664, when a quantity of two pounds, two ounces was imported. By 1783
the amount sold by the East India Company alone was nearly 6 million
pounds, and two years later it came to more than 15 million (Greenberg
1951: 3). An additional amount perhaps as great was smuggled into
England by private traders attempting to avoid taxes. (When the Crown
could not collect tea taxes in Europe, it tried to do so in Boston,
turning Americans into rebels and coffee drinkers at the same time.) All
this tea had to be paid for in silver, causing silver to flow to the
East in "a chronic hemorrhage" (Dermigny 1964,1: 724). China drew silver
both from Japan and Manila. In 1600 the flow of silver from Japan to
China amounted to 200,000 kilograms, but around that same year the
annual flow of silver from Manila into China came to 8 million kilos
(Rawski 1972: 76). China became "the tomb of American treasure."
Dermigny estimates the amount of silver flowing into China between 1719
and 1833 at between 306 and 330 million piasters, representing one-fifth
of all the silver produced in Mexico during this time, and perhaps as
much as 20 percent of all European stocks of silver (1964, I: 740).

   In this bullion drainage, the English inherited an ancient problem.
Even in Roman times, southern India had sent spices, muslins, and
precious stones to the Mediterranean, receiving in turn Roman gold.
Roman aurei or denarii have been found in quantity in hoards of Roman
coins in India (Wheeler 1955: 164—166). The amount of bullion drained
from the Mediterranean was considerable. Pliny remarked that "in no year
does India absorb less than fifty million sesterces" (quoted in Wheeler
1955: 167). Nor did the outflow cease with the fall of the Roman Empire.
The Middle Ages witnessed a steady outflow of gold and silver through
Italy to Byzantium and the Muslim world, and from there on to India
(Lopez, Miskimin, and Udovitch 1970). In the early modem period, Braudel
writes,

   the Mediterranean as a whole operated as a machine for accumulating
precious metals, of which, be it said, it could never have enough. It
hoarded them only to lose them all to India, China, and the East Indies.
The great discoveries may have revolutionized routes and prices, but
they did not alter this fundamental situation. [1972, I: 464]

By the seventeenth century, the same problem faced northwestern Europe.

   All this commercial activity had, of course, repercussions within
China itself. In the sixteenth century along the southern coast of
China, expanding Portuguese and Spanish trade had prompted the
specialized production of sugar, textiles, porcelain, and metal wares
for the overseas market. In turn, the Iberians brought tobacco, sweet
potatoes, and peanuts from the New World. The new food crops were
eagerly adopted by the Chinese peasantry, and they appear to have been
instrumental in its rapid population growth (Ho 1965). Tobacco became a
major cash crop in the course of the seventeenth century, spreading
inland from the coast to Yunnan, to northwestern China, and to the
valley of the lower Yangtze. Rawski (1972) has traced the chain of
consequences of this commercialization in rising land values, heightened
competition for land, greater investment in land improvements, rising
productivity, and higher rents and interest rates. Increasing demand for
tea intensified this cycle, as advances began to flow from the East
India Company to the Cohong, and from the Cohong to tea wholesalers in
Fukien, Chekiang, Kiangsi, and Anhwei. The tea wholesalers advanced the
money to family-sized “hill households," who gradually moved from
tea-shrub raising as a subsidiary occupation to full-time specialization
in tea.

The China Tea Trade. Oil on canvas. China Export School, c. 1800. The
leaves are grown on the hillside (upper left), dried, roasted, trampled,
packed, and weighed. Foreigners buy the tea (bottom left) and take it to
their ships (far right). (Courtesy, Berry-Hill Galleries, New York)

   This tea had to be paid for, and the East India Company faced an
ever-growing deficit in its balance of payments. It was already in
serious debt to the English Crown for monies lent in the course of the
conquest of India. To meet its obligations, it borrowed money from rich
Parsi bankers, like Jagath Seth, while its officials—trading as private
parties— often incurred debts with Indian moneylenders. The money went
into growing cotton in India and shipping it to China. There developed a
complex triangular trade whereby private agency houses of “country
traders," run mostly by Parsi and Scottish merchants, would take Indian
cotton to Canton and sell it there for silver. With this silver they
would buy East India Company bills of credit, redeemable in London. The
Company, in turn, used the silver obtained through the sale of its bills
of credit to buy tea.

   In the course of these transactions, many of the English country
traders and Company officials dealing on their own behalf laid the basis
of considerable private fortunes, which they parlayed into influence and
political representation at home. In Parliament their influence,
combined in what William Pitt called "the Bengal squad," soon outweighed
that of the West Indian interests.

   Yet even though the English sold an annual average of 27 million
pounds of raw Indian cotton between 1785 and 1833, the sums obtained
still did not suffice to buy all the tea they wished to ship to England.
To add to the stock of specie, the English India Company had to import
it from the Spanish possessions in the New World. In 1776, however, the
American Revolution cut England off from the supply of Mexican silver.
At the same time, cotton from northern China began to flow into Chinese
textile production at prices lower than those of Indian cotton. The
answer to the Company's financial prayers was opium from India.

   The sale of opium had already constituted a major source of Mughal
revenues. In 1773 the East India Company had established a monopoly over
opium sales, and in 1797 it extended its monopoly to cover production.
The factors at Patna and Ghazipur near Benares gave their names to the
opium they produced—Patna and Benares. Later the principality of Malwa
on India's west coast joined the producers. Patna and Benares opium,
packed in mango-wood boxes holding about 145 pounds each and
representing the production of five or six acres, was auctioned off to
agency houses on Tank Square in Calcutta. Malwa opium reached Canton
through Parsi merchants from Bombay. Americans joined the trade as well,
shipping increasing quantities of opium from Turkey to New York, and
from there to China.

   The opium trade was covert and illegal, and enormously profitable.

  The agency houses dealing in opium soon handled quantities worth four
times the value of all the goods the Company brought to Canton in its
own ships. Armies of henchmen and corrupt officials moved the opium
inland. By the end of the nineteenth century, one out of every ten
Chinese is thought to have become an addict. The Europeans, however,
finally had something to sell to the Chinese. During the first decade of
the nineteenth century, China still showed a trade surplus of 2 6
million silver dollars. In the third decade, 34 million dollars left
China to pay for opium (Wakeman 1975: 126). The outflow of silver from
China soon affected the country at large. The government set tax quotas
in silver; the peasants paid in copper cash. As silver grew scarce and
rose in price, ever larger amounts of copper were required to meet
taxes. Opium thus did more than undermine the health of Chinese addicts;
it began to subvert the social order in the countryside.

Trade in the Pacific

Opium was by far the most important import into China, but the Europeans
also strove to locate other resources of interest to the Chinese. One of
these was sandalwood, which furnished an oil used by the Chinese in
making incense. Early in the development of the sandalwood trade, a ship
“sandalwooding” out of Sydney, Australia, could make a profit of 25
percent (Furnas 1947: 221). Various Pacific islands were exploited to
obtain sandalwood, often to the point of depletion. Fiji was cut over in
the years between 1804 and 1810, the Marquesas between 1804 and 1818,
Hawaii between 1811 and the mid-1830s. The Hawaiian king traded an
annual $300,000 in sandalwood, receiving in return hardware, cloth,
clothing, rum, guns, and even a luxury yacht built in Salem,
Massachusetts. By 1826, however, the chiefs were in arrears in their
deliveries, and American traders exacted instead a contract according to
which each male Hawaiian was to be taxed for one picul (about 140
pounds) of sandalwood at four Spanish dollars to cover the debt (Furnas
1947: 120).

   Around mid-century, natives were hired on contract to obtain
sandalwood in New Caledonia and the New Hebrides, and the use of native
labor became common during the 1850s, when the Australian gold rush
depleted the supply of European labor. In payment the natives received
iron tools and hardware, cloth, tobacco and pipes, as well as muskets
and powder. At the same time, the traders also paid in the native
products of other islands, thus intensifying inter-island exchanges.
Fiji, Lifu, and Tana furnished pigs to other islands. Tana wanted
tortoise shells from the Solomons in exchange for its pigs; Eromanga
desired nunpuri shells from New Caledonia; Espíritu Santo and Eromanga
received pigs, shells, tortoise shells, and whales' teeth in exchange
for sandalwood (Shineberg 1966).

   Another product in demand in China was the sea cucumber (also called
trepang or beche-de-mer), which the Chinese valued both as a food and as
an aphrodisiac. This product had long been supplied by Indonesian and
Philippine sailors, but European traders began to organize the trade
themselves. The collecting and processing of sea cucumbers required a
great deal of labor. An average-sized establishment might house some 300
people engaged in cleaning and collecting firewood to dry the sea
animals. Native laborers were contracted for, working first under their
own chiefs and later under European control. The influx of trade goods,
including guns, in payment for sea cucumbers was probably even greater
than in the sandalwood trade. Prices at Canton went as high as $90 a
picul (Furnas 1947: 212).

   Sandalwooding and the trade in sea cucumbers, along with intensified
whaling, contributed greatly to the distribution of firearms throughout
the South Seas. Where powerful local chiefs gained control of the new
weapons, they found themselves equipped with greatly enhanced military
potential. Thus, European trading spurred the rise, on a number of
islands, of small states headed by powerful chiefs equipped with
European armament.

   On Hawaii, control of favorably located beaches permitted Kameha-
meha, a nephew of the Hawaiian paramount, to acquire a store of weapons
in the 1790s and to use these first to conquer several rival chiefdoms
and then to displace the rightful successor to the kingships. By 1804
Kamehameha commanded 600 muskets, 14 small cannon, 40 swivel guns, and
20 sailing vessels (Furnas 1947: 121). His son and heir further
consolidated the kingship by abolishing the system of traditional taboos
through which the priesthood could have challenged the emerging
centralization of power (Webb 1965; Davenport 1969).

   In Tahiti the young chief Tu used European guns, obtained in exchange
for pigs sold to the prison colonies of New South Wales, to set himself
up as King Pomare. His son, Pomare II, consolidated the new kingship by
allying himself with English missionaries and converting his people
forcibly to Christianity.

   Five thousand guns were introduced into Fiji between 1828 and 1835,
and probably an equal number between 1842 and 1850, in the wake of the
sea cucumber trade. This wealth in guns prompted the rise of the polity
of Bau, when a chief called Cakobau was able to monopolize the
importation of firearms (Ward 1972: 110— 111). Similar war leaders arose
in the Solomon Islands and in the New Hebrides (Docker 1970: 23-42).

   The Portuguese pioneered the sea route into Asian waters, and Dutch,
English, and French companies and private traders soon followed in their
wake. Unable to penetrate the mainland directly, the Europeans
consolidated points of entry along the Asian coasts and proceeded to
envelop the littoral of the continent in a web of long-distance traffic
and commerce. To feed the burgeoning trade, various regions along the
sea routes began to specialize in the production of commodities to
exchange for other commodities. Some products, above all Chinese tea,
generated an especially intense demand. To pay for tea, otter skins from
the Northwest Coast of North America, sea cucumbers and sandalwood from
the Pacific, silver from America, and Indian raw cotton and opium all
began to flow toward China in a gigantic escalation of mercantile
activity. At the same time, the increase in water-borne commerce had
repercussions in distant hinterlands, where it reduced the overland
caravan trade, diminished the importance of caravan emporia, and altered
the balance of power between pastoral and sedentary populations.

   While in most of Asia European mercantile activity remained closely
tied to its medium, the sea, one trade organization—the English East
India Company—charted a different course for itself. It took over the
political and economic inheritance of the land-based Mughal power,
changing its role from that of a trading company to a political
sovereign. Once established, sovereignty passed to the English Crown.
English rule had profound consequences for Indian society. Land and tax
reforms abrogated the hierarchies of tribute takers that had formed the
Mughal order, and replaced them with echelons of landed proprietors. The
elites of locally and regionally dominant castes were converted into
landowning entrepreneurs, required to raise money for taxes and prompted
to do so by producing cash crops. The character of relations among
landowners, village servants, and dependent laborers was altered, in
turn. While the cultural forms of obligation and dependency among castes
were maintained and even intensified, these relationships served
increasingly to mobilize labor for the production of agricultural
commodities.

   Within the structure of the British Empire as a whole, India came to
play a crucial role. Throughout the period of British rule, India paid a
colonial tribute to defray English expenses incurred during the conquest
and during the defeat of the Great Mutiny, and to cover the costs of
English administration in India. Plunder accumulated in the wars of the
eighteenth century created great English fortunes. Revenues obtained in
Bengal were of a scale sufficient to finance the expanding trade with
the Orient, obviating the annual transfer of bullion from England.
Indian opium opened China to foreign trade and reversed the flow of
species from Europe to Asia. The English sold fine Indian textiles in
Europe, Africa, and Indonesia, aiding in the accumulation of money-
begetting money in the home country.

   With the installation of the capitalist mode of production in England
(chapter 9), industrial capital moved to dominate mercantile wealth,
also drawing India into its expanding orbit. English machine- made
textiles invaded the Indian market, to the detriment of Indian
handicrafts. In the mid-nineteenth century, railroad building in India
furnished a major outlet for English capital, spurring iron and steel
production in England and opening a market for English coal on the
subcontinent. Thereafter, the export of Indian agricultural commodities
and machine-made Indian cottons to international markets helped balance
British trade deficits with the industrializing nations of Europe and
the United States. Indian surpluses enabled England to create and
maintain a global system of free trade. Had England been forced to ban
imports from the United States and Germany and to compete with them in
foreign markets, American and German industrialization would also have
been significantly slowed. Thus, "Asia in general, but India and China
in particular, far from being peripheral to the evolution of the
international economy of the time, was in fact crucial" (Latham 1978:
70). Under English domination, India became a key foundation of the
emerging worldwide capitalist edifice.

Power loom weaving in a Manchester cotton mill. Line engraving by T.
Allom.J. Carter, and J. Tingle, c. 1835. (The Granger Collection, New
York)

Part Three Capitalism

From the fifteenth century on, European soldiers and sailors carried the
flags of their rulers to the four corners of the globe, and European
merchants established their storehouses from Vera Cruz to Nagasaki.
Dominating the sea-lanes of the world, these merchants invaded existing
networks of exchange and linked one to the other. In the service of "God
and profit," they located sources of products desired in Europe and
developed coercive systems for their delivery. In response, European
craft shops, either singly or aggregated into manufactories, began to
produce goods to provision the wide-ranging military and naval efforts
and to furnish commodities to overseas suppliers in exchange for goods
to be sold as commodities at home. The outcome was the creation of a
commercial network of global scale.

   During three and a half centuries of European expansion, Spain and
Portugal divided between them the South American continent. England and
France laid hold of the Antilles and planted them with sugar cane.
England and France also contended for control of the eastern seaboard of
North America, disputing each other for the access routes to the Great
Lakes and beyond. In the Old World, in contrast, the Europeans moved
inland only rarely, as when the Portuguese penetrated Angola and when
the English came into control of the Indian subcontinent. For the most
part, the European sea traders in Asia and Africa preferred to seize and
hold the major sea-lanes, and to tap the wealth of the continents
through their control of vital ports.

   At the same time, the growth of European commerce encountered its own
limits and contradictions. Merchants strove to ensure their control of
sources of cheap supply through a variety of monopolies and constraints
on trade. They were aided in this by their rulers, who hoped to increase
their own exchequers while decreasing those at the disposal of their
opponents. Mercantile activity, enhanced and strengthened by the
protection of the state, greatly enlarged the flow of commodities, but
it remained largely within defined channels, hedged about by a carapace
of privileges and prerogatives. Even where merchants had begun to
mobilize artisans and cottage producers to make goods available for sale
through purchasing arrangements or through the putting-out system, only
rarely did they bring laborers directly into owner-supervised
establishments. They preferred instead to reap the benefits of commodity
circulation, while delegating the risks of production to the direct
producer. Thus, as Dobb has phrased it, the "relations of economic
dependence between individual producers or between producers and
merchant was not directly imposed by the necessities of the act of
production itself, but by circumstances external to it" (1947: 260).

   Before capitalist relations could come to dominate industrial
production, a set of related changes was required to guarantee the new
order. The state had to be transformed from a tributary structure to a
structure of support for capitalist enterprise. Tributary relationships,
embodied in monopolies of all kinds, cut into the reproductive capacity
of capital and had to be abrogated. The officialdom of the state
apparatus had to be made responsive to the needs of capital accumulation
by removing state control over productive resources and by reducing the
hold of tributary overlords over the machinery of the state. At the same
time, state investment had to be redirected toward the creation of an
infrastructure of transportation and communication that could benefit
capital without demanding excessive outlays from it. There was a need
for new legal codes, protecting rights of private property and private
accumulation, on the one hand, and enforcing new forms of the labor
contract, on the other. State intervention had to be mobilized also to
break down intrastate barriers to the movement of capital, machines, raw
materials, and labor. Finally, state assistance and subsidies were often
necessary to protect nascent industries against external competition, or
to open up new markets abroad.

   The breakthrough from mercantile domination to the capitalist mode of
production was achieved in England in the second half of the eighteenth
century. Spurred by capitalist investment, a series of linked inventions
established the predominance of production by machine, first in textile
production and later in the construction of railroads. The example of
England was soon followed by other countries in Europe and America.
Rising industrial production demanded raw materials and foodstuffs for
the new "workshops of the world." While industrial production under
capitalist auspices transformed the industrializing areas, equally
powerful forces unleashed concomitant changes in the lives of people in
the supply zones of the globe. The spread of the capitalist mode set in
motion not only new flows of commodities but also large-scale movements
of people toward the developing centers of industrial activity. The
world witnessed the emergence of working classes, varying in their
characteristics according to the place and time of their entry into the
accumulation process. Driven by a general dynamic, capitalism yet gave
rise to a variability of its own.

9 Industrial Revolution

The major vehicle for the transition to the capitalist mode of
production was the textile industry of eighteenth-century England. In
cloth production mercantile wealth was visibly transformed into capital,
as it acquired the dual function of purchasing machines and raw
materials, on the one hand, and buying human energy to power their
operation, on the other. From then on, the accumulation of wealth no
longer depended on the extraction of surpluses "by other than economic
means,” and on the marketing of surpluses by merchants. Through the
purchase of machines, wealth-as-capital laid hold of technology and
became proprietor of the material apparatus for the transformation of
nature. By purchasing labor power, capital took command of social labor
and applied it to the transformation of nature on its own terms. People
had worked for wages before the installation of the capitalist mode; but
now wage labor became the pivotal form of labor recruitment, and the
existence of a class of laborers, necessarily dependent on wages, became
the dominant factor governing the mobilization and deployment of social
labor. Technology and labor power were subjected to the calculus of
creating surplus value. The result was to speed up the pace of
technological change and the synchronization of labor power with the
requirements of technology. As Polanyi put it, "up to the end of the
eighteenth century, industrial production in Western Europe was a mere
accessory to commerce" (1957: 74). Now, in Marx's words, commerce became
the servant of industrial production (Cap. Ill, 1967: 330, 336).

   Why did this transformation happen in Europe? An answer sometimes
given is that Europe was "endowed with the privilege of backwardness."
Before A.D. 1000, Europe was a frontier region, marginal to the
Mediterranean, to the Islamic Near East, and to the centralized states
of the Orient. Political power was fragmented; power holders were weak.
Relations between military-political overlords and merchants were often
ambiguous and antagonistic. Lords might plunder merchants, restrict
their political autonomy, or prohibit mercantile investment in land. Yet
they also had a greater need for merchants to trade surpluses for
strategic commodities than did the big centralized states, which could
raise the gamut of needed supplies through taxation. Paradoxically, by
keeping merchants from acquiring land and gaining political power, the
lords of Europe also forced them to reinvest in trade, to risk their
wealth in commerce rather than to invest it securely in real estate.
Thus, in the interstices of weak power domains and in the intervals
between them, European merchants were able to construct commercial
linkages that could convert surpluses into commodities and commodities
into money over wide geographic areas.

   The presence of trade does not in itself lead to the emergence of the
capitalist mode of production. There existed wide-ranging interarea
trade in the Near East, India, and China, and even merchant-sponsored
handicraft production concentrated in manufactories or dispersed in
cottages in all these areas. Yet merchants in these centralized
tributary polities remained strongly constrained by political rulers and
dependent upon them. There might be “sprouts of capitalism," as Chinese
scholars have said, but no capitalist mode of production. What is
distinctive about the English case is not that merchants dealt in
commodities, but that they were drawn—rapidly and irresistibly—into the
realm of production.

The English Transformation

How and why did this happen, and why in England? In spite of a great
deal of research, there seems as yet to be no comprehensive answer. One
can, however, point to a number of possible causes for this unusual
development.

   In the fifteenth century, England had made the transition from
raising sheep for wool to be sold abroad to the production of woolens on
its own. Thereafter woolen production became England's chief
manufacture. Echelons of merchants and financiers appeared in the
provincial towns, drawing the product from the initial producers,
supervising its processing, and speeding it on to market. The woolen
trade thus gave rise to a hierarchy of commercial interests, linking
London firmly with the hinterland.

   Four interconnected developments followed. First, landowners
increasingly turned agriculture into a business, converting land to
sheep ranges, but also intensifying cultivation with new methods
introduced from the continent. As Tawney put it, landowners “stood to
gain much if they adapted their farming to meet the new commercial
conditions. They stood to lose much if they were so conservative as to
adhere to the old methods" (1967: 195).

   Second, the chain of linkages between the hinterland and London not
only gave rise to a multiplicity of merchant groups but also brought
about a high degree of interaction and mutuality among commercial agents
and tributary overlords, among merchants and landed aristocrats. In many
parts of Europe, landowning nobles could not engage in trade, and
merchants were barred from acquiring land. In England, merchants and
landed aristocrats intermarried and interacted to an unusual degree.

   Third, these merchants and landowners, in alliance, were able to turn
to their advantage the peculiar status of the English “husbandmen." This
status was the outcome of a characteristic paradox in English
development: cultivators had won increasing freedom from tribute
payments to overlords since the mid-fifteenth century, while at the the
same time failing to establish freehold control over the land. By the
middle of the fifteenth century, the English peasantry had won the total
end of serfdom, and with it the end of labor dues and arbitrary
tallages. Rent was fixed by custom, and its real value diminished as
money lost its value in the course of inflation. Lords, unable to carry
through a sei- gnorial reaction that would have reinstituted and
intensified serfdom, began to rationalize agricultural production
through the use of financial instruments. They converted peasant land
under customary tenure into leaseholds, favoring well-to-do tenants who
worked the land profitably in large units. Furthermore, they burdened
the peasantry with fines upon inheritance and upon confirmation of
property titles. In areas where grain farming was prosperous, peasant
holdings yielded to “improved" commercial agriculture. In areas where
agriculture was poor and livestock keeping predominated, especially in
the highlands of the North and West, the peasantry sought alternative
employment in rural crafts and subsidiary activities. Thus, in some
areas where peasants began to supplement their income, first by making
wool cloth and later by weaving, the number of peasants paying customary
rents (copyholds) even increased in the course of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, although on reduced holdings (Thirsk 1974). The
ability to combine cultivation or herding with craft production,
and—later— with wage work, also meant that couples were able to marry
and produce offspring earlier than before. Yet population increases, in
turn, probably fragmented landholdings further (see Tilly 1975:
404-405). There was also an increase in the number of the wholly
landless. By the end of the seventeenth century, landlords held between
70 and 75 percent of the cultivable land (Brenner 1976: 63); by the
1790s the great landlords and gentry controlled 80—85 percent of the
land (Mingay 1973: 25). E. L. Jones has estimated that by the end of the
seventeenth century, as much as 40 percent of the English population had
left the land, many going into industrial employment (quoted in Brenner
1976: 66). While "improving" landlords and their tenants thus laid the
basis for a capital-intensive agriculture, it also made available to
industry a labor force of mobile "free" laborers.

   Fourth, successive political struggles weakened the power exercised
by leading aristocrats and merchants in support of the king, giving
greater freedom to the lower echelons of landholders and commercial
agents in the provinces. The stage was thus set for innovative action on
the local level.

   The transformation of agriculture and the development of a rural
population in need of full-time or part-time employment allowed
merchants to extend their operations widely throughout the countryside.
One way merchants expanded was by placing orders with master craftsmen
in provincial towns, who then worked up the desired goods in small-scale
workshops with family labor or hired hands. Another way was by entering
the putting-out system, in which merchants distributed raw materials to
workers to process in their own cottages, often using simple machines
rented from the "putter-outer." These two systems for mobilizing labor
often interdigitated, with master craftsmen engaged in one phase of the
work process acting as rural factors in another. Merchants and their
agents then collected the finished product and sent it to market.

Dutch and Indian Competition

This textile trade, operated under the aegis of merchant wealth, soon
ran into seemingly overwhelming competition from two sources: the rival
Dutch, and the artisan producers of India.

   Dutch competition in the textile trade was serious. Their techniques
of dying and finishing cloth were superior to those available to the
English. To meet Dutch competition, the English shifted to a cheaper
product. Instead of the undyed, unfinished, all-wool "old draperies"
they had produced up to then, they took to the production of "new
draperies"—mixtures of wool with silk, linen, or cotton—as well as
lighter worsteds in which both warp and weft were of combed wool. They
were able to produce these more cheaply than the Dutch, first by
shifting production from urban areas into the countryside, and later by
the mechanization of the textile industry. The Dutch were unable to
follow suit because of prevailing high wages in both industry and
agriculture (de Vries 1975: 56), and because their commerce earned much
higher returns than their textile industry (see Smit 1975: 62). While
Dutch labor, then, was expensive, English rural labor was cheap.

   This cost advantage, however, did not operate in England's
competition with the textile industry of India. India produced textiles
both cheaper and technically better than any made by Europeans. Indian
cottons or calicoes, so named after the city of Calicut on the Malabar
coast, became the craze of Europe. Both the Dutch and the British East
India companies, therefore, began to commission Indian weavers to
produce calicoes for European tastes, and they began to import Indian
calicoes into Europe for additional printing in European designs. Indian
silks and muslins also became popular in Europe, and both companies
imported them along with Indian cottons, especially from Bengal. At this
point, however, the home industries resorted to political means to halt
the inflow of Indian textiles. The English East India Company was
forbidden to import calicoes or to have then printed. At the same time,
the English industry began to produce copies itself, notably fustian, a
mixture of linen and cotton, which became increasingly difficult to
distinguish from the Indian product. This competition in turn reinforced
the mechanization of the English industry, allowing it to defeat its
Asian competitors through the production of cheap machine-made cloth. At
the same time, English success in using machine production to underwrite
"import substitution" for Asian products allowed them to stifle German
and French competition around the end of the eighteenth century.

Calico printing on a wood-framed calico printing machine. Line engraving
by J. Carter, c. 1835. (The Granger Collection, New York)

The New Entrepreneurs

As of 1760 the machines used in British cotton manufacture were still
"nearly as simple as those of India" (E. Baines 1835, quoted in Rostow
1975: 126). The putting-out system through which cotton was spun and
woven in innumerable cottages "evolved as an innovation in organization,
without drastic change in technique" (Coleman 1973: 14). Two decades
later, technological and organizational changes were in full swing. Who
were the people responsible for this change?

They were not the big London merchants of Blackwell Hall, the London
cloth mart, but rather the provincial merchants and their agents or
factors involved in the commercial networks of the putting-out system.
These merchants and factors began to extend their supervision over the
finishing stages of cloth production, its bleaching, dying, and
printing, in order to obtain standardized products that could compete
with cloth produced abroad. From control of finishing they moved to the
production of improved yarn, either becoming producers of yarn
themselves or motivating the owners of workshops to adopt new machines.
We have noted that these two roles sometimes interdigitated: owners of
workshops could also double as country factors for putting- out
merchants. Indeed, as Chapman ( 1973 ) has shown in an analysis of ?the
assets of a thousand textile entrepreneurs between 1730 and 1750, they
were often also involved in malting, brewing, and innkeeping, in retail
trade and farming, and in buying houses and real estate. These assets
allowed them to accumulate some wealth and to improve their social
standing, while serving as hedges against downturns in the textile
market. Buildings, inns, and inn yards were easily converted into
workshops and weavers' tenements, or mortgaged to obtain funds for
investment. The amount of capital needed to buy the early machines and
to hire labor power was initially low (between 3,000 and 5,000 pounds
sterling), until the spread of Roberts's automatic mule raised costs
tenfold after 1830 (Chapman 1972: 26, 30). As we shall see, when
spinning became mechanized, weaving had to be transformed to keep up
with the increased output of yarn. Once begun, capital expenditure in
machines, raw materials, and labor power created its own operational
logic, which strove to maximize surplus value through the "rational”
coupling of factors of production. Thus, the very process of harnessing
men to machines prompted the rise of the capitalist entrepreneur, who
united in his person "the functions of capitalist, financier, works
manager, merchant and salesman" (Wilson 1957: 103). Socially, this was a
class of "new" men, recruited from the lower segments of the provincial
middle class—"of a condition,” as a contemporary put it, "between
gentlemen and cottagers or peasants" (quoted in Dobb 1947: 125). From
this same stratum and milieu, too, came the "engineers" and "artificers"
who designed, improved, and produced the new machines, along with water
wheels, steam engines, and agricultural equipment.

   Initial capital for industry was largely local, raised through
connections of kinship, marriage, friendship, and local acquaintance; it
"did not come from institutional sources" (Perkin 1969: 80).
Transactions were facilitated, however, by an instrument for granting
short-term credit, the bill of exchange. The bill of exchange was a
statement, sent to the debtor, of money owed for goods and services. The
debtor would sign the bill to acknowledge his debt, and return it to the
supplier. The supplier would endorse the bill and then use it to cover
his own obligations. Toward the end of the eighteenth century,
intermediaries— known as bill dealers or bill brokers—arose to
facilitate and speed up these transactions. They usually dealt with the
newly established country banks, forwarding bills from London to be used
in industry.

Mechanization

Stocks of capital paid for machines, but the key problem in employing
machinery to achieve low and competitive costs was the lack of
synchronization between spinning and weaving. Spinning with the wheel
was slow, while weaving was comparatively fast. The introduction of
Kay's manually operated "flying shuttle" in 1733 had doubled the
weaver's output by greatly increasing the speed with which the weft was
thrown through the warp. Bottlenecks began to develop in the delivery of
yarn to the weaving looms. Inventors thus concentrated heavily on
rendering spinning more efficient and productive.

   In 1770 James Hargreaves introduced the "spinning jenny," which
enabled a spinner to spin several threads of fine yarn simultaneously.
In 1769 Arkwright patented the water frame, which drew out the loosely
twisted fibers on rollers and wound them on upright spindles in one
continuous operation. In 1779 Crompton introduced his "mule," combining
features of both water frame and jenny, to which steam power was applied
in 1790. The new inventions produced a staggering increase in
productivity. Whereas an Indian hand spinner of the eighteenth century
had taken more than 50,000 hours to process 100 pounds of cotton,
Crompton's mule cut the time to 2,000 hours, while power- assisted mules
of around 1795 reduced this time further to 300 hours. This was also the
level of performance of Arkwright's machine, which employed mostly
unskilled and low-paid women and children, and which held its own in
productivity until Roberts's automatic mules reduced operative time to
135 hours per 100 pounds of cotton around 1825 (Chapman 1972: 20-21).
Increased productivity was also accompanied by improvement in the
quality of yarn produced. This is measured by the number of hanks or
skeins of fiber spun per pound of thread. It rose from 16—20 hanks spun
by the hand wheel to over 300 attained by Crompton’s mule at the end of
the eighteenth century. The number of mule spindles thus rose from
around 50,000 in 1788 to 4.6 million in 1811 (Chapman 1972: 21-22).

   At the same time, mechanization also transformed the preparatory
steps required by spinning. Cotton fresh from the bale had to be picked
and cleaned. It had to be beaten to open the fibers, combed or brushed
to disentangle them, and drawn out to lay them parallel. As these steps
were brought under mechanical control, the bases were laid for
coordinating the various activities required by spinning into a
continuous flow of operations. In all of these machines, the application
of Watt's steam engine (1764) provided the transition from manual to
machine operations.

   The new machines also affected the kinds of labor required to put
them in motion. We have already seen that Arkwright's water frame could
be operated by women and children, and it thus competed effectively with
more productive machines until the turn of the century, and in some
marginal areas even thereafter. The new machinery certainly increased
the number of spindles that could be tended by one person. With the
introduction of Roberts's automatic mule in the 1830s, one mule spinner,
assisted by two or three boys, could work as many as 1,600 spindles.
Mule spinning thus became a highly skilled and well- paid craft that
soon had its own trade union, whose members occupied the best room in
taverns—reserved by the sign “Mule Spinners Only."

   Paradoxically, while spinning was mechanized, weaving remained for a
long time technologically arrested. Cartwright's power loom was patented
in 1785, but it did not begin to spread until forty to fifty years
later, the number in use rising from 12,150 in 1820 to 85,000 in 1833.
Yet the number of handloom weavers increased at the same time from

75,000 in 1795 to 250,000 in 1833 (Chapman 1972: 60). These figures
bespeak several changes. First, competition with the power loom drove
down wages and income earned by the handloom weavers, who rapidly lost
their independence and grew increasingly impoverished and deprived
(Thompson 1966: Ch. 9). This decline in wages in handloom weaving may
actually have retarded the adoption of the power loom. Second, the
decline in wages and status affected a population in widely scattered
rural households, all the more defenseless because of this dispersion. A
corollary of this, however, is that factory work in cotton actually did
not become common until the 1830s. In the early 1830s the cotton
handloom weavers still outnumbered all the adult workers, male and
female, in the spinning and weaving mills of cotton, wool, and silk
combined. Third, this new labor force manning the power looms was
predominantly female and juvenile. By 1838 only 23 percent of textile
factory workers were adult men (Hobsbawm 1969: 68).

The Factory

Inevitably, the dispersed organization of labor gave way to the
development of a new form of productive enterprise, the factory. The
idea of concentrating a large number of workers engaged in different
technical operations on one site, and even in one complex of buildings,
was not new. What was new, however, was the creation of such
organizations under unified technical management, responsible for
synchronized productive processes and for changes in production in
response to changing conditions of the market. The workshops and
cottages of the putting-out system had operated “in a partly immobile
environment, with a fairly static technology, in the enjoyment of an
actual or legal monopoly or of vast orders from non-commercial buyers,
like Courts or armies" (Pollard 1965: 7).

   The advent of the factory was a consequence of the limitations of the
putting-out system (see Landes 1969: 55-60; Pollard 1965: 30-37;
Schlumbohm 1977: 274-276). That system, in which a merchant-entrepreneur
furnished the raw materials to have them processed in many small
household establishments, encountered serious difficulties in sustaining
and expanding the scale and scope of operations. It therefore set limits
to the possible accumulation of capital. There were limits to the
intensity and duration of labor where producers worked in scattered and
unsupervisable economic units. This was especially true as long as
industrial operations supplemented agricultural tasks, such that work in
the fields could take precedence over work on spinning wheel and loom.
Similarly, religious activities, kinship events, and recreation could,
and did, interfere with work intensity and procedures. Furthermore, the
merchant had little defense against pilfering and embezzlement of raw
materials by the dispersed workers and little control over quality of
output—both problems that grew increasingly serious in the course of the
eighteenth century. The lack of synchronization among the different
steps in the sequence of production added to the costs of
transportation: when spinning was slow, the merchant-coordinator had to
go in search of spinners to feed the looms; when spinning had improved
through innovations, merchants had to go in search of hand- loom
weavers. There were delays in processing and in deliveries, which slowed
the turnover time of capital and left customers dissatisfied.
Ever-rising large-scale trade thus encountered the limitations of a
productive system divided into innumerable small workshop units,
"unsupervised and unsupervisable" (Pollard 1965: 31). The answer to this
contradiction was the establishment of the capitalist factory.

   This new form of organizing work entailed a number of interconnected
changes. First, it brought together "under one roof" as many phases of
work as was feasible and profitable. Such concentration reduced the
costs of supervision and transport characteristic of the putting-out
system. It also increased control over the labor force, allowing the
organizers of production to "subdue the refractory tempers of
work-people accustomed to irregular paroxysms of diligence," as Andrew
Ure, an apologist for the factory system, wrote in 1835 (1967: 16).
Second, the work process became partitioned "into its essential
constituents," replacing "the division of gradations of labour among
artisans" (Ure 1967: 20). Third, these different phases of work came to
be ranked by training and skill required, and remunerated
differentially. This permitted a more efficient synchronization of work,
while enhancing labor control through a division of the labor force into
teams motivated by different interests. Fourth, synchronization of tasks
rendered the work process continuous, maximizing the extraction of
surplus value. Indeed, continuity of work became a major imperative of
factory operation, as increased amounts of capital became fixed in
machines. The merchant directing a putting-out system could simply halt
operations when demand slackened. Under capitalist relations of
production, however, depreciating machinery at rest ate directly into
capital. Moreover, if machinery was not put to work when new, it might
not repay its cost before becoming obsolete. The entrepreneur had become
"a prisoner of his investment” (Landes 1969: 43).

   The early British textile factories were faced, however, with a
general unwillingness on the part of the potential laboring class to
enter into factory employment. Above all, they resisted the unrelenting
labor and discipline of the factories, so much at odds with earlier
habits and with older customs of sociability of autonomous labor. Many
early factories were modeled on penal workhouses and prisons, and indeed
were manned by involuntary pauper apprentices. The identification of the
factory with forced penal labor also meant that former artisans or
laborers in cottage industry felt a loss of social status in moving from
the relative self-determination of the cottage producer to the servitude
of the industrial worker. Indeed, "as long as there was some measure of
freedom of choice between cottage and factory the workman preferred the
cottage" (Pollard 1965: 162). The growth of a free factory proletariat
was slow, and it was resisted. Hatred of the factory system fueled, in
no small part, the state of near civil war between the gentry and the
common man that characterized the first part of the nineteenth century
in Britain. This conflict began to abate only after mid-century, when
increased stabilization of factory labor went hand in hand with a
growing differentiation in the status and rewards of different
positions, and factory discipline was reinforced by the spread of an
ethos of work and obedience among the new working class (Pollard 1965:
186, 197; Foster 1974).

   The growth of the cotton factory produced the growth of the great
textile-producing centers of England. There had been great urban
agglomerations before, but in the rise of the manufacturing towns of
England the world witnessed a qualitative change unsurpassed in scale
and speed. The great city of London, already crowded with half a million
inhabitants in 1660, was not then an industrial city, but "a capital
centre of trades and of distribution: of skilled craftsmen in metals and
print; of clothing and furniture and fashion; of all the work connected
with shipping and the market" (Williams 1973: 147). In contrast, the new
industrial towns that carried forward the industrial revolution "were
organized around their decisive places of work—usually a single kind of
work" (Williams 1973: 154). Of these towns Manchester was both the
quintessential embodiment and symbol. In 1773 it had a mere 24,000
inhabitants; by 1851—when the majority of the inhabitants of the British
Isles lived in towns—its population had increased more than tenfold, to
more than 250,000 people. Of these, by mid-century two out of every
three inhabitants was a worker; in the nearby industrial satellite towns
around Manchester this was true of nine out of ten. By that time, too,
more than two-thirds of the population over twenty years of age had been
born elsewhere. Of these, about 130,000 came from the surrounding
counties, and some 40,000 came from Ireland. For some, the new city was
"sublime as Niagara" (Carlyle), for others it was a "a new Hades” (de
Tocqueville), "the entrance to hell realized” (Napier). For Friedrich
Engels, it was one of the birth places of the English proletariat.
People moved there "of their own free will" (1971: 135)— freed indeed to
sell their labor power by the disintegration of a mode of production
that had once held them fast. Now, however, they were subject to the
exigencies of the capitalist mode, which threw the worker upon the labor
market as a seller of labor power, only to transform his product into
the very means by which the capitalist could then purchase it. Thus, the
industrial cities became the sites of large labor markets in which
various groups and categories—hand spinners and mule spinners, handloom
weavers and power-loom operatives, men and women and children, former
artisans and new immigrants—competed for available employment. These
markets for labor created ongoing oppositions in turn: opposition
between artisans about to be displaced by machines and the machine
operatives; opposition between supervisors of production and producers;
opposition between men, whose labor was more expensive, and women and
children, who were remunerated at lower wages; opposition between
employed and unemployed, especially during the cyclical downturns of
1826 and the 1840s; and opposition between English workers and Irish
immigrants.

   The conflict between English and Irish workers became especially
severe with the progress of industrialization. The immigration of
Irishmen into English cities grew heavy after 1800. By the 1830s
Irishmen were to be found in "all of the lowest departments of manual
labor" (Report on the State of the Irish Poor in Great Britain, quoted
in Thompson 1966; 435). Marx wrote in 1870:

Every industrial and commercial center in England now possesses a
working class divided into two hostile camps, English proletarians and
Irish proletarians. The ordinary English worker hates the Irish as a
competitor who lowers his standard of life. In relation to the Irish
worker he feels himself a member of the ruling nation and so turns
himself into a tool of the aristocrats and capitalists of his own
country against Ireland, thus strengthening their domination over
himself. He cherishes religious, social and national prejudices against
the Irish worker. His attitude towards him is much the same as that of
the "poor whites" to the "niggers" of the former slave states of the
USA. The Irishman pays him back with interest in his own money. He sees
in the English worker at once the accomplice and the stupid tool of the
English domination in Ireland.... This antagonism is the secret of the
impotence of the English working class, despite their organization.
[1972: 293—294]

The conflicts between English and Irish flared up occasionally during
the first part of the nineteenth century, but they greatly increased in
the second part. This intensification is linked to a general change in
working-class politics, which shifted from a common antiestablishment
Chartism during the first half of the century to greater acceptance of
capitalist domination in the second. The developing trade union movement
organized workers, but it also institutionalized gradations of skill,
reinforced occupational hierarchies, including the supervision of female
workers by males, and sought stabilization of employment and working
conditions through the acceptance of upper-class educational and moral
norms (see Foster 1974). At the same time, the conflicts between English
workers and Irish workers intensified, fanned by anti-Catholic agitation
by the Church of England, which was attempting to deny the political
claims of the Irish Catholics (see Hechter 1975: 269, n.).

Cotton Exports

The production of cotton textiles thus became the major "carrier”
industry of the industrial revolution under capitalist aegis in Britain.
After the Napoleonic wars, says Eric Hobsbawm,

something like one half of the value of all British exports consisted of
cotton products, and at their peak (in the middle of the 1830s) raw
cotton made up twenty per cent of total net imports. In a real sense the
British balance of payments depended on the fortunes of this single
industry, and so did much of Britain's shipping and overseas trade in
general. Thirdly, it almost certainly contributed more to the
accumulation of capital than other industries. [1969: 51]

   Where did all that cotton go? Latin America constituted, in British
eyes, one of the great untapped markets. By 1840 it absorbed 35 percent
of English textile exports (Hobsbawm 1969: 147). This increase was
accompanied by the spread of English trading firms in Latin America. By
the second decade of the century, more than 150 such commercial houses
operated in Latin America, most of them in Brazil and Argentina. Yet the
market available to Latin American importers reached its limit when
local domestic production proved able to compete with the British
products, despite steadily falling prices for the imports. To retain a
hold on the Latin American market, the British government used public
funds to open credit lines for Latin American governments with British
firms operating in Latin America, but this counteracted the decline in
sales only in Brazil and Argentina. To compensate for losses in Latin
America, British textile exporters enlarged their sales in Asia. India
and China, taking only 6 percent of cotton exports after the Napoleonic
wars, took 22 percent in 1840, 31 percent in 1850, and more than 50
percent after 1873. After that date, India became the main participant
in this Asian trade (Hobsbawm 1969: 147).

Regions of Supply: The Cotton South

Unlike wool, which was England's first trump card in its entry into
overseas commerce, and which had been produced at home, cotton had to be
imported. In 1787 over half of these raw cotton imports came from
European possessions in the West Indies. Smyrna and Turkey furnished
one-quarter more. By 1807, however, more than 60 percent of all the
bales that landed at London, Liverpool, and Glasgow came from England's
former colony, the United States (North 1961: 41), and the United States
remained the main source of English cotton thereafter. The cotton crop,
in turn, became “the most important proximate cause of expansion" in the
U.S. economy after 1815 (North 1961: 68). It constituted in the period
between 1815 and 1860 more than half of the total value of domestic
exports.

   Just as spinning and weaving in England were facilitated by the
technological coupling of the steam engine with spinning jennies and
power looms, so cotton production in the American South was rendered
possible by a machine, in this case Eli Whitney's cotton gin. Initial
British demand was for Sea Island cotton, introduced to the Georgia—
Carolina coast from the Bahamas in 1786. With this cotton, fibers were
easily separated from the seeds by squeezing them through rollers, but
restrictive climatic prerequisites kept production low. Most American
cotton exported was therefore second-grade “middling Uplands." Whitney's
gin, which allowed the seed to be separated easily from the sticky
fibers, soon allowed a man to clean fifty pounds of Uplands in the time
it had previously taken him to clean only one pound.

   Cotton-growing enterprises, based on the use of slave labor, were
highly organized, labor-intensive units of production. As the plantation
moved westward, there was a shift from tobacco and grain growing to
cotton production. This involved a growth in scale and thus an increase
in the number of slaves. Only a minority of slave owners were able to
keep up with this development. Most specialized cotton production came
to be carried on on estates of 30 slaves or more. In the decade before
the war between the Union and the Confederacy, the minimum number of
slaves on an efficiently producing plantation was about 50 on the
black-belt soils of Alabama and Texas, and more than 200 in the alluvial
lands of the Mississippi flood plain. High intensity of labor was
achieved through the assignment of labor gangs to successive specific
tasks within the cycle of cultivation, in a rhythm reminiscent of
industrial production. The ultimate sanction for the discipline required
in these operations was, of course, force, exercised by drivers and
overseers. Force was crucial to the system, for, as Fogel and Engerman
(1974: 238) say, "available evidence shows that the application of force
made it possible to obtain labor from slaves at less than half the price
that would have had to have been offered in the absence of force."

   Cotton growing with slave labor was profitable business. On the
average, slave owners earned about 10 percent on the market price of
their slaves, which compares favorably with the returns earned by the
most successful textile firms in New England around the middle of the
nineteenth century (Fogel and Engerman 1974: 70). At the same time, it
must be remembered that there were many white families who owned no
slaves at all, and even among slave holders almost half owned less than
five slaves at a time (Bruchey 1967: 165).

   Growing cotton was not the cause of slavery in the United States, but
it proved an important factor in the continuance of slavery well into
the nineteenth century. Underlying this continuance of slavery was the
steady demand, mostly English, for cotton. From a total output of 3,000
bales of cotton in 1790, American cotton production rose to 178,000
bales in 1810, to 732,000 in 1830, and to 4,500,000 in 1860 (Fogel and
Engerman 1974: 44). This growth of production was accompanied by a
spread of cotton growing in space, as cotton production moved westward
from the Atlantic seaboard into the Deep South along a climatic belt in
which there was the minimal 200 frostless days and the amount of
rainfall required by the cotton crop. The spread of cotton growing was
paced by the steady advance of transportation by steamboat and railroad,
which brought even more distant areas into contact with the major ports
of embarkation. This expansion involved a massive relocation of people.
Between 1790 and 1860, 835,000 slaves were moved— mostly from Maryland,
Virginia, and the Carolinas toward Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and
Texas. More than two-thirds of these slaves moved between 1830 and 1860
in one of the greatest forced migrations of all times.

   This slave population in North America was largely self-reproducing,
in contrast to the slave populations of the West Indies. As early as
1680, Blacks born in the United States colonies made up a majority of
the slave population. By the end of the American War of Independence,
nativeborn slaves outnumbered slaves born in Africa by four to one. By
I860 all but 1 percent of slaves were native bom, many of them descended
from other native-born slaves in the third or fourth generation. This
stands in marked contrast to the West Indies and to Brazil, where the
slave population had to be replenished by continuous imports. “Of all
the slave societies in the New World," says Eugene Genovese (1972: 5),
“that of the Old South alone maintained a slave force that reproduced
itself." The reasons for this are not wholly clear. The thesis that
slaves were systematically bred for sale is called into question by
research into plantation records (see Fogel and Engerman 1974: 78-86).
It has been suggested that yellow fever killed off slaves in the
tropical West Indies, but not on the more salubrious continent; but this
would carry conviction only if the total epidemiological environment of
the two areas were compared. Gutman (1976: 341-343) has pinpointed the
decades immediately following 1720 as crucial in the continental shift
from a West Indian-like pattern of slave mortality to self-perpetuating
reproduction, and he has suggested that family formation and emerging
kin networks among North American slaves played a major role in
supporting further growth.

   Whatever the reasons for the sustained reproduction of slaves in the
United States, it follows that this population would develop its own
store of experience and modes of coping, and would pass it on across the
generations. Recent research (see, notably, Gutman 1976) has shown how
networks of kin and Active kin developed and functioned among the
slaves, and how they were used to transmit and elaborate knowledge and
beliefs based on the slave experience rather than on the requirements of
the masters.

   The existence of such networks, linking generations of kin and
quasikin in space and time, also calls into question the image of the
slave as a human being perfectly socialized in the patriarchal ideology
of his master. Slaves learned to cope with their masters, but there is
no evidence that they passively internalized the master's command as
their own psychic reward. It is unlikely that force could ever be used
"optimally" in such a system of labor to achieve the largest product at
the lowest cost, as Fogel and Engerman have suggested (1974: 232). What
was at issue between masters and slaves was not the careful calibration
of "treatment" to obtain "optimal submission," but a complex and
changing relationship between two classes held together by command and
labor but differentiated by class organization and interest. Gutman,
indeed, has suggested that "the presence of kin and quasi-kin networks
within slave communities over the entire South in the 1840s and the
1850s is an important reason why the slave system remained harsh and
coercive" (1976: 325). Yet within these constraints, day-to-day
relationships had to be renegotiated continuously. As George Rawick
(1972: 62) has said, "The relationship was a highly problematic one and
required the constant creation and recreation of a day-to-day etiquette
in order to help humanize social relationships that were hierarchical
and based on naked power."

   The Southern plantation thus involved a double tier of relationships:

the hierarchical relationships of the Big House and its slaves, and the
horizontal ties of the Black community that extended beyond the
plantation. The plantation unit typically comprised an overseer, usually
white; drivers, usually black; slave artisans in large numbers and often
highly skilled; and field hands. There were also slave house servants,
although the distinction between them and the field hands might, more
often than not, represent a stage in the life cycle rather than an
absolute barrier—servants being drawn from the young and old, while
field hands were recruited from the able-bodied young and middle-aged.
There were also free Blacks, numbering about half a million in 1860,
mostly concentrated in Maryland, Virginia, the Carolinas, and Louisiana.
These people sometimes worked as craftsmen and laborers, especially in
Louisiana, though elsewhere they were regarded with ambivalence by the
plantation owners. Conversely, in the towns, slaves were often rented
out for work elsewhere.

Brokers

Slaves loading cotton by torchlight on the Alabama River. Engraving by
W. Floyd, ?842. (Courtesy of The New York Historical Society, New York
City)

The slaves, drivers, overseer, and owner of a plantation were only links
in a chain, which also included the intermediaries who forwarded the
cotton crop to its destination, and the merchants who speeded it on its
 way. Cotton flowed outward from the Southern states in return for
credit and goods bought with credit, which flowed inward. The principal
agent managing this double flow in return for a commission on sales was
the factor. There were factors stationed in coastal ports, like Savanna
and Charleston, and inland factors in towns such as Fayetteville,
Columbia, Augusta, Macon, Atlanta, Montgomery, Nashville, Memphis, and
Shreveport. These inland factors dealt directly with the larger
planters, reaching the smaller planters through storekeepers in the
hinterland who passed on credit in the form of advances and who received
cotton. Transactions were further assisted by banks that discounted the
notes of planters endorsed by their factors. As credit flowed in, cotton
flowed out. Storekeepers or planters passed the cotton on to the inland
factors, who negotiated with coastal factors for transshipment to
Europe. Until the end of the Napoleonic wars in 1815, most of the cotton
left for Liverpool from Savanna and Charleston. After that date
Baltimore and, especially. New York became the main ports of
transshipment across the Atlantic.

   New York owed its ascendancy over the Southern cotton trade to a
number of causes. In 1816 a group of entrepreneurs—most of of them
Quakers connected by ties of marriage—established the Black Ball Line,
which soon operated regular packet services to Europe and along the
American coast. This trade began to carry cotton from Southern ports and
from New York to Liverpool, returning from Europe with English
manufactured goods and European immigrants. European and Northern
manufactured goods would then be sent on to the South (Albion 1939). The
strategic role of New York in this triangular trade was reinforced when
Western grain, meat, and timber began to flow eastward over the newly
completed Erie Canal, with manufactured goods, native and foreign,
traveling from east to west. Another factor in the growing prominence of
New York lay in the establishment there of rules prohibiting the
withdrawal of goods offered for sale when bids ran low. Consequently,
the city increasingly attracted buyers in search of bargains. These
multiple commercial transactions, in turn, were facilitated by the
development of profitable banking institutions. Finally, many cotton
factors operating in the South were either New Yorkers themselves or
agents of New York firms. Much of the credit advanced to Southern
planters came from New York, on a scale exceeding that which Southern
business houses could provide (Foner 1941: 12).

   Most of the manufactured goods used in the South were supplied by the
Northeast, made either at home or imported from abroad. After the end of
the Napoleonic wars, the Northeast also began to employ a share of the
Southern cotton in its own growing textile industry. The numbers of
spindles in the region tripled between 1815 and 1831, and tripled once
again between 1831 and 1860 (North 1961: 160). It was the expanding West
that supplied ever larger quantities of food for the South, especially
after 1816 when steamboats began to travel on the Mississippi River.
Western food also flowed increasingly northeastward with the opening of
the Ohio, Erie, and Pennsylvania canals in the 1820s and 1830s. With the
construction of the east-west railroads in the 1850s, largely financed
by British money, Chicago became the grain elevator and "hog-butcher" of
the United States. The regions composing the United States thus grew
increasingly specialized and complementary in their specialization; yet
within this network of interdependencies the South was clearly at a
disadvantage. As soon as profits accumulated in the hands of the
plantation owners, the new wealth flowed out again to pay for foodstuffs
for the poorly provided estates, and to import manufactured goods—cloth
and ironmongers' stock for the slaves, luxury goods for their owners.

Indian Removal

The westward expansion seemed the "American dream" come true. There
appeared to be land for the taking in the North American wilderness, and
agrarian democrats like Jefferson looked forward to a nation of sturdy
yeomen, servants to no man through their possession of land. But, of
course, this was not "a land without people for a people without land."
Land was occupied and used by native American populations; and to make
yeomen, these natives had first to be dispossessed. To the new settlers,
land was valued for more than the crops and livestock it could sustain.
Land was "the nation's most sought after commodity in the first
half-century of the republic" (Rohrbough 1968: xii),its "major
investment opportunity" (Rogin 1975: 81).

   The major Indian political units in the Southeast were the Cherokees,
in what is now Alabama, Georgia, North Carolina, and Tennessee; the
Creeks, in present-day Alabama and Georgia; and the Choctaw, in
Mississippi. The less numerous Chickasaw inhabited northern Mississippi,
and the Seminole southern Florida. All these groups were horticulturists
(with cultivation in the hands of women) as well as hunters, firmly
settled upon their land and hunting ranges and unwilling to yield them
to newcomers. The basic unit was the village, whose population was
between 350 and 600 among the Cherokee, between 100 and as many as 1,000
among the Creek. Villages were autonomous, each with a complement of
matrilineal clans, a council of elders drawn from the matrilineages, and
a village chief, usually drawn from a particular matrilineage. Since
clans were nonlocal and crosscut villages, there existed a mechanism for
possible alliances; and in the early eighteenth century, both among the
Cherokee and the Creek, villages began to form themselves into
confederations. Under European pressure, often transmitted through
Indian allies of the French, English, or Spanish, these confederations
became increasingly centralized. Especially instrumental in this
centralization was the need for defense against the expansionist
Carolina colony, which raided far and wide for slaves. At the same time,
relations with Europeans led to the adoption of many European forms,
including crops and livestock, as well as firearms. Some important
chiefs came to be owners of cotton plantations, often worked with
African slaves bought from the Europeans. A native elite developed in
the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. It intermarried with
Europeans and was often Christianized. In the case of the Cherokee, the
elite also became literate; the Cherokee script was developed in the
early nineteenth century by Sequoya, who adopted the concept of writing
without being literate in English (Kroeber 1948: 369).

   These tribes—especially the Creek and the Choctaw—stood in the way of
the expanding frontier and its primary interest, the acquisition of land
for the cultivation of cotton. War with the Creek in 1813-1814 opened
the first breach through which white planters moved into Alabama in the
wake of rising cotton prices after the war between England and the
United States in 1812. The war that Andrew Jackson conducted in
1817-1818 against the Seminóles, a Creek population that had filtered
down the peninsula of Florida, not only added Florida to the United
States but also closed off a sanctuary where many runaway black slaves
found refuge among the native Americans.

   By 1817 the idea of removing all Indians to the area west of the
Mississippi—an idea already advocated by Jefferson—took hold. Under the
prompting of Jackson, Indians were given the alternative of either
accepting their land in commercially alienable individual allotments or
of moving altogether. The campaign for removal was accompanied by a wave
of intrusions into Indian lands, usually carried on with covert official
support. Indian land, stock, and improvements were seized; game was
killed off; Indian hunters were attacked for hunting within state lines.
Indians were bribed to sell their land, and land titles were obtained
through fraud. State laws were invoked to harass Indians living within
their boundaries. Government agents were planted among the Indians to
advocate removal, while Indian chiefs were coopted with gifts and grants
of annuities to speak in favor of the policy. Missionaries and other
Whites living among the Indians and opposed to removal were ordered to
leave.

   Removal itself was signed into law in 1830. Where Indian groups did
not depart voluntarily, the army was sent in to enforce the removal
order. Between 1820 and 1840, three-fourths of the 125,000 Indians
living east of the Mississippi came under government removal programs;
during the same period, between one-fourth and one-third of all Southern
Indians lost their lives. By 1844 less than 30,000 Indians remained in
the eastern United States, most of them located around Lake Superior.
The entire process of forced migration was accompanied by paeans
extolling the victory of civilization over savagery. The successful
conclusion of the operation realized Jackson's hope that Indian land
could be speedily brought "into market" (quoted in Rogin 1975: 174).

Regions of Supply: Egypt

The English textile industry imported its cotton not only from the
American South but also from the eastern Mediterranean. The Levant had
long raised cotton for sale in Europe, and in the nineteenth century
Egypt became an important producer of cotton fibers for the European
market. This Egyptian development holds a double interest. Egypt was one
of the first regions of the Ottoman polity to commit itself to
commercial ties with the West, and—in doing so—it became the first case
of a non-European state attempting to "catch up" with the
industrialization and commercialization of Europe.

   This twin effort required, first, a wholesale transformation of prior
political and economic relations. During the eighteenth century, power
in Egypt was wielded by mamluk, a Turkish-Circassian elite of military
bondsmen and tribute takers who bought from the Ottoman superstate the
right to exact tribute from the cultivating peasantry. Egypt had
entertained a lively transit trade with Europe in Yemeni coffee, but
this decreased sharply toward the end of the century. The decline led to
a proportionate increase in the tribute imposed on the long-suffering
peasantry. Competition among the military tribute takers for power and
resources further increased the burden of tribute. Still, the peasant
villages managed to defend their autonomous jurisdictions over communal
tenures and land transfers, and they were left free to grow whatever
crops they pleased, as long as the appropriate tribute was forwarded to
the mamluks by the village headmen.

   This distribution of political and economic forces was altered
drastically in 1803 with the advent to power of Mehemet Ali, nephew of
an Ottoman vice-governor from Albania. He had grown wealthy in his
homeland in the tobacco trade, and he had played an important role in
leading a contingent of Albanian troops during the ousting of the French
from Egypt. Mehemet Ali not only asserted his autonomy from the Ottoman
polity but he broke the power of the mamluk by killing the lot of them.
Although Mehemet Ali regarded Egypt as his private family domain rather
than as a public trust, he recognized the need for political and
economic change to meet foreign competition. Consequently, he initiated
in the 1820s a program to decrease the production of grain for domestic
subsistence and to increase production of the one crop that could be
exported, long-staple cotton. He also launched an attempt to build
industry, especially to enhance his military capability, and created an
army of peasant draftees to replace his unreliable Albanian contingent.
In these efforts he had the assistance of Europe's first "technocrats,"
the French Utopian socialist Saint-Simonians. As part of this aid, the
Suez Canal was constructed under the guidance of the Saint- Simonian de
Lesseps; it was completed in 1869. Peasants were also drafted in large
numbers to build irrigation works and canals in order to create the
hydraulic infrastructure required for cotton cultivation.

   Under Mehemet Ali and his successors, peasant autonomy in growing
subsistence crops was sharply curtailed in favor of mandatory cotton
deliveries and forced corvées, and peasant lands were turned over to
large landowners who increased cotton production. Among these landowners
was, of course, the royal family itself. Between 1818 and 1844, the land
in the hands of the peasantry diminished from 85—90 percent of the total
land area to 56 percent. Foreign loans incurred by the
development-oriented regime led to further increases in tribute payments
demanded by the state, which led in turn to an ever-increasing emphasis
on cotton production by laborers on large estates, as well as by
sharecroppers and small owners striving to keep up with tax payments. In
the process, village headmen also gained in power, both as
intermediaries between the peasantry and the state and as moneylenders.
As a result, their holdings also grew. Rising internal unrest and
rebellion, coupled with the increasing inability of the state to meet
its foreign debts, finally brought on foreign intervention to put down
an anti- foreign military revolt. In 1882 the British took over Egypt.
They reinforced the pattern of cotton growing on large estates, thus
laying the basis for the problems that were to plague Egypt in the
twentieth century.

The Indian Textile Industry

In the Asian provinces of the British Empire, industrial production of
textiles began to develop in the second part of the nineteenth century.
This development was not an outgrowth of the highly developed Indian
textile crafts of the early period of European expansion into Asia. The
handicraft industry was largely destroyed by English imports into India
of machine-made cloth and yarn, so that by 1840 the head of a major
English firm trading in India could refer to bandannas, hand-printed
silk handkerchiefs, as "the last of the expiring manufactures of India"
(quoted in Thorner and Thorner 1962: 71). Moreover, Indian raw cotton
was not favored in the English market, except when American cotton
supplies were cut off; a short-staple variety, it was harder to clean
and required greater attention, and hence higher labor costs, than the
American long-staple varieties. Indian raw cotton, however, constituted
one of the major items of English exports to China. Hence cotton acreage
in India expanded until there were more than 8 million acres under
cotton by 1850. About half of this acreage lay in western India, within
reach of the developing city of Bombay (Guha 1972, 1973). Bombay agency
houses and traders, working through middlemen, advanced money for
cultivation to landlords in the provinces, and concentrated the product
for local use or export. The need to transport large quantities of
cotton produced a "bullock cart revolution" (Guha 1972: 21 ), in which
carts drawn by two bullocks multiplied more than sixfold the amount that
could be carried by a single animal. Aided thereafter by the expansion
of the Indian railroad network, cotton production came to cover 17
million acres in the last decade of the nineteenth century (Guha 1973).

   The initial growth of the Indian machine-textile industry, like the
expansion of cotton acreage on the subcontinent, must be understood in
terms of India's role as a major English base of commerce with China.
Cotton yarn and manufactures were second only to opium in items sent to
China, and they were the most important after the trade in opium
declined (Latham 1978: 88 — 90). Participation by Indian merchants in
the opium and cotton trades laid the basis for the Indian fortunes that
were invested in the development of the textile industry, the only
industry in India that "owed its birth and development to the initiative
of domestic capital and domestic entrepreneurship" (Saini 1971: 98).
This autonomous development was possible because India acted as a relay
station in the extraction of surpluses from China. The industry expanded
until it met Japanese competition for the China market at the end of the
nineteenth century. Even then the Indian textile industry continued to
supply a significant proportion of the yarn employed by Japanese
factories.

Bombay

The center of this new textile industry was Bombay. Originally a small
settlement on one of seven islands, named after a goddess of local
fishermen, it was transferred to the British Crown in 1665. In
attracting settlers to the town, the English governor followed the
Indian pattern of negotiating contracts between ruler and serving
castes. Although its importance as a trading port was at first
overshadowed by Surat and Broach, termini of the trade with the Levant,
Bombay soon gained in commercial importance with the settlement of
merchants from Diu and Surat and with the growth of a colony of Parsi.
These were Zoroastrian artisans, merchants, and shipbuilders originally
from Iran who soon enlarged their share in the lucrative trade to the
east. Bombay's population increased from its initial 10,000 inhabitants
to between 160,000 and 180,000 in the second decade of the nineteenth
century (Morris 1965; Rowe 1973).

   By 1800 Bombay had become the major port of western India, exporting
opium and raw cotton to China, and importing sugar and metal goods. By
mid-century it grew into the major distributing point for British
manufactures in Asia, and the chief entrepot for the transshipment of
raw short-staple cotton to Europe. Railroad construction after
mid-century enhanced still further Bombay's role as the hub of cotton
transshipment from Gujarat and Nagpur. Expectably, Indian cotton exports
boomed as American supplies were cut off during the War between the
States.

   It was by mid-century, too, that the city became the center of the
Indian cotton textile industry. The first mill, using English technology
but financed by Indian—mostly Parsi—capital, went into production in
1856. At first producing only yarn, but soon engaging in weaving as
well, the number of mills increased to 86 by 1900. Correspondingly, the
number of laborers in the mills rose from 6,600 in 1865 to 80,000 in
1900, between a fifth and a fourth of them women.

   Although Indian capital participated strongly in the founding of
these mills, managerial control lay in the hands of managing agencies.
Managing agents, who usually began as traders, held strategic shares in
joint-stock companies and interlocking directorships within a number of
different industries. They played a vital and often speculative role in
developing the resources that India used to pay for foreign imports. The
cotton textile industry was only one of these endeavors, and it was
often “treated as a milch cow to be drained of profits" (Morris 1965:
34) to the benefit of other enterprises operated by the agencies.

   Within each mill the administrative and technical staff were at first
British, but soon Indians were recruited. The key figure in the
organization of the mill was the "jobber," a kind of foreman charged
with recruiting and supervising unskilled laborers. He wielded a great
deal of power. Selecting new laborers from the shape-up at the mill
gate, he could favor relatives and caste members from his village or
region, unless dissuaded by an emolument or, later, kickbacks. Since he
was charged with maintaining work discipline, his say in who could stay
and who must go constituted another source of revenue, and often speeded
up labor turnovers. At the same time, he lent money at interest to the
workers, and sold them goods on commission from interested merchants.
Though technically not a labor contractor, he in fact played an
important role in organizing the labor market through personal ties with
his followers. One surmises that preference in employment was often
given to members of his own lineage or caste segment.

   There was no occupational specialization by caste in the mills, with
one major exception. Untouchables, constituting less than 10 percent of
the labor force, were generally relegated to the performance of menial
tasks. They were barred altogether from weaving, the fastest-growing and
highest-paid department, on the pretext that if Untouchables sucked the
yarn onto the shuttle when replacing a weft bobbin, they would pollute
their ritually superior fellow workers (Morris 1965: 79).

   During the nineteenth century, most laborers in the Bombay mills came
from a distance of 100 to 200 miles away, from the Konkan district and
the Deccan plateau south and east of Bombay. In the twentieth century,
there was a marked increase of immigrant laborers from Uttar Pradesh in
the north, more than 750 miles away. William Rowe, who studied such
northern migrants in the 1950s, suggests that they were first recruited
among Muslim cotton-carding and weaving castes (1973: 222). They settled
in Bombay by place of origin and caste. In the mid-1950s such residence
clusters were formed by consanguineals, but they included affines from
the same caste as well. Fictive kinship, making use of the term village
brother (goan bhai), further strengthened the solidarity of the cluster.
Clusters also had headmen who knew the city and who acted as authorities
within the clusters and as representatives to the groups outside. At the
same time, residential groups of higher caste status had wider kinship
connections and used them to find better and better-paying jobs.

   Indian textile production, with markets located mostly in Asia,
represents an early example of industrial proliferation on the
“periphery” of the growing industrial capitalist system. Hampered by
English import duties, excise taxes, and capital exports from India,
textiles nevertheless represent the one economic area in which native
capital predominated. Although production expanded at first, its rate of
growth began to fluctuate and to stabilize at low levels after 1890. The
value of Indian textile exports, consisting mainly of yarn, fell almost
by half between its high point at the end of the nineteenth century and
the second decade of the twentieth. The reason for this decline was
foreign competition, resulting in the loss of both the Japanese and the
Chinese markets to Japan, which initiated its own textile industry after
the Meiji Restoration in 1869. The Indian industry then shifted toward
the production of cloth for the home market, even importing Japanese
yarn after World War I (Saini 1971).

   Within India, the development of the textile industry affected, in
turn, the areas within which it was located. We have already seen how it
gave rise to an Indian laboring class of textile workers. It also
provided a stimulus to expand the acreage under cotton in India,
especially in Bombay-Sind, Berar, and Hyderabad (Guha 1973), with Bombay
agency houses extending credit in return for the crop. When additional
cotton acreage was required, much cotton was obtained from other British
possessions, especially Uganda. There the Uganda Agreement of 1900
converted lineage and clan lands to heritable freehold tenure, with the
result that much of the land was monopolized by a class of about 1,000
chiefs and notables, who employed their clan brothers as share tenants
in the raising of cotton (Mair 1934; Apter 1961: 122—123).

   Thus, after an earlier period of political and economic destruction
of much of the Indian hand-weaving artisan population, the expansion of
the British Empire and its trade, notably to the East, permitted the
secondary growth of a machine-based Indian textile industry with its own
base of supply and labor. Even though this industrial growth was not
sustained, it furnishes an early case of capitalist industrialization on
the periphery, a process that greatly accelerated in the twentieth
century.

Crisis and Renewed Expansion

It was in England that capitalists first took "the really revolutionary
road” of transforming the means of production, and they did so in the
production of cotton textiles. We have traced the development of this
"carrier industry" and its impact on extra-European areas of supply,
chiefly in the South of the United States and in Egypt. Yet one must
keep in mind that this first launching, important though it was in
spurring the economy of England and in portents for the future, was
relatively modest in scale. The textile industry was only one among many
industries, and the capital demanded for the construction and operation
of new mills was within reach of entrepreneurs of quite modest means. At
the same time, it was primarily a consumer goods industry, though it
created a demand for new machines in turn. Its first success was based
on rising profits, realized with relatively cheap artisan-built
machinery and decreasing labor costs.

   The English textile industry had seemed securely on its way when, in
the second quarter of the nineteenth century, it suddenly experienced a
downturn, one of the first great "structural" crises of the capitalist
mode. This may have been partly the result of rising costs of machinery,
causing the rate of profit to level off. It may have been in part a
"realization" crisis, since low wages at home diminished the domestic
market, while foreign markets seemed saturated. Whatever the reason, the
period between 1826and 1847-1848 wasa period of contraction. It was
accompanied, in England, by major political upheavals, as a rising tide
of discontent erupted in radical agitation. This was also a time when
increased numbers of migrants from the British Isles began to seek
alternative homes and employment abroad (see chapter 12).

Railroad Construction

To restart the money-making engine required new infusions of capital and
the development of a new industry, one capable of restoring the rate of
accumulation and of tapping new markets. This industry was railroad
building, with its twin satellites of steel production and coal mining.
The construction of railroads had, as Dobb noted (1947: 296), "the
inestimable advantage for Capitalism of being enormously capital-
absorbing; in which respect they are only surpassed by the armaments of
modern warfare and scarcely equalled by modern urban building."

   This industry, too, had its origin in England, where the first
railroad linked the Durham coal fields with the coast in 1825. At the
same time, the new invention quickly spread abroad. In 1827 the
Baltimore and Ohio Company received a charter for a railroad, completing
seventy miles of track five years later. The inception and rapid growth
of railroading in the United States was greatly affected by the infusion
of English capital into American development. Its most spectacular
product was the construction of the Erie Canal, begun in 1817 and
completed in 1825. It linked New York with Buffalo, and through Buffalo
with the West, thus making New York City the great terminus and entrepot
of western trade. American railroad building was a direct consequence of
this success. Other states, not to be outdone, invited English capital
to finance canal building and railroad construction. English investors
held at least $200 million in American securities by 1836, when the boom
ended in a financial bust so complete that “the trade of three
continents dwindled by a half" (Jenks 1973: 98). The inability of the
American Republic to pay interest on the loans incurred "caused American
stocks to join those of Portugal and Mexico and Greece in the ghettoes
of finance" (Jenks 1973: 99).

   By this time, however, railroad building in Britain itself offered
alternative opportunities for investment. When the effects of the
American bust hit England, it was discovered that the railroads built
there by provincial capitalists in the 1830s were doing well and paying
dividends in the 1840s. The ensuing railroad boom soon absorbed more
than 60 million pounds seeking investment. Capitalization for British
domestic railroads more than tripled between 1844 and 1849; railroad
mileage increased nearly threefold. Steel production rose concomitantly.
As "elderly men and women of small realized fortunes, tradesmen of every
order, pensioners, public functionaries, professional men, merchants,
country gentlemen" (Thomas Tooke, quoted in Jenks 1973; 132) poured
their funds into railroad construction, the renewed upturn of the
economy also silenced the mutterings of social revolt.

   Railroading thus sponsored the second phase of the industrial
revolution, shifting production from major reliance on cotton textiles
to reliance on iron and steel. We are so accustomed to thinking of
industry in terms of "heavy" industry that we may find it strange to be
told by Fernand Braudel that until the beginning of the nineteenth
century iron was a "poor relation" (1973b: 275—277). Before this time,
metallurgical industries were important primarily in making war,
flourishing when there was warfare and languishing in times of peace. In
the sixteenth century, England lagged behind such iron-producing areas
as the Basque country, Styria, Liège, France, Germany, and Sweden. In
1539 it produced only 6,000 tons. On the eve of the English Civil War in
1640, English production rose to 75,000 tons of iron, but in 1788 it
again was only 68,000 tons.

   Then, in the nineteenth century, came the great leap forward. Some of
its prerequisites were technological. The big increase in production
required fuel and power converters to turn heat into energy. Short of
timber to provide charcoal, England turned to coal for fuel. Moreover,
English ores were low grade and required power to rid them of impurities
through smelting, puddling, and rolling. To furnish the power for these
operations, innovators adapted the pumps used to clear flooded mines.
Thereafter, the use of coal and iron turned England into the "workshop
of the world."

   The driving force of this transformation was the railroad. Railroad
construction rose from 45,000 miles in 1840—of which 17,000 were located
in Europe and 28,000 in North America—to more than 228,000 miles
worldwide forty years later (Hobsbawm 1975: 54). Much of this
construction was undertaken because

organizations needed work, ironmasters orders, bankers and business
organizers a project to work upon. And railway building became a service
which Great Britain could dump abroad when her financial and
constructing plant could not be kept employed at home. [Jenks 1973: 133—
134]

British iron production reached 2.5 million tons at mid-century. British
exports of railroad iron and steel more than tripled between 1845 and
1875, while exports of machinery increased more than ten times (Hobsbawm
1975: 40, 39). Financed by railway "kings" and organized by contractors,
"the shocktroops of industrialization" (Hobsbawm 1975: 39) fanned out
abroad to build railroads from Argentina to the Punjab. Some of this
railroad building represented mere "conspicuous production," but much of
it provided the infrastructure of transportation that would permit a
vast increase in the transfer of goods from the sites of production
overland to points of transshipment on the coast. An important aspect of
this expanding movement of goods was the decline of overland freight
rates, amounting in the last quarter of the nineteenth century to a
decrease of more than 90 percent (Bairoch 1975: 115-119).

Shipping

Costs of ocean freight also fell dramatically in the course of the
century, almost as much as the decline in overland rates.
Technologically, this was made possible by improvements in sailing
vessels, notably the development of the sharp-bowed, narrow-beamed
American clipper ships. To these ships—Baltimore clippers, opium
clippers, and tea clippers—American naval development owed much of its
ascendancy in the first half of the nineteenth century. In the second
part of the century, however, the British again regained naval hegemony
by building clippers better adapted than their American counterparts to
freighting a variety of products. In 1853 these were built with iron
hulls; by 1864, with hulls of steel. Such sailing ships with metal hulls
had a carrying capacity of 1,500 to 2,000 tons, making them competitive
for a while with the more costly steamship.

   In the end, however, the steamship won out over the sailing vessel
because it possessed greater tonnage and speed. The decisive step in
securing this victory was the introduction of steel boilers, which
permitted the development of higher pressures and hence greater power.
Whereas it took the average clipper ship of approximately 1,000 tons of
cargo capacity between 120 and 130 days to make the journey from the
south coast of China to London, the steamships of the Blue Funnel Line
with a capacity of 3,000 tons, launched in 1865, negotiated the voyage
in 77 days (Hyde 1973: 22). The steamship, first introduced in Atlantic
crossings, conquered the Atlantic in the 1840s and 1850s. The use of
steam-powered vessels in Asian seas was greatly encouraged by the
opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. Clipper ships, however, did not
disappear from the Asian seas until the last quarter of the nineteenth
century. The final victory of steam over sail occurred only during the
Great Depression of 1873- 1894, when an overabundance of tonnage
provoked a crisis of overproduction in naval craft (A. Lacroix, cited in
Toussaint 1966: 212).

   Construction of the Suez Canal finally cut travel time from England
to eastern Asia in half. A railroad across the isthmus was begun in
1851, and in 1854 a concession for building the canal was granted to a
French consortium by developing Egypt (see p. 286). France subscribed
one- third of the cost and the Egyptian ruler (khedive) another third,
with the rest of the shares intended to be sold in other countries. This
last third never found buyers, and the canal had to be refinanced
through private European financiers. The canal was completed in 1869,
with the labor of

20,000 conscripted Egyptian fellaheen. Yet the cost of the canal and
other development projects, parlayed into ever larger loans at ever
higher interest rates on the advice of financial experts (see Jenks
1973: Chap. 10), eventually bankrupted the Egyptian treasury. In 1874
the British government acquired a majority of shares in the Suez Canal
Company through an arrangement with the Rothschild bank, which advanced
the needed money. The crushing debt imposed on Egypt put the country
under financial receivership to the Anglo-French Treasury of Public Debt
and committed it to annual repayments of interest thereafter. The debt
was ultimately paid by the Egyptian fellaheen. When a section of the
Egyptian military, supported by village sheiks, rose in revolt against
the rulers who had led the country into such complete dependence on
external capital, the British intervened and imposed unilateral control.

   An attempt to build a western counterpart to the Suez Canal across
the Isthmus of Panama began in 1879, ten years after the completion of
the Suez project, again under a French company headed by the same de
Lesseps. Work on the canal was initiated in 1881, primarily with
Jamaican labor, but technical difficulties brought the undertaking to a
halt in 1888. The project was not resumed until 1903, when the United
States encouraged Panama to break away from Colombia, and received
rights to the ten-mile-wide isthmus in return for a down payment in gold
and annual payments “in like coin.” In 1904 the United States purchased
the rights to the canal from the French company; the completed canal was
opened to oceangoing ships ten years later.

   The growth of the English textile industry initiated a social order
built upon a new mode of production. Under the governing relations of
this mode, capitalists bought machines and hired laborers to set them in
motion, while a new population of laborers submitted to the discipline
of factory work in exchange for wages. Control of the means of
production enabled capital to call up machines and labor power as
required, and to arrange and rearrange them in the service of enhanced
profitability. At the same time, capital could halt machines and lay off
manpower in regions of low profitability, and recommence production in
other regions promising higher returns. Under the conditions of the new
mode, capital was able to embark on a process of continuous internal and
international migration, drawing ever more groups of people into its
orbit and reproducing its strategic relationships wherever and whenever
it took root.

   Historically, such large-scale coupling of capital with
wage-dependent labor is unusual enough to lead one to ask how “free"
labor ever came to develop at all. Why free labor, and not one or
another form of servitude? Englishmen, like other Europeans, were
familiar with penal servitude, forced employment of vagrants, pauper
apprenticeships, mandatory labor in workhouses, and indenture, and could
have employed any or all of these coercive mechanisms in recruiting
workers for the incipient factories. The first factory masters, however,
found a supply of unemployed laborers, created historically by the
enclosure and clearances of land, and by the growing size of cottage
families working in the putting-out system. Aided by this unusual
conjuncture of factors, the English textile industry was able to employ
free labor in overcoming Dutch and Indian competition.

   The new industries required not merely labor power and machines but
raw materials as well, and extensive regions of the world were
reorganized to supply these materials to the factories. These efforts
produced new regimes of labor, or greatly intensified the demands on
labor in already existing systems. To feed the factories of Lancashire,
slave plantations displaced native populations in the American South,
while the growing demand for cotton burdened the slaves with ever-
increasing exactions. In Egypt, peasant production yielded to cotton-
growing large estates. To furnish cotton to the Bombay mills, millions
of acres formerly in food crops were given over to cotton in western
India.

   When capital began to move from the manufacture of textiles into
railroads, areas of raw-material supply were opened up to support the
new combinations of men and machines created by the railroad era. The
construction of railroads, in turn, and the development of shipping
widened the area of supply and of commodity trade. Yet while the
capitalist mode brought ever new populations directly and indirectly
into the widening orbit of its linkages, it also subjected them to its
rhythm of acceleration and advances, and deceleration and retreats.
Under the new mode, incorporation brought specialization, and
specialization entailed dependence on economic and political
conjunctures of worldwide scope.

10 Crisis and Differentiation in Capitalism

With the mechanization of the textile industry under capitalist
auspices, England entered the “really revolutionary road" toward the
ascendancy of the capitalist mode of production. Expanding outward from
England in the course of the ninteenth century, this mode brought the
entire world under its dominance. Some areas came under its direct sway,
such as North America and—after 1868—Japan. Elsewhere it enveloped and
penetrated other modes, setting up capitalist enclaves with differently
organized hinterlands.

   The process of creating strategic bases of the capitalist mode and
dependent zones of support went on in the capitalist homelands as well
as abroad. This point must be stressed because it is often obscured by
an uncritical use of such terms as core and periphery. Capitalist
development created peripheries within its very core. The advent of
industrial capitalism in England, based on mechanized weaving and
spinning, caused a massive collapse of home-based crafts organized under
the mercantile putting-out system. Within Britain regions able to make
the transition quickly, such as West Riding and Ulster, became major
industrial centers, while other regions, like the West Country, East
Anglia, and southern Ireland, declined. When the end of Napoleon's
continental blockade opened European markets to English textiles,
European regions active in craft production fell one after another
before the competition of cheaper imports. Still other areas of Europe
that had produced textiles for markets overseas, especially in Latin
America, yielded to English competition abroad. Ireland, Flanders and
Brabant, western France, southern Spain, southern Italy, and southern
and eastern Germany were especially affected by this decline. They
became subsidiary or dependent regions, furnishing cheap foodstuffs, raw
materials, and labor for the industrializing heartlands.

Capitalism: Mode and Market

The outcome of this process was a complex hierarchical system controlled
by the capitalist mode of production, but including a vast array of
subsidiary regions that exhibited different combinations of the
capitalist mode with other modes. The carrier industries of the
capitalist mode dominated the system, but these rested upon variable and
shifting supports that were often embedded in different modes of
production. Ernest Mandel (1978: 48—49) has captured the complex
relationships involved in this system by defining it as “an articulated
system of capitalist, semi-capitalist, and pre-capitalist relations of
production, linked to each other by capitalist relations of exchange and
dominated by the capitalist world market." Such a definition
accomplishes at least three things. First, it draws a distinction
between the capitalist mode of production and "the capitalist world
market." The capitalist mode of production may be dominant within the
system of capitalist market relations, but it does not transform all the
peoples of the world into industrial producers of surplus value. Second,
it opens up the question of how the capitalist mode relates to other
modes of production. Third, it allows us to take note of the
heterogeneity of the different societies and subsocieties making up the
system rather than obliterating that heterogeneity in dichotomies such
as “core—periphery" or "metropolis- satellite."

   It should be stressed that Mandel's definition points in a direction
different from the models of the capitalist system developed by A.G.
Frank and Immanuel Wallerstein. Their models—implicitly in Frank's case
and explicitly in the case of Wallerstein—define capitalism as a system
of production for the market, propelled by the search for profit
realized by nonproducing entrepreneurs who pocket the surplus of the
direct producer. Both writers have therefore focused on the process of
surplus transfers rather than on the mode of production under which
surpluses are generated. For Wallerstein, especially, the way social
labor is deployed in the production of surpluses is a secondary matter,
since for him all surplus producers operating under capitalist relations
of exchange are "proletarians" and all surplus takers "capitalists."
These models collapse the concept of the capitalist mode of production
into the concept of the capitalist world market. Furthermore, in
defining capitalism as production for a market in order to earn profits,
this approach identifies the expansion of Europe since the fifteenth
century with the rise of capitalism in its entirety. Not only have Frank
and Wallerstein thus defined the European search for wealth in the
sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries as capitalism pure and simple; for
them, the whole world and all its parts have become similarly capitalist
since that time.

   Capitalism as a mode of production is not merely economic action that
"rests on the expectation of profit by the utilization of opportunities
for exchange, that is on (formally) peaceful chances of profit. . .
action which is, in the last analysis, oriented to profits from
exchange,” or disciplined "pursuit of profit, and forever renewed
profit, by means of continuous, rational, capitalistic enterprise"
(Weber 1958: 17). Max Weber's definition of capitalism represents but a
latter-day version of Ibn Khaldun's “search for gain” or Adam Smith's
postulated “human propensity to truck and barter." No one denies that
merchants seek gain. Indeed, Francesco di Marco Datini, the
fourteenth-century merchant of Prato, captioned his ledgers with the
motto, "In the name of God and profit" (Origo 1957). What we must be
clear about, however, is the analytical distinction between the
employment of wealth in the pursuit of further wealth, and capitalism as
a qualitatively different mode of committing social labor to the
transformation of nature.

   We are dealing here with the difference between Max Weber and Karl
Marx. For Marx capital was not merely a stock of wealth but a strategic
financial element combined with other elements: machinery, raw
materials, and labor power. This combination, in Marx's view, is not
rooted in any supposed human propensity, nor in human greed. It is not
universal, but particular to a time and place. It involves the
historical development of indentifiable prerequisite elements and their
combination over time. These elements indeed take the form of stocks of
wealth, human energy, and tools. But it is precisely when a stock of
wealth is able to buy human energy and set it to work with tools to
produce more wealth, which can buy more human energy and tools, that
wealth becomes capital. Wealth, human energy, and tools are only factors
until they are combined in a relational set, a system, in which each
factor acts in relation with every other. Only when the stock of wealth
can be related to human energy by purchasing living energy as “labor
power," offered for sale by people who have no other means of using
their labor to ensure their livelihood; and only when it can relate that
labor power to purchased machines—embodiments of past transformations of
nature by human energy expended in the past—only then does "wealth"
become "capital."

   In contrast to Frank and Wallerstein, therefore, I argue that the
capitalist mode of production did not come into being until the latter
part of the eighteenth century. Before that time, European expansion
produced a vast network of mercantile relations anchored in
noncapitalist modes of production. The worldwide movement of commodities
generated prices and money-begetting money, without as yet subsuming
both means of production and labor power under capital. Only the
conversion of means of production and labor power into factors to be
bought and sold on the market created the all-embracing
"self-regulating" market of the economists. After that, "the
organization of labor would change concurrently with the organization of
the market system" (Polanyi 1957: 75). The capitalist mode produced, at
one and the same time, a new form of deploying social labor and a change
from a mercantile to a capitalist market. The rise of capitalist
relations of exchange is thus predicated upon the development of the
capitalist mode of production, not the reverse. The enormous escalation
of these relations to the level of a worldwide capitalist market was
fueled by the dynamism of that newborn mode.

The Expansion of Capitalism 

But what is the source of capitalism's tendency to drive incessantly
beyond its own frontiers? Marx's answer was that ceaseless capital
accumulation, coupled with ever-rising levels of productivity through
investment in technology, produces odd and contradictory results. In the
course of capitalist production, capital purchases two elements: means
of production and labor power. With rising technological inputs, the
proportion of capital invested in means of production would increase,
while the proportion of capital invested in labor power would decrease.
“Surplus" under capitalist conditions is the amount of value produced by
the work force during the time it operates the means of production,
beyond the time needed to obtain its wages. Thus, raising the amount of
capital devoted to technological inputs lowers the relative contribution
of capital invested in labor power in the total mix of capital inputs.
Indeed, the surplus might rise in amount, but the rate of surplus
production—and hence the rate of profits obtained—would decrease (see
Sweezy 1942: 69). In this disproportion Marx saw the crucial
contradiction of the capitalist mode of production. Competition requires
a ceaseless investment in the growth of means of production, but that
very growth threatens a decline in the rate of profit. When the rate
falls below a certain critical point, crisis ensues.

   What happens then? One consequence, which Marx stressed, is that
capital becomes unproductive and even subject to destruction. Plants
close, credit based on future production collapses, capital depreciates
in value. At the same time, growing unemployment drives down wages. This
double movement, however, causes the cycle to start anew. Capital
invested in means of production would have depreciated in the course of
the crisis, and labor power could be purchased at a lower cost. Hence
the ratio of capital invested in means of production to capital invested
in labor would now be the opposite of what it was before the crisis.
Before, the increased ratio of plant to labor brought on a falling rate
of profit; now, the increased ratio of labor to plant would cause the
rate of profit to rise once more, and expansion would recommence. This
model should not be read as an account of what actually happens in
specific crises, but rather as an attempt to delineate an inherent
structural imbalance in the capitalist mode, which makes it always
unstable.

   Marx himself noted, but did not work out, another source of crisis:
the problem of realizing surplus value at the point when too much has
been produced, market prices fall below value, and profit is reduced or
wiped out. This “realization crisis" does not spring from the inherent
tendency of the rate of profit to fall, but from an inability of
capitalists to make a profit because of the inability of consumers to
absorb the sum of commodities produced (see Sweezy 1942: Chap. X). Such
a crisis may be the result of either competition between capitalists
that causes more to be produced than can in fact be sold, or the lack of
sufficient purchasing power in the hands of consumers.

  Writers following Marx utilized one or another aspect of his model of
the capitalist crisis to explain capitalism's tendency to expand beyond
the confines of a single political system. This was a problem that
engaged Marx only tangentially. He did not talk about imperialism, but
about foreign trade. Indeed, the word imperialism does not appear in his
writings, although it was in use by the 1850s. He was interested
primarily in using the English case as the basis of an abstract model
that would permit him to define “the law of motion” of capitalism. The
search for an explanation of imperialism was, however, the main concern
of some of his successors, notably Lenin and Luxemburg. Lenin's
Imperialism was written in 1916; Luxemburg's Accumulation of Capital
appeared in 1913.

   Lenin drew on the work of the English liberal economist John Hobson,
whose Imperialism: A Study was published in 1902. Hobson tried to
account for the development of imperialism by arguing that while capital
tended to accumulate in the hands of capitalists, there was not enough
of a domestic market for the commodities produced; hence capital sought
opportunities for new investment abroad. Behind the political and
military competition of nation-states stood, according to Hobson, the
economic competition of capitalists searching for opportunities to
export and invest capital. But whereas Hobson's book was written to
argue for the creation of greater purchasing power and of markets fed by
that purchasing power at home, Lenin expanded Hobson's analysis to argue
that imperialism was not a reversible variant of capitalism but rather a
necessary further stage of capitalism in development. According to
Lenin, capitalism had outgrown the conditions of competition among
individual firms, and had entered a stage in which giant combines of
financial and industrial capital concentrated production and capital
accumulation in the hands of a financial oligarchy that dominated the
entire economy. Possessed of amounts of capital too large to find
outlets in production, these giant combines sought investment
opportunities abroad. Investment in foreign areas required, in turn, a
corresponding extension of political controls, and the giant combines
proceeded to carve up the world into spheres of influence. Having done
so, they prompted wars among the capitalist nation-states. Lenin's
argument therefore connects monopoly capitalism, the need to export
capital, the political seizure of colonies, and the outbreak of war
among contending capitalist powers in one chain of cumulative causation.

   Since Lenin wrote, some of the links in this chain of causation have
been shown to operate as contingent features of particular circumstances
rather than as sequential and inevitable stages. First, Lenin probably
overestimated the role of monopoly in capitalism at the time he wrote.
There were few capital-industry combines of consequence in the Great
Britain of 1900. In Germany the banks had come to exercise control over
industry rather early, but the great trusts did not arise until after
the turn of the century. In the United States, the merger movement in
the early years of the twentieth century led to more rather than less
competition (Kolko 1963). Thus, giant combines did not grow up in the
same way at the same time everywhere, nor did their growth produce
uniform results.

   Second, the mass of British capital exports went not so much to the
colonies as to other capitalist countries—the United States, Argentina,
and the British dominions of Canada, Australia, and South Africa. India
received about a fifth of the capital exported. The African companies
drew their funds mainly from small subscribers, not from the big banking
houses (Cairncross 1953). Even in Lenin's time, capitalism showed a
tendency to reinvest in already existing centers of accumulation rather
than to open up frontier regions of new investment.

   Third, the relation between trade and the flag was, in many parts of
the world, more indirect than Lenin's analysis would suggest. England's
connection with India was certainly vital to the British imperial
system, and England did intervene in Egypt in 1882 in order to protect
the Suez Canal lifeline to Asia. English intervention in Africa and in
Malaya, however, was more frequently the result of conflicts between
European traders based overseas and of local power holders competing
with one another. Such local conflicts were compounded by the
ever-present possibility that rival European powers would exploit the
situation for their own purposes. In Latin America, indeed, the English
rarely even attempted colonial rule; the seizure of Belize (British
Honduras) was exceptional, and a project to take Buenos Aires was
quickly abandoned. Nevertheless, intervention and seizure did often
follow particular local moves in the capitalist game of expansion.
Ronald Robinson has stressed the difficulties of meshing noncapitalist
and capitalist social constellations. Such synchronization requires the
rise of a social group of mediators or collaborators. If these
collaborators are riven by conflicts among themselves, or are unable to
concentrate the necessary mediating functions in their own hands, the
carriers of the capitalist mode find it difficult to transact their
business. Robinson thus traces imperial takeovers to "the breakdown of
collaborative mechanisms in extra- European politics which hitherto had
provided them with adequate opportunity and protection" (1972: 132).

   Yet we must not forget that the social constellations of Europe were
also unstable, although perhaps in a different way. Joseph Schumpeter,
for example, thought that the great wars resulted not from capitalism as
such, but from a fusion of monopolistic industry with anachronistic
state machines characterized by warrior traditions. While he may have
been wrong about the pacifist implications of the capitalist mode, his
judgment does point to the possibility that a class of tributary
overlords associated with a previous noncapitalist mode can perpetuate
itself under capitalism through entry into the military or into colonial
officialdom. Such a class, favoring the pursuit of war and colonial
rule, could find allies among captains of industry and industrial
workers, both standing to gain from an armament race or from access to
cheaper raw materials, and among colonists and traders with active
interests in local takeovers. Finally, there is always the possibility
of a “social imperialism" that strives to unify people at home by
displacing internal conflicts upon an external enemy, with tangible
gains accruing to the members of a "master race" from the domination of
multitudes of "wogs." The spread of imperialism and the extension of
outright colonial rule thus appear to be the result of a more complex
interplay of social constellations than was allowed for in Lenin's
explanation.

   Rosa Luxemburg's analysis is important for other reasons. For her,
the real cause of the capitalist crisis lay neither in the tendency of
the rate of profit to fall nor in the accumulation of capital without
opportunities for investment, but rather in the tendency of the system
to produce more commodities than purchasing power could absorb. Hence,
she thought, capitalism could expand only by extending its markets and
by selling commodities to new customers. In her view, such customers
could be found only in noncapitalist economies.

   Luxemburg was probably wrong in her economic diagnosis. She neglected
the fact that the expansion of capitalist production is based on the
tendency for production to be its own consumer—to produce ever more
means of production in order to expand production, rather than producing
ever larger quantities of use values for people to consume. She also
thought that worker income could not increase under capitalism; in fact,
capitalist expansion increases capital investment in means of production
not only in producers' industry but also in consumer industry, which
raises the real value of the worker's wages. Furthermore, she offered no
explanation as to where the prospective consumers in noncapitalist
economies would obtain the purchasing power required to buy the
commodities produced by capitalist industry.

   Nevertheless, Luxemburg did point to the tendency of the capitalist
mode to expand in search of new raw materials elsewhere, and in search
of cheap labor to process them. Moreover, her empirical accounts are
replete with examples showing that such control over raw materials and
labor was frequently obtained by force, and that force was also deployed
to make laboring populations buy commodities produced elsewhere. She
thus showed more clearly than ever before that the expansion of the
capitalist mode abroad often entailed the installation of processes of
domination over noncapitalist modes. She was a forerunner of approaches
that reject a focus on the capitalist nation-state as an isolated
phenomenon and emphasize, instead, relations between capitalist center
and dominated periphery.

Differentiation in the Capitalist Mode

While Marx constructed a model of the capitalist mode of production in
its pure form, it is debatable whether he ever thought that the mode
would become established identically everywhere. In Capital (III, 1967:
792) he wrote that the same economic base could show “infinite
variations and gradations in appearance" because of "innumerable
different empirical circumstances, natural environment, racial
relations, external historical influences, etc." He also realized that
the presence of a large peasantry could inhibit the full unfolding of
the capitalist mode (Cap.Ill, 1967: 196; also, the original Ch. 6 of
Cap.I, quoted in Mandel 1978: 45). In 1881, in a letter to Vera
Zasulich, he wrote that his analysis of the capitalist mode was
"expressly restricted to the countries of Western Europe" (see,
especially, the draft of this letter [Marx 1942: 298-302]). It is
significant that Marx wrote this at a time when he had immersed himself
heavily in ethnological and agrarian-historical literature.

   Lenin and Luxemburg both attempted to apply Marx's pure model to an
analysis of the worldwide spread and impact of the capitalist mode
between the onset of the Great Depression of 1873- 1894 and World War I.
Lenin focused on the need for capital exports, Luxemburg on the
limitations of the home market. Both, however, were interested primarily
in defining the "law of motion" that propelled the movement of the
capitalist mode from its point of origin outward into other areas of the
globe. They focused on the capitalist vortex as it spewed forth capital
or commodities; and they visualized its effects as essentially similar
everywhere, encompassing the whole world in a homogeneous field of
effects.

   The outbreak of the Russian Revolution of 1917 (and the subsequent
failure of Germany to follow suit) made it clear that "the infinite
variations and gradations in appearance," which Marx had noted, had
strategic consequences for the way the postulated system worked in
historic actuality. When Lenin characterized Russia as "the weakest
link" in the chain of capitalist domination, he implicitly raised the
question of what made some links stronger and others weaker. Trotsky,
who attempted an answer, argued that this variability was produced by
"uneven and combined development"—“uneven" because capitalism
encountered extremely diverse conditions produced by uneven development
in the past, and "combined" because capitalism had to combine with these
uneven conditions in the very act of permeating them. This answer
granted a measure of influence to pre-existing noncapitalist modes, and
recognized that the way capitalism worked depended upon this influence.
Yet Trotsky still defined capitalism as uniform in its "law of motion,"
and therefore uniform in its effects. What, however, if the capitalist
mode generated variability and differentiation not only through its
combination with other modes but also in the very course of its own
operations?

   We can distinguish a number of sources of differentiation. Some grow
out of the mode itself. All capitalists know that the drive for higher
profits demands that they invest continuously in new technology in order
to maximize their means of production, but not all are able to respond
equally. At every point in the ascending curve of capital accumulation,
some capital aggregates grow larger, while others fall behind. Some
holders of capital forge ahead; others maintain their position; still
others withdraw or are eliminated from the race. The victors cash in the
chips of the losers:

the differences in the level of profit arise out of the competition of
capitals and the inexorable condemnation of all firms, branches and
areas which fall behind in this race and are thus forced to surrender
pan of their "own" surplus value to those in the lead. What is this
process, other than the continual production of underdeveloped firms,
branches, areas, and regions? [Mandel 1978: 85]

At every point, therefore, the capitalist mode generates distinctions
between those capital aggregates employing higher ratios of capital in
means of production to capital laid out in labor power and those
employing lower ratios. This distinction, in turn, influences the
different ways that units of capital relate to other sources of finance,
technological inputs, markets, arrangements for obtaining labor power,
and political influences at home and abroad.

   Another source of variability is the tendency of the capitalist mode
to exhibit repeated upswings and downturns of economic activity, to
alternate advances in capital accumulation with retreats. In the Marxian
model, these swings are seen as growing out of the contradictions of the
mode itself. In his book Late Capitalism (1978), Ernest Mandel defines
seven "long waves" in the development of the capitalist mode, from the
last decade of the eighteenth century to the time of the Vietnam war.
Each wave is marked off from the preceding one by a change in the rate
of profit, produced in turn by changes in the ratio of capital invested
in means of production to capital invested in labor power. Each time
capital was invested in novel technology, the higher amount of capital
invested in plant, as against capital invested in labor, resulted in an
acceleration of the rate of profit. This was true of the first phase of
industrialization (1793-1825), which marked the replacement of crafts by
artisan-produced machines; of the period between 1848 and 1873, when
machine-made machines were introduced and railway construction boomed;
of the period between 1894 and 1913, when electric machines and the
combustion engine were introduced; and again between the onset of World
War II and 1966, when capital was invested heavily in war industry,
which then spun off postwar electronic industries.

   Each phase of acceleration in the rate of profit was followed by a
phase of deceleration. Thus, the upturn of the industrial revolution was
followed by a period of depression between 1826 and 1847, which involved
a "realization crisis" resulting from the shrinking of markets for
industrial products. The halcyon period of machine-made machines and
massive railroad building between 1848 and 1873 gave way to the Great
Depression of 1873—1894. This downturn was marked by a growing export of
capital and by efforts to reduce the costs of raw materials. Its
political manifestation was intensified competition among rival European
powers for spheres of influence and for access to raw materials abroad.
The brief boom of 1894-1913 reaped the harvest of the preceding period's
capital exports and enhanced raw material production, and labor
productivity increased sharply through the introduction of a new
technology. The boom ended, however, with World War I and the economic
and political disruption that followed (1914-1939). Only World War II
and the technological revolution afterward rescued the system from
depression and set off a new phase of expansion in the rate of profit.

   This periodization of capitalist development demonstrates that the
impact of the capitalist mode is not the same in all phases. The mode
varies in its requirements at different times, and thus also in the
demands it places on different world areas.

   Another source of differentiation lies in the fact that precapitalist
patterns of mercantile wealth sometimes survive under capitalism.
Historically and developmentally, money-begetting money turned into
capital when it assumed the function of capital in production. In this
sense, capital is an offspring of stockpiled mercantile wealth. Yet in
changing its function, money-as-capital accomplished what money-
begetting money had been unable to achieve: the capacity to affect and
regulate the quantity and quality of social labor embodied in
commodities.

   Mercantile activity had sought profit in buying cheap and selling
dear, what is generally known as nonequivalent or unequal exchange. To
this end, merchants obtained goods in a number of ways. In the fur
trade, the trader advanced valued goods such as guns and blankets,
receiving furs in return. In the spice trade, the Dutch East India
Company exchanged European goods or fine cloth made in India for spices
that native overlords obtained as tribute. In the case of slave-produced
sugar, the merchant advanced means of production in the form of slaves
and processing equipment, as well as European commodities, receiving
sugar from the planter in return. In all these cases, merchants used
money and goods bought with money to gain a lien on production, but they
remained outside the process of production itself. They implanted their
circuits of exchange in other modes of deploying social labor, using a
mixture of force and sales appeal to obtain collaboration and
compliance. That collaboration and compliance, however, were unstable,
and subject to renegotiation when the local ally increased his demands,
took his trade to a competitor, or refused to cooperate altogether. The
merchant was always dependent on his own state to back up his claim. At
the same time, he was obliged to sweeten the disposition of his trade
partner so as to perpetuate their unequal exchange.

   With the establishment of the capitalist mode in England and its
borderlands, industrial capital seized control of commodity production
at home; it thus attached the domestic terminus of the mercantile
circuit to a new productive base. As the capitalist mode spread to other
areas, it affected, in turn, the foreign terminus of the merchant's
operations. This was increasingly true as the development of new
machinery demanded ever larger and more secure deliveries of commodities
from abroad. During the nineteenth century, then, industrial capital
gradually deprived the merchants of their autonomy, turning them into
agents of capital rather than actors on their own behalf. Yet this
process worked unevenly during different phases of capitalist expansion
and in different parts of the world. Merchants acting as agents of the
growing textile industry sought markets in Latin America during the
first quarter of the nineteenth century, but the subsequent economic
downturn led them to seek new outlets in Africa and Asia. During the
phase of railroad construction, mercantile activity intensified, but the
depression that followed put the merchants under heavy pressure. The
great demand for raw materials at this time led to the establishment of
capitalistically operated plantations and mines in several parts of the
world. In these areas merchants were either pushed to the edge of the
new sector of industrial agriculture and mining, or else were forced to
aggregate their resources in large commercial-industrial cartels, such
as the English and French companies trading in West Africa.

   Mercantile activity and accumulation, however, remained significant
in many world regions that were influenced by the advances of the
capitalist mode but not engulfed directly by machine production or
"factories-in-the-field"—regions that lay along the forward edges of
capitalist expansion or between its advancing salients. Such regions
included the hinterlands of the British Empire outside of its “white"
colonies and major raw-material-producing areas; the interior of Latin
America beyond the belt of coastal plantations; the edges of American
and Canadian advance across the North American continent; and the
islands of the Pacific. In these areas advancing merchants created
commodity frontiers and labor frontiers. They carried to these zones
goods from the industrial centers, exchanging them for local products or
advancing them in order to contract laborers for plantations or mines.

   In these regions, initial mercantile penetration often enabled groups
to continue in the kin-ordered or tributary mode through the nineteenth
century and even into the twentieth. Occasional exchanges could
reinforce a group's ability to cope with its environment and to defend
itself against encroachment by outsiders. Increasing exchange, however,
gradually undermined the autonomy of the local group. As long as the
sphere of exchange relations remained restricted, the native trade
partner and the outside merchant could be equals in exchange, each
proffering goods desired by the other. But as the sphere of exchange
widened, the native producers tended to become clients of the trader
rather than symmetrical partners. As they grew more dependent on the
merchant for instruments of production such as guns, ammunition, steel
traps, and metal tools, as well as for items of consumption such as
manufactured goods and even food, they came to depend increasingly on
the wider capitalist market. They confronted a gradual reduction in
their ability to control their means of production, especially as
widening exchange eroded their ability to reproduce these means through
the mechanisms of kinship or power. Similarly, tributary elites, drawn
into dependence on goods produced under capitalist auspices, found
themselves under pressure to intensify tributary labor and to redirect
it toward commercial production. Labor recruiters who exchanged money or
commodities for labor power set in motion changes in the ties linking
the laborers to their kinsmen or overlords. Under such circumstances,
local resources and services tended to become commodities, increasingly
subject to transactions operating outside the preexisting modes.

   Such frontier perimeters were thus gradually drawn into the
capitalist market and connected indirectly with the industrial bases of
the capitalist mode of production. In this process, the merchants became
caught up in a contradiction. As advance agents of the market in
frontier zones, they enjoyed a measure of antonomy that they often
translated into local or regional dominance. As market relations grew
more intense, however, their increasing need for capital and commodities
tied them more closely to the metropolitan centers of production and
distribution. At the same time, their temporary local monopolies often
dissolved under the impact of widened competition.

   Some frontier regions that served as sources of occasional labor were
in time reshaped into permanent reservoirs of ready labor. Such regions
included the catchment areas for contract laborers in India and China
during the nineteenth century, the "native reserves" created in Africa
toward the end of the nineteenth century, and the supply zones of
migratory labor around the Mediterranean in the twentieth century.
Historically, these regions formed parts of states that had been
defeated by military force, or that had been sidetracked in the course
of European expansion. Such regions became organized to nurture and
provision labor until needed, and to maintain it after its productive
years. One part of the population was mobilized for wage labor outside
the zone of supply, while their families and kin would remain in the
reserves, sustaining themselves through a combination of household
production for subsistence and commodity production for sale. The flow
of wages and remittances coming into the zone from outside, together
with commodities produced within, underwrote the emergence of mercantile
intermediaries who linked the labor reserve to its capitalist matrix.

Differentiation: The State

A major reason for differentiation within the capitalist mode is that
capitalist development is carried forward by politically separate and
distinct states. To understand this aspect of the mode, we must first
ask, with Ber Borochov,

why, on the one hand, the capitalistic system appears as international,
and destroys all boundaries between tribes and people and uproots all
traditions, while on the other hand, it is itself instrumental in the
intensification of the international struggle and heightens national
self-consciousness. [1937: 160]

   In an earlier chapter (2) we defined the state in the capitalist mode
as an apparatus installed to maintain and further the strategic
relationships governing the capitalist deployment of social labor. The
capitalist state exists to ensure the domination of one class over
another. Yet in each state this function is executed differently, and
with different consequences.

   There are historical reasons for this. The capitalist mode did not
come to dominance all at once. It was incubated in older, tributary
arrangements, and it expanded only fitfully and gradually to occupy
wider social terrain. Each new cohort of capitalists encountered other
preexisting classes rooted in varied tributary arrangements. Each
emerging capitalist society also differed from others in the background
of its working class, and in the speed and intensity with which this
class developed. Such variability in class “mix” was further amplified
by the different ways that capitalist classes assumed dominance. In
their rise to power, English industrialists entered into an alliance
with "improving landlords." In the course of German industrialization,
the captains of industry joined the East Elbian plantation owners, or
Junkers, in a pact of “steel and bread.” In the United States, the issue
of who was to dominate the state led ultimately to the war between the
Union and the Confederacy, ending in a defeat for the class forces
represented by the South.

   Once such internal wars were settled, the problem of class domination
assumed the guise of politics, of “who gets what when" within the
framework of class rule. Such politics again differ from state to state.
Politics under capitalism involves, first of all, conflicts among
segments of the capitalist class itself. While all capitalists share a
common interest in class domination, individual groups of capitalists
are in fact often at loggerheads, driven by divergent short-run
interests. These conflicts may even grow to a point where they threaten
the state. Different segments of the capitalist class will also enter
into alliances with segments of other classes, including segments of the
developing working class. Since the characteristics of all these classes
are variable from state to state, the nature of both intraclass and
interclass conflicts and alliances will also vary. This variability,
working over time, cumulatively shapes the form and function of the
state apparatus.

   Still another source of differentiation among capitalist states lies
in the manner that each capitalist cohort entered into capital
accumulation abroad. The earlier expansion of European merchants abroad
had created networks of commercial influence and power in different
areas of the world. Some cohorts of expanding capitalists were able to
take advantage of these mercantile networks and to transform them into
resources for their own accumulation. Each time a capitalist state
assumed control of an area, moreover, it also altered the terms of entry
for later competitors. Thus England, in making the first breakthrough
into the capitalist mode, was also able to capitalize on the commercial
network created by British traders, gaining strategic advantages in
access to markets and raw materials and denying such advantages to later
competitors, such as France and Germany.

   England's success, in turn, changed the course of political
development for its competitors. The hegemonic expansion of England and
its capitalist class evoked the consolidation of national states among
all her rivals. Such consolidation sought to improve each capitalist
society's control over its own “conditions of production" by
strengthening the power of the state. Policies to support capitalist
expansion were adopted—to protect infant industries against English
competition, to develop an infrastructure of transport and communication
responsive to national needs, to set up centralized investment and
banking, to create national systems of labor discipline and
state-sponsored education, and to develop a war-making potential.
Whereas England undertook capitalist development with a "cheap" state
that was still able to delegate many functions of domination to local
power holders, later competitors had to build strong and expensive
states to stay in the competitive race.

   All states, cheap or expensive, require funds to pay for state
services. Such funds are usually raised through taxes or through public
loans that are repaid out of taxes. Taxes are collected by deductions on
wages or by transfers of surplus value from capitalists to the state.
Such deductions or transfers of surplus value are managed variably by
different states, with differential results for their citizens. All,
however, serve to accumulate a fund of "indirect surplus value"
(O'Connor 1974: 39-42) that is managed by the state apparatus. This fund
can then be used to generate additional industrial development,
especially in war-related industries, favoring one segment of the
capitalist class against others; or it can be dispensed in social
services or in price-support programs of various sorts that favor
certain classes or class segments. Once again, issues of class
domination are translated into politics. The variable outcomes of
conflicts over "who gets what when" add to the differentiation of
capitalist states. Although we are speaking here primarily of the
initial development of the international state system under capitalism
during the nineteenth century, it is not amiss to point out that these
state functions, based on the accumulation of indirect surplus value,
were enormously enlarged in the twentieth century—especially after
1930—under the impact of depression, social dislocation, and war.

11 The Movement of Commodities

During the latter part of the nineteenth century, production under
capitalism took a great leap forward, escalating the demand for raw
materials and foodstuffs and creating a vastly expanded market of
worldwide scope. Whole regions became specialized in the production of
some raw material, food crop, or stimulant. Some of these regional
specializations had been established earlier under mercantile aegis, as
in the case of the sugar-producing areas of the Caribbean. Others grew
up in response to early capitalist development, such as the
cotton-growing regions of the United States, Egypt, and India. Still
others were entirely new. Regional emphasis on a monocrop or single raw
material product demanded, in turn, that other areas raise crops to feed
the primary producers, or furnish labor power to the new plantations,
farms, mines, processing plants, and transport systems. Through the
expanding commitment to the production of commodities, changes on the
level of the world market had consequences at the level of household,
kin group, community, region, and class.

   To understand how people were forced or drawn into this market
requires cognizance of the market not only as a means for the exchange
of goods and services but also as a set of "mechanisms of social
articulation" (Mintz 1959a: 20). Goods and services produced for a
market are commodities; as commodities, they can be compared and
exchanged without reference to the social matrix in which they were
produced. As we have noted, commodity exchange long preceded the rise of
the capitalist mode of production, as merchants placed into exchange
commodities produced under tributary or kin-ordered modes. Each
commodity embodies a fraction of the social labor expended to transform
nature to human purposes, social labor that has been mobilized under the
governing relations of a mode of production. With the unfolding of
capitalism, ever larger quantities of such commodities entered a market
where they encountered and competed with commodities produced under
other modes. Under the growing worldwide predominance of capitalism, the
market was transformed into an arena of articulation and conflict
between contending modes of production, expressed in the exchange of
their diverse commodities. Capitalism did not always abrogate other
modes of production, but it reached and transformed peoples' lives from
a distance as often as it did so directly.

   The development of industrial capitalism did not move in a smooth
ascending line. Phases of advance in capital accumulation gave way to
downturns; periods of optimistic expansion were followed by periods of
uncertainty and gloom. Each phase of advance opened up new theaters of
operation and new zones of supply. Each downturn challenged the dominant
course of capital investment and raised the specter of contracting
markets, as in Latin America after 1825. Each phase of advance and each
endeavor to stem the tide of depression had its effects on the
populations caught up in the web of capitalist linkages. Sometimes the
effects of capitalism were direct, the outcome of investment or
disinvestment in industrial facilities, raw material supplies, or
food-producing enterprises in various regions of the globe. At other
times its effects were transmitted through the mechanism of the market,
intensifying or diminishing the transformative impact of the capitalist
mode upon other modes. Each advance brought on changes in the way social
labor was organized. When advance was followed by retreat, however, a
return to previous adaptations was no longer possible. For many of the
peoples studied by anthropologists, such changes became especially
critical during the last quarter of the nineteenth century.

The Great Depression

Only five years after the opening of the Suez Canal, with its promise of
greatly enhanced commerce between Europe and Asia, capitalist expansion
experienced another major downturn. Railroad construction had pulled
capitalism out of the slump of 1826—1847, and it had fueled renewed
development in the years between 1848 and 1873 through a big spurt in
the production of iron, steel, and coal. In 1873 expansion gave way to a
downturn once again. The effects of this downturn have come to be known
as the Great Depression. Economic historians disagree on the generality
of the phenomenon, noting that it was not equally widespread and intense
everywhere. Some scholars have even denied its occurrence altogether.
Yet a major change occurred in the pace and nature of capitalist
accumulation, a change still reverberating into our time. The Great
Depression ushered in a new phase in the encounter between capitalism
and the rest of the world. During this phase a militant capitalism
encroached ever more intensively on the social arrangements predicated
upon tributary or kin-ordered modes of production. It did so by drawing
resources and labor power organized in different ways into a larger
system dominated and permeated by capitalist productive relations.
Within this system, the subsidiary parts were forced or motivated to
become producers of specialized commodities, all grown and marketed
under the directives of the central process of capital accumulation.

   Several factors underlay this shift of gears in capitalist
development. The rate of profit declined as real wages increased in
Europe and the costs of raw materials went up in other parts of the
world. Capital investment to finance renewal of the means of production,
in order to cut these rising costs, came about only slowly. It is
possible that the stock of capital then available was not sufficient to
finance a rapid shift from the technology of the steam engine to a new
technology based on the internal combustion engine and turbine, driven
by oil or electricity. The new chemical industry was similarly in its
infancy.

   The industrial slowdown had a geographical and political aspect. It
was steam-driven English industry that slowed down, while the United
States and Germany gradually expanded their industries on the new
technological foundations. Britain lost its predominance as the workshop
of the world. By 1870 it possessed only a quarter of the world's steam
power and produced less than half the world's steel (Hobsbawm 1969:
134). Between 1880 and 1890 U.S. steel production overtook Britain's;
within another decade German steel production had overtaken the British
as well (Barratt Brown 1970: 82). Britain's "satanic mills” still glowed
in Birmingham and Sheffield; its bank—The Old Lady of Threadneedle
Street—was still the hub of worldwide financial transactions; and
Britannia "still ruled the waves.” Yet Britain was no longer the
industrial leader of the world; it was merely one of a number of
industrializing countries.

   The Great Depression was thus a crisis in capitalist accumulation
because it affected the country that had fueled the process and changed
its relationship to the rest of the world. It initiated a crisis in
British hegemony. Thereafter it was less Britain's own industrial
capacity that underwrote its continued influence than the returns on
past successes. What kept Britain abreast of international competition
was its control over India. Indian cotton and textiles, sold in
ever-increasing quantities to the United States, on the European
continent, and to Japan, furnished surpluses for the imperial system.
Indian trade in cotton and textiles rose in the second half of the
nineteenth century from $4 million to $50 million. Even more important
were the so-called "home charges," the tribute levied on India to defray
the costs of British administration and the interest payable on debts
incurred by the colonial British government of India, which rose from 70
million to 225 million pounds sterling in the last quarter of the
century (Barratt Brown 1970: 85). The flow of these sums maintained
British predominance as a financial center, but the staff of
international leadership passed to others.

   At the same time, a major shift occurred in European agricultural
production. European agriculture was subjected suddenly to massive
imports of American and Russian wheat, which led to a precipitous fall
in agricultural prices. American expansion into the plains and Russian
cultivation of the southeastern steppe increased supplies of wheat,
while improved transportation—because of the construction of railroads
and the expansion of steamship and sailboat travel across the
Atlantic—caused a rapid decline in transportation costs. The cost of
carrying a quarter of wheat, or eight bushels, from Chicago to Liverpool
averaged eleven shillings in 1869-1879, but fell below three shillings
in 1902 (Bagwell and Mingay 1970: 75). This shook the foundations of
European agriculture and intensified the outward flow of migrants to the
Americas (see chapter 11).

   The outcome was that the several capitalist nation-states of Europe
embarked upon an intense search for new investments and markets in a
period of declining opportunities. They found themselves in fierce
competition with one another for control of regions that could provide
cheap raw materials and labor. In the United States and Russia the same
impetus fueled expansion, colonization, and consolidation across entire
continents. Rising discontent at home and intensifying competition
abroad, in turn, unleashed drives for expansion by political means—the
politics of imperialism. These politics sought to unite disaffected and
contending classes at home through a common struggle for colonies or
spheres of influence abroad, while giving the "mother country"
privileged access to markets and resources. The Great Depression spurred
the extension of European sovereignty abroad. Africa was carved up; new
colonies were established in Asia; the Pacific was colonized. The
European powers during this period of economic stagnation tripled their
territorial acquisitions abroad. Capitalist accumulation was thus
restored, albeit haltingly. Taking advantage of the new means of
transportation available in the last quarter of the nineteenth century,
capital entered into the development of "tropical" agricultural products
and raw materials for European markets.

Regional Specialization

The advent of new crops and new products significantly altered the
relations between regions on the same continent and relations between
entire continents. Some regions specialized in producing foodstuffs or
industrial raw materials; others processed the raw materials, consumed
the food grains or meat, and sent back manufactured goods. We have
already seen how Britain became dependent on American and—later—
Egyptian and Indian supplies of cotton. The cotton-producing areas, in
turn, became so specialized in producing their major cash crop that they
had to be supplied with food and manufactures from elsewhere. Britain,
which had fed itself and even exported an agricultural surplus in the
eighteenth century, was at the end of the nineteenth century dependent
on foreign supplies for four-fifths of its wheat and two-fifths of its
meat (Woodruff 1971: 12). The American Cotton South came to depend
almost entirely on Northern manufactures and Western wheat.

   Regional specialization was not confined to food grains, meat, and
cotton. To provide tropical products like sugar, tea, coffee, or rubber
in bulk, entire world areas were turned into sugar, tea, rubber, or
coffee plantations. Since plantation production was heavily concentrated
on one or two cash crops, the labor force had to be sustained in turn by
producers who could furnish foodstuffs and other required commodities.
In the Asian context it was rice rather than wheat that supplied the
basic staple for maintenance of the labor force, and the expansion of
plantation agriculture therefore went hand in hand with an expanding
production of rice, destined for riceless areas. Still other regions of
the world came to specialize not in crops or industrial activities, but
in the production of laborers for agriculture and industry. While common
bonds were forged between these areas under the aegis of industrial
capitalism, their involvement with one another in fact led to
divergence, and to a continuing reorganization of social relations and
cultural patterns within each area.

   When Adam Smith and David Ricardo had envisaged a growing worldwide
division of labor, they had thought that each country would freely
select the commodities it was most qualified to produce, and that each
would exchange its optimal commodity for the optimal commodity of
others. Thus, in Ricardo's example, Britain would send Portugal its
textiles, while Britons would consume Portuguese wines in turn. What
this vision of free commodity exchange omits are the constraints that
governed the selection of particular commodities, and the political and
military sanctions used to ensure the continuation of quite asymmetrical
exchanges that benefited one party while diminishing the assets of
another.

   Choice in the growing system of interrelationships was rarely free.
In the majority of cases it was imposed by force, or by constraints
stemming from market domination by more powerful participants. Coercion
or constraint—whether through outright political takeover of a colony or
through economic domination alone—were of the essence of the process;
they were not epiphenomena. Moreover, once a region was included in the
circuits of capital, the requirements of accumulation were such that it
had to reorganize its factors of production to intensify capital growth,
or else fall under the wheels of the chariot of progress. In capitalist
agriculture this led either to the growth of highly capitalized
“factories in the field," or to the growth of small-scale specialized
producers whose operations were dictated by cash-product markets. At the
same time, the very process of accumulation stripped other areas of
access to means of production, hence “freeing" them to become vendors of
labor power to third parties.

   In this chapter we shall examine the ways that some agrarian and
pastoral products came to be produced on plantations or on small
holdings, and we shall illustrate some of the ways these new forms of
production affected the participating populations. In the next chapter,
we will look more closely at the worldwide development of working
classes, which manned the new industries and agricultural enterprises
thrown up by accumulating capital in the course of its ever-intensifying
reproduction.

Commercial Agriculture: Plantations

In agriculture, the main instruments of capitalist expansion in the
nineteenth century were the plantation and the specialized cash-crop-
producing small farm. A plantation can be defined formally as a capital-
using unit employing a large labor force under close managerial
supervision to produce a crop for sale. The labor force usually works in
labor gangs that carry out the repetitive and physically demanding tasks
under the watchful eye of foremen who enforce the required sequence and
synchronization of tasks. Plantation agriculture therefore takes on
something of the order and drill of an army, which led Edgar T. Thompson
to characterize it as "military” agriculture. Its aim is to produce one
or two crops for the market. That specialization is a source at once of
its strength and of its weakness. The organization can respond to
increases in market demand; but it is also highly vulnerable to economic
downturns.

   Plantations tend to be large in size, achieving economies of scale by
devoting as much of their resources as possible to the cultivation of a
single crop. Large-scale production requires large-scale processing. The
bulk product must be moved from the fields to a processing center; the
processed crop must be stored until it can be taken to market. The
combined functions of organizational control, processing, and storage
create the plantation center, which becomes a post of command, walled
off from surrounding fields and workers' barracks. Where the plantation,
with its novel forms and functions, is set up in the midst of an already
inhabited countryside, it appears as an "enclave" driven into an alien
environment. Where plantations are formed on the edge of older
settlements, they constitute an expanding "frontier." They are in fact
the outposts of one mode of production in the midst of other modes. The
relation between the plantation and the forms of production predicated
on these other modes is usually antagonistic. The plantation is an
invader, and its successful expansion is the fruit of successful
invasion.

   Up to the end of the eighteenth century, plantations had been created
mainly in the Americas and on a few islands in the Indian Ocean. They
were worked primarily with slave labor imported from Africa, which they
consumed in great quantities. In 1807, however, Britain abolished the
slave trade, followed soon after by the United States, France, and the
Netherlands. In 1833 Britain went further, outlawing slave labor
entirely in its various possessions around the world.

   Why slave trading and slavery were abolished in the first decades of
the nineteenth century admits of no easy answer. It is true that the
profits in slaving were on the decrease (see Craton 1974: 113). It is
also evident that the planter class of the British Caribbean sugar
islands, once the financial cynosure of the expanding empire, was
seriously weakened in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. French
competition, based on exploitation of slave labor in Saint Domingue,
together with rising sugar imports from Bengal, had lowered sugar
prices. Warfare with the United States and then with France had
disrupted relations with the North American colonies, and had brought on
hunger and inflation in the islands. On some islands cane production
appears to have reached the limits of productivity. During the
Napoleonic wars, too, continental Europe took up the production of sugar
by raising sugar beets, and it was soon to become a formidable
competitor of cane- grown sugar. Beset by debts, the British planters in
the Caribbean experienced a real "crisis of the planter class" (see
Ragatz 1928).

   Yet the shift from slave labor to other forms of labor control within
the British orbit must be understood not only in terms of internal
British development but also in terms of the changing international
system of which Britain formed a part. Under the rising hegemony of
industrial capitalism, there was a growing preference for the use of
free labor over slavery. It must be noted, however, that slavery
continued in the United States, and it even intensified in Brazil and
Cuba in the course of the nineteenth century. Brazil did not abolish
slavery until 1871, and Cuba, with its rising output of sugar produced
by burgeoning factories in the field, not until 1886. The former slaves
in Jamaica withdrew from the plantations to take up subsistence
agriculture on their own plots. Yet Brazil still imported close to
1,900,000 slaves between 1811 and 1870, and Cuba another 550,000. The
end of slave trading and slave labor in one part of the world led to its
continuation and even intensification in another part. One of the areas
that continued to use slave labor was the American Cotton South, now the
major producer of the strategic raw material for the expanding
capitalism in Britain. The rise of industrial capitalism thus rested on
the maintenance of slavery in another part of the world, even though
that slavery was no longer dependent on the continuation of the slave
trade.

   Another aspect of the shift away from slavery within the British
orbit was that the Napoleonic wars placed in Britain's hands control of
much of the tropical world outside the Caribbean. Whereas much of
Britain's wealth before the wars had come from the Caribbean, after the
wars British manufacturers could begin to look forward to a "new"
empire. This empire would not be based on the coerced labor of a few
islands, but on export of manufactured products to Asia and Africa, and
on import of tropical products from them. New kinds of ocean transport
would carry these commodities across oceans made secure against slavery
by the British navy. In consequence, slavery in the British sugar
islands was sacrificed to expanding plantation agriculture and to cash
cropping by small producers in other parts of the world. As a result of
the reorientation of British interests, therefore, slave-grown sugar
from the British Caribbean declined in relative importance as a source
of capital accumulation, and other kinds of cash crops grown in other
parts of the world gained in significance.

   In the course of the nineteenth century, agriculture on plantations
underwent a major change—away from estates capitalized with the
financial resources of planter families and of merchants who advanced
needed commodities against the crop, and toward highly capitalized,
corporate “factories in the field," in which all the factors of
production, including labor, were determined by the play of the
ever-enlarging capitalist market. The “fall of the planter class" was
not confined to the Caribbean; it was worldwide (Beckford 1972:
102-110). The privileged relationships between planter and merchant had
to give way to the free flow of liquid capital. To maximize capital
accumulation and to lower labor costs, capital had to be allowed to flow
freely toward forms and branches of agriculture capable of
intensification and expansion, and away from those hampered by
superannuated technology, limiting organization, and an immobile labor
supply.

   In one plantation area after another, the planter class—possessed of
limited access to capital and wedded to outmoded patterns of
production—failed to make the transition. Metropolitan corporations
acquired their assets and transformed plantation technology and
organization under corporate control, with capital pumped in from
London, Paris, New York, or Hamburg. Giant producing and distributing
organizations, such as the United Africa Company, United Fruit,
Harrisons and Cros- fields, Brooke Bond, the Compagnie Fran?aise de
l'Afrique Occidentale, and the Société Commerciale de l'Ouest Africain,
came to dominate entire branches of economic activities and entire
countries. Both plantation agriculture and small-scale cash-crop
production thus became subject to financial and commercial controls from
distant centers.

Commercial Agriculture: Cash-Cropping Small Farms

The nineteenth century also witnessed, within Europe as in other parts
of the world, an increase and development of cash-crop production on
smaller land holdings. Put in general terms, peasants became farmers. In
Europe this was accomplished in two ways. One way was by freeing the
peasantry economically and politically from tributary obligations to a
class of overlords, enabling the peasants to employ their land and labor
as market factors of production. It was a gradual process, operating in
phases and stages, and one that moved from west to east, beginning in
France in 1789, reaching the Austro-Hungarian dominions after 1848, and
victorious in Russia with the emancipation decrees of 1861. The second
way of moving the peasantry toward specialized cash-crop production was
by severing the connection between subsistence farming and household
craft production under the putting-out system. As craft production under
merchant control gave way to capitalist industry, the poorer
peasant-artisans were forced to give up cultivation and to move toward
sources of industrial employment, leaving their luckier or wealthier
neighbors to engross their land and to employ it to grow specialized
crops for the market. It goes without saying that this was not an even
process taking place everywhere at the same time. In some areas it took
several generations to complete. In the end, however, tributary modes
and the operations of mercantile wealth existing alongside them were
abrogated, and a new kind of agricultural producer was set free to
respond to the inputs of the market.

   As we shall see, such developments also occurred in areas outside of
Europe, notably in West Africa and Southeast Asia. Capitalist expansion
was forwarded both by small holders and by plantation agriculture; yet
these were but agents on the ground, so to speak, for holders of capital
in corporations or agency houses elsewhere. The expansion of commercial
agriculture involved the development of a multitiered structure of
capital inflows, local production and sale, and capital outflows. We
shall follow the growth and spread of some crops and products, and
sketch out some of the ways that this growth and spread affected the
lives of populations "on the ground." These developments and their
effects, however, were but local episodes of a gigantic global process
of capital accumulation.

Commodity Production: Foodstuffs

Especially important in the new worldwide agricultural specialization
were food grains, particularly wheat in Europe and America and rice in
Asia, specialized livestock production, and plantation food crops such
as bananas.

Wheat

We have already noted how much Great Britain came to depend on imports
of grain crops to provide for the "workshop of the world." Three areas
stand out in the specialized production of wheat for export in this
period. The first was the American Midwest and West, where cultivators
advanced into the Great Plains and made inroads on the tough grasses of
the area with the deep plow and the mechanical reaper. The first
shipment of wheat sent eastward—seventy-eight bushels— reached Chicago
in 1838, but the great increase in grain production came after the war
between the Union and the Confederacy. It was then that railroad
construction and the advent of the tramp steamer made overseas exports
increasingly profitable.

   The inland march of the railroads first prompted the creation of
great "bonanza" wheat farms worked with migratory wage labor. In the
1880s, however, these failed, to be replaced with farms operated by
households—households equipped with agricultural machinery. Steam
threshers appeared in the 1830s, mechanical reapers in the 1850s, the
combined harvester-thresher in the 1880s. With this machinery it became
possible for a two-male household, such as that constituted by a
father-son team, to carry on successful wheat farming on 200-acre farms.
These were not peasants aiming at subsistence, but commodity producers
buying their means of production in the market and selling their product
into a market in turn (Friedmann 1978).

   American wheat, sold in Europe at lower prices than the domestic
product, brought on a crisis in European peasant agriculture, sending a
migrant stream of ruined peasants to seek new sources of livelihood in
the burgeoning Americas. Ironically, many of them made the journey
westward on the same ships that carried to Europe the wheat that proved
their undoing.

   The East German Junkers responded to the grain crisis by replacing
their permanent tenant-laborers with migratory wage workers. The tenants
had worked on the Junker estates in return for rights to a cottage, a
plot to farm on their own, pasture for their cows, and a share of the
harvest. They now lost these rights; many of them emigrated (Walker
1964: 184-190). To replace them, the Junkers brought in seasonal Polish
agricultural workers who could be paid low wages. These wages were kept
low by a Junker-backed state policy aimed at inhibiting the growth of
independent Polish-owned farms in the area (Weber 1979; Gerschenkron
1943).

   In the 1880s Argentina was added to the great wheat producers of the
world. As of 1870 it still imported wheat from abroad, but by the end of
the century it was one of the world's main exporters. European immigrant
colonists, tenant farmers, and harvest laborers pushed the wheat
frontier westward until it reached its limit at the line of minimum
rainfall.

   Western Europe, in turn, was fed by a third wheat-producing area,
southern Russia, where wheat grown on the steppe tripled between 1831
and 1860. Ninety percent of this wheat was exported through the port of
Odessa, where world prices began to set levels for the entire Russian
region (Lyashchenko 1949: 367). In contrast to the rest of European
Russia, moreover, the Russian steppe developed patterns of wage labor in
agriculture, replacing serfdom on estates farmed increasingly with
machinery.

Rice

While wheat poured into the European peninsula from Russia and the
Americas, rice became a vital export crop in South and Southeast Asia.
In 1855 Britain seized Lower Burma, the delta region of the Irrawaddy
River, where about a million acres stood under rice. Between 1855 and
1881 that acreage increased ninefold. The primary producers were
peasants, many of them new immigrants from the dry country of Upper
Burma. Production was financed by the great rice mills in Rangoon and
Bassein through a rural network of moneylenders. Most of these were
members of the Chettiar caste from Madras who displaced Burmese
moneylenders. Peasant indebtedness, spurring additional increases in
rice production, was intensified further by loans from Burmese and
Chinese shopkeepers—loans made to finance consumption, life-cycle
ceremonies, and theatrical (pwe) performances. In Burma about half of
the rice raised for export went to India; a quarter went to the
plantations of Ceylon and Malaya, which had begun to specialize in the
production of tea and rubber; and a quarter fed the sugar colonies of
Mauritius and the West Indies. Much of this Burmese rice was consumed by
Indian indentured laborers working on estates overseas, and the boats
carrying these laborers to their destination also bore the rice that fed
them.

   Thailand, similarly, began to produce rice for export, though on a
smaller scale than Burma. Here the rice mills were in Chinese hands, and
it was the Chinese who expanded into the rural districts as middlemen
and moneylenders. Rice growing expanded especially in Thailand's central
plain. One of the settlements founded around midcentury was Bang Chan,
northeast of Bangkok, which a century later was studied by Lauriston
Sharp and the Cornell Thailand Project (Sharp et al. 1953; Sharp and
Hanks 1978; Hanks 1972). The settlement developed in response to the
construction of the Saen Saeb Canal: thirty-four miles long, it linked
the eastern plain with the Chao Phraya River on which Bangkok is
located. Built initially for military reasons, the canal opened up the
region for the Bangkok market. The people who settled in Bang Chan were
a medley of Hainanese Chinese intermarried with Thai, Muslim Malay
prisoners of war from the south, Laotian prisoners of war from the
northeast, and freed slaves from Bangkok. The local Buddhist temple,
which imparts identity to the settlement cluster, was built around 1891
by a river trader of Chinese origin from the village where the canal and
the Mae Nam join. Rice cultivation for the market increased especially
in the third quarter of the century, and it had become fully dominant by
the onset of World War I.

   Bang Chan has acquired importance in the anthropological literature
as a diagnostic case of a "loosely structured social system," a concept
originally developed by John Embree (1950) to characterize Thai society.
The study of Bang Chan concluded that "the exceptionally amorphous,
relatively unstructured character of all Thai society is clearly
reflected in the undifferentiated social organization of Bang Chan"
(Sharp et al. 1953:26). This view provoked a good deal of debate about
models of Thai social structure. It led Jack Potter (1976) to propose an
alternative model of a number of "structural elements" that "generate"
Thai rural communities. Yet the features of Bang Chan that led to its
characterization as "loosely structured"—like the features of other Thai
villages caught up in the rice economy in other ways—must be understood
not merely as a social structure of a certain kind but as the outcome of
the expansion of commodity production.

   The third Asian region producing rice for export was Cochinchina, the
southern delta region of Vietnam, occupied by the French in 1861. To a
large extent, this region is a product of French hydraulic engineering—
work carried out to produce large quantities of rice for export. Most of
the rice was produced on large estates worked by tenants. The area
planted in rice doubled between 1880 and 1900, while rice exports
(funneled through Saigon) nearly tripled in that period. Much of this
rice was shipped to China by way of Hong Kong; this trade came to be
handled largely by Chinese.

Meat

With the onset of the industrial revolution, meat consumption in Europe,
which had earlier been at a relatively high level, decreased markedly.
The advent of the railroad and steamboat, however, prompted the
development of new "livestock frontiers." By 1860 there were new sources
of meat for European and American tables.

   The best known of these frontiers is the American "Wild West," which
became one of the world's "cattle kingdoms" after the end of the war
between the Union and the Confederacy. Great herds of half-wild and
unbranded cattle roamed the open range of southern Texas before the war.
Cessation of the conflict brought on a sudden spurt in the demand for
meat, turning heretofore useless range stock into a market-able
commodity. This turn of events initiated the great cattle drives, with
“cowboys” guiding the herds toward the railheads from which trains sped
the animals on their way to the slaughterhouses of the East. These
mounted wageworkers consisted in part of Anglo-Americans, in part of
Mexicans, in part of American Blacks who had gone out West after the end
of slavery. The technology of the cattle business derived from the
technology of Mexican pastoralism.

   Although the days of the cowboy have become enshrined in popular
American mythology, they lasted no more than a quarter of a century.
Moreover, the West never furnished more than a third of all the cattle
produced in the United States. The grazing of semiferal cattle on the
open range was only an episode in the growth of a cattle industry that
soon made its peace with the advancing cultivators by turning to tame
blood cattle raised intensively on carefully fenced ranches.

   The North American cattle industry developed as an adjunct to the
packing houses of Chicago, St. Louis, and Kansas City; so also, cattle
raising developed on the Argentine pampa as an adjunct to the packing
houses of Buenos Aires. On this grassy steppe, cattle gone wild had
first been hunted for hides, and later to provide salted meat for the
slave plantations of Brazil. An industrial Argentine cattle industry did
not develop until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, however,
when it became possible to freeze meat and transport it cheaply to
European markets, especially Britain. It was British capital that built
and fueled most of the Argentine railroads, provided the blooded stock,
fenced the ranches with barbed wire, built the freezer lockers required
to freeze the fresh-killed meat, and provided the refrigerator ships
that took the meat across the Atlantic. "By the end of the nineteenth
century," says George Pendle (1963: 141), "the pampa had been tamed,
organized, and virtually harnessed to the economy of Great Britain."

   The expansion of the Argentine cattle industry was secured in three
interrelated phases. First, the horse riding Araucanians of the
grasslands were defeated and destroyed militarily. Second, the
semi-independent cattle hunters of the pampa, the gauchos, were deprived
of their autonomy. Wire fencing reduced the numbers of men needed to
keep animals within ranch boundaries. The gaucho became a hired ranch
hand. Third, production on ranches and agricultural estates was
synchronized. The estates, now leased to Spanish and Italian immigrants,
provided in rotation wheat for export and alfalfa for the cattle
ranches.

   A third area where a livestock industry developed was Australia. Here
sheep had been raised for their exportable wool since the first quarter
of the nineteenth century on ranges won from their aboriginal occupants.
When the gold rush of the mid-century drained the sheep range of
available labor, the sheep lords rationalized their production through
the use of mounted boundary riders and through the introduction of New
World techniques of fencing and other innovations. The Australian sheep
ranges, however, remained separate from the agricultural regions that
rimmed the periphery of the continent. The Australian sheep increased in
number from 8 million at mid-century to 70 million by the end of the
century.

   In the last quarter of the century, Australian cattle keeping also
expanded inland. Sheep and cattle came to compete increasingly for
vegetation and water with the kin-ordered aboriginal population. This
drew aborigines and Europeans into inevitable conflicts. Some groups,
like the Ngadidji and Aranda, were simply overrun by the pastoralists.
Others, like the Walbiri, who lived outside the grazing areas, kept
their autonomy for a while, until the younger men began to work as hired
hands on pastoral stations and were soon followed by others. Mervyn
Meggitt noted that in the mid-1950s the Walbiri had made use of their
increased leisure, freed from the stringent demands of food collecting
by the transition to wage work, to intensify their social and ceremonial
activities (1962: 333).

Bananas

Bananas are not staples in a class with grains and meat; yet the
development of banana plantations, stimulated by the commercial upswing
of the nineteenth century, affected wide areas, especially Central
America. The plant had originally been introduced into the Americas by
Spaniards from the Canary Islands during the first years of the
Conquest. It had spread widely as a staple crop among both primitive and
peasant populations in the tropical lowlands. In the 1870s it became a
plantation crop. In 1871 a railroad promoter from the United States,
engaged in constructing railroads in Costa Rica, began to experiment in
commercial banana production to provide freight for his railroad. Out of
these experiments grew the United Fruit Company, incorporated in 1889.

   In the course of thirty-five years, the Company produced
approximately 2 billion bunches of bananas on its own far-flung estates
in Costa Rica, Panama, Honduras, Colombia, and Ecuador. Geographic
dispersal enabled the Company to offset political pressures in any one
host country. Dispersal also allowed it to take advantage of suitable
environments in different locations, thus reducing the chance that
floods, hurricanes, soil depletion, and plant diseases could bring
production to a halt in any one of them. To further reduce these risks,
the Company acquired a great deal more land than it could use at any one
time, to hold as a reserve against the future. In some areas it formed
relationships with local cultivators who grew bananas and then sold them
to the Company.

   Such was the case on the northern coast of Colombia in the floodplain
at the base of the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta (see Partridge 1979).
This area—drained, irrigated, and intensively cultivated by the Tairona
in pre-Hispanic times (see chapter 2)—was only sparsely settled after
the Spanish conquest decimated the native population. Until the last
quarter of the nineteenth century, the land was either in extensive
livestock estates or was used by swidden cultivators who resided in
scattered hamlets and raised crops for subsistence and occasional sale.
The lifeways of these settlers form the backdrop of One Hundred Years of
Solitude by the Colombian novelist Gabriel García Márquez, who
synthesized the experience of several settlements in his portrayal of
the imaginary town of Macondo. In the 1870s Colombian entrepreneurs
opened up the area with the construction of a railroad, a drainage
canal, and irrigation ditches. Colombian planters initiated banana
production soon afterward, sending the stalks to market in New York. In
1896 the United Fruit Company bought the railroad and acquired land
south of the Colombian holdings to build up its own irrigation district.
The Company's control of land transport, shipping, and marketing soon
rendered the Colombian planters dependent upon it, requiring them to
synchronize their productive processes with those of the United Fruit
plantations and to sell their fruit through the Company. Labor
contractors recruited plantation workers and oversaw the actual labor
process. Workers were paid a small daily cash wage and scrip for
purchases at the plantation commissary. García Márquez's novel
poignantly describes some of the changes wrought by wage labor in the
life of the local population, and their culmination in the bloody strike
of 1928.

   While most workers on the Colombian banana estates were recruited
locally, in Central America the Company favored workers from the
English-speaking islands of the Caribbean, especially Jamaica. The
Company encountered difficulty in attracting people from the adjacent
highlands to work in the tropical lowlands. The English-speaking West
Indians not only could communicate with the North American plantation
staff but, more importantly, they were wholly dependent on the Company
while in its employ abroad and thus more manageable than native workers.
The islanders could also be laid off when the Company abandoned
cultivation in one area in favor of another. The role of West Indian
workers on United Fruit plantations gradually diminished, as host
governments exerted pressure against the importation of foreign workers
and native populations became more familiar with wage work on the coast.

   One group of Central Americans who became workers on the Company's
Panama plantations were the Guaymi. This Chibcha-speaking population had
retreated from the Spanish Conquest into the sanctuary provided by the
rugged mountain country of western Panama, and there they preserved
their kin-based corporate landholding groups. In the 1930s, increasing
numbers of Guaymi began to combine shifting cultivation in their home
province with periodic stints of wage labor for the Company. Growing
ever more dependent on wages and store- bought commodities, they would
be hard hit in the 1960s when the Company began to mechanize, replacing
men with machines. Philip Young (1971) has seen in this deprivation the
main cause of the nativist millenarian movement. Mama Chi, that
developed among the Guaymi at that time.

Industrial Crops

Rubber in America

An industrial tree crop that became important during the nineteenth
century was rubber. It became a prime industrial material after the
discovery of vulcanization in 1839, and it was used first in the
manufacture of raincoats, shoes, bicycle tires, condoms, and other
household articles. Then it came to be used for railroads, in
engineering, and as insulation in the new electrical industries.
Finally, at the end of the century, it became a major raw material for
the automobile industry.

   Until 1900 Brazil was the only producer of rubber; it increased its
production from a mere 27 tons in 1827 to an annual average of 20,000
tons in the last decade of the century (Poppino 1968: 140- 141). The
primary producers were at first Amazonian Indians and Luso-Brazilian
cultivators on the Amazon. Later, laborers from the Brazilian Northeast
(the so-called flagelados) were brought in to collect rubber under
contract. They were impelled to seek a new source of livelihood in the
tropical forest by the general economic decline of the sugar industry in
the Northeast, the former heartland of the Brazilian economy. In more
immediate terms, they were victims of the great drought that assailed
the region between 1877 and 1880, and that may have been responsible for
the death by starvation of some 200,000 people. A similar number moved
into Amazonia in the last decades of the century (Furtado 1963:
143—144). The town described by Charles Wagley (1953) under the name of
Ita owes its origin to the advent of such Northeastern migrants in 1880.

Rubber Gatherers: Mundurucii

How Amazonian Indians reacted to the introduction of the rubber trade is
well exemplified by the people who called themselves Weidyenye ("our
people"), but who are more widely known under the name given them by
their Parintintin enemies—Mundurucii—after a species of ant. The
Luso-Brazilians first met up with them in the late eighteenth century,
when they raided other Indians and white settlers in the lower Amazon
Valley. The Mundurucii and the intruders became allies, an alliance in
which Mundurucii males and females took different roles. The women began
to produce manioc for the frontiersmen. The men, though initially
hostile, joined their new allies as mercenaries in warfare against the
Mura Indians (who inhabited the area between the Amazon and the Rio
Negro) and the Cawahiwa on the upper Tapajos. The Luso-Brazilians
employed the Mundurucu to raid for slaves among these populations, to
suppress local uprisings, and to put down general rebellions—such as the
Revolution of the Cabanas in 1835, an uprising of local Whites,
Afro-Brazilians, and Mura and other Indians.

   The increase in manioc production, carried on by the women, and the
expansion of long-distance warfare, carried on by the men, not only gave
rise to an intensified division of labor between the sexes but also
affected Mundurucu patterns of residence and descent. When Robert Murphy
went to study the Mundurucu in the 1950s, they represented an
ethnographic anomaly. They combined patrilineal reckoning of descent
with matrilocal residence. Kroeber (1952:213) had written that he "did
not know of such a society, and should expect is occurrence to be rare."
Murphy, moreover, found that the Mundurucu had acquired this unexpected
combination by changing from an earlier pattern of patrilineality and
patrilocality—a change thought by some anthropologists to be so unlikely
that the obstacles to it were "well-nigh insuperable" (Murdock 1949:
217). Murphy showed how the Mundurucu had made this shift.

   Until the early nineteenth century, the Mundurucu had lived in
villages, each centered upon a single patrilineage that recruited women
in marriage from other patrilineal villages through the rules of
patrilocal residence. Each patrilineage symbolized its unity through the
possession and ritual use of sacred trumpets embodying the ancestral
spirits that were kept in a "men's house." With the advent of the manioc
trade based on female production, however, the rule of marriage became
matrilocal, which had the effect of maintaining the unity and continuity
of the female-centered domestic task force. Instead of women moving to
their husbands' villages upon marriage as before, men now moved to their
wives' places of residence. The men in any given village were recruited
from a number of different patrilineages, which were no longer anchored
locally. The men's house of the village thus no longer served only one
patrilineage, but became a common male clubhouse and "barracks." The
sacred trumpets ceased to symbolize the distinctiveness of
patrilineages. Rather, they began to stand for the unity of the men's
house, emphasizing its translocal military potential.

   Rubber tapping brought on still another transformation of Mundurucu
social organization. Before the advent of the rubber trade, Mundurucu
villages were usually located on high, savannahlike ground. In the dry
season of each year, the villagers would descend to the river to fish.
With the growing demand for rubber, however, they began to tap wild
trees in the gallery forests along the river's edge, exchanging the
latex they gathered for metal goods, clothing, and even food. Gradually,
separate domestic groups set up permanent residences along the
riverside, where they laid exclusive claim to tracts of forest.

Mundurucu village of Cabrua. Women drying manioc flour over a fire; men
relaxing in the men s house. Photographs by Robert F. Murphy. (Courtesy
of Robert F. Murphy)

Increasingly exchanging latex for commodities at the trading post, they
abandoned their own crafts and became ever more dependent on the goods
advanced by the trader. The Mundurucu villages, once fighting and
manioc-growing units, thus dissolved into numerous small households,
each linked separately to the trading post in a web of exchanges and
growing debts. The trader replaced the Mundurucu chief as the pivot of
local circuits of production and exchange. The rubber trader depended,
in turn, on merchant houses downriver to receive the rubber and to
supply him with needed commodities, while the merchant house was itself
dependent upon an export-import firm for supplies and rubber sales. Thus
Mundurucu, trader, merchant, and export-import firm all became linked in
an expanding network of production and circulation.

Rubber in Asia

Brazilian wild rubber monopolized the world market during most of the
nineteenth century. In 1876, however. Sir Robert Wickham smuggled seeds
of Amazonian rubber to Kew Gardens in England, where they were
acclimated and selected for planting in Malaya. After 1900 rubber
production expanded rapidly in Asia, notably in Malaya. Malayan rubber
plantations grew from 5,000 acres in 1900 to 1,250,000 in 1913. An
original planter class of small initial means was soon replaced by
managers installed by agency houses that floated loans in London
(Jackson 1968). The laborers were mostly imported from southern India.
They were Tamil, working under indenture to labor contractors who hired
laborers in their native villages and supervised their work in gangs on
the plantation (Jain 1970).

Malaya: the region of plantation rubber.

   Another rubber-producing area in southern Asia developed on the east
coast of Sumatra, around Deli. In this area, the Dutch had long grown
tobacco on plantations, which developed in symbiosis with the
slash-and-burn agriculture of local Malay and Batak villagers. The
plantation took over the labor of burning off the covering vegetation.
It then raised the first crop, tobacco. When productivity decreased in
the second year, the plantation opened a new field, allowing the
villagers to take over the tobacco plots in order to raise food. When
rubber was introduced in 1906, this symbiotic relationship came to an
end. Rubber trees were a perennial crop and could not be alternated with
annuals. Instead, rubber cultivation, carried on by imported Javanese
and Chinese laborers, now engulfed the subsistence plots of the native
population. Local villages gave way to company towns.

   Plantation rubber did not remain the only source of rubber in either
Indonesia or Malaya. In Indonesia, both in Sumatra and in Borneo, small
holders also began to raise rubber. At first, they planted rubber in
combination with food-producing swiddens, moving gradually toward
greater reliance on the cash crop as market conditions and prices
permitted. In Malaya, similarly, Malay cultivators came to rely on
rubber production as a source of income. In a peasant village in
Kelantan, studied in the late 1950s (see Downs 1967: 162-166), for
instance, rubber tapping had become a source of cash income for almost
three- quarters of the adult villagers. It was increasingly preferred to
growing irrigated rice, in spite of the high basic value placed on rice
in Malaya.

Palm Oil

  A second tree crop to come into prominence during the nineteenth
century was the palm. The export of palm oil from West Africa first
paralleled the export of slaves, and then became the chief export of the
West African forest belt with the abolition of the slave trade in the
1860s. Whereas West Africa exported a mere 1,000 tons of oil to England
in 1810, palm oil exports reached an annual average of 50,000 tons
between 1860 and 1900. Palm oil took the place of animal tallow in
making soap, and it became increasingly important as a source of
lubricants for machines. In the late nineteenth century, palm kernels
also furnished oil for the manufacture of margarine and cattle feed.

   

The region of palm oil production, West Africa.

  The old centers of the slave trade responded to this new demand. Yet
the new trade brought on major upheavals both in internal and external
relations. An immediate consequence of the new trade was a "crisis of
the aristocracy," namely, the warrior elites and state organizations
that had grown powerful and wealthy through the pursuit of slaving. An
entity like Dahomey, wholly specialized for slave raiding and slaving,
found it particularly difficult to switch over to the new commodity.
There was an increase in interstate warfare for easy sources of plunder
and tribute. In addition, the rulers of Dahomey and the chiefs of the
Yoruba attempted to produce palm oil on plantations worked by slaves.
The Asante state expanded its production and sale of kola nuts to the
Hausa in the north in order to make up for the decline of slaving; but
at the same time Fante middlemen on the coast were escaping the Asante
grip by themselves producing palm oil for the new market. Old elites
found their incomes threatened. The canoe houses of the Niger delta
disintegrated; former slaves asserted their independence in order to
take part in the new trade; and there were repercussions in disorders
among slaves. The production of palm oil was also a business that could
be entered by small cultivators if they could gain access to oil palms
on the lands of their descent group or ward division and mobilize the
labor of their households (see Uchendu 1965).

   In contrast to the slave trade, in which African middlemen had
delivered the slaves to the coast for transshipment, the palm oil trade
prompted European wholesalers to establish direct contact with the
producers or with their representatives in the African hinterlands. In
turn, a new commercial elite of Africans, many of them ex-slaves
educated in European religious missions, took over the import trade
previously handled by the slave traders. The dual development of
European palm oil merchants and African importers was aided by the
spread of European all-purpose money in place of the iron, copper, and
cowrie currencies used previously. This diminished the exchange of
European goods for slaves or for African products, and it put palm oil
export and commodity imports on a cash-and-carry basis.

   This interplay of contending forces was profoundly affected by the
Great Depression of 1873. Prices for palm oil products declined; profit
margins decreased. Former aristocrats of the slave trade, new African
middlemen, European wholesalers, and African producers all confronted
diminished opportunities and sharply increased competition for scarcer
resources. "Not surprisingly," notes A. G. Hopkins, "there was a fierce
struggle in the late nineteenth century as each party sought to control
the local market and dictate terms to the other" (1973: 154). The
European merchants called for law and order, a call often supported by
colonial officials, whose reputation was tied up with the expansion of
European-based commerce. The Europeans wanted to rationalize commerce
and transportation still further by expanding railroads inland; the
former ruling class saw this, correctly, as the final spike driven
through their declining power. To add to the embroilment, the various
European powers competed with one another, each supported by a
mercantile contingent hoping for privileged access to a controlled
market.

   The result was the entry of European troops, the conquest of the
inland kingdoms of Asante, Dahomey, Oyo, and Benin, the destruction of
the Aro and their Great Oracle, and the establishment of European
domination. In West Africa, the expansion of imperial European rule was
undertaken by imperial officials who were perhaps not fully conscious of
any economic imperatives. The dialectic of forces was complex, and the
resulting disorder invited political and military intervention. Yet the
disorders were economic in their basic causes, and the intervention was
economic in its consequences.

Stimulants

Among the panoply of products destined for consumption in the
industrializing areas, a few are clearly not staple foodstuffs or
industrial products but rather stimulants. Already significant during
the period of Europe's initial overseas expansion, such commodities as
tea, coffee, cocoa, sugar, tobacco, and even opium recur so often in the
roster of imports and exports during the latter nineteenth century that
some scholars have even begun to speak of their role as the "Big Fix."

   The popularity of these stimulants is not easily explained. It may be
that they are pharmacologically addictive, answering to certain
biochemical propensities of the human body. In that sense they would not
be unique, but would form part of a wider set of stimulants in human
use, including the West African kola nut, the betel nut of South and
Southeast Asia, the maté of Argentina, and the coca of the Andes. These
other products remained of only regional interest, however, and did not
enter the circuits of worldwide traffic, in contrast to the products
popularized in the course of the industrial revolution. It has been
suggested that these stimulants of the industrial era were favored
because they provided quick energy in a period when more intense and
prolonged performance was demanded from the human body. Some of them
provided carbohydrates and energy, without at the same time rendering
the body inefficient, as would alcohol. Thus, “tea time" and “coffee
breaks" fitted better into the new industrial schedule of work than
libations of gin or rum would have. Still, these latter continued to be
drunk in considerable quantities, despite the great efforts of a growing
temperance movement.

   We should perhaps not look to the physiological properties of various
stimulants as the final explanation, but rather view their increasing
use as part of a general reshaping of consumption patterns. There were
major changes of diet in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, many
of them nutritionally for the worse (Braudel 1973b: 129-130; Hobs- bawm
1967: Chaps. 5, 7). There was less access to peasant produce, and
especially to meat, with the decline of small producers supplying local
markets. There was greater demand for a few bulk products for the
growing agglomerations of population in cities and industrial centers.
Yet there were also new patterns of sociability and communication, such
as those provided by coffeehouses and teashops. New class-based norms
for where, when, and how to eat developed, in turn setting up new
standards for cultural emulation in societies undergoing rapid social
and cultural change. With these new patterns, the consumption of
alkaloids, theobromides, sugars, and even “tranquilizers“ made rapid
progress in all social classes. Purveying the new products, in its turn,
"European enterprise accumulated considerable savings by the provision
of low-cost foods and substitutes to European working classes" (Mintz
1979b: 61).

Sugar

First among the stimulants was still sugar—an indispensable additive to
sauces and pastry, as well as a sweetener for innumerable cups of tea,
coffee, and cocoa. Although the supremacy of sugar cane as a source of
sugar had been challenged, first by the rebellion of the slaves in
French St. Domingue (Haiti) and by the abolition of slavery in British
Jamaica, and later by the diffusion of the sugar beet in temperate
Europe, it never lost out completely and once again expanded in acreage
after the third decade of the nineteenth century.

   In the British orbit, this renewed rise took place with the aid of a
new labor supply, namely, indentured laborers from the East Indies. The
island of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean, won from the French in 1815,
was the first British colony to benefit from the arrival of these new
recruits to the labor force, and it took first place among the new sugar
producers. It was followed by Trinidad, which Britain captured from
Spain, and Guyana, taken from the Dutch. In the second half of the
century, Indian indentured laborers began to work in the cane fields in
Fiji (1850) and in Natal, South Africa (1860), while Melanesians, mostly
from the New Hebrides, were impressed or contracted for work in
Queensland, Australia (1863), as well as in Fiji (1864).

   The forcible recruitment of Melanesians, or "blackbirding," affected
large numbers of men. Between 1863 and 1907, 61,000 Melanesians were
taken to Queensland alone, of whom fewer than 45,000 returned (Docker
1970: 274). On many islands, blackbirding aided the careers of local
labor recruiters or hunters of men. One such was Kwaisulia on the island
of Sulu Vou. Kwaisulia had signed up to work in Queensland and had
returned home in the 1880s. Drawing on his local network, he provided
the blackbirders with labor recruits, for which he received arms and
ammunition, dynamite, kerosene, medicines, hardware, and building
materials (Docker 1970: 130— 138). This wealth then enabled Kwaisulia to
enlarge the scale of his operations. In other areas the local end of the
trade was not controlled by monopolists. Blackbirding meant, however,
the advent of guns, leading to an increase in raiding and fighting and
to the decimation of the local population.

   Beginning in 1830, the Dutch, too, undertook to expand sugar
production—in Indonesia, especially in Java, under a system known as the
Culture System (Dutch Cultuurstelsel, meaning "cultivation system") (see
Geertz 1963). The culture system demanded that villagers pay goverment
taxes in crops rather than in money. Designed to elicit and increase the
production of all tropical crops, it was most successful in the case of
sugar and coffee. These became the two major export crops of the Dutch
East Indies. Sugar, an annual, could be raised on the same land as the
irrigated rice of the Javanese villagers. By allocating one-fifth of
village lands to the production of sugar, the Dutch sugar estates
acquired at one and the same time a suitable land base and a labor force
resident in villages and available seasonally for labor in the cane
fields. Independent production of sugar by Javanese smallholders was
discouraged, but the customary workings of the Javanese village were
reinforced. These villages, where labor reproduced itself by ever
intensifying the cultivation of irrigated rice, thus functioned
efficiently as labor reserves for the sugar operations.

   In 1870 new legislation transferred the responsibility for making the
system work from the government to private enterprises. The law
continued to maintain village integrity by protecting village titles to
land, but it now granted ownership of cane plantings to private holders.
Soon after, when these newly created planters experienced financial
shipwreck, their rights passed to Netherlands-based companies, which
successfully combined the sugar estates with large capital-intensive
processing facilities. Labor in sugar continued to be drawn from the
wet-rice-growing villages, but management of each new mill and of the
cane lands associated with it passed entirely into the hands of European
personnel.

 The Rise of the Capital-intensive Plantation

The Dutch transformation of the East Indian sugar estate from a unit
dependent primarily on massive use of labor to a unit organized around a
capital-intensive sugar mill illustrates the worldwide “fall of the
planter class." The planter, drawing on merchant capital and delivering
his cash crop to pay for it, could not marshall the financial and
technical resources required to raise transportation, labor operations,
and processing to the higher level required by ever-increasing capital
accumulation. In sugar production, this stepped-up requirement involved
large new outlays for land, processing equipment, and a transportation
infrastructure, creating "factories in the field." Simultaneously,
financial control of the undertaking shifted from merchant houses to
joint-stock or limited-liability companies, and still later to corporate
capital.

   This transformation occurred in the Caribbean as well as in
Indonesia. It was especially massive in Cuba, where sugar production
intensified in the second half of the century, intensifying the
exactions of slavery in turn. In Cuba, as in Puerto Rico, American
intervention in the local effort to separate the islands from Spain
created the conditions for the replacement of planters' capital with
corporate capital brought in from the United States.

   Cutting and loading sugar cane at Las Canas, one of Cuba's
technologically most advanced sugar estates during the second half of
the nineteenth century. Sketch by Walter Yeager, 1880. (Courtesy of the
New York Historical Society, New York City)

Sidney Mintz (1974: Chap. 4) has traced in detail the transformation of
such a plantation on the south coast of Puerto Rico. Before slavery was
abolished in 1873, Hacienda Vieja drew on a labor supply of landless
freemen forced to work by coercive labor legislation, in addition to
their supply of slaves. The plantation, owned by a single family, was
small, usually falling into the range of 100 to 400 acres. A fourth of
the land was in sugar cane; the rest was in pasture and subsistence
plots used to feed the laborers. Fields were worked with hook-type
plows; fertilizer other than animal droppings was unknown; and
irrigation, necessary for cultivation on this dry coast, was limited.
The sugar- processing machinery was old-fashioned, and the sugar
produced was crude. When slavery was abolished, the plantation changed
over to the use of free labor, paid wages, and granted subsistence plots
where workers raised their own food. Available capital, however, was too
limited to make possible the transition to more modern agricultural and
processing technology.

   This transition came only a quarter of a century later, with the
North American occupation. The plantation was sold to a mainland
corporation, which now aggregated the older plantations into one large
complex of “tributary farms" centered upon a giant processing mill.
Cultivation was expanded to engulf subsistence plots and pasture range
alike, turning the whole region into a continuous belt of burgeoning
cane. Irrigation and swamp drainage were expanded; fertilizer was
introduced. Subsistence plots disappeared, and work—now paid as
piecework—was remunerated in wages in the form of tokens exchangeable
for commodities at a company store. Within a short time, the labor force
of the area was transformed from a population of laborers paid largely
in kind into a full-fledged rural proletariat.

Coffee

Coffee drinking reached Europe through contacts with the Near East.
Originally native to Ethiopia, it was drunk in Aden by the end of the
fifteenth century. In spite of frequent prohibitions, it became popular
throughout the lands of the Ottoman polity in the course of the
sixteenth century. It spread through Europe along with the institution
of the coffeehouse in the late seventeenth century. At first the only
source of the bean was the hinterland of the town of A1 Mukha (Mocha) in
Yemen, but by 1712 the Dutch were planting coffee shrubs in Java. In
1833 there were more than a million coffee trees in Java; by midcentury
300 million (Geertz 1963: 66). Coffee produced on Dutch estates and by
Indonesian small holders soon became the Dutch East Indies' major export
crop.

   Production, however, dipped severely between 1880 and 1890, when the
fungus of the coffee blight hit the orchards. It recovered thereafter,
with a shift in species from arabica to robusta. both on estates and on
peasant-owned swiddens in the Outer Islands, but it had by then lost
first place to sugar as the main export crop. In the meantime, a decade
of crop destruction in Java had provided the opportunity for enlarged
production in Brazil.

   Coffee had reached Brazil early in the eighteenth century, but it had
been grown wholly for domestic consumption. The slave rebellion in
French-held St. Domingue (Haiti) brought on an increase in coffee
prices, which in turn stimulated a rise in Brazilian coffee exports.
Coffee produced on slave plantations rapidly became Brazil's leading
agricultural export, in spite of a decline in coffee prices. The
employment of unremunerated slave labor in fact compensated for the fall
in returns. To expand production further, however, confronted Brazil
with a serious manpower problem (see Furtado 1963: Chaps. 21, 22). The
African slave trade had been halted, while Brazil's internal supply of
slaves failed to reproduce itself. Moreover, slavery was, for various
reasons, finally abolished in 1888. Moving labor from the precarious
swidden subsistence sector into plantation agriculture would have
undermined the food economy without guaranteeing an increase in the
available labor force. Some Brazilians already envisaged the importation
of Asians when agricultural difficulties and the decline of the textile
industry in southern Italy unleashed a stream of European migrants into
Brazil. A million and a half European immigrants came to Brazil between
1880 and 1890, most of them Italians, and large numbers became laborers
on the rapidly expanding coffee fazendas of Sao Paulo. By the end of the
century, Brazil was able to supply three-quarters of the world's coffee.

   Although Brazil came to dominate the world coffee market, other areas
entered coffee production as well. Among these was Central America,
specifically the Mexican state of Chiapas and Guatemala. Here the spread
of commercial coffee production was materially aided by legislation
(Mexico, 1856; Guatemala, 1877) that abolished communal jurisdiction
over land. This legislation did away with the legal armature that had
permitted corporate native American communities to survive and to
stabilize themselves in the face of repeated attempts to seize their
resources and tap their labor supply (see chapter 5). Land was now to be
owned privately and to be made subject to purchase, sale, and pawning.
This allowed non-Indians to buy up unregistered land and to foreclose
mortgages of Indian debtors. By the mid-nineteenth century, the Tzel-
tal- and Tzotzil-speaking communities surrounding San Cristobal Las
Casas in Chiapas had already lost most of their territorial base, except
for a small remnant of heavily overutilized communal land. In 1869 the
Tzeltal, in fact, rose in rebellion against this diminution of their
resources under external pressure. In the 1870s, however, coffee was
introduced on foreign-owned estates, and many Indians were encouraged to
settle in the new coffee areas. After World War I, the planters further
increased their labor supply by engaging temporary workers from the
highland communities through the use of cash advances. This system of
advances made wage labor the major source of income for many highland
dwellers who, between stints of labor, would return to their communities
to farm small subsistence plots (Wasserstrom 1977, 1978). Once again, we
see the development of a system whereby plantations producing a cash
product and subsistence-oriented "labor reserves" came to exist side by
side.

   More recently, during World War II, Mexican landowners in the lowland
Grijalva basin expanded their production of foodstuffs, notably corn, in
response to advantageous prices in the national capital. They did this
by renting unused or untapped land to Zinacanteco tenants to clear and
cultivate, thus maintaining property rights over the land while
obtaining a ready work force. The more successful Zinacanteco renters,
in turn, hired wage laborers from Chamula to maximize their output, or
they employed other members of their community to recruit and organize
work crews on their behalf

   Zinacantan, Chamula, and other Tzeltal- and Tzoltzil-speaking
communities in the vicinity of San Cristobal Las Casas in highland
Chiapas have been studied intensively by American anthropologists since
the 1940s. Most of these studies have dealt with them either as "tribal"
survivors of the ancient Maya, maintained in relative isolation from
outside contact, or as parts of a colonial Hispanic society preserved in
encapsulated form within a modernizing Mexico. Tzeltal and Tzotzil,
along with other Native Americans in Central America, however, were
drawn early into the networks of mercantile expansion (see McLeod 1973),
and they have participated actively since the nineteenth century in the
commercial coffee and corn economy of the area and in the politics of
the Mexican state. These involvements, in turn, have altered their
agricultural adaptation, changed their class structure, and affected
their political and ceremonial organization. Their continuing identity
as inhabitants of “Indian” communities is thus not a corpus of unchanged
traditions maintained in unbroken fashion from a distant past. It is,
rather, the outcome of a multitude of interrelated and often
antagonistic processes set in motion by capitalist development.

Tea

Tea became, of course, coffee's main competitor in providing alkaloid
stimulants to the world. The first historically reliable reference to
tea is in a Chinese source dating from the fourth century A.D., but it
was not until the eighth century that it was given its own character,
ch'a. in the script, and became sufficiently important economically to
be taxed by the state. Portuguese missionaries were perhaps the first
Europeans to report on tea, and the Dutch sea merchants introduced the
brew to Europe. By the middle of the seventeenth century, it had become
a popular drink in the Netherlands and France; during the last third of
the century it became the predilect drink of English court circles. At
this time it still came entirely from China. During the first quarter of
the eighteenth century, tea replaced silk as the main item loaded on
British ships trafficking along the China coast. It was soon drunk not
only in the British Isles but also in the American colonies. There it
constituted the third largest import, after- textiles and ironwares,
until Sam Adams's rebel band—clumsily disguised as Indians—initiated the
American War of Independence by feeding a recently arrived consignment
of tea to the fish of Boston harbor.

   From 1840 on, tea began to be raised in quantity in Assam, where the
bush grew wild, and in various parts of India where it was planted. Yet
until the opening of the Suez Canal, Indian teas furnished only a
fraction of the world's supply of tea. After the opening of the canal,
the steamboat won out over the clipper ship in loading and transporting
tea, and Indian “black” teas became dominant commercially over the green
teas of China.

   In Ceylon, tea plantations spread with astonishing rapidity
throughout the uplands in the 1870s, to a great extent at the expense of
the Kandyan Sinhalese peasantry. A large amount of village common land
was turned into royal land and then sold to planters. In 1848 coffee had
covered some 60,000 acres, held by 367 plantations, but when the coffee
blight struck in 1868, the planters switched to tea. By 1903 more than
400,000 acres had been planted with tea shrubs (Royal Kandyan Peasantry
Commission, quoted in Yalman 1971: 20, n. 10). The effect was to
restrict the Sinhalese peasantry to the precincts of their irrigated
rice villages, and to curtail their ability to open slash-and-burn
fields in their land reserves.

   Tea cultivation is enormously labor consuming. With each acre bearing
between 3,000 and 5,000 bushes (each bush furnishing between five and
eight ounces of tea), twenty to forty harvesters are needed per acre per
day. To obtain the needed labor, the planters imported Tamilspeakers
from South India into Ceylon. These "India Tamil," who differ from the
much older "Ceylon" or "Jaffna" Tamil of the north and east coasts,
today number close to a million people, as compared with some 2 million
upland Kandyan Sinhalese. The socioeconomic opposition between the India
Tamil and the surrounding Sinhalese peasantry has been exacerbated by
linguistic and religious differences. The Sinhalese speak an
Indo-European language, the Tamil are Dravidian-speakers; the Sinhalese
are Buddhists, the Tamil Hindus. These differences, in turn, have fueled
open conflicts between the Sinhalese cultivators and the Tamil
plantation proletariat.

Cocoa

Cocoa was originally a Mesoamerican crop. In the course of the
seventeenth century, the Dutch took it to the island of Sao Tomé in the
Gulf of Guinea off the West African coast. In 1879 an enterprising
Ga-speaker carried the seed from the neighboring island of Fernando Po
to the Akwapim Ridge, above the city of Accra on the Gold Coast of
present- day Ghana. By the 1890s cocoa was grown on the Akwapim Ridge in
place of the palm products that suffered a decline in prices after 1885.
Cocoa could be adopted readily: no new tools were required; drying and
fermenting the beans were simple processes; and only at harvest time was
there a requirement for large inputs of labor. The financial skills
required for producing and marketing the new crop were also present. We
have seen (chapter 7) that West Africans had acquired a great deal of
knowledge and sophistication in the mechanics of commerce. The
cultivators who launched themselves into cocoa production were
acquainted with the mechanisms of money and credit. Some had been
involved in trade in the past; others had tried their hands at
collecting wild rubber for sale.

   To obtain land on which to raise cocoa, the new growers negotiated
land sales with the chiefs in control of surplus land in Akim Abuakwa.
In buying this land, the new occupants neatly combined the new ways of
land acquisition with older patterns of group organization. Patrilineal
populations, like the Krobo, formed nonkin "companies" or land- buying
clubs that bought land in severalty, assigning separate strips to
company members. The matrilineal Aburi and Akropong bought land for
their matrilineage (abusua), allocating land in usufruct to lineage
members. Usually the original settlers maintained the cohesion of their
starting nucleus, including its political subordination to a local
village chief.

Cocoa-growing and ethnic affiliation, Ghana and Ivory Coast.

   The cocoa producers first farmed in the vicinity of their home
village, growing trees until these reached maturity. With the proceeds
from their original cocoa stands, they then opened up a new belt of
cocoa production, bringing in share tenants and their families to
cultivate and harvest, generally in return for a third of the crop.
Laborers—usually Ewe and others from east of the Volta River—were also
hired to weed the land between harvests. In time, people with
accumulated capital would buy land "forward" and stake others to the
purchase of new outlying stands of cacao, or else they would take over
lands relinquished by cultivators unable to compete.

   By 1911 Ghana was the world’s major producer of cocoa, a commodity
dear to every worshiper of chocolate candy. Expanded production favored
owners of larger holdings who worked the land with sharecroppers and
seasonal wage laborers, over households employing family labor only.
Thus, over time, increased cocoa growing differentiated the population
into classes of fanners and laborers (Hill 1963).

   Cocoa growing spread rapidly throughout West Africa—northward to the
Asante, eastward to the Yoruba of Nigeria, westward to the Ivory Coast.
On the Ivory Coast, it was not introduced by African cultivators but
rather was initiated by the French colonial government, in the hope of
developing a new source of commercial wealth and taxation. The people
brought into cocoa cultivation here were not, as in the Ghanaian case,
pioneer cultivators on a settlement frontier, but were members of
hierarchically organized African states under French colonial control.
These states had been formed by the Agni, a warrior population related
to the Asante. They had moved into what is now the southeastern Ivory
Coast in the seventeenth century, forming two states, Ndenié in the
north, Sanwi in the south. Each of these states was organized around a
king who delegated power to village and matrilineal chiefs. The
population was divided into tribute takers and tribute producers. The
tribute takers were made up of the royal family (matrilineal descendants
of the first Agni chiefs) and several strata of chiefs, including
warriors appointed to the chiefship and chiefs of immigrants and of
splinter groups. The producers of tribute—in labor and in kind—were
either free members of Agni matrilineages or slaves who were usually
descendants of populations conquered by the Agni. Rights to use the land
were matrilineally inherited, with succession to usufruct passing from
mother's brother to sister's son.

   The advent of cocoa production on the Ivory Coast put this system
under stress. First of all, lineage heads with overrights to land began
to depress lineage mates to the status of laborers and to engross the
profits produced by the new crop. This caused schisms within lineages.
Second, matrilineal succession to rights came into conflict with the
pattern whereby cocoa cultivation was carried out by patrilocal working
groups. New heirs to land often found themselves in conflict with the
people actually working it, either as sharecroppers (abusan) or as
pieceworkers. Matrilineal succession to rights meant that a son could
not inherit the land in which he had invested his labor; nor could he be
certain that his uncle would provide him with a comparable holding.
Third, foreigners—Diula, Baoulé, or Mossi—applying for use rights to
Agni lineage lands found themselves at odds with the Agni chiefs
granting such rights. The newcomers wanted to pass on their newly
developed holdings to their own sons, but they soon found themselves
beset by demands from their matrilineally organized landlords. Often
successful in their cocoa-growing ventures, moreover, they sought status
equal to that of the Agni, who considered themselves—as victorious
warriers—superior to all foreigners. Finally, the increasing need for
money and capital placed power in the hands of wealthy merchants,
moneylenders, and cocoa planters. This caused the possession of wealth
to override kinship connection and status distinctions based on the
Agni/non-Agni polarity. Furthermore, the new wealthy elite, comprising
both Agni and non-Agni, built up ties with outsiders who connected
Agnidom with the circuits of capital in Abidjan and beyond. These
outsiders were usually Diula or Lebanese merchants. A wholly different
set of social relationships was thus superimposed on Agni society, with
resulting conflicts between classes and ethnic groups.

Opium

Among the crops that grew increasingly important in the nineteenth
century was opium. We have already seen that it played a major role in
English trade with China. The Chinese state fought in vain to stem the
increase of opium production within China and the importation of
“foreign mud" from outside. Smoking opium was prohibited in 1729. A
further edict, in 1800, banned smoking, growing, and importing opium.
This, however, proved merely a stimulus to smuggling and to local
production in the Chinese provinces of Szechwan and Yunnan. Finally, the
Chinese defeat in the Opium War of 1839-1842 with Britain opened up
China to unlimited imports of Indian opium. In 1858 the Chinese
government recognized its inability to control the British- sponsored
trade by signing an agreement that put a small tax on opium imports. At
the same time, internal opium production increased spectacularly after
1860, competing effectively with the foreign product. By the 1880s
Szechwan province was harvesting an estimated 10,000 tons of raw opium a
year, and Yunnan province began to export opium to Southeast Asia.

   Opium production and smuggling also became a mainstay in the economy
of the hill people inhabiting the mountainous area between the Chinese
border and the Southeast Asia lowlands. Among these were the Hmong
("Meo" or "Miao") and the Iu Mien ("Yao" or "Man"), who had been
gradually driven out of China since the late seventeenth century. They
now began to take up production of the resin-bearing flower on their
own. In the 1890s opium was being produced in Thailand and in
northeastern Burma, where a British observer saw "miles of slopes
covered with the poppy" (J. Scott, quoted in McCoy 1972: 65). Among most
of the hill dwellers of Southeast Asia—Hmong, Iu Mien, Akha, Lahu,
Lisu—opium has since become the major cash product.

   Since the Yunnan variety of the opium poppy grows best above
altitudes of 3,000 feet, it is usually grown on higher ground above dry
rice swiddens, or else it is rotated on swidden fields with maize as the
alternate crop planted each year. Declining production on swidden fields
leads to migration about every five years. In order to secure suitable
terrain in competition with other groups, people draw on wide-ranging
kinship ties and the backing of their ethnic category.

   Opium production requires a great deal of labor. Not only must land
be cleared but fields must be continuously weeded and thinned. Once the
flower petals fall, the exposed capsules must be tapped. They must be
carefully scored to allow the resin to flow, and the congealed resin
must then be scraped off and packaged. This work must, of course, be
synchronized with other tasks of cultivation of rice, maize, or
vegetables. The high demand for labor is met by family members and
sons-in-law who are expected to perform bride service. Households also
exchange labor, and laborers are sometimes hired for work other than the
delicate operations of tapping. These hired laborers are often addicts
of other ethnic categories, who are paid in part with opium for their
own use. Success in opium production thus depends on a man's ability to
attract sufficient labor, and a man gains by having many children and
sons-in-law. Raising numerous children and multiplying sons-in-law, in
turn, hinge upon success in manipulating the marriage market and the
flow of bridewealth. Success in poppy growing and in expanding kinship
ties brings a man political influence, which he enhances further by
offering costly feasts on behalf of household and lineage spirits.

   The role of opium as a key economic factor in the lives of the hill
people bears upon the case of the Kachin, who occupy the hill areas of
northeastern Burma. These people have become significant in
anthropological studies as a result of the path-breaking work of Edmund
Leach (1954). Leach was one of the first British social anthropologists
to go beyond the static structuralism advocated by Radcliffe-Brown to
depict Kachin social structures as a reversible process of oscillation
between a hierarchical model of chief-follower relations, called gumsa,
and an egalitarian model of organization, called gumlao. The
hierarchical gumsa model represented a Kachin approximation to the
theocratic kingship of the valley Shan. Yet it was inherently unstable,
since it lacked an economic base in lowland irrigation agriculture and a
political base in a theocratic state. Instead, it was anchored in a
system in which patrilineages were ranked as wife-givers to wife-takers.
This system was continuously threatened by schisms, as siblings became
rivals for the same chiefship position or as sons-in-law refused to have
their bride service turned into more permanent and coercive forms of
dependence. Gumsa hierarchy was thus inherently subject to breakdown,
giving rise to fission and to new groups organized on more egalitarian
gumlao lines. Yet gumlao would again give way to gumsa as aspirants for
the Shan-like chiefship began to expand their roles as "thigh-eating
chiefs."

   This interpretation, which locates the cause of Kachin
differentiation in the inherent contradictions in their social
organization, has been challenged by Jonathan Friedman (1975). In
Friedman's alternative model, the causative mainspring for gumlao revolt
is a combination of political-economic features. With slash-and-burn
cultivation yielding diminishing returns, groups giving valuables in
bride payment to wife- givers fall into debt, a condition they solve by
fission. Conversely, the successful conversion of valuables into
merit-making feasts to spirits allows some Kachin segments to acquire
more wives and followers, enabling them to achieve greater renown and
influence.

   When the constellations of gumsa and gumlao are placed in a wider
historical context, however, it becomes clear that gumlao revolts
represent historically recent reactions to changes that affected the
Kachin hills in the late nineteenth century, and that they are not the
invariable outcomes of gumsa status emulation and claims on the labor
services of affines.

   This history has been analyzed in a recent paper by Nugent (1980).
Until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, Kachin chiefs were all
gumsa. They grew opium with the aid of slaves, and controlled deposits
of amber, serpentine, and jade—indeed, furnishing since the early
eighteenth century most of the jade of China (Leach 1954: 290). Above
all, they levied tolls on the extensive and lucrative Chinese carrying
trade between China and Burma, and the income from these tolls
constituted the major source of power for the leading gumsa chiefs in
the late nineteenth century (Leach 1954: 237). The gumsa chiefs were
sought after as allies by the English advancing across Assam, by the
Burmese striving to contain the British advance, and by the Chinese
traders running their caravans between Yunnan and Burma. The ability of
Kachin chiefs to emulate the Shan saohpas was thus based on their
control of slave labor, trade, and arms supplied by the political powers
competing in the area.

   This favored situation was increasingly undermined during the second
half of the nineteenth century. Revolts in Yunnan and Shan rebel lions
against the disintegrating Burmese state brought about the decline of
the carrying trade between China and Burma. English interference in
Burmese affairs led to the annexation of Lower Burma in 1852, the
seizure of Upper Burma in 1886, and wars of pacification against Shan
and Kachin until 1891. With the exception of the Triangle area north of
Myitkyina, which was not pacified until the 1920s, English
administration severely curtailed the power and influence of the Kachin
gumsa chiefs. Their domains were broken up, and each village under its
own chief was treated as a distinct political entity. Slaves were set
free, lessening chiefly participation in the production of opium. Chiefs
were no longer allowed to charge tolls from passing caravans—their main
source of income in the nineteenth century—and were forbidden to exact
tribute from neighboring Shan communities. The forcible reduction of
chiefly power by the English completed the decline of the thigh-eating
chiefs initiated by the drying up of the China—Burma border trade.
Gumlao revolts began to appear as the power of the gumsa chiefs waned.
Thus, these revolts are better understood as a reaction to the weakness
rather than the growing strength of the chiefs.

   The revolts took place, moreover, against the background of opium
production. As Maran La Raw has noted, the gumlao "deviation from
gumchying gumsa, the traditional, original Kachin ideal model, has
coincided with their progressively greater reliance on upland
opium-poppy (cash-crop) cultivation, in place of subsistence upland-rice
agriculture" (1967, I: 138-139; see also Leach 1954: 26). In raising
opium, the Kachin were also raising money, since opium has always
served, and continues to serve, as general-purpose money among the
populations of the hills. Indeed, it plays a part in the manipulations
of bride wealth important in gaining status and power. Leach mentions a
case in which a man who had grown rich in trading opium paid entirely in
opium a bride price set formally in cattle, silver, opium, and rifles
(1954: 151, n. 66). It seems likely that the consolidation of wealth
created by continued opium production underwrites the rise of new gumsa
chiefs, primarily dependent on growing, selling, and smuggling opium.
This seems to have occurred in the Wa States of Burma, where successful
opium growers have modeled themselves on wet-rice producers of the
plains, have adopted Buddhism, and have become known as Hill Shans (Tai
Loi).

Gold and Diamonds

Plant and livestock products were not the only kinds of commodities that
entered the world market in large quantities during the nineteenth
century. There were also ores, such as tin from Malaya and copper from
Chile. In 1866 diamonds were discovered in the territory of the
Afrikaaner (Boer) Orange Free State in southern Africa, followed by the
discovery of gold on the Witwatersrand in Transvaal twenty years later.

By 1874 there were already 10,000 Africans employed in the diamond
mines, and ten years after the gold strike 97,000 were working in the
gold mines. By 1910 the number of African miners had risen to 255,000;
in 1940 it stood at 444,000.

   In South Africa, European settlement had opened up a frontier not
unlike that of North America. The initial European settlement in the
area was on the Cape, a provisioning station opened up in 1652 by the
Dutch East India Company for its Asian trade. From this station the
initial Dutch settlers had fanned out to drive back and destroy the
food-collecting San (Bushmen) and to reduce the pastoral Khoi-Khoi
(Hottentot) to servitude, appropriating at the same time their
fat-tailed sheep and their cattle.

   Further expansion northward brought the Europeans into contact with
Bantu-speaking populations, whom they drove back in stages until they
reached the Fish River by 1775. There the frontier stayed for fifty
years, a perimeter determined by the distance to the Capetown cattle
market. After a sizable contingent of British settlers arrived in 1820
on the lower Fish River at Albany Bay, however, the frontier began to
move again, this time unleashing conflicts over cattle and pasture
between Boers and groups of Bantu-speaking Xhosa. With these encounters
pressures built up in the area between the Fish River, to the south, and
Portuguese-held Delagoa Bay, to the north.

   This area was occupied by small Nguni chiefdoms, each built up around
a chief, his patrilineage, and other patrilineages linked by descent or
alliance. The Nguni military and hunting organization, focused on the
figure of the chief, would fragment with the breakup of one chiefly
domain and re-form around another, in a continuing process of fission
and renewed alliance. During the last quarter of the eighteenth century,
three chiefly clusters won out over the rest; in the first decade of the
nineteenth century, one of these clusters, the Mthetwa, came to dominate
the others, in part through the military prowess of its chief
Dingiswayo, in part perhaps through trade connections with the
Portuguese on the coast. Dingiswayo replaced the military and hunting
organizations that owed loyalty to subchiefs by militarizing the age
grades of his people. He also adapted a hunting technique—the surround
by pincer movement ("the horns")—to warfare. After Dingi- swayo's death,
Shaka, the leader of a minor allied clan known as Zulu, usurped the
Mthetwa chiefship and built a still larger Zulu polity, successfully
organizing it for warfare using Dingiswayo's age-grade organization and
tactics. Shaka also enhanced the shock value of the Zulu troops by
introducing the assagai—a short stabbing spear—which he may have
invented and, in any case, which he ordered the Zulu blacksmiths to
produce.

   The formation of the Zulu state furnishes a more dynamic example of
cultural transformation than is usually available to anthropologists.
Dingiswayo and Shaka responded to changes in the field of political
forces around them by constructing a new political entity. In doing so,
they drew on patterns of organization familiar to them from the past,
but they altered these patterns radically in the process. These changes
undermined the particularistic interests of the locally based
patrilineage, while at the same time consolidating its manpower in a
powerful military machine. Thus, Dingiswayo forbade the circumcision
schools that had united the members of related homesteads under the
jurisdiction of their chief's son. Whereas the previous military
organization had brought together kinsmen drawn from neighboring
homesteads under the command of their local chiefs, Dingiswayo
militarized the age sets. This use of the age sets assigned successive
generations of the same lineage and compound to different regiments, and
focused their loyalty upon the kingship. Each regiment was given special
dress and cowhide shields of a distinctive color. Shaka reinforced the
role of the regiments by setting up parallel organizations for women.
Men were forbidden to marry until the age of forty, and then they were
assigned by regiment to take wives from the corresponding female unit.

   Shaka also assumed all responsibility for magic in Zululand. He took
over all rainmaking functions himself, expelling rival rainmakers; he
forced medicine men to teach him their cures; and he made all verdicts
in sorcery cases subject to royal confirmation. Fortifying the Zulu
kingship still further, he centered the annual first-fruits and war
ritual upon the figure of the king and upon the line of his royal
ancestors. The annual ceremonial became a show of strength and unity by
the assembled army. "The traditions of the Zulu royal lineage became the
traditions of the nation; the Zulu dialect became the language of the
nation; and every inhabitant, whatever his origins, became a Zulu, owing
allegiance to Shaka" (Thompson 1969; 345). This transformation exhibits
in stark form the ways that rituals were manipulated in a process of
state making set in motion by the expanding frontiers of European
settlement.

   Zulu expansion between the beginning of the century and 1836, in
turn, propelled other populations centrifugally in all directions, in
many instances leading to the creation of new political clusters. Thus,
the Kumalo clan of the Nguni first established dominance over
neighboring Tswana and Sotho, and then overran populations across the
Limpopo River in Zimbabwe-Rhodesia to form the Ndebele (Matabele)
macrocluster. The Makololo clan moved northward into the Zambezi Valley
to dominate Barotse and to become the Kololo. The Dlamini from Delagoa
Bay established dominion over the Nguni and Sotho of northern Swaziland
to form the Swazi macro-cluster. Other clusters, such as the Basuto of
Lesotho, were formed out of refugee splinter segments of other groups.
The Ngwato cluster, of present-day Botswana, was similarly compounded
from a nuclear group of Western Sotho-speakers, to which were added
elements of Tswana, Northern Sotho, Shona, Rotse, Kubam, Subia, Herero,
and Bantuized San (Schapera 1940). The Zulu-initiated difaqane, or
forced migration, thus created many new political clusters that had not
existed before the nineteenth century—and which now are described in the
anthropological literature as “tribes” or “primitive states.”

   The British conquered the Cape in 1795 and began to settle along the
coast after the second decade of the nineteenth century. This
settlement, in turn, sent the Dutch cultivators and pastoralists (boers)
on their trek or migration inland, where they established the
independent republics of the Transvaal and the Orange Free State in 1852
and 1854, respectively. Dutch and British both advanced against Africans
in the so-called Kaffir wars against the Xhosa (1835, 1847, 1851) and
against the Basutho (1858, 1865-1866, 1867-1888). These wars destroyed
the pastoral basis of Xhosa life and reduced the Xhosa to servitude and
squatter tenancy on European-owned farms. Millenarian movements in the
1850s—in which cattle were slaughtered to bring on the hoped- for state
of purification and abundance, as well as disaster for the whites and
their allies-further weakened Xhosa ability to resist. The Zulu were
still strong enough to defeat the British at Isandhlwana, but they lost
the final battle five months later at Ulundi. With this loss, the Zulu
army ceased to exist. Thereafter, despite frequent war and rebellion,
one African population after another was brought under European
control—including the Basuto and Tswana in the 1880s and the Swazi in
the 1890s.

   The pacification of the African populations accompanied the growth of
the mining industry in South Africa, an industry based on the use of
African labor (see chapter 11). Within five years after the discovery of
diamonds in Griqualand, diamond exports reached the value of ?1.6
million per annum. During the hundred years following, no less than ?700
million worth of diamonds were recovered in this part of the world. In
the eighty years after the discovery of gold in 1886, the South African
gold mines yielded ?6,000 million worth. Both kinds of mining demanded
large agglomerations of capital, especially when surface "dry diggings”
gave way to mining in depth; gold mining, in addition, required
expensive installations to recover gold from the immense but low-grade
deposits. De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. was founded by Cecil Rhodes;
it was named after one of the first mine sites at Kimberley, near a farm
owned by a Boer called De Beer. Rhodes bought the farm for $18,000
(Gunther 1953: 553). It is now a syndicate of seven named companies,
which controls diamond production and marketing. Gold mining is
controlled by seven giant interlocking corporations, two of the
largest—De Beers and Anglo-American—in the hands of the same family.

Zulu attack on the 80th regiment at Intombi River during the final
British drive to capture the Zulu capital at Ulundi. Wood engraving
based on a sketch by Lt. L. W. R. Ussher, 1879. (The Granger Collection,
New York)

   The Great Depression of the late nineteenth century initiated an
unprecedented expansion in commodity flows among all parts of the globe.
Each of the commodities that served capitalist development— food
products, industrial crops, stimulants, gold, diamonds—entered into a
growing stream, each one broadening and intensifying its currents. We
have looked at a few such commodities of import to some of the peoples
who make up the anthropological record. There were many others, their
accelerated movements graphed in the transactions of the world's
financial markets.

   Commodity production and marketing, of course, were not new. The
world before 1400 was already heavily crisscrossed by the pathways of
mercantile exchange within and between tributary societies, as well as
between such societies and kin-ordered groups. Many populations were
drawn into commodity production to supply this trade long before the
advent of the European sea merchants. European expansion, however,
created a market of global magnitude. It incorporated pre-existing
networks of exchange and created new itineraries between continents; it
fostered regional specialization and initiated worldwide movements of
commodities.

   The growth of capitalism brought about a qualitative change not only
in the regnant mode of production but also in the commercial networks
connected with it. These networks now served the process of capitalist
accumulation, which not only multiplied commodities in order to beget
more money but generated capital to buy machines, raw materials, and
labor power in order to expand production and hence to accumulate more
capital. The independence and autonomy of commercial exchange was
abrogated, for the rate of profit was no longer determined solely by
regional discrepancies in price (which allowed merchants to buy cheap
and sell dear), but by the process of production itself.

   The “people without history" were now drawn into a system that
harnessed the world's resources to the cause of capital accumulation.
Yet this does not mean that all the productive arrangements for
supplying commodities to the market became capitalist. Following Mandel,
the capitalist world economy is an articulated system of capitalist and
noncapitalist relations of production, linked by relations of exchange
that are dominated by capitalist accumulation (see p. 297). At any given
time, some sectors and regions of this system are central and strategic
to its operation, while others occupy auxiliary or marginal positions,
providing commodities or labor power to the center. Over time, the
distribution of central and secondary regions may change, as the demands
of capital accumulation elevate auxiliary segments to a position of
centrality or relegate previously central segments to marginality.

   While the central sectors and regions are governed directly by the
productive relations of the capitalist mode, social arrangements built
up in the kin-ordered or tributary modes may be tolerated, maintained,
or even reinforced in auxiliary and marginal areas. When this occurs, it
is under conditions of severely limited political and economic autonomy.
First, the societies in question must yield up their substantive
sovereignty and their ability to deploy arms in the pursuit of their
independent interests. Second, they gradually relinquish the capacity to
reproduce their social networks and hierarchies without participation in
the capitalistically dominated market. Their people, as commodity
producers and laborers, become part of the reserve army of capitalism,
mobilizable during periods of advance, released back to their
reservations or enclaves during periods of retreat. In one population
after another around the world, peoples' lives were thus reshaped to
correspond to the dictates of the capitalist mode.

12 The New Laborers

The essence of capital is its ability to mobilize social labor by buying
labor power and setting it to work. This requires a market in which the
capacity of human beings to work can be bought and sold like any other
commodity: buyers of labor power offer wages, which sellers accept in
return for a commodity, their own labor. The market creates a fiction
that this buying and selling is a symmetrical exchange between partners,
but in fact the market transaction underwrites an asymmetrical
relationship between classes. Through that transaction, workers are paid
back a portion of the product of their own labor in the form of wages,
relinquishing the remainder as surplus value to the capitalist class.

   The working classes, entering industry or plantation agriculture
under the aegis of the capitalist mode of production, constituted a new
phenomenon in the world, a novelty well understood by many observers in
the nineteenth century. The appearance of these working classes
furnished a hidden agenda of modern history and social science, but
scholars moved only hesitantly toward a recognition of their role in
creating new kinds of societies. Their emergence upon the stage of
history prompted fear of mass irruption and social disorder, as well as
exaggerated hopes of imminent social renewal. For historians primarily
concerned with the actions of the powerful, the new working classes had
no history, only an anti-history. For social scientists who defined
sociology primarily as a "moral" science, the newly emerging "masses"
spelled rootlessness and anomie. For humanists concerned with upholding
the higher achievements of the Human Spirit, the proletariat conjured up
the image of Ostrogoths already stabling their horses within the
confines of the City. For revolutionaries, the working classes embodied
the promise of social transformation, the "new men" providing the
antithesis to Civilization.

   Even when social scientists began to examine these new men more
closely, they treated them mainly as social problems—problems created by
a severance from their roots through detribalization or
immigration—rather than as social actors in their own right, responding
to new conditions. Even labor historians concentrated at first on the
history of labor organizations and labor movements; that is, they were
more interested in efforts to transcend a condition than in delineating
that condition itself. Research thus concerned itself mainly with what
was absent—conditions and characteristics that had once been and no
longer were, or conditions yet to come. Less was said of what was
present, the relational matrix and content of working class existence.
Only recently have some social historians moved toward the writing of a
processual and relational history for the working classes, much as a
history has begun to be written for the populations supposedly arrested
upon some timeless plateau of evolution. In fact, the two branches of
history are but one. The trajectories of the "people without history" on
the various continents of the globe dovetail and converge within the
larger matrix created by European expansion and the capitalist mode of
production.

Labor Markets

In the course of the nineteenth century, industrialization and the
introduction of large-scale cash cropping in agriculture went on apace.
As capital flowed toward new areas of opportunity and into new branches
of activity, it massed machines into ever larger aggregates, and brought
ever new battalions of workers into the growing industrial army.
Manufacture—production in which "the pace was set by men and not
machines" (Landes 1969; 121)—yielded increasingly to "machinofac- ture,"
in which the machine set the pace of work. Political economies were
refashioned, social ties rent and rearranged, and people moved from
areas of supply to areas of demand.

   Many indices trace the increases in the scale of output and reflect
the growing demand for industrial labor. From the beginnings of
industrialization in the second half of the eighteenth century, world
steam power reached an estimated 4 million hp in 1850, and about 18.5
million only twenty years later. The production of coal, strategic in
the growth of industrialism, stood at 15 million tons per annum in 1800,
at 132 million tons in 1860, and at 701 million tons in 1900. World
production of ferrous minerals rose from 1 million metric tons in 1820
to 65 million in 1910. Inanimate energy produced from coal, lignite,
petroleum, natural gasoline, natural gas, and water power amounted to
1.1 milliard megawatt-hours in 1860,6.1 milliard in 1900,21 milliard in
1950 (Cipolla 1962: 48, 49, 51; Woodruff 1971: 9). Railway trackage
increased from 332 km. in 1831 to more than 300,000 km. in 1876;
steamship tonnage went from 32,000 tons in 1831 to 3.3 million tons in
1876 (Hobsbawm 1975: 310). Ports around the world bulged with the output
of plantations, destined for transshipment to Europe and America.

   The units of production increased in size, accelerating the demand
for labor. The average cotton mill in Lancashire in the 1820s employed
between 100 and 200 hands; but in the Oldham of 1851 one-thirdof the
cotton workers were already employed in mills of more than 250 hands
(Chapman 1972: 26; Foster 1974: 91). By 1841 more than half of the
Oldham miners were in mines using more than 200 workers. Much larger
aggregates of laborers appeared early, too, and became more common over
the years. Thus, in 1815-1816 Robert Owen employed 1,600- 1,700 hands at
New Lanark (Chapman 1972: 32). In 1849 the largest iron plant in the
United Kingdom, at New Dowlais, had more than 7,000 workers (Landes
1969: 121 (.There were only 72 workers in the Krupp works at Essen in
1848, but nearly 12,000 by 1873; at Le Creusot in France, the Schneider
company employed 12,500 workers in 1870, more than half the people in
town (Hobsbawm 1975: 213). Similarly, plantation agriculture demanded
laborers, leading to aggregations of some 2,000 on one plantation in
coastal Peru and of several thousands on estates in Java.

   The new labor regime inaugurated by the capitalist mode endowed the
capitalist entrepreneur with great flexibility in meeting the
opportunities and requirements of growth. Under the kin-ordered mode,
kinsmen cannot be hired or fired. A tributary overlord must exercise
military force or a functional equivalent to expand or decrease the
number of surplus producers under his jurisdiction. Even the slave owner
is restricted in his ability to manipulate his labor supply, for he must
protect his investment in slaves by feeding them during times when they
do not labor. In contrast, capitalist entrepreneurs can hire and fire
laborers or vary their wages in response to changing circumstances.
Alterations in the rate of profit occasion changes in the supply and in
the remuneration of labor, and hence fluctuations in the size and the
character of labor markets. Intensified accumulation opens up new
sectors of the labor market, or expands old ones; decelerating
accumulation narrows work opportunities, or shifts them to regions of
lower labor costs. As changes in capital accumulation occur, the
consequent changes in the demand for labor alter, in turn, the
conditions for the emergence and stabilization of different working
classes.

   Under capitalism, entrepreneurs can also vary their use of labor in
relation to machinery, calling up additional laborers to man the
available machines or reducing the size of their wage fund by
substituting machines for human labor. In its continuous drive for
accumulation, the capitalist mode of production has tended historically
to increase the ratio of capital invested in plant and raw materials to
capital paid out for labor power. Industrial units that use machines to
enlarge the scale of production, while diminishing the labor cost per
unit produced, have tended to replace industrial units with a higher
ratio of labor power to plant. This trend, however, is neither linear
over time nor general at any moment. At any point in time, competition
among capitalists yields a distribution of industries, of branches of
industries, and of enterprises within industries, marked by very
different mixes of capital. Thus, industrial units that rely more on
machines and raw materials than on labor power will always coexist with
and confront industrial units that place a greater reliance on labor
power.

   Special circumstances may indeed favor enterprises with a highlabor,
low-machine mix. For example, unskilled and low-paid women and children,
using the older Arkwright technique of roller spinning in plants endowed
with an abundant supply of water, could compete for a time with the more
productive mule spinners (Chapman 1972:20-21). A similar situation held
in the delayed reaction of textile manufacturers on the European
continent to English competition (Landes 1969: Chap. 3). Sometimes it
may be efficient and profitable for entrepreneurs working with a high
machine-to-labor ratio to delegate phases of the work process to firms
operating at a lower level. Increases in the scale of plants and firms,
intended to lower production costs per unit of output, may actually
reach a critical point where unit production costs remain unchanged or
even go up. Such critical points are not merely the outcome of
mechanical processes of growth but are closely related to factors of
concentration, location, management, labor discipline, and demand. It is
thus possible for industries with a capital ratio that favors machines
over labor power to spawn industries of lower organic composition.

   This variation among industrial units with different capital ratios
affects the labor market, producing variation in the quantitative and
qualitative demand for labor. The result is that the labor market is
"segmented" or "differentiated," not homogeneous (Gordon 1972). At any
moment in time, branches of industry with a high capital ratio of plant
to labor power will demand a high level of skill and formal or
on-the-job training, pay relatively high wages and status rewards, and
aim for stability of their labor force, while branches of industry with
a lower capital ratio of plant to labor power will lower wages,
disregard status rewards, de-emphasize skill and training requirements,
and make use of an unstable or rotating labor force. Segments of the
labor market—and the workers answering to the demands generated in these
various segments—thus come to be ranked hierarchically with respect to
one another, with a "labor aristocracy" garnering higher rewards in
income and prestige at the top, and with workers receiving low wages in
unstable employment at the bottom. Such a hierarchy may characterize a
given industrial location; it may describe the contrasts between
industrial regions connected with different branches of industry; and it
may hold internationally, ranking labor forces engaged in different
kinds of industrial employment in different countries and continents.

   The distribution of capitals and labor markets, and the resulting
differentiation of the labor force locally, regionally, nationally, and
internationally, are never fixed and stable. Just as the vanguard of
industrial entrepreneurs may fall by the wayside in the course of
competition, so the labor aristocracy of yesteryear may be replaced by
machines to become a redundant part of the labor force tomorrow. The
history of technological change under capitalism is replete with
examples of skilled labor suffering "de-skilling" (Burawoy 1979; Warner
and Low 1947). At the same time, working-class cohorts located in one
region may be thrown into the ranks of the semiemployed and unemployed
"industrial reserve army" by capital movement to other regions. The
decline of the New England textile industry because of plant and capital
relocation to the southern United States after World War II, as well as
the more recent relocation of manufacturing activity to areas of cheaper
labor power like Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Korea, offers a present-day
illustration of a process continuously repeated under the aegis of the
capitalist mode.

Working Classes

When the term working classes first emerged around 1815, it took the
form of a plural, describing a plurality of classes. Indeed, although
the development of working classes everywhere "reproduces" the general
relation of labor to capital, the characteristics of particular working
classes show wide variation. They differ in origin, in point of entry
into the labor force, in composition, and in the ways they relate to
other groups and social categories.

   Differences of origin may place varying resources at the disposal of
new working classes. An artisan group such as the glassblowers of
Carmaux in southwestern France embarked on a different working- class
career than the miners of the same region. The glassblowers were
descendants of a corporation of skilled migratory craftsmen with wide-
ranging "cosmopolitan" connections. The miners were the descendants of a
smallholding peasantry, with local roots and local speech, who doubled
as miners during the agricultural off-season. As they lost their land,
they became increasingly dependent upon industrial mining, which leveled
out differences of skill and status among them (Scott 1974; Trempé
1971). The German working classes contained a very high percentage of
skilled artisans; the Russian working classes recruited heavily among
the sons and daughters of the peasantry (Walker 1971; Moore 1978;
Lyashchenko 1949). Some countries drew their working classes mostly from
within their national territories; others, like the United States, built
up their labor force mainly by importing different ethnic groups and
categories from abroad.

   The particular circumstances surrounding working-class recruitment
enhance working-class variability still further. An "old" working class
will show different characteristics from "new" ones. The English working
class, subdivided into a multiplicity of "trades" and recruited into
plants of relatively small size, developed in response to market demands
very unlike those that faced the new Russian working class of the late
nineteenth century (Gordon 1941), the Chinese working class of the first
decades of the twentieth century (Chesneaux 1962), or the Bemba entering
the Rhodesian copper mines in the 1920s (Epstein 1958).

   Working classes vary also in their composition. A large part of the
labor force recruited into the English textile mills of the first phase
of industrialization consisted of women, children, and pauper
apprentices. The millhands of early New England were primarily young,
unmarried women. The labor force of the Bombay mills that opened up
after 1850, in contrast, was made up largely of adult married males.
Working classes differ, further, in the location, geographical range,
and supportive capacity of the social ties that underwrite their
maintenance and reproduction. In the English mill towns around 1850, the
constituent units of the working class were nuclear or stem families,
which coped with the problems of survival by sending women and children
to work, or by aggregating ("huddling”) into larger domestic groups. In
the textile center of Oldham, one-third of the mothers of children
eleven years and under went to work, as did a quarter of the children
themselves. Many families clustered together in shared accommodations
(Foster 1974: 96 — 99). At the same time, people in the mill towns
strove to maintain ties with kinsmen in the countryside, often with an
eye toward maximizing mutual advantages (see Anderson 1971: 999). In
contrast to the English case, in India textile workers left their wives
and children with their joint families in the home villages, returning
later to let other family members take their places at work (Morris
1960). Elsewhere, working class experience involved only a phase of the
life cycle. For instance, it was mainly the unmarried daughters of
pioneer cultivators who were recruited for work in the New England
textile mills. Their wages allowed farming families to stay in the area,
and the women returned to these families at marriage. In South Africa,
such shuttling during the life cycle was written into the labor contract
itself. Workers were brought to the mines from the different "tribal"
reservations and compelled to return there when their contracts expired;
thus, the development of a permanent resident working class was
inhibited. Among immigrants to the United States between 1879 and 1918,
males outnumbered females roughly two to one. The factors of distance
and travel costs inhibited return migration, and the majority of
immigrants remained in the New World; even so, over 30 percent of the
new immigrants after the 1880s returned to Europe (Rosenblum 1973: 72 —
73, 126).

   The characteristics of a working class are thus determined not only
by the wage nexus but also by ties of kinship, locality, and
association, spanning the distance between villages and towns of origin
and the new neighborhoods of industrial locations. There are connections
to parents and siblings, fiancés, wives and children back home; to
kinsmen in the new place of residence; to labor bosses, emigrant agents,
moneylenders, priests; to friends, neighbors, fellow workers,
relationships formed in boardinghouse, taverns, and union halls; to
comembers of parish sodalities, burial societies, and kite-flying clubs.
Working classes are not "made" in the place of work alone; they are the
outcome of many links that extend into the larger society. It is this
wider web of connection that also determines working class politics—the
ability of particular working classes to challenge employers and
governments, to organize associations, labor unions, and party
organizations, and to improve the conditions of their work and lives.

Urbanization

The development of working classes was intimately related to the
accelerated growth of cities after 1800 and the massive increase in
size, density, and heterogeneity of urban populations. In 1600 only 1.6
percent of Europe's population lived in cities of 100,000 inhabitants or
more; in 1700 the figure was 1.9 percent; in 1800, 2.2 percent. Britain,
the pioneer country of industrialization, led in urbanization. In 1801
about one-tenth of the population of England and Wales lived in cities
of 100,000 and larger. By 1840 that percentage had doubled; by the end
of the century it had doubled again. "By 1900 Britain was an urbanized
society" (Davis 1965: 43). Embarking on industrialization somewhat later
than Britain, other countries of Europe soon followed a parallel course
of urban expansion.

   The movement of population toward large, dense urban centers that
were connected with large-scale industry reversed an earlier trend.
During the two centuries from 1600 to 1800, the diffusion of the
putting-out system had disseminated islands of "industrialization before
industrialization" throughout the countryside. During this period, the
proportion of Europeans living in cities of over 20,000 people did not
grow significantly, and may well have declined, despite substantial
overall population growth (Tilly 1976). Population had shifted from
larger centers toward smaller towns and the countryside, probably
because of the increased entry of agricultural laborers and artisans
into rural cottage industries. After 1800 capitalist industrialization
pulled people in the opposite direction, and in turning the rural areas
into catchment basins for industrial labor, it also worked to
deindustrialize the countryside.

   The shift toward increased urban concentration was not merely
quantitative but also entailed a qualitative change in the mechanisms
allocating people to space and activities. The older centers of
political administration, of trade, or of symbolic communication were
now transformed into pivots of the new mode of production. Machinofac-
ture gave rise to new factory towns like Manchester and Essen, and
surrounded existing cities with a ring of industrial districts. The
development of financial services and the needs of business
communication supported the growth of business districts with banks,
offices, and clubs. The burgeoning working classes were housed in
working-class neighborhoods or districts, characterized by the
large-scale construction of multifamily tenements or “rental barracks."
Port facilities were built, and railroad tracks, yards, and stations
transformed the urban landscape. Beyond the industrial districts,
working-class neighborhoods, and freight yards, the captains of industry
and commerce erected new mansions and country villas.

Labor on the Move

To meet the increasing demand for labor power, labor began to flow from
regions where people were underemployed, or displaced from agriculture
or cottage industries, toward regions of heightened industrial or
agricultural activity. The subsequent growth and expansion of capitalism
evoked massive relocations of human populations as people carried their
labor and resources from areas where they were redundant or obsolete to
new key areas of accumulation. This is not to say that population
movements always occur in response to upswings and downturns of demand.
Labor is often held fast by constraints, and governments are not always
willing to allow their subjects to emigrate. Sometimes population
movements precede rather than follow an upswing in economic activity,
the increased supply of laborers pushing down wages and favoring
investment. Nevertheless, capitalism has generally found laborers when
and where it needed them, and migratory movements have carried labor
power to market all across the globe.

   In treating the subject of migration, social scientists usually
distinguish "internal" from "international" migration, or contrast
"intracontinental" and "intercontinental" flows of population. Movements
over great physical distances or across politically demarcated borders
create special problems of logistics and communication, both for the
migrants and for the recipient populations. Yet the size of the social
and cultural gap between origin and destination is not determined by
physical distance or political boundaries. Nor should we prejudge the
degree of estrangement experienced by the migrant by applying an
ahistorical measure of national identity. The nineteenth century was, in
Europe, a century of nation building—a century of economic and political
incorporation, of linguistic standardization, and of the creation,
imposition, and diffusion of hegemonic cultural patterns. These
processes had been set in motion by the beginning of the century, but
they had not yet run their course. Inhabitants of the same national
polity were often still divided by barriers of linguistic and cultural
incomprehension. These internal barriers between town and country,
between classes, and between regions were not different in kind from
those that faced the migrant in external or intercontinental movement.

   It is an error to envisage the migrant as the bearer and protagonist
of a homogeneously integrated culture that he either retains or yields
up as a whole. We have learned enough about cultural patterns to know
that they are often internally contradictory and, at the same time, able
to combine with patterns drawn from other cultures. It is no more
difficult for a Zulu or a Hawaiian to learn and unlearn culture than it
is for a Pomeranian or a Fukien Chinese. What is significant for the
migrant is the position he is placed in, in relation to other groups, on
arrival. That placement determines which of his prior resources he can
apply and which new ones he must acquire.

   The migrant's position is determined not so much by the migrant or
his culture as by the structure of the situation in which he finds
himself. Under the capitalist mode of production, this structure is
created by the relation of capital to labor in its particular spatial
and temporal operation, that is, the structure of the labor market.
People may move for religious, political, ecological, or other reasons;
but the migrations of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries were
largely labor migrations, movements of the bearers of labor power. These
labor migrations, of course, carried with them newspaper editors to
publish papers for Polish miners or German metalworkers, shopkeepers to
supply their fellow migrants with pasta or red beans, religious
specialists to minister to Catholic or Buddhist souls, and others. Each
migration involved the transfer to the new geographical location not
only of manpower but also of services and resources. Each migratory wave
generated, in turn, suppliers of services at the point of arrival,
whether these were labor agents, merchants, lawyers, or players of
percussion instruments.

   In the development of capitalism, three waves of migration stand out,
each a response to critical changes in the demand for labor, each
creating new working classes. The first of these waves was associated
with the initial period of European industrialization. Beginning in
England, these initial movements toward capitalist industry covered only
short distances, since industrial development was itself still localized
and limited. Thus, in the cotton town of Preston in Lancashire, where
roughly half the population consisted of immigrants in 1851, over 40
percent had come less than ten miles from their birthplaces and only
about 30 percent had come more than thirty miles. Fourteen percent of
all immigrants had been born in Ireland, however, and came to Preston as
part of the rising tide of Irish immigration in the 1840s (Anderson
1971: 37). Localized as such movements were, they made Lancashire the
most urbanized county in Britain by the middle of the nineteenth
century, with more than half the people of the county living in fourteen
towns with populations of more than 10,000 (Anderson 1971: 32).

   Belgium followed Britain in the movement of workers from the
countryside, as the industrial towns of the Walloon-speaking southern
provinces burgeoned in the 1820s. In the 1830s the Prussian provinces of
Westphalia, Rhine, Berlin, and Brandenburg initiated their industrial
expansion, attracting a large-scale flow of population from Prussia's
eastern agricultural regions (Milward and Saul 1977:44—46). This flow
intensified greatly in the last quarter of the century, as dependent
cultivators were displaced by the consolidation and mechanization of the
large Junker estates.

   While the first wave of labor migration under capitalism carried
people toward the industrial centers within the European peninsula, a
second flow sent Europeans overseas. An estimated 50 million people left
Europe permanently between 1800 and 1914. The most important destination
of this movement was the United States, which between 1820 and 1915
absorbed about 32 million immigrants, most of them of European origins
(Rosenblum 1973: 70). This influx of people provided the labor power
that underwrote the industrialization of the United States.

   A third wave of migration carried contract laborers of diverse
origins to the expanding mines and plantations of the tropics. This flow
represents a number of developments, such as the establishment of a
migratory labor force for the South African mines, the growth of the
trade in Indian and Chinese contract labor, and the sponsored migration
of Italian laborers to the coffee regions of Brazil. These movements not
only laid the basis for a large increase in tropical production but also
played a major part in creating an infrastructure of transport and
communication, prerequisites for a further acceleration of capitalist
development.

The United States

While Britain, Belgium, and Germany recruited their working classes
largely through internal and intracontinental migration, the United
States imported its working class by sailboat and steamship. Such
reliance on immigrant labor, of course, predates the onset of
industrialization in the United States. We have discussed the forced
movement of Africans to the New World, including the area that was to
become, under the impact of British textile development, the Cotton
South. European migration before the American War of Independence also
included many people who accepted the temporary bondage of indenture in
the hope of establishing themselves in the New World; these indentured
laborers may have comprised as many as two-thirds of all early migrants.
Later in the eighteenth century, there came a quarter of a million
Scotch-Irish, transplanted first from the Scottish Lowlands to Ulster,
and then forced by rack-renting and rising tithes to abandon Ulster for
America. Another group that came in the eighteenth century were Scottish
Highlanders, displaced by sheep or driven by rising rents; they were led
by their “tacksmen," heads of cadet lines of the chiefly clann, who
acted as intermediaries between chief and commoners (see Fox 1976;
112—113). Another quarter of a million migrants arrived from
southwestern Germany, an area of impoverished and parcelized
agriculture. Mass immigration into the United States, however, began
only after the cessation of the Napoleonic wars.

   In the 1820s, 151,000 immigrants came to the United States; in the
decade of the 1830s, the number tripled to 599,000. It increased again
to

1,713,000 in the 1840s, and to2,314,000 in the 1850s (Jones 1960: 93).

The main factors pushing these people out of Europe were the spread of
industrial capitalism and the commercialization of agriculture. As
industrial capitalism spread, it displaced artisans and destroyed the
domestic putting-out system. Transformations in agriculture burdened
Irish and southwestern German cultivators with increased rents,
mortgages, and indebtedness, and drove Scottish, English, and
Scandinavian cultivators off the land to make way for sheep or cattle.
In the period between 1820 and 1860, therefore, the main contingents of
immigrants came from Ireland (2 million), southwestern Germany (1.5
million), and the British Isles (750,000). Of course, the United States
was not the only target of such migrations. Between 1818 and 1828,
250,000 Germans settled in southern Russia. Others went to Brazil, while
Irishmen settled in Canada and the Maritime Provinces, or sought new
homes in Australia. In the United States, the advent of the new
immigrants speeded up capitalist industrialization. “Neither the factory
system," says Maldwyn Jones, "nor the great canal and railroad
development of the period could have come into existence so quickly
without the reservoir of cheap labor provided by immigration" (1960:
132). The role of the Irish immigrants, who quickly developed a new
monopoly on unskilled labor in construction work and factory employment
in this period, in fierce competition with American Blacks, proved
especially important in this regard.

   More Englishmen, Swedes, and Germans from east of the Elbe arrived
between 1860 and 1890. Again, many of them were displaced
agriculturalists driven off the land by the disintegration of English,
Swedish, and German wheat production between 1865 and 1875, a result of
the importation of low-priced American and Russian grain. The Great
Depression also affected German and English coal mining, iron and steel
production, and textiles; miners, metalworkers, spinners, and weavers
came to seek employment in the New World. The cultivators among them
could take advantage of land grants offered by the advancing railroads
and by the midwestern and western states and territories.

   Around 1890 the area of migrant supply shifted from northern and
western Europe to southern and eastern Europe. The new immigrants were
largely displaced peasants and agricultural laborers from southern
Italy, the Austro-Hungarian empire, and the Balkans. In addition, there
were Poles, Jews, and Volga-Germans from the Russian empire; Russians
themselves migrated mostly to Siberia. The newcomers quickly replaced
their predecessors in a number of industrial locations and occupations.
The coal miners in Pennsylvania had been largely of British or German
origin before 1890, but after that time they were mainly Poles, Slovaks,
Italians, and Hungarians. Whereas the New England textile mills had been
manned primarily by French-Canadians, English, and Irish, the new
textile workers were Portuguese, Greeks, Poles, and Syrians. In the
garment trades, Russian Jews and Italians took over from Germans,
Czechs, and Irish.

Italian immigrants on their way to Ellis Island, c. 1905. (The Granger
Collection, New York)

   This large-scale influx of European labor had a marked influence on
the direction of American technological development. During the first
half of the nineteenth century, capitalist entrepreneurs were faced with
a relative shortage of labor. There was land available to those who
wanted to farm, and there were opportunities for artisan employment,
both of which attracted newcomers away from industrial work. Wages were
relatively high for all categories of workers. This appears to have
fostered the development of labor-saving devices and their early
introduction into industry (Habakkuk 1962). The later influx of
industrially unskilled workers from southern and eastern Europe, in
turn, favored the further development of machinery and of rationalized
processes of production that did not rely on mechanical skills. In 1908
the U.S. Immigration Commission noted that the new migrants were often
drawn into highly capitalized industries, despite their lack of skills:

As a consequence their employment in the mines and manufacturing plants
of the country has been made possible only by the invention of
mechanical devices and processes which have eliminated the skill and
experience formerly recognized in a large number of occupations, [quoted
in Rosenblum, 1973: 76).

Most of the foreign-born workers entered the unskilled, lower-paid
levels of industrial occupations. While their new employment yielded
remuneration substantially higher than they would have earned in Europe,
the combination of mechanization and unskilled immigrant labor permitted
American entrepreneurs to keep wages down (Douglas 1930; Rees 1961 ).
Without the Italian, Slav, Greek, Portuguese, French- Canadian, and
Russian Jewish workers who furnished the bulk of the labor for the
leading American industries by 1900, the industrial expansion that took
place between 1880 and 1900 would not have been possible (Jones 1960:
312).

Labor for the Mines: South Africa

We have seen (chapter 11 ) that at about the same time the United States
moved toward full industrialization, a takeoff into capitalist
development also took hold in southern Africa. There, diamonds and gold
were discovered in the last third of the nineteenth century, in the
areas north of the Orange and Vaal rivers. The core area of South
African development shifted correspondingly to these inland areas. At
first diamonds and gold were both mined by surface diggers. Sometimes
particular tasks were contracted to White entrepreneurs who organized
work gangs. While some Africans paid the license fees needed to become
full-time diggers, by 1876 the higher-paid skilled jobs were monopolized
by White diggers (Welsh 1971: 181), and African laborers were contracted
only for short periods of about three months. By 1892 the skilled
workers had formed a trade union to defend their position against any
attempt of management to lower labor costs by using African laborers or
by sponsoring further immigration from England.

   War between Britain and the Afrikaaners for political control of
South Africa disrupted mining operations between 1899 and 1902, and cut
the available working force in half. By 1906, however, the mines were
again in full production, with a labor force of 18,000 Whites,

94,000 Africans, and 51,000 Chinese indentured servants (Houghton 1971:
15). In 1907 there was a strike of White skilled workers who opposed
management plans to increase Chinese immigration and to replace White
with Black labor. It was broken when unemployed Afrikaaners were brought
in as strikebreakers. The lasting outcome, however, was the repatriation
of Chinese miners and a reinforcement of the color bar in employment.

   Most of the White miners, as of 1912, came from outside South
Africa—from Britain, Australia, the United States, and elsewhere. These
Whites made up the skilled labor force. The Africans, in contrast, were
unskilled migratory workers, on contracts from six to eighteen months'
duration, who received a tenth of the wages paid to the Whites.

   The idea of employing Africans as temporary laborers became
established in the first decade of mining. In the 1880s it was combined
with the notion of confining Africans to residential compounds for their
contractual period. This practice took root first in the Kimberley
diamond mines, in part to stop the illicit sale of diamonds by African
miners to dealers, in part to control desertion. This "closed” compound
has remained a feature of the diamond mines ever since. Local traders
initially protested the company stores set up by the mining companies
for their shut-in work force. When the gold mines adopted the compound
system somewhat later, compounds were set up in an "open" rather than
"closed" form to meet the objections of local storekeepers (Welsh 1971:
180).

   From the beginning, the mining industry had attracted workers from as
far away as Nyasaland and Mozambique, as well as from South Africa
itself. In the second decade of the twentieth century, the mines began
to rely increasingly on the import of temporary contract laborers from
the so-called Native Reserves. The Reserves consisted of territories set
aside specifically for African occupancy. They were formed from a land
area that consisted of about 13 percent of the total territory of the
Union of South Africa, as well as the area of the British
"protectorates" of Bechuanaland (now Botswana), Basutoland (now
Lesotho), and Swaziland. These areas were expected to furnish the
migratory labor for the mines, while providing basic subsistence for the
families of the migrants and for old people. The institution of the
Native Reserves, however, formed only one component of a larger system
of labor control, which involved simultaneously the organization of an
African labor supply for white farmers and the denial to Africans of
permanent legal residence in towns and cities. The Land Act of 1913
assigned those Africans remaining on White-owned land to the farm owners
as “labor tenants." These tenants owed farmers stated amounts of labor
in exchange for permission to reside on their land. This labor allowed
the White farmers to expand the commercial production of food crops
(notably maize) to provision the growing mines and cities, while at the
same time it curtailed cash-crop sales by African cultivators living on
the Reserves. This enhanced White-owned commercial agriculture and
inhibited the growth of a cash-cropping African peasantry, confining the
Reserves to production for subsistence only. The institution of Reserves
had the effect of lowering the wages paid in the mines, since the mine
owners were able to pay African labor at rates below subsistence, while
the Land Act inhibited the movement of labor from White farms to towns.

   Still another cornerstone in the policy of labor control was the
"pass" laws, which required Africans to carry residential permits,
lodgers' permits, certificates from their employers, and curfew passes,
and which allowed the state to move Africans deemed supernumerary from
one location to another. These laws made free movement impossible.
Further laws made desertion of employment and breaches of discipline
criminal offenses. The effect of these laws was to inhibit the growth of
a stable African working class in towns—a class able to make demands on
the economic and political system—and to force urban Africans back on
their ties with their Reserves. Simultaneously, White workers were
granted advantages in access to supervisory positions and in
remuneration, resulting in a segmented labor market maintained by
political means.

   Since World War II, South African industrial development beyond
mining has greatly speeded up, drawing ever larger numbers of black
South African laborers into industrial employment other than mining. In
response, the mining companies have intensified their search for cheap
migratory labor beyond the confines of South Africa, as in Malawi and
Mozambique. This policy has served to keep wages low for unskilled
labor, both in the mining sector and in the industrial sector outside
the mines.

Labor for the Planters: East Indians

While Britain, northwestern continental Europe, and the high South
African veld were importing labor to man the new industrial machinery,
other regions of the world were seeking new sources of agricultural
labor. The "old" areas of plantation agriculture, most of them growing
sugar cane, had lost their supply of slave labor with abolition. On some
of the small islands of the Caribbean, such as Barbados and St. Kitts,
the freed slaves had no alternative but to work for their former
masters. But on the larger islands like Trinidad and Jamaica, and in the
mainland sugar colony of Guyana (then Demarara), the ex-slaves could and
did take up land beyond the confines of the plantation, and they
resisted further work on the old estates. Facing potential ruin, the
planters began to agitate for new sources of labor. Sometimes the
British intercepted slave ships going to Brazil, nominally freed the
slaves, and then sent them to the West Indian sugar islands (Furtado
1963: 135).

   These proved to be only stopgap measures. To the cry for replacement
of the old labor supply was soon added the demand for more and more
labor as the scale of commercial agriculture expanded. Beyond the old
sugar areas, there were sometimes political reasons for importing
laborers. In Malaya, for example, the British decided to maintain intact
the Malay peasantry and its tributary relationship with village headmen
and ruling nobles. The need for plantation labor was therefore met
through the organized migration of indentured laborers from India and of
contract labor from China.

   Whereas Chinese labor came to be utilized primarily in mining and
construction work, Indian indentured labor was deployed mainly in
plantations, specifically plantations located within the British empire.
Already under the Mughals groups of men had taken service as bearers and
on ships, and by the end of the eighteenth century there were Indian
laborers—hired for periods of two to three years—in all the ports of
Southeast Asia. Yet the great stimulus for the development of what
Tinker (1974) has called “the second slavery" came with the abolition of
the slave trade in 1808 and the sudden need for cheap and tractable
labor, especially on the sugar-producing plantations of the tropics.

   Guyana asked for Indian laborers, as did Jamaica and Trinidad from
1836 on. (At present. East Indians make up more than 50 percent of the
population in Guyana, about 40 percent in Trinidad, and about 2 percent
in Jamaica.) East Indian labor migration to Mauritius began in 1835; by
1861 East Indians constituted about two-thirds of the population of the
island. In 1860 the tea plantations in Assam and Bhutan began to compete
for migrants, and between 1870 and the end of the century 700,000 —
750,000 laborers were recruited for work there. The demand for East
Indians in Fiji began in 1879; today, Indians there outnumber native
Fijians. After the 1870s Ceylon became a main area of demand; in the
1880s, Burma; after the turn of the century. Malaya. Natal in South
Africa began importing East Indian contract labor for its sugar
plantations around 1870. All together. Tinker estimates, "over a million
Indian laborers went overseas to tropical plantations in the forty years
before 1870; though the figure could be as high as two million" (1974:
114-115).

   When the English first began to recruit laborers for their indigo
plantations in Bihar and for service in Calcutta, they drew heavily on
the dhangar, or hill-dwelling populations, of the Chota-Nagpur plateau,
such as the Santals, Munda, and Oraons. These hill people were also
significant among the indentured servants sent to Mauritius and Guyana
immediately after the end of slavery. In the 1870s they took part in the
migration to the tea plantations of Assam and Bhutan. After the dhangar,
labor recruiters turned to the populations of the "presidency towns" of
Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta. In the 1840s Bihar became a province for
recruitment, as Bihari in the army were replaced by Brahmans and Rajputs
of Oudh. Then South India became a main recruiting ground, so much so
that all South Indians overseas came to be called Malabars.
Tamil-speakers made up most of the laborers for Ceylon, Burma, Malaya,
and Natal. As of 1945 the population of East Indian origin in Burma was
about a million, with 750,000 in Ceylon, 750,000 in Malaya, 300,000 in
Mauritius, 100,000 in Fiji, 300,000 in Trinidad and Guyana, and 100,000
in Natal.

   A complex delivery system developed to carry on this trade in
indentured servants. At the apex of the business in India stood an elite
of subagents. These usually belonged to middleman minority groups, such
as Jews, Armenians, Indian Christians, and Eurasians. The subagent would
send out a recruiter (called an arkatia or arkati) who was knowledgeable
about local conditions. He either contacted prospects directly or worked
through local gang bosses or recruiters. In the South, such a local gang
boss came to be known as a kangatii, from kankani, the Tamil word for
headman. By the middle of the century, a kangani often managed a team of
labor recruits through silara, agents loyal to him. Recruiting was done
by offering advances, which the recruit used to settle debts, give a
going-away feast, and purchase his ticket. All the obligations incurred
had to be worked off at the point of arrival. Unhappily, arrival at the
final destination was not assured. In the 1850s nearly one out of six
passengers to the Caribbean died on the three- to four- month journey.

   During the century following 1830, such Indian districts as Thanjavur
in Madras province (called Tanjore by the British) were reorganized to
meet the exigencies of the Indian labor trade (Gough 1978). In the 1830s
the British government began to restore Thanjavur's irrigation system,
which had been destroyed during the conquest. By midcentury
three-quarters of Thanjavur's cultivated area was irrigated and turned
over to rice production. Irrigated rice made up nearly 70 percent of the
district's exports in 1841 — 1842 and more than 80 percent by 1868—
1869, most of it going by sea to the plantation dependencies of Ceylon,
Malaya, and Mauritius. At the same time, British rule wrought major
changes in land tenure and in labor arrangements in Thanjavur. Lands
were gradually allocated as private property to the individual
households of the village managerial caste. The new landowners were
empowered to negotiate private rental agreements with tenants, to
dismiss unwanted dependents, and to hire casual wage labor at will,
instead of the former practice of dealing collectively with village
servants and tenants. These changes intensified emigration. The majority
of the million or so people who left Thanjavur between 1830 and 1930
were Untouchables or members of non-Brahmin lower castes of the
peasantry. Three-quarters were men, the others young women. Producing
labor power and rice for export, Thanjavur became in effect "a human and
nutritional service station for British plantations” (Gough 1978: 42).

Labor for the Planters: Europeans

Another major source of agricultural labor was European. We have already
made mention of the Polish workers who began to replace German
tenant-laborers on the Junker estates of eastern Germany after 1870. In
the coffee belt of Brazil, the end of slavery also created a labor
crisis. It proved impossible to tap the labor of Luso-Brazilian
small-scale cultivators, most of whom were held fast in relationships of
dependency upon local landlords and other powerholders. For a time, some
Brazilian political leaders harbored plans to bring in indentured
“Asiatics." Finally, the problem was solved by importing Italian
laborers. The government paid for their voyage, and the local planter
advanced a year's wages and a subsistence plot, thus subsidizing "free”
Italian labor.

   The Italian emigration was prompted largely by the crisis of
agriculture within Italy beginning in the 1870s (see Schneider and
Schneider 1976: 120-125). The sale of public-domain land and church
holdings had created a situation in which large landowners were able to
add to their holdings, while small cultivators were being squeezed out
by falling prices for agricultural products. This price decline was in
considerable part the result of competition from Russian and American
wheat. The increasing flood of manufactured goods also disrupted local
handicrafts, while the phylloxera blight destroyed vineyards. Wealthy
landowners began to move their liquid wealth into industry (see Mack
Smith 1969: 159), but smallholders and laborers could escape the squeeze
only by moving elsewhere, either seasonally, temporarily, or
permanently.

   At first, in the 1860s, Italians took up work in France, Switzerland,
Germany, and Austria-Hungary, but only 16,000 emigrated permanently in
that decade. In the 1870s the stream of permanent emigration grew to
360,000, with some 12,000 now going to Argentina and Brazil. Then,
between 1881 and 1901, the number of permanent emigrants rose sixfold to
more then 2 million. In all, more than 4 million left Italy permanently
between 1861 and 1911. The majority came from southern Italy, where the
agricultural crisis hit most heavily. Four-fifths were agricultural
laborers and construction workers (Sereni 1968: 353). In the 1800s and
1890s South America was the major target of migration: three times as
many went to Brazil and Argentina as went to the United States. By 1901,
however, the trend was reversed. In the first decade of the twentieth
century, more than twice as many went to the United States as to South
America; in the second decade, more than three times as many. By that
time, however, the new labor supply had permitted Brazil's coffee
planters to lay the basis for rapid industrial growth, with the
Brazilian government paying the transportation costs for the new work
force.

 

Rio Claro, Brazil

The changeover from slave labor to labor by immigrant workers on the
Brazilian coffee plantations has been studied by Warren Dean in one
county about 150 miles north of Sao Paulo (Dean 1976). In the eighteenth
century the county of Rio Claro was still boca do sertao, a mouth of the
backlands opening upon the wilderness beyond. It came to be inhabited by
squatters who grew subsistence crops on swiddens and raised pigs to
supplement the meat obtained from game; a few sold their hogs and
tobacco. By the 1830s, however, two-thirds of the land had passed into
the hands of plantation owners, merchants, officials, and urban
professionals, either through land grants or through purchase for
speculation. The displaced squatters moved farther into the wilderness,
encroaching on the territories of native Tupian groups. In the resulting
conflicts, they absorbed the fury of native American attacks; they
attacked in turn, thus interposing a barrier between the Tupi and the
developing plantations.

   The first crop raised on the plantations of Rio Claro was sugar,
which was usually grown by planters who owned processing mills. Their
labor force was made up of African slaves, dependent laborers who
settled on the plantations (agregados), squatters still in the area who
turned to wage work to supplement their subsistence product, and
floating laborers hired by the job (camaradas).

   In the 1840s coffee was introduced into the area, and by 1859 2.6
million coffee trees had been planted in the county. The money for
growing coffee came from reinvested sugar profits or from English and
German exporters who made their homes in Santos, the port of Sao Paulo.
The initial planting of trees was handled by contractors owning slaves.
The planter then took over the groves and worked them with his own
slaves; he also had to buy the expensive machinery required for hulling.
The high cost of land, slaves, and equipment favored concentration, and
by 1860 eleven growers accounted for more than 60 percent of the coffee
produced. Although coffee became the major crop, the plantations never
became entirely specialized. They grew their own food, raised their own
draft animals, and maintained their own artisans, although they bought
manufactured goods in town.

   Coffee production rose steadily, reaching its zenith in 1901.
Expansion was aided by the construction of a railroad connecting the
county with the port of Santos; financing came from the local planters
and from British investors. The coffee was sold to brokers who were
sometimes related to the planters by kinship or marriage. With the
passage of time, the planters themselves moved to Sao Paulo, leaving the
supervision of their plantations in the hands of hired administrators.

   Although the African slave trade had been declared illegal in 1835,
more than half the agricultural labor force in Rio Claro still consisted
of slaves in the 1870s. The use of slaves was declining in other parts
of Brazil, but in Rio Claro it actually expanded as planters brought
slaves from less prosperous regions and entrepreneurs with slave gangs
still engaged in planting. Nevertheless, the slave population did not
reproduce itself. Infanticide was common and infant mortality from other
causes very high. Slaves also ran away regularly, giving employment to
professional slave catchers. After mid-century, when most of the slaves
had been born in Brazil and the labor force had become more homogeneous,
the slaves grew increasingly rebellious.

   To replenish their labor supply, the planters began to look to
immigrants. Some planters in Rio Claro had already experimented with the
introduction of Portuguese, German, and Swiss indentured laborers in the
1840s and 1850s. In 1857 there were more than a thousand such workers in
Rio Claro. The experiment failed, however, when the Europeans protested
their working conditions through their consular representatives. The
planters were thus forced back on the labor of their slaves, even though
slave prices rose steadily for the next twenty years and the costs of
control also rose.

   After abolition in 1888, the planters turned to the importation of
Italian laborers. The state supported this practice by financing the
passage of men and their families from Europe to Santos. The newcomers
were hired as families, and they worked under the direction of the male
head of the household. Contracts were on an annual basis, extending from
harvest to harvest. Wages were paid according to the hoe work required
and the quantity of coffee harvested. Houses were provided rent-free,
and workers were allowed to buy at plantation stores, receiving advances
against work performed. They could also grow subsistence crops for
themselves, although this created conflicts between workers and
planters, who feared that the home garden tended to diminish attention
to the coffee trees. At the end of each contractual period, there was a
considerable amount of movement as workers sought employment on more
productive estates.

   While much of the work on the plantations passed into the hands of
such immigrants, about half the trees continued to be tended by
Brazilian tenant laborers (colonos) or gang laborers hired by the job.
Gang labor by unmarried Italians or by freedmen was contracted out; it
remained important in such tasks as clearing, planting, and fencing.

   The advent of wage labor caused major changes in the class structure
of the town. Only about 10 percent of the immigrant colonos bought land
themselves, generally with subsidies from the state, which had an
interest in stabilizing the immigrant population. The remainder either
returned home or joined the proletariat of the town. The increased flow
of cash provided by wages intensified commerce. This brought new
merchants to town, who then invested their profits in purchasing land.
The freedmen were generally depressed into the ranks of casual laborers,
along with the descendants of squatters remaining in the area. The
Italian immigration thus created an "ethnic” stratification of the
population, subsidized to a considerable extent by the state on funds
that derived originally from the exploitation of Brazilian labor.

   Little was done to maintain the productivity of the coffee trees. As
productivity decreased, the coffee frontier moved farther inland, and
planters and camaradas moved inland with it. The town remained behind,
with its new middle class of merchants and professionals and its
depressed proletariat, to be engulfed gradually by the urban sprawl of
Sao Paulo.

The Trade in Chinese Labor

China proved to be another source of labor for the outside world. In
Southeast Asia there had been Chinese before the European expansion.
Moslem Chinese of mixed Han, Persian, Arabic, and Central Asian origins,
called Hwei or Hui, moved into the southwestern Chinese borderlands
during the Mongol period of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries;
many carried on the overland trade to southern Asia. Chinese trading
colonies also settled in the islands at this time. In the fifteenth
century, however, the Chinese state throttled foreign commerce and
created an unpopulated no-man's-land along the coastal fringe in order
to prevent foreign contacts with the Han population. This stemmed
out-migration. Nevertheless, Chinese laborers were exported by the
Portuguese through Macao, while the Dutch East India Company captured
Chinese along the China coast in order to populate its headquarters town
of Batavia (Dermigny 1964, I: 831).

   The conclusion of treaties at the end of the Opium War in 1842
removed the barrier to emigration and permitted foreign entrepreneurs to
tap the Chinese labor market directly through the establishment of the
"coolie” trade. Political disorders and economic crises in China, such
as the Taiping rebellion, drove many to accept labor contracts abroad.
Soon a sophisticated apparatus of traders grew up to facilitate this
movement. If an entrepreneur wanted Chinese laborers for use in Malaya,
he could contact a "coolie broker" in Singapore or Penang. The coolie
broker, in turn, issued the orders for labor to "eating-house" keepers
in Swatow, Amoy, Hong Kong, or Macao. The eating-house keepers then
contacted "headmen" (khah-taus), who recruited laborers on the village
level. Laborers either paid for their own transportation or else
indentured themselves to a "credit-ticket" broker who paid the cost of
their travel.

   The laborers who had paid their own fare could move about freely in
search of work after arrival. The "unpaid passengers," however, were in
debt to the broker and indentured to him for the duration of their debt.
In Malaya, such indentured arrivals were housed in depots, where they
were guarded by "depot keepers" employed by the coolie broker. Coolie
brokers and depot keepers usually held positions in powerful secret
societies, which also furnished the depot guards. The secret societies
developed a dual function in the context of the labor trade. They
maintained social control and coercion over the dependent Chinese
population, while at the same time they defended the interests of the
Chinese enclave against the dictates and strategies of local
governments. The depot system lasted in Malaya until the onset of World
War I in 1914.

Singapore

One of the great hubs of this Chinese labor migration was Singapore.
Singapore provides an apt example of the ways that the labor trade
fitted into the other activities of a major port and commercial center
in Asia.

   Singapore had been founded in 1819, when England received rights to
the site—then inhabited by a few Malay and Chinese fishermen. By 1900
the city had 229,000 inhabitants—two-thirds of them Chinese, the
remainder Malays—drawn mainly from the Malay peninsula but also from the
island archipelago as far east as Borneo and the Philippines.

   The surrounding population was also largely Malay. This population
was organized in the tributary mode and divided into a number of
kingdoms. Each kingdom was headed by a monarch drawn from a royal line
and confirmed in office by a hierarchy of territorial, district, and
local chiefs of aristocratic descent. At the base of the hierarchy was
the village, inhabited by Malay peasantry, or ra'ayat. Tribute in kind
and labor flowed from the village, through the village headman
(penghulu) and the hierarchy of nobles, toward the royal capital, which
was usually located strategically near the mouth of the polity's
principal river. In extending their sovereignty over the Malay states,
the British made a political decision to preserve the Malay social order
with as little change as possible, in return for an annual quitrent. As
a result, "the great bulk of Malays remained locked within the framework
of a traditional society which was changing only slowly" (Roff 1967:
122).

   Yet change it did, and largely through the agency of the great
commercial city that had been created in its midst. When Chinese
planters began to grow cash crops such as pepper and gambier (an
astringent extracted from a plant and used in medicine, tanning, and
dyeing) on Singapore Island, the Malay rulers welcomed further
immigration by Chinese planters and cultivators in order to tap a
welcome source of new revenue. After 1850 they also sponsored the
movement inland by Chinese tin-mining companies. Soon the Singapore
hinterland became a battlefield between rival coalitions of local Malay
chiefs, Chinese tin miners, and Chinese merchants engaged in financing
and supplying both chiefs and miners. The resulting rivalries undermined
the edifice of indirect rule promoted by the British, inviting direct
British intervention.

   From 1867 on, Singapore became a pivot of the British efforts to
govern in the peninsula, using British officials, Malay adjutants, and
Chinese and Tamil clerks. The British also managed the agency houses
charged with handling the European-based trade. Alongside the European
traders stood the Chinese merchants, headed by the prestigious Baba
families and closely interlinked through kinship ties. As non- Malays
they were barred from any access to the formal positions of political
authority, but they held much of the real power over capital and men in
the city. They advanced money to planters and miners. They managed the
labor trade through which workers were funneled to the tin mines of
Perak and Selangor and to the plantations. They dominated the powerful
secret societies that controlled the immigrant laborers and offered
protection and assistance in return for loyalty and service (see
Freedman 1960: 33). The British, in turn, used the heads of these secret
societies as "captains of the Chinese" to control the Chinese
population, until the secret societies themselves accumulated too much
power and were declared illegal in 1889. Their place was taken by
associations based on common dialect or surname, patterned on the
regional associations found in China and fulfilling similar functions of
support and welfare. These associations also functioned as religious
bodies. In the setting of Singapore, they both embodied the anti-Manchu
political stance of the secret societies and offered unorthodox
religious expression of individual needs through spirit-medium cults.

   Capital in the city thus flowed mainly through British and Chinese
hands, while most of the labor was furnished by Chinese. In this city
planted in their midst, the Malays were relegated to a minor role. A few
held political office. A number—Bugis from Celebes, Dyaks from Borneo,
and Minankabau from Sumatra—were traders dealing with the archipelago.
There were a few religious teachers and mosque officials. The largest
number were engaged in low-yield occupations: policemen, watchmen,
drivers, servants, office runners, street hawkers, and small shopkeepers
in the Malay quarter. When rubber growing became prominent at the
beginning of the twentieth century, this too passed into the hands of
Indian laborers, with the Malays in Singapore relegated to marginal and
interstitial jobs. In the countryside the Malay cultivator, although
protected in his political rights, fell victim through growing
indebtedness to an army of non-Malay rice millers, rubber marketing
agents, village shopkeepers, and moneylenders.

Chinese Labor: Other Destinations

Malaya was not the only destination of Chinese labor. Some 90,000
indentured Chinese laborers were sent to Peru between 1849 and 1874,
mostly through Macao, to replace Hawaiians who had died working in the
guano beds (Stewart 1951: 74). Some of these Chinese were assigned to
work in the cotton fields of coastal Peru when demand for cotton rose in
the wake of the scarcity created by the war between the Union and the
Confederacy. Others were employed in railroad construction.

   Another 200,000 Chinese were sent to California between 1852 and 1875
(Campbell 1923: 33), where they were employed in fruit growing and
processing, in panning for gold, and in building railroads. In the 1860s
some 10,000 to 14,000 Chinese laborers built the Central Pacific
Railroad of California, which by 1885 linked the West Coast with eastern
Utah and thus completed the transcontinental railroad. Five thousand
more workers were taken from Hong Kong to Victoria to build the Canadian
Pacific Railroad, which opened up the gold placer beds of British
Columbia.

   In California the movement of Chinese labor was controlled by
merchant-brokers who hired out the laborers as needed, while retaining
control over them through the operations of secret societies (see Dillon
1962; Lee 1965). The secret societies, in turn, were interlinked with
the so-called Six Companies, named for their districts of origin in
Kwantung province and patterned after the regional associations that
developed in China during the Manchu Ch'ing regime (Ho 1966). As in
Singapore, the Six Companies defended Chinese interests in an
antagonistic environment. At the same time, they exercised control over
the Chinese population on the West Coast. The Pacific Steamship Company
cooperated with them by agreeing not to allow any man to return to China
who had not cleared his debts. After the cessation of the labor trade,
the Six (later Seven) Companies continued as political, educational, and
welfare associations of the Chinese community in the United States.

   Gold was discovered not only in California and British Columbia but
also in Australia (1853). By 1854 there were 2,000 Chinese miners in the
Australian gold fields, with 42,000 there by 1859. Other areas also
entered the Chinese labor trade. Cuba contracted for 800 Chinese in
1847, and for some 8,000 to 15,000 in 1852. Between 1856 and 1867,

19,000 Chinese left Hong Kong under contract, of whom 6,630 went to the
British West Indies (mostly Guyana), 4,991 to Cuba, 2,370 to Bombay in
India, 1,609 to Dutch Guiana, and 1,035 to Tahiti, Hawaii, and other
Pacific islands (Campbell 1923: 130, 150).

   In addition to Chinese laborers who stayed abroad only until their
contracts expired, there were also migrants who went in search of
permanent settlement. One of the major areas of such settlement was
Southeast Asia, where the Chinese population in the 1970s was more than
12 million (McEvedy and Jones 1978: 166). Early migrant groups were
often traders who in time formed a mercantile aristocracy, such as the
Babas of Malacca and the Peranakans of Indonesia. Later comers
frequently had to contend for power with the earlier arrivals.

   Often Chinese merchants would, in their new homeland, build up a
dependable following by calling on kinsmen or people from the same home
region in China. In employment, close kin were preferred to more distant
kin, more distant kin to speakers of the same Chinese dialect, members
of the same dialect category to other Chinese, and Chinese to
non-Chinese (Jeromin 1966: 53). Such a following, built up on kin or
quasi-kin ties, would engage in many different activities, often
centering around operations that connected the primary producers in the
hinterland with Western commercial enterprises. Chinese were widely
active as middlemen, to the point where Indonesians began calling them
bangsa tengah, "the middle race." Chinese merchants also advanced the
credit necessary to oil the circuits of commerce. "The native peasant is
in debt to the Chinese trader, the trader to the wholesaler, the
wholesaler to the export-import firm. Debt obligations connect all the
steps of trade with each other" (Jeromin 1966: 75). Unsurprisingly,
these middleman and credit functions have often made the Chinese
creditor-merchant the target of political attack and persecution in
Southeast Asia, where their position has often been compared to that of
the Jews in Eastern Europe.

   The Chinese laborers, too, faced hostility from workers in the areas
to which they were brought. In 1882 the United States passed the Chinese
Exclusion Act under pressure from the Knights of Labor, who had even
insisted on the ejection of Chinese from the laundry business. The
anti-Chinese agitations that broke out on the West Coast of the United
States were not merely a California problem but part of an emergent
racism in the United States (see Hune 1977: 48-50). Restrictions on
Chinese immigration constitute merely one phase in a larger movement to
divide employment opportunities along racial lines. Similar efforts at
excluding the Chinese were made in Australia after their employment in
the gold fields came to an end, and in South Africa, where 43,296
Chinese contract laborers worked on the Rand in 1904, only to be
repatriated in 1907 (Campbell 1923: 187).

Ethnic Segmentation

A hallmark of the industrial and plantation complexes constructed under
capitalist auspices all around the world has been the juxtaposition of
groups of different social and cultural origins. Societies based upon
such complexes, plantation dependencies in particular, have sometimes
been labeled “plural societies" (Furnivall 1939, 1942, 1948). This term
was intended to convey their internal disjunction into distinctive
social and cultural segments. The disparate segments, juxtaposed in the
marketplace, were seen as being held together by power exercised by a
dominant segment, the European minority. An underlying assumption was
that the segments would cannibalize each other as soon as sovereign
power were removed; European rule was thus necessary to contain the
conflicts inevitably generated by diversity. The Caribbean and Southeast
Asia furnished salient examples of such pluralism.

   This view is misleading in that it grants explanatory power to social
and cultural heterogeneity. Rather, this heterogeneity must itself be
located in the organization of the labor process. The diverse groups
brought together did, of course, make use of distinctive cultural forms
to build ties of kinship, friendship, religious affiliation, common
interest, and political association in order to maximize access to
resources in competition with one another. Such activity, however,
cannot be understood without seeing it in relation to the ways different
cohorts of the working class were brought into the process of capitalist
accumulation.

   Emphasis on the distinctiveness of such cohorts leads, moreover, to a
false contrast of heterogeneous "plural" societies with the supposedly
homogeneous societies of Europe. It is not true that cultural uniformity
eased the way to state making and nation formation in Europe. The
difficulties of integrating the regional divisions of France and of
turning "peasants into Frenchmen" (Weber 1976); the problems posed by
the centrifugal propensities of "invertebrate Spain" (Ortega y Gasset
1937); the obstacles encountered in turning the inhabitants of multiple
cities and provinces into "Italians" (Mack Smith 1969); the forging of
the individualized and reluctant "home towns" of Germany into one Reich
(Walker 1971); and the enduring divisions of Britain between its Celtic
fringe and "Sassenach" core (Hechter 1975), and between its classes,
divided into "two nations" (Disraeli 1954)—all call into question any
simple opposition of plural heterogeneity and European homogeneity.

   The "plural societies" of the plantation dependencies do not
constitute a special type of society. They are historically and
geographically specific instances of the general tendency of the
capitalist mode to create a "disposable mass" of laborers out of diverse
populations, and to then throw that mass into the breach to meet the
changing needs of capital. In all such instances, the mode re-creates
the basic relation between capital and labor power. At the same time, it
re-creates the heterogeneity of the labor force produced. It does so in
two ways: by ordering the groups and categories of laborers
hierarchically with respect to one another, and by continuously
producing and re-creating symbolically marked "cultural" distinctions
among them.

   We have noted earlier that shifts in the ratio of capital expended on
plant to capital paid out in wages produce segmentation in the labor
market. The workers filling positions in the more privileged segments of
that market enjoy higher pay and better working conditions than those
entering the lower segments; they are also better able to defend and
augment their perquisities through union organization and political
influence. In contrast, the workers in the lower segments are directly
exposed to the downward pressure on their wages and conditions of work
exerted by unemployed labor. In a wider perspective, not only are they
worse paid and less secure in their jobs than the more advantaged
echelons of the working class but they also buffer the upper echelons
against direct job competition by the "reserve army," whether that labor
reserve is national or international.

   The opposing interests that divide the working class are further
reinforced through appeals to "racial" and "ethnic" distinctions. Such
appeals serve to allocate different categories of workers to rungs on
the scale of labor markets, relegating the stigmatized populations to
the lower levels and insulating the higher echelons from competition
from below. Capitalism did not create all the distinctions of ethnicity
and race that function to set off categories of workers from one
another. It is, nevertheless, the process of labor mobilization under
capitalism that imparts to these distinctions their effective values.

   In this regard, distinctions of "race" have implications rather
different from "ethnic" variations. Racial designations, such as
"Indian" or "Negro," are the outcome of the subjugation of populations
in the course of European mercantile expansion. The term Indian stands
for the conquered populations of the New World, in disregard of any
cultural or physical differences among native Americans. The term Negro
similarly serves as a cover term for the culturally and physically
variable African populations that furnished slaves, as well as for the
slaves themselves. Indians are conquered people who could be forced to
labor or to pay tribute; Negroes are "hewers of wood and drawers of
water," obtained in violence and put to work under coercion. The two
terms thus single out for primary attention the historic fact that these
populations were made to labor in servitude to support a new class of
overlords. Simultaneously, the terms disregard cultural and physical
differences within each of the two large categories, denying any
constituent group political, economic, or ideological identity of its
own.

   Racial terms mirror the political process by which populations of
whole continents were turned into providers of coerced surplus labor.
Under capitalism these terms did not lose their association with civil-
disability. They continue to invoke supposed descent from such
subjugated populations so as to deny their putative descendants access
to upper segments of the labor market. "Indians" and "Negroes" are thus
confined to the lower ranks of the industrial army or depressed into the
industrial reserve. The function of racial categories within industrial
capitalism is exclusionary. They stigmatize groups in order to exclude
them from more highly paid jobs and from access to the information
needed for their execution. They insulate the more advantaged workers
against competition from below, making it difficult for employers to use
stigmatized populations as cheaper substitutes or as strikebreakers.
Finally, they weaken the ability of such groups to mobilize political
influence on their own behalf by forcing them back into casual
employment and thereby intensifying competition among them for scarce
and shifting resources (see Bonacich 1972: 555 — 556).

   While the categories of race serve primarily to exclude people from
all but the lower echelons of the industrial army, ethnic categories
express the ways that particular populations come to relate themselves
to given segments of the labor market. Such categories emerge from two
sources, one external to the group in question, the other internal. As
each cohort entered the industrial process, outsiders were able to
categorize it in terms of putative provenience and supposed affinity to
particular segments in the labor market. At the same time, members of
the cohort itself came to value membership in the group thus defined, as
a qualification for establishing economic and political claims. Such
ethnicities rarely coincided with the initial self-identification of the
industrial recruits, who first thought of themselves as Hanoverians or
Bavarians rather than as Germans, as members of their village or parish
(okolica) rather than as Poles, as Tonga or Yao rather than as
"Nyasalanders." The more comprehensive categories emerged only as
particular cohorts of workers gained access to different segments of the
labor market and began to treat their access as a resource to be
defended both socially and politically. Such ethnicities are therefore
not "primordial" social relationships. They are historical products of
labor market segmentation under the capitalist mode.

   The process by which new working classes are simultaneously created
and segmented has continued down to the present. It has followed the
general rhythm of capitalist accumulation, which spurred the development
of new labor markets as it intensified and then narrowed the demand for
labor as it slackened. Accumulation slowed with the derangement of
international markets in the wake of World War I, but it regained
momentum between 1919 and 1926, when the introduction of automatic
conveyor systems lowered the cost of durable consumer goods such as
automobiles and electrical applicances. The process of accumulation then
stagnated and collapsed, recovering only with the vast increase in
military expenditures initiated by World War II and with the rebuilding
of plants destroyed by the war.

   This last phase of accumulation saw the introduction of automation
guided by electronic machines (“continuous process technology").
Automated units of production have grown into larger complexes of
automated plants and fields of related activities around them
(Nehnevajsa and Frances 1959: 397). These complexes are increasingly
manned by workers who no longer intervene directly in the process of
production, but whose primary function is to ensure the smooth operation
of the automated machines. An automated factory requires new operational
teams composed of an elite of skilled workers and a supporting cast of
personnel engaged in simplified routines of maintenance. Automation thus
creates a specialized demand for laborers with appropriate skills, while
at the same time reducing the size of that demand.

   Only a minority of plants, however, have been able to automate
profitably. The rest must seek to maximize profits in other ways,
ranging from partial automation to primary dependence upon cheap labor
power. Continued reliance on processes of production in which labor
still plays a significant part is characteristic not just of “light"
industries such as textile production or semiautomated food processing.
Even the electronics industry, producing the strategic means for
controlling automation, remains highly labor-dependent, with labor
accounting for about half of its costs of production (C. Freeman, quoted
in Mandel 1978: 206). Thus, capital continues to seek areas of redundant
labor supply and lower labor costs, and creates new working classes
through its demand for cheaper labor. Since 1960, for example, over
forty top-ranked industrial firms moved from the northeastern United
States to the South, where wages were 20 percent below the national
average and only a minority of the labor force belonged to unions
(NACLA-East Apparel Project 1977: 2). Mote American capital has moved
south of the Rio Grande into Mexico's border region, while American,
German, and Japanese capital has taken advantage of low labor costs in
the "Little Japans" of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan.

   This migration of capital has given rise to an industrial pattern of
combining high technology in some phases of production with
laborintensive manual production in other phases. Standardization of
parts, electronic monitoring of production, and data processing have
permitted the labor process to be fragmented between automated parent
plants and labor-dependent assembly plants located in low-wage areas.
The reduction of the labor force in automated plants is thus accompanied
by the growth of new working classes in so-called “export platforms,"
located primarily along the shores of eastern and southeastern Asia and
along the littoral of the Caribbean in the Americas.

   Capital has migrated not only toward more labor-dependent industry
but also toward the new and different sectors of production generated by
the expansion of consumerism after World War II. This
phenomenon—supported by the expansion of consumer credit and stimulated
by advertising—has shifted many activities previously carried out in
households to industrial and commercial enterprises, and has greatly
increased the demand for industrially produced or processed commodities.
This growth of consumer-oriented industries and services has been
accompanied by a concomitant demand for labor, especially low-wage
labor, which has been met largely by new working populations. Large-
scale industrial food processing, in turn, has given rise to renewed
capital investment in agriculture, the resulting "agribusiness"
enterprises combining high-cost machinery and scientific inputs with
intensive manual operations by low-cost migratory labor.

   The period since World War II has thus intensified the recruitment
and employment of working classes on an international scale. Some 11
million "temporary workers" from the Mediterranean region were at work
in the booming industrial centers of West Germany, France, Switzerland,
and the Benelux countries in the late 1960s (Castles and Kosack 1973),
while West German industry drew on the influx of 10 million refugees
from the European East. In the United States, the labor market was
partly restructured by the northward movement of Afro- Americans
displaced from the rapidly mechanizing South; by a nearly threefold
increase in the number of working women between 1950 and 1970; and by
the immigration of laborers from Mexico and the Caribbean. The
oil-producing countries of the Middle East began to import a working
class recruited among Egyptians, Palestinians, and Indians. Labor
migration has also grown apace in Africa and Latin America. In 1950
100,000 Mossi were migrating seasonally from Upper Volta to the
plantations of the Ivory Coast; in 1965 there were almost a million. In
1968 Ghana attracted 2.3 million foreigners, most of them coming to work
in the cocoa orchards (Amin 1973a; 52-53, 68). About a million rural
Colombians have moved to neighboring oil-rich Venezuela; another 60,000
have entered Ecuador to take jobs in the new petroleum enterprises there
(Chaney 1979; 205).

   Capitalist accumulation thus continues to engender new working
classes in widely dispersed areas of the world. It recruits these
working classes from a wide variety of social and cultural backgrounds,
and inserts them into variable political and economic hierarchies. The
new working classes change these hierarchies by their presence, and are
themselves changed by the forces to which they are exposed. On one
level, therefore, the diffusion of the capitalist mode creates
everywhere a wider unity through the constant reconstitution of its
characteristic capital-labor relationship. On another level, it also
creates diversity, accentuating social opposition and segmentation even
as it unifies. Within an ever more integrated world, we witness the
growth of ever more diverse proletarian diasporas.

Afterword

This book has asked what difference it would make to our understanding
if we looked at the world as a whole, a totality, a system, instead of
as a sum of self-contained societies and cultures; if we understood
better how this totality developed over time; if we took seriously the
admonition to think of human aggregates as "inextricably involved with
other aggregates, near and far, in weblike, netlike connections" (Lesser
1961: 42). As we unraveled the chains of causes and effects at work in
the lives of particular populations, we saw them extend beyond any one
population to embrace the trajectories of others—all others.

   Ultimately, these chains of causation and consequence encompassed
whole continents, and brought together the Old World and the New. In
bringing about this global conjuncture, a signally important role fell
to Europe—a small peninsula off the landmass of Asia. We took the year
A.D. 1400 as a reference point in time, to exhibit the nature of that
expansion. The world of 1400 was already burgeoning with regional
linkages and connections; but the subsequent spread of Europeans across
the oceans brought the regional networks into worldwide orchestration,
and subjected them to a rhythm of global scope.

   Drawn by these forces into convergent activities, people of diverse
origins and social makeup were driven to take part in the construction
of a common world. They included the European sea merchants and soldiery
of various nationalities, but also native Americans, Africans, and
Asians. In the process, the societies and cultures of all these people
underwent major changes. These changes affected not only the peoples
singled out as the carriers of "real" history but also the populations
anthropologists have called "primitives" and have often studied as
pristine survivals from a timeless past. The global processes set in
motion by European expansion constitute their history as well. There are
thus no "contemporary ancestors," no people without history, no peoples—
to use Lévi-Strauss's phrase—whose histories have remained "cold."

   To demonstrate the global interconnections of human aggregates is one
task; to explain the development and nature of these connections,
however, is another. I have taken the position that no understanding of
these connections is possible unless it is grounded in the economic and
political conditions that generated and maintained these connections. To
explicate the material underpinnings of these linkages, I have drawn
freely on concepts taken from the storehouse of Marxian ideas. I have
taken from Marx the basic notion that social life is shaped by the ways
human beings engage nature through production. I have also utilized the
Marxian labor theory of value, the distinction between mercantile and
industrial capital, and the idea of long waves of capitalist
development. I have striven to treat these concepts as intellectual
tools, not as ultimate verities; their utility resides in their
explanatory adequacy.

   I have placed special analytic weight on a concept intended to reveal
the key relationships through which social labor is brought to bear upon
nature—the mode of production. In this usage "production" is not
synonymous with work; a mode of production is not the same thing as a
system of technology. Nor is a mode of production identical with a
"society." The idea of society centers upon the social alignment of
groups; the idea of mode of production aims at identifying the forces
that guide those alignments. To speak of a mode of production,
therefore, draws attention to the ways in which human beings confront
their world in order to modify it in their favor, and focuses on the
dynamic consequences of that confrontation. I do not use the term
relationship to indicate co-occurrence or co-variation of perceived
characteristics of elements, an occurrence itself empty of consequences.
I think of relationships as possessing force: relationships subject
human populations to their imperatives, drive people into social
alignments, and impart a directionality to the alignments produced. The
key relationships of a mode of production empower human action, inform
it, and are carried forward by it. As Marx said, men make their own
history but not under conditions of their own choosing. They do so under
the constraint of relationships and forces that direct their will and
their desires.

   Each mode of production gives rise to a characteristic conjunction of
social groups and segments, a conjunction that embodies its dynamic and
reproduces the conditions for its proliferation. Each mode also creates
its own characteristic fissures and oppositions. The kin-ordered mode is
predicated upon oppositions between those who "belong" and those who do
not, and engenders distinctions of gender, rank, and privilege favoring
some kin over others. The tributary mode sets tribute takers against the
producers of tribute and gives rise to military and political
competition both within and between the contending classes. The
capitalist mode acts to accumulate capital through the hiring of labor
power, but it is marked by the cyclical alternation of labor
mobilization and labor displacement; each intake of labor power uproots
some prior adaptation, while each sloughing off of labor power creates a
new cohort of the disemployed. Since the key relationships governing the
mobilization of social labor differ for each mode, and since each mode
produces its own disjunctions, the encounter of different modes spells
contradictions and conflicts for the populations they encompass.

   To envisage human aggregates interconnected in time and space, yet
responding to the forces generated by various modes of production,
impels us to think in more processual ways about the notion of society.
"Societies” emerge as changing alignments of social groups, segments,
and classes, without either fixed boundaries or stable internal
constitutions. Each mode, in the compass of its influence, generates
conjunctions of groups and classes that serve its requirements under
given historical and geographical circumstances. These requirements
change, as do the resulting alignments. Where different modes of
production intersect, the conjunctions of groups will bear the mark of
the interplay of forces. Therefore, instead of assuming
transgenerational continuity, institutional stability, and normative
consensus, we must treat these as problematic. We need to understand
such characteristics historically, to note the conditions for their
emergence, maintenance, and abrogation. Rather than thinking of social
alignments as self-determining, moreover, we need—from the start of our
inquiries—to visualize them in their multiple external connections.

   Such a view of the connectedness of human aggregates also demands
that we rethink the concept of culture. We need to remember that the
culture concept came to the fore in a specific historical context,
during a period when some European nations were contending for dominance
while others were striving for separate identities and independence. The
demonstration that each struggling nation possessed a distinctive
society, animated by its special spirit or culture, served to legitimate
its aspirations to form a separate state of its own. The notion of
separate and integral cultures responded to this political project. Once
we locate the reality of society in historically changing, imperfectly
bounded, multiple and branching social alignments, however, the concept
of a fixed, unitary, and bounded culture must give way to a sense of the
fluidity and permeability of cultural sets. In the rough-and-tumble of
social interaction, groups are known to exploit the ambiguities of
inherited forms, to impart new evaluations or valences to them, to
borrow forms more expressive of their interests, or to create wholly new
forms to answer to changed circumstances. Furthermore, if we think of
such interaction not as causative in its own terms but as responsive to
larger economic and political forces, the explanation of cultural forms
must take account of that larger context, that wider field of force. "A
culture” is thus better seen as a series of processes that construct,
reconstruct, and dismantle cultural materials, in response to
identifiable determinants.

   Nearly fifty years ago Robert Lowie distinguished between "matter-
of-fact usage” and "secondary interpretations" or "rationalizations”
(1937: 138—139). The distinction is still useful. Even the simplest
food- collecting group deploys an impressive array of objects, customs,
and knowledge in its dealings with the world, together with a body of
instructions for their use. This constitutes the matter-of-fact level of
cultural phenomena. On another level, such instrumental forms— objects,
acts, and ideas—appear as elements in cultural codes, which purport to
define their place in the relations of human beings to one another, and
of human beings to the surrounding world. Instructions about the
instrumental use of cultural forms are synchronized with communications
about the nature and praxis of the human situation. This is the level of
interpretation, rationalization, or ideology, of assumptions and
perspectives defining a particular view of the human lot. These
communications are more than denotative and logical; they are often
somatic, kinesthetic, affective, and aesthetic as well.

   Anthropologists have called particular combinations of such matter-
of-fact usages and ideological rationalizations "cultures,” dealing with
them as if they possessed an inherent coherence over time. Yet the
association of matter-of-fact instruments with communications about
their wider import is by no means automatic and self-evident. Meanings
are not imprinted into things by nature; they are developed and imposed
by human beings. Several things follow from this. The ability to bestow
meanings—to "name" things, acts, and ideas—is a source of power. Control
of communication allows the managers of ideology to lay down the
categories through which reality is to be perceived. Conversely, this
entails the ability to deny the existence of alternative categories, to
assign them to the realm of disorder and chaos, to render them socially
and symbolically invisible. Once things are named, moreover, power is
required to keep the meanings so generated in place— names must, as the
Chinese say, be "rectified." Sanctions must be used to defend the
categories of ideological discourse against possible challenges. The
construction and maintenance of a body of ideological communications is
therefore a social process and cannot be explained merely as the formal
working out of an internal cultural logic. The development of an overall
hegemonic pattern or "design for living" is not so much the victory of a
collective cognitive logic or aesthetic impulse as the development of
redundancy—the continuous repetition, in diverse instrumental domains,
of the same basic propositions regarding the nature of constructed
reality.

   If ideology-making is social in nature, it follows that the processes
through which ideologies are constructed take place in historic time and
under definable circumstances. The ability to project symbolic universes
may well be located in the structure of the human brain, driven—
according to Lévi-Strauss—to resolve the irresolvable contradiction
between Nature and Culture. Lévi-Strauss notwithstanding, however, this
contradiction is dealt with not in pure thought alone ("myth thinking
man"), but in the active transformation of nature through the social
labor of human beings. Contrary to those who believe that Mind follows
an independent course of its own, I would argue that ideology-making
does not arise in the confrontation of Naked Man thinking about Naked
Nature; rather, it occurs within the determinate compass of a mode of
production deployed to render nature amenable to human use.

    Each mode of production entails essential distinctions among human
beings. The social oppositions engendered by these distinctions
constitute the forcing ground for the construction of ideologies. In the
kin- ordered mode, the key distinction between kinsmen by descent and by
affinity is variously symbolized as ties of blood, bone, or fertilizing
spirit. The tributary mode's primary antithesis is phrased as that
between tribute-taking "children of the Sun," "descendants of the gods,"
"blue bloods," or "white bones," and tribute-producing "commoners,"
"black bones," or “black-haired people." The primary antithesis is then
compounded by further differentiation among the various grades within
each category. The capitalist mode's basic opposition between owners of
means of production and working hands is legally and politically
sanctified, and is conjugated by additional discriminations, such as
"white-collar" and "blue-collar" workers.

   Ideologies codify these distinctions not merely as instrumental
aspects of social relations, but as grounded in the essence of the
universe—in the nature of nature, the nature of human nature, and the
nature of society. In kin-ordered societies the distinctions of descent
and affinity are anchored in the workings of super-nature. In tributary
societies the differences in basic social categories are conceptualized
as an aspect of cosmic hierarchies, and myth and ritual as well as force
are deployed to maintain the proper orchestration between Earth and
Heaven. In societies dominated by the capitalist mode, distinctions of
essence appear in the Calvinist notion that God rewards virtue and that
the successful are virtuous, or in the idea that Nature awards the palm
of success to winners in natural selection. Poverty is thought to
demonstrate lack of worth and failure in natural selection to merit
assignment to base occupations.

   Yet each mode at the same time generates characteristic
contradictions that appear in both behavior and thought. In the
kin-ordered mode, some kinfolk emerge as "more equal than others," and
lesser kin confront the real limits of kin-based assistance. A social
world divided into insiders and outsiders, moreover, creates the problem
of strangers and orphans. In the tributary mode, the continuing clashes
of interest between tribute takers and tribute payers engender not only
social opposition but also ideological concerns about what constitutes
"right action" or “commensurate justice,” as opposed to “wrong action"
and "injustice." Thus tributary social orders, in enforcing divine
hierarchies, may yet face rebellion to right the injustices caused by
such enforcement.

   In the capitalist mode the regnant ideology assumes the equality of
all participants in the market, in the face of basic distinctions in
political and economic power between capitalists and workers. While all
social actors are defined as participants in commodity exchange, the
mode is structurally dependent upon the "unequal factor endowment" of
owners of capital and sellers of labor power. Ideology-making thus
transmutes the distinction between classes into distinctions of virtue
and merit. Success is demonstrated by the ability to acquire valued
commodities; hence, inability to consume signals social defeat. Since
the mode alternates continuously between labor mobilization and
abandonment, however, it also continuously reproduces an opposition
between virtuous consumers and the disvalued poor. Just as the tributary
mode gives rise to both class opposition and rebellions to right
injustice, so the capitalist mode spawns both labor discontent and
ideological movements to change the definitions of virtue and demerit.

   Ideology may mediate contradictions, but it cannot resolve them.
Alternative systems of ideas and ideologically charged behavior are
continuously generated by the operations of the modes themselves. They
are produced in the interplay of groups and classes that use ideological
alternatives to define their place in the field of force generated by a
mode of production. The alternatives take various forms, expressing both
the relatedness of groups and classes within a given mode and their
opposition. They may appear as different accents or connotations imputed
to the same communicative code by social actors occupying distinct
points of vantage. They may take shape in ideas and practices that sound
a systematic counterpoint to the mainstream of communication. They may
even develop into heterodox visions of reality, carrying with them a
threat of rebellion against the prevailing order. Such connotations,
counterpoints, and heterodoxies, moreover, remain but rarely confined
within a single social constellation or society; cults, religions, or
political movements all tend to overleap boundaries and to convey
ideological alternatives to audiences beyond the frontiers.

   There is thus an economic and political side to the formation of
idea-systems, and idea-systems, once produced, become weapons in the
clash of social interests. Sets of ideas and particular group interests,
however, do not exist in mechanical one-to-one relationships. If a mode
of production gives rise to idea-systems, these are multiple and often
contradictory. They form an “ecology" of collective representations, and
the construction of ideology takes place within a field of ideological
options in which groups delineate their positions in a complex process
of selection among alternatives. This process of inclusion and exclusion
is not only cognitive; it also involves the exercise of power. To
sustain ideological hegemony, the defenders of orthodoxy must carry
their message into an ever larger number of instrumental domains, while
curtailing the ability of subaltern groups to advance viable
alternatives. Where redundancy falters and ideology-making fails, the
deficit may be made up by force.

   It has been an argument of this book that we can no longer think of
societies as isolated and self-maintaining systems. Nor can we imagine
cultures as integrated totalities in which each part contributes to the
maintenance of an organized, autonomous, and enduring whole. There are
only cultural sets of practices and ideas, put into play by determinate
human actors under determinate circumstances. In the course of action,
these cultural sets are forever assembled, dismantled, and reassembled,
conveying in variable accents the divergent paths of groups and classes.
These paths do not find their explanation in the self-interested
decisions of interacting individuals. They grow out of the deployment of
social labor, mobilized to engage the world of nature. The manner of
that mobilization sets the terms of history, and in these terms the
peoples who have asserted a privileged relation with history and the
peoples to whom history has been denied encounter a common destiny.

Bibliographie Notes

This book incorporates the findings of various disciplines, and ranges
widely in historical time and geographical space. In such a work the
author owes his readers an account of his sources, together with the
reasons for their selection. The body of the text includes reference
only for quantitative information, quotations, and points upon which
there might be dispute. In this essay I present the larger body of
materials on which this book is based. My intent is not to cite all the
works I have consulted, but rather to indicate those that most
significantly shaped my theoretical understandings and most directly
contributed to my education in each subject matter. Since this book is
the cumulative outcome of many experiences and research efforts, the
discussion of my sources is to some extent also an intellectual
autobiography.

1. Introduction

Criticism of the social sciences for excessive specialization,
professional myopia, and a neglect of history is not new. Sociologist
Robert S. Lynd wrote Knowledge for What? in 1939, and a critique of
sociological method in “The Science of Inhuman Relations" in 1949. C.
Wright Mills advocated a renewal of sociology throughout his career, and
Alvin Gouldner was a major intellectual critic of the field until his
death in 1981. In trying to understand the development of social
thought, I have found most useful the masterful trilogy by H. Stuart
Hughes (1958, 1966, 1975). Leon Bramson has provided insight into the
conservative basis of sociology in his too little-known Political
Context of Sociology (1961).

   Political science has lost its generalizing thrust since it forsook
political sociology and a concern with economics for "behavioral"
studies. The influence of scholars like V. O. Key, Jr., who combined
micro-studies (such as his 1949 Southern Politics) with an interest in
the state apparatus, seems to have been swept away by a concentration on
small-group politics and attitude surveys. The recent work by Charles
Lindblom

(1977), which compares the economic performance of different political
systems, is quite unique. The most vital work on politics recently has

394 Bibliographic Notes

come from historically minded sociologists, such as Barrington Moore,
Jr. (1966, 1978), Charles Tilly (1975), Ellen K. Trimberger (1978), and
Theda Skocpol (1979). Political theory has been greatly illuminated by

C. B. Macpherson's Political Theory of Possessive Individualism (1962)
and by the works of Nicos Poulantzas (especially Political Power and
Social Change, 1973), whose promise was cut short by his suicide in
1979. A useful overview of "recent theories of the capitalist state" can
be found in Bob Jessop (1977).

   Anthropology has been slower than sociology to take a critical look
at its basic assumptions. An early attack on functionalism and its
implications by Dorothy Gregg and Elgin Williams ( 1948) presaged later
criticisms, but its effects were neutralized by its style of argument
and by the wrath unleashed against it by both Kroeber and
Radcliffe-Brown. The next major critical voice to be heard was that of
Peter Worsley, first in the little-read appendix to his Trumpet Shall
Sound ( 1957), then in "The Analysis of Rebellion and Revolution in
British Social Anthropology"

(1961). In the early 1960s J. R. Hooker raised questions about
anthropology in Africa (1963), and Jacques Maquet wrote critically about
"Objectivity in Anthropology" ( 1964). Within American anthropology it
was Kathleen Gough who first asked, in 1967, why the discipline seemed
to "bypass the most crucial problems of world society" (1968: 138).
Thereafter there was an outpouring of self-consciously critical
discussions, such as Dell Hymes, ed.. Reinventing Anthropology (1969),
Talal Asad, ed.. Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter ( 1973, and
Jean Copans, éd.. Anthropologie et impérialisme (1975), to name only a
few. The search for viable alternatives, however, has been slow. Two
interesting attempts, from very different perspectives, are Worsley's
Third World (1964) and Darcy Ribeiro's Civilizational Process (1968).

   Since Karl Marx's name is such a bugaboo, it is important to focus on
his ideas rather than on the polemics surrounding them. Vernon Venable's
Human Nature: The Marxian View (1945) is, to me, still the best
all-round introduction to the subject. Bertell Oilman's "Philosophical
Introduction" to his book Alienation (1976) offers a useful entry into
Marxian philosophical ideas. Alfred Schmidt's Concept of Nature in Marx

(1971) is rewarding but difficult. I have learned a great deal about the
development of Marx's ideas from Franz Mehring's biography of Marx
(1935). Alvin Gouldner's Two Marxisms ( 1980) is a good introduction to
the contradictions in Marx's own thought and to the subsequent variants
in Marxism that incorporate one or another aspect of that thought. Eric
J. Hobsbawm has written perceptively on "Karl Marx's Contribution to
Historiography" (1973).

   Anthropologists may wish to turn to Eleanor B. Leacock's introduction
to the 1972 edition of Friedrich Engels's Origin of the Family, Private
Property and the State, to Maurice Godelier's "Dead Sections and Living
Ideas in Marx's Thinking on Primitive Society" (1977), and to the
well-written book by James W. Wessman, Anthropology and Marxism

Bibliographie Notes 395

(1981). Marx's own ethnological researches have been edited and brought
into publication by Lawrence Krader (1972).

2. The World in 1400

The effort to write a world history as a process of cultural
connections, or to understand culture in global terms, is not new in
anthropology. I came into the field when V. Gordon Childe's What
Happened in History (1946) was required reading, and graduate education
included an obligatory immersion in Kroeber's rewritten Anthropology (
1948). Ralph Linton's Tree of Culture (1955), based on his lectures and
bereft of references, is also in that tradition, which seems to be alive
in anthropology today only among archaeologists. Within the field of
history, there are prodigious universal historians such as Arnold
Toynbee, whose view of history as a march toward salvation, however,
will persuade only believers. Much more helpful for anthropologists is
William McNeill's Rise of the West (1963), which attempts to portray
human history as linkages and interconnections, challenging the civil-
izational monads of a Spengler or a Toynbee.

   My penchant for seeing Europe and Asia synoptically traces back to
the influence of Joseph Strygowski, whose lectures and exhibits on the
Eurasian animal style were much discussed during my childhood in Vienna.
Owen Lattimore's Inner Asian Frontiers of China ( 1951 ) offered a
stimulating general view of nomad-cultivator interaction, as did his
later collection of essays (1962).

   In trying to understand nomad-cultivator relations around the
Mediterranean region, I have benefited by Altheim (1954, 1960), as well
as by von Barloewen ( 1961 ). Frederick J. Teggart's Rome and China
(1939) is an interesting work; an example of early cliometrics, it also
reveals the limitations of mechanical quantification.

   My major source on the political history of Asian nomadism has been
René Grousset's Empire of the Steppes (1970). The anthropology of this
cultural type owes a great deal to Lawrence Krader, especially his
papers on social organization (1955), ecology (1957), and polity (1958).
It is clear that one should not regard the role of the pastoral nomads
as an independent prime mover of political history, but view it rather
in relation to the ecology, exchange systems, and power structure of the
settled areas. On this, see Lacoste (1974) and Lees and Bates (1974).

   I have had a long-standing interest in the history and development of
the Islamic world (see Wolf 1951; 1969: Chap. 5). A great deal of what I
know I learned from teaching on Mediterranean cultures jointly with
William D. Schorger at the University of Michigan from 1961 to 1971. The
standard treatises on Islam are listed in readily available
bibliographies, but I would single out Marshall G. S. Hodgson's
three-volume Venture of Islam ( 1974). This work has been criticized for
its idealist bias, a charge that can be laid at the door of most
treatments that emphasize

396 Bibliographie Notes

the normative character of Islam. It does, however, deal with the
Islamic world in all its geographic and temporal dimensions, and it
avoids many of the ethnocentric biases of other Western writers. Its
major shortcoming is its lack of grounding in social and economic
history—a weakness, once again, that is general among writers on Islam.
For a trenchant critique of much of the writing on the Islamic world,
see Bryan Turner's Marx and the End of Orientalism (1978).

   Apart from a few scattered essays of an earlier time, the social and
economic history of Islam is only now beginning to be written. The
salient efforts include the volumes edited by M. A. Cook (1970), Charles
Issawi (1966), and, especially, Abraham Udovitch (1980). Useful
discussions of technology and production are Andrew Watson's “Arab
Agricultural Revolution” (1974) and Richard Bulliet's Camel and the
Wheel (1975). On relations between town and country, see Ira M.
Lapidus's collection. Middle Eastern Cities (1969), especially the essay
by Lapidus himself. The writers on Islamic history who pay special
attention to social and economic aspects include Claude Cahen (1955,
1957, 1959, 1965) and S. D. Goitein, who has dealt with the rise of Near
Eastern artisans and bourgeoisie (1956— 1957, 1964). Some day we will
have a better understanding of the wide-ranging trade connections of the
Islamic world. Heyd (1885) and Lybyer (1915) remain classics; there is
much information in Robert Lopez and Irving Raymond's collection on
Mediterranean trade (1955); and D. S. Richards has edited a useful book
on Islam and the trade of Asia (1970). Udovitch has written a splendid
book on commercial law in medieval Islam (1970), and Maxime Rodinson's
Islam et capitalisme (1966) is replete with insights and information.

   On early Ottoman history, Wittek (1957) is indispensable, especially
if read in conjunction with Werner (1966). Halal Inalcik's Ottoman
Empire (1973) is a valuable contribution by a Turkish historian; I would
also call attention to his “Capital Formation in the Ottoman Empire”

(1969). Most challenging are the recent papers by Ca8*ar Keyder on
Ottoman disintegration (1976) and by Huri Islamoglu and Keyder, “Agenda
for Ottoman History" (1977).

   The exploration of African prehistory constitutes an exciting
research frontier. A useful overview of the subject is Roland Oliver and
Brian Fagan's Africa in the Iron Age (1975). J. D. Fage and Oliver had
edited a selection of major papers from the Journal of African History
under the title. Papers in African Prehistory (1970). Oliver's own paper
in that volume, on "The Problem of Bantu Expansion," however, must yield
first place in an exposition of this subject to D. W. Phillipson's
"Spread of the Bantu Languages" (1977), on which I have relied. Vansina,
Mauny, and Thomas (1964), as well as McCall (1969), explore the
possibilities and difficulties facing the historian in Africa.

   We now know something about the extensive networks of exchange that
linked many parts of Africa. E. W. Bovill's Golden Trade of the Moors

Bibliographic Notes 397

(1968) deals with trans-Saharan trade; this is a revised version of a
book that he wrote in 1933, Caravans of the Old Sahara. Lars Sundstrom's
Exchange Economy of pre-Colonial Tropical Africa (1974) is a welcome
reprint of a little-known book published in Sweden. Also valuable is
Mauny (1961). Ivor Wilks (1962) stresses east-west trade routes, as well
as north-south connections. A collection edited by Claude Meillassoux

(1971) contains relevant information, but it deals mostly with
nineteenth-century trade. On West Africa as the leading supplier of gold
to the international economy between the eleventh and the seventeenth
centuries, see Braudel (1972; 462-475) and Hopkins (1973: 82).

   The politics of the Sudan have been discussed by Nehemia Levtzion and
by Abdullahi Smith in Ajayi and Crowder, eds.. History of West Africa

(1972). Levtzion deals with the states of the Western Sudan before 1500,
Smith with those of the Central Sudan. Daniel McCall (1971) has written
on Islamization in this area in the eleventh century. Jack Goody (1971)
illuminates state formation in Africa through comparisons with
state-formation processes in Europe and Asia; but see also the critique
by Emmanuel Terray (1973).

   The volume edited by Robert Rotberg and H. Neville Chittick on East
Africa and the Orient (1975) makes one think about connections across
the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean. G.S.P. Freeman-Grenville's
Medieval History of the Coast of Tanganyika (1962) and Chittick's paper
on "The Coast Before the Arrival of the Portuguese" (1972) provide the
archaeological background of coastal settlement. Roger Summers has been
interested in defining and dating the archaeological sequences at
Zimbabwe; see his book Zimbabwe (1963) and his later "Rhodesian Iron
Age" (1970). K. R. Robinson has written on "The Archaeology of the
Rozwi" (1966). D. P. Abraham has pioneered the combined study of
Portuguese records and African oral traditions in several articles
(1961, 1962, 1966). Also useful are Edward Alpers's discussion of
"TheMutapa and Malawi Political Systems" (1968) and S. G. Mudenge on
"The Role of Foreign Trade" (1974).

   My perspective on India was shaped early in my graduate-school days
by a paper by Paul Rosas, "Caste and Class in India" (1943), and later
by Frederic K. Lehman's ambitious doctoral thesis. Anthropological
Parameters of a Civilization (1957). Bernard S. Cohn's India: The Social
Anthropology of a Civilization (1971) is excellent. I have also learned
something from K. S. Shelvankar's little book on The Problem of India
(1943), and a great deal from an article by P. C. Joshi (1970), who
argues against the uniformity and unchangeability of traditional India.

   Like everyone who has studied India, I have tried to comprehend
caste. The literature on the topic is labyrinthine, and the reader is
not always sure there is light at the end of the tunnel. There are those
who locate the cohesive forces holding the caste system together in
ideology, in an underlying structure or postulate of ritual purity and
pollution. The major statement of this position is Louis Dumont's Homo
Hier-

398 Bibliographie Notes

archicus (1970). Others, whose approach I find more persuasive, hold
"that caste systems are held together by power, concentrated in certain
groups, more than by consensus" (Berreman 1979: 112). That power plays
an important role in maintaining caste distinctions and caste positions
was made abundantly clear in M. N. Srinivas's paper, "The Dominant Caste
in Rampura" (1959), and in F. G. Bailey's books. Caste and the Economic
Frontier (1957) and Tribe, Caste, and Nation (1960). The systemic nature
of this power emerged for me from Eric Miller's demonstration that royal
power was the linchpin of the system in his "Caste and Territory in
Malabar" (1954); from the discussion of the conflict between priestly
and political power in J. C. Heesterman's "India and the Inner Conflict
of Traditions" (1973); and from Chandra Jayawar- dena's explanation of
"The Disintegration of Caste in Fiji Rural Society"

(1971).

   At the same time, one should not conclude that caste is merely
epiphenomenal. Caste categories involve notions of corporate membership,
common descent, and endogamy, even when subcastes and caste sections
merge or separate according to context and situation (Beteille 1969:
157), or when castes as a whole change their social positions (see
Sinder 1964; Silverberg 1968). Morton Klass (1980) has plausibly traced
the rise of the caste system to a process of differentiation of
originally equivalent corporate groups. Claude Meillasoux (1974) has
offered a model of the caste system based on such differentiation in
access to means of production, although he slights the ideological
element in the determination of which group gets what. Joan Mencher's
"The Caste System Upside Down" (1974) clarifies the position of the
Untouchables.

   I conclude that the caste phenomenon is tied up intimately with power
and control of economic resources, but that the corporate nature of
descent-based groups must be taken into account in trying to understand
the workings of the Indian system of classes within a field of power.
The model for such an approach, for me, is Richard G. Fox's Kin, Clan,
Raja, and Rule (1971); I have relied heavily on this brilliant study.

   My reading on China began with Owen and Eleanor Lattimore's Making of
Modern China (1944) while I was in the army during World War II. I
subsequently encountered two remarkable books: Karl Witt- fogel's
Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Chinas (1931) and Owen Lattimore's Inner
Asian Frontiers (1951). During my graduate studies I learned much from
Morton Fried, who was then laying the basis for his renowned courses on
China and the Chinese periphery, first offered in 1950. Fried also
introduced me to the ethnic complexities of the Southwestern Chinese
frontier; see his "Land Tenure, Geography and Ecology"

(1952). Wolfgang Eberhard's writings, now synthesized in A History of
China (1977), as well as Mark Elvin's notable Pattern of the Chinese
Past (1973), provided a different perspective in their emphasis on
cumulative, noncyclical changes in Chinese development. Elvin offers an

Bibliographie Notes 399

especially dramatic account of Han expansion into the Chinese South.

   My discussion of trends in Chinese land tenure draws on Etienne
Balazs's "Evolution of Landownership in Fourth- and Fifth-Century China"
and "Landownership in China from the Fourth to the Fourteenth Century,"
both included in a book of his essays (1964); Denis Twitchett's Land
Tenure and the Social Order in T'ang and Sung China (1962); and chapters
6 ("Manorialism without Feudalism") and 15 ("The Disappearance of
Serfdom”) of Elvin's Pattern of the Chinese Past. Elvin has also
influenced my view of Chinese mercantile activity, together with W. E.
Wilmott, ed.. Economic Organization in Chinese Society

(1972). Trade connections with the Arab world are discussed by Jitsuzo
Kuwabara in the work "On P'u Shou-keng” (1928-1935). I first became
aware of Chinese contacts with Africa through J.J.L. Duyvendak's China's
Discovery of Africa ( 1949).

   In early graduate work in anthropology I read on the ecology of
Southeast Asia: E.C.J. Mohr's Tropical Soil Forming Processes (1933) and
Soils of Equatorial Regions (1944); Pierre Gourou's Les paysans du delta
tonkinois (1936); and Karl Pelzer's Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic
Tropics (1945). At that time, various writings by Robert von
Heine-Geldern, Anj. Thomassen a Thuessink, and B.H.M. Vlekke furnished a
spotty and conjectural view of early culture history. The situation has
much improved since then, through such works as J. C. van Leur's
Indonesian Trade and Society (1955); George Coedès's Les peuples de la
Péninsule Indochinoise (1962) and Les états hindouisés d'Indochine et
d'Indonésie

(1964); Paul Wheatley's Golden Khersonese (1961) and his fine essay on
the change from reciprocity to redistribution ( 1975); and the books by
O. W. Wolters on Early Indonesian Commerce ( 1967) and The Fall of
Sriviyaya in Malay History (1970).

   D.G.E. Hall's History of South-East Asia (1968) offers a sound
general introduction to the history and politics of the area. I have
also found useful the systematized ethnographic information in Lebar,
Hickey, and Musgrove, eds.. Ethnic Groups of Mainland Southeast Asia
(1964), as well as Kunstadter, ed.. Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities,
and Nations (1967). An enduring contribution to the understanding of
this area is Harry J. Benda's 1962 essay, "The Structure of Southeast
Asian History," which calls for systematic attention to major social,
economic, and political relationships. It is included, together with his
other essays, in a volume published to honor that gifted author after
his death (Benda 1972).

   The study of cultural development in the New World owes a debt to
Julian Steward for his part in moving American archaeology toward a
concern with ecology and socioeconomic processes. I cut my
anthropological eyeteeth on the Handbook of South American Indians,
which Steward edited (1946-1959). A synoptic version of this
seven-volume work is available in Steward and Faron (1959). Steward's
paper, "American Culture History in the Light of South America" ( 1947),
has been an aid to me in thinking comparatively about native American

400 Bibliographie Notes

ethnology. I found very useful the papers in Jennings and Norbeck, eds?
Prehistoric Man in the New World (1963) and in Meggers and Evans, eds..
Aboriginal Culture Development in Latin America (1963); Gordon R.
Willey's two-volume Introduction to American Archaeology (1966, 1971);
and William T. Sanders and Joseph Marino's New World Prehistory

(1970).

   The "paleosociology" of the Andean and sub-Andean areas is
illuminated in John V. Murra, Formaciones económicas y políticas dei
mundo andino (1975); Betty J. Meggers, Ecuador (1966); and Gerardo
Reichel- Dolmatoff, Colombia (1965). On the site of Buritaca, see
Colombia Today (1979). Donald Lathrap, in The Upper Amazon (1970),
emphasizes the relationship of the Andean and Amazonian zones, a topic
that is likely to hold some surprises in the future. The archaeology of
Isthmian America is ably reviewed by Olga R. Linares (1979). Mary Helms
has written a fine book on Ancient Panama: Chiefs in Search of Power
(1976).

   For Mesoamerica, on which I have written earlier (Wolf 1959), I have
made use of William T. Sanders and Barbara J. Price, Mesoamerica: The
Evolution of a Civilization (1968); Pedro Carrasco et al..
Estratificación social en la Mesoamérica prehispanica (1976); and
Carrasco and Johanna Broda, eds.. Economía, política e ideología en
Mesoamérica (1977).

   Gordon F. Ekholm and Gordon R. Willey together edited the fourth
volume of the Handbook of Middle American Indians, entitled
Archaeological Frontiers and External Connections (1966), in which J.
Charles Kelley deals with Mesoamerica—Southwest connections and James B.
Griffin discusses the relation of Mesoamerica to the Eastern United
States. See also Charles Di Peso, Casas Grandes (1974). On the
prehistory of the Eastern United States, see Joseph R. Caldwell's Trend
and Tradition (1958) and "Eastern North America" (1962); Melvin L.
Fowler's "Agriculture and Village Settlement in the North American East"

(1971); and James A. Brown's "Spiro Art and Its Mortuary Contexts"
(1975).

3. Modes of Production

This book makes extensive use of the concept of "mode of production,"
but in a more eclectic fashion than some of its current advocates. An
introduction to the concept can be gained from Bridget O'Laughlin's
“Marxist Approaches in Anthropology" (1975), Jonathan Friedman's
"Marxism, Structuralism and Vulgar Materialism" (1974), and Chapter 6 of
Wessman (1981). Readers should be aware, however, that the concept of
the mode of production has achieved its current salience only recently,
through the fusion of Marxism and structuralism in France. It thus
represents a particular variant of Marxian thought and not its totality.

   Marx and Engels themselves used the term Produktionsweise quite
freely and often ambiguously. They distinguished a number of "generic

Bibliographic Notes 401

types of productive systems” (in Venable's terms). They sometimes wrote
as if they saw the succession of such systems—primitive communism,
Asiatic society, slaveholding society, feudalism, capitalism, and
socialism—as evolutionary stages. At other times, they arranged these
generic types bilineally, visualizing one line of evolution moving from
primitive communism to the Asiatic mode, and another line from primitive
communism to capitalism on the Western European model. Eric J. Hobsbawm
has examined some of the issues involved in his "Introduction” to Marx's
Precapitalist Economic Formations (1964), which embodies a part of the
long-untranslated and unknown Grundrisse. Orthodoxy after Marx and
Engels tended to favor a unilineal evolutionary model in which each
generic type of productive system gave rise, in turn, to a higher stage.
Soviet interpretations, especially under Stalin, tended to favor a
worldwide universal sequence—slaveholding society, feudalism,
capitalism, and socialism—in order to lend ideological legitimacy to
Soviet socialism as a rightful successor to its feudal and capitalist
predecessors.

   The attempts of French structuralists (notably Louis Althusser and
Etienne Balibar in philosophy and Maurice Godelier in anthropology) to
define and analyze modes of production as structures or systems in their
own right, without reference to questions of evolution, transition, or
history, needs to be understood as a reaction against the accepted
orthodoxy. These attempts have contributed clarity to the discussion, as
well as a good deal of sophisticated Gallic logic chopping.

   I have learned much from the structuralists; at the same time, I see
limitations in their approach. Since they believe that Marx was a
systems theorist before his time, one who used Hegelian language because
he could not speak Althusserian, they have eliminated the Hegelian
dialectic in Marx. This does away with Marx's interesting (and, to me,
valuable) effort to build a philosophy of internal relations, in favor
of a mechanistic systems approach that deals with elements-in-relation
instead of elements-of-relation (see Oilman 1976: Part I). The
structuralists, moreover, have endowed the structure or system with an
absolute teleology ("structural causality"), which moves people as
carriers of the system but leaves no room for human consciousness or
history. In their anthropology they consequently show a tendency to
collapse all culture and cultural diversity into the elements of the
mode of production. Furthermore, they reify the mode of production
concept into timeless essences, which are then allowed to reproduce
themselves or conjugate ("articulate") with one another without
reference to historical time or circumstance.

   I have adopted the mode of production concept as a way of thinking
about relationships, not as God's truth. The concept cannot account for
everything, nor is it the solution to all theoretical problems. I favor
it in this work because it allows us to move away from mechanical,
linear causalities; but I am not prepared to embrace the Rube
Goldberg-like

402 Bibliographie Notes

theoretical constructions of articulated sectors, levels, moments, and
instances that are often only complicated rephrasings of the
timehallowed notion of "function."

   Those interested in delving deeper into the relevant literature
should read Althusser and Balibar, Reading Capital (1970), especially
Part III, and Godelier's Rationalité et irrationalité en économie (
1966). A book edited by David Seddon, Relations of Production (1974),
offers a convenient selection of writings in English translation by
French structuralist anthropologists; however, Seddon's introduction
misleads in suggesting that Marxist approaches in anthropology
originated at the ?cole Normale Supérieure in Paris in the 1960s. Those
able to read German will find Irmgard Sellnow's Grundprinzipien einer
Periodisierung der Urgeschichte (1961) an interesting contribution from
a different tradition. Barry Hindess and Paul Q. Hirst, acting as the
enfants terribles of Marxian social science in Britain, "out-Althusser"
Althusser in their "Introduction" to Pre-capitalist Modes of Production
(1975). They are infuriating in their insistence that no fact exists
without theory, and in their resolute denial of history in constiucting
their modes of productions; but their extremism provides a standard
against which others can test their own ideas. An informed, angry
critique of the entire structuralist enterprise is provided by E. P.
Thompson in The Poverty of Theory

(1978).

   Some of my insights into how the capitalist mode operates derive from
the experience of growing up among textile workers in the German-Czech
borderland of northern Bohemia in the Depression years of the 1930s. My
interest in an alternative economics was whetted by John Strachey's
Nature of the Capitalist Crisis ( 1935), which I read in 1939. When I
attended Queens College in New York, I became acquainted with
institutional economics through reading Dixon and Eberhardt (1938). Two
outstanding books dealing with Marxian economics are Paul M. Sweezy's
Theory of Capitalist Development (1942) and Ernest Mandel's Marxist
Economic Theory (1968). Since 1968, the Review of Radical Political
Economics has proved a lively and productive source of high-quality
publications on economic and political subjects. The Rosetta stone of
analysis is, of course, Karl Marx's Capital; I have used the 1977
Vintage/Random House edition for Volume I and the 1967 International
Publishers edition for Volume III.

   The concept of a "tributary mode of production" has been used by
Samir Amin in a number of his writings, such as Le développement inégal
(1973), especially Chapter 1 on precapitalist formations. But the
concept is foreshadowed by Marx in a discussion, in the Grundrisse, of
the possible outcomes of conquest (Gr. 1973: 97). The Japanese historian
Jiro Hayakawa, writing in the mid- 1930s, equated the tributary mode of
production with the Asiatic mode (see Shiozawa 1965). Ion Banu,
historian of philosophy at the University of Bucharest, similarly
identified Asiatic and tributary social formations (1967).

Bibliographie Notes 403

   The notion of a distinctive Asiatic mode of production stems from the
writings of the classical economists: Adam Smith, James Mill, Richard
Jones, and John Stuart Mill. Marx developed the concept in a number of
writings, notably the Grundrisse, but with varying emphases, stressing
sometimes the hydraulic underpinnings of Asiatic societies, sometimes
the presence of village communities acting in support of a god-king who
represents their undifferentiated unity. The pioneer attempt to use the
concept operationally in the analysis of a hydraulic society is
Wittfogel's masterly Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Chinas (1931).
Wittfogel continued to be the main protagonist of the idea after the
advent of Stalinism rendered its discussion impermissible in the Soviet
Union and elsewhere in the member parties of the Communist
International. Soviet Marxism- Leninism evidently felt threatened by the
critical stance toward state managerial bureaucracies that the concept
implied; by the possibility that it could be used to characterize Soviet
society as "Asiatic"; and by the implication that sociocultural
evolution might be multilineal rather than unilineal, and thus might
demand multilineal and heterodox political responses and strategies
rather than uniform and orthodox ones. The renewed interest in the
concept after Stalin's demise seems to be the result of efforts on the
Left to chart multilineal, nationally differentiated roads to socialism.
Among writings pointing in that direction are those by the redoubtable
East German historian of the Near East and classical antiquity,
Elisabeth Charlotte Welskopf ( 1957); the French historian of the
Orient, Jean Chesneaux (1964); the French anthropologist Maurice
Godelier (1965); and the Hungarian historian of Oriental literature,
Ferenc T?kei (1966). Useful works dealing with the issues posed by the
concept are Wittfogel's Oriental Despotism (1957), especially chapter 9;
the volume of collected papers. Sur le 'mode de production asiatique, '
published by the Centre d'Etudes et de Recherches Marxistes (1969);
Lawrence Krader's Asiatic Mode of Production (1975); the critical
chapter 4 in Hindess and Hirst ( 1975); and Irfan M. Habib's
"Examination of Wittfogel's Theory of Oriental Despotism" (1969).
Jonathan Friedman's System, Structure and Contradiction (1979) suggests
the possible development of Asiatic state forms out of pre-existent
kin-ordered "conical clan" structures, and encourages one to think of
rank-ordered and kin-based, feudal, and Asiatic formations as
transformations of one another.

   An introduction to the issues posed by feudalism and to the relevant
bibliography is the article "Feudalism" by Joshua Prawer and Shmuel N.
Eisenstadt in the International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (
1968). The classic work on the topic remains Marc Bloch's Feudal Society
( 1961 ), first published in 1939— 1940 at the beginning of the war from
which its author would not return. The Centre d'?tudes et de Recherches
Marxistes has published a volume of papers, Sur le féodalisme ( 1971 ),
in which René Gallissot questions why the weak, short-lived, and
peripheral Northwest European feudalism should serve as the type case
for

404 Bibliographic Notes

feudalisms everywhere. Heide Wunder has brought together an interesting
collection of papers by West and East German authors, Feudalismus
(1971), which includes a helpful introduction by Wunder. The publisher
did not, however, receive permission to reprint Otto Hintze's important
essay on “Wesen und Verbreitung des Feudalismus" ( 1929). This paper
first encouraged me to think of feudalism as a phase within a larger
mode. It treats feudalism as a recurrent, but not universal,
constellation or syndrome, which can occur either in the course of state
formation or as a result of political devolution and breakdown. The East
German scholars included in the Wunder volume treat feudalism as a mode
of production, as do Hindess and Hirst (1975: Chap. 5). Among the East
Germans, Bernhard T?pfer (Wunder 1971: Chap. 7) is the most concerned
with feudalism as particular outcomes of multilineal processes; in
contrast, Hindess and Hirst are prevented by their extreme structuralism
from asking questions about the cross-cultural temporal and geographic
occurrence and variability of their postulated mode. Also important for
its discussion of feudal "rationality" and the role of commerce in a
feudal system is Witold Kula's economic theory of the feudal system
(1970).

   My construction of a kin-ordered mode was prompted by diverse
influences. Among these were Paul Kirchhoff's "Principles of Clanship in
Human Society," written originally in 1935 but not published until 1955
(reprinted 1959), along with Morton H. Fried's reworking of Kirchhoff's
ideas in his "Classification of Corporate Unilineal Descent Groups" (
1957). A second source was the essays of Claude Meillasoux, especially
"Essai d'interprétation du phénomène économique" (1960), "From
Reproduction to Production" ( 1972), and "The Social Organization of the
Peasantry" ( 1973). A third influence was Marshall Sahlins's notion of
the contradiction between the domestic level and kinship (see,
especially, his Stone Age Economics, 1972: Chaps. 2 and 3). A fourth was
Janet Siskind's excellent "Kinship and Mode of Production" (1978), which
links the basic elements of kinship and marriage to the division of
labor between the sexes. The complexities of kinship as a symbolic
construct were brought home to me by David M. Schneider's "What is
Kinship All About?" (1972).

   On the contradictory role of the chief within the kinship order, and
on the transition from kinship to classness, see Kirchhoff (1959), Fried
(1957, 1960), Sahlins( 1960; 1972: 130-148,204-210), Ruyle ( 1973), and
Webster (1975, 1976).

   The question of how modes of production articulate with one another
has been raised by Pierre-Philippe Rey's Les alliances de classes
(1976), the essay on articulation included in that volume having been
circulated in mimeographed form since 1969. Barbara Bradby's article,
"The Destruction of Natural Economy" ( 1975), represents a lucid and
important contribution. Aidan Foster-Carter's "Can We Articulate
Articulation?"

(1977) discusses some of the relevant literature and its problems.

Bibliographic Notes 405

4. Europe, Prelude to Expansion

To explain Europe's peripheral position in relation to the Levant after
the fall of the Roman Empire requires one to ask first just who and what
fell. A useful introduction to diverse views on the problem is the
booklet edited by Mortimer Chambers, The Fall of Rome (1963). A
sophisticated recent appraisal of the question is Perry Anderson's
Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism (1978). There clearly was a
political collapse in the western half of the empire, but a simultaneous
diffusion of Roman patterns throughout the rural areas; on this point,
see Heichelheim (1956). One must also remember that while Western Rome
fell. Eastern Rome survived for another thousand years. The major work
on Byzantium is Georg Ostrogorsky's History of the Byzantine State, but
Anderson's discussion of Byzantium (1978: 265—293) cites much new
literature. My concept of the Byzantine-Viking pincer that contained
Europe to the west is based on my reading of Archibald Lewis's splended
Naval Power and Trade in the Mediterranean, 500-1100 (1951) and The
Northern Seas (1958), as well as Gwyn Jones's History of the Vikings
(1968), which treats the Viking connections to the east (Part 2, Chap.
4).

   There is need for further detailed study of the trade in European
slaves to the East, where until the tenth century they constituted a
major article of commerce. On Byzantine slavery, see Hadjinicolaou-
Marava (1950); on the slaving activities of the Al-Radhaniyya in the
ninth century, Lopez and Ramond, Medieval Trade (1955: 31 — 32, 115); on
Viking trade in slaves to the Islamic world, see the chilling account of
Ibn Fadlan, in Togan (1939); on the Venetian slave trade. Lane's Venice
(1973: 69). Charles Verlinden's L'esclavage (1955) is the major source
on the slave trade through the ports of the Black Sea. Iris Origo
documents the presence of large numbers of such Eastern slaves in
Tuscany in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries (1955).

   On the development of the Italian city-states, see Robert Reynolds's
Europe Emerges (1961); Gino Luzzatto's Economic History of Italy (1961),
which includes much pertinent bibliography; and Robert Lopez's booklet
on the commercial revolution of the Middle Ages (1971). The entire
subject of the Crusades requires re-examination. Reynolds offers useful
comments on European expansion in the Mediterranean in "The
Mediterranean Frontiers, 1000-1400" (1957). Heyd (1885) remains a key
source for the commercial activity connected with the eastward
religious-political thrust. The renewed European movement beyond the
frontiers of the peninsula after 1400 should be seen as a response to
the so-called "crisis of the fourteenth century." This crisis is well
discussed by Leopold Genicot in his contribution to the Cambridge
Economic History of Europe (1966), which includes an extensive
bibliography. Immanuel Wallerstein offers a particularly clear
presentation of the issues posed by the crisis in his Modern
World-System (1974: 21-28). Rodney Hilton (1951) argues that there was a
general crisis of feudal

406 Bibliographie Notes

ism. He sees the roots of the crisis in the inability of the feudal
system to increase production without stepping up the level of tributary
extraction from the peasantry, and in the peasant revolts that engulfed
Europe in response to heightened exploitation.

   Portuguese development is well covered in A. H. Oliveira Marques's
History of Portugal (1972). My sources for the discussion of the
Portuguese abroad include: Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne
Empire (1973a); Bailey W. Diffie and George D. Winius, Foundations of
the Portuguese Empire (1977); and Vitorino Magalháes Godinho's two-
volume work on the global economic aspects of the discoveries
(19631965).

   My views on Spain have been shaped by Angel Palerm's article ''El
industrialismo y la decadencia'' (1949). Indispensable are Jaime Vicens
Vives's Economic History of Spain (1969) and his Approaches to the
History of Spain (1970), as well as John H. Elliott's Imperial Spain
?469-1716

(1966). Palerm also introduced me to Ramón Carande's Carlos Vy sus
banqueros (1943, 1949). I learned much from Ruth Pike's account of the
Genoese role in the opening of the New World (1966). I have
consulted—but am overawed by—Huguette and Pierre Chaunu's eight- volume
study of the Spanish and Spanish-American economies, Seville et
I'Atlantique (1955- 1959). E. J. Hamilton's American Treasure (1934), a
book much discussed and much criticized, remains the classic work on the
impact of American silver on the Spanish economy.

   On the development of the Dutch Republic, I read Pieter Geyl's book.
The Revolt of the Netherlands (1932), while still in college. Historical
geography, such as the work of C. T. Smith (1967), is useful in locating
the Low Countries within the developing European economy. Virginia
Barbour (1963) on seventeenth-century Amsterdam, and Charles Boxer
(1973b) and George Masselman (1963) on Dutch overseas expansion, allow
one to connect internal and external developments. I have found helpful
the symposium on Britain and the Netherlands edited by J. S. Bromley and
E. H. Kossman (1964, 1968), especially the contributions (in Vol. II) by
J. G. van der Dillen on the role of Amsterdam and by J. D. Roorda on the
ruling classes of seventeenth-century Holland. Jan de Vries (1974) has
stressed the high level of specialization achieved by the Netherlands,
and has argued that Dutch success in making the most of the
"Renaissance" technology of windmills, canals, wood mechanisms, and peat
fuel inhibited the capacity of the Netherlands to move in the direction
of industrial capitalism and proletarianization (de Vries 1975).

   It is not easy to grasp the continuous threads in French development,
perhaps because few books on French history escape the impact of the
revolutionary rhetoric of 1789. As an anthropologist, I am impressed
with the diversity of the nation, pulled into concordance by the force
of its political and ideological center at Paris. This impression has
been heightened by reading Edward W. Fox (1971) on the geographic divi

Bibliographic Notes 407

sions within France; Charles Tilly's analysis of the Vendée rising
against the revolution (1964); and the fine, unpublished doctoral
dissertation by Harriet Rosenberg ( 1975) on the development of
underdevelopment in the Alpine Queiras. The growth of hegemonic France
has been clarified for me by Henri Sée ( 1937), by Barrington Moore (
1966), and by Theda Skocpol ( 1979). Marc Bloch's French Rural History (
1970) deals with the development of the French agrarian base and its
many variations, and offers counterpoints with the course of English
agricultural development. I have found convincing Fran?ois Crouzet's
comparison of economic growth in France and England during the
eighteenth century (1967). Cobban (1964), Hobsbawm (1962), and Kemp
(1971) all wrestle with the paradoxical character of the French
Revolution— bourgeois but noncapitalist, even anticapitalist.

   For an understanding of medieval England I have relied on Doris
Stenton's English Society in the Early Middle Ages ( 1952), Marion
Gibbs's Feudal Order (1949), and Joseph Strayer's insightful On the
Medieval Origins of the Modem State (1970). These works elucidate the
apparent paradox of the early political unification of the realm and its
simultaneous delegation of legal and political activities to locally
based groups and categories of people. S. T. Bindoff's Tudor England
(1966) shows how the Tudor dynasty was able to consolidate its rule upon
the ruins of the English aristocracy, brought on by its internecine War
of the Roses after withdrawal from the Hundred Years War with France.
Rodney Hilton's book on the decline of serfdom (1969) and, especially,
Robert Brenner's trenchant article on "Agrarian Class Structure and
Economic Development” (1976) throw light on the contradiction between
the political gains of the English peasantry and its weakening grip on
economic resources. Alan MacFarlane ( 1979) deals with many of the same
issues, but he takes the idealist view that English individualism led to
the development of private property in land rather than looking to the
condition of the English peasantry to explain its individualism. The
separation of English cultivators from the land is well treated, I
think, by Richard Tawney's Agrarian Problem in the Sixteenth Century
(1967), Moore's Democracy and Dictatorship ( 1966: Chap. 1), and William
Lazo- nick's paper on enclosures (1974). Lazonick properly argues that
scholars such as T. S. Ashton, J. D. Chambers, and G. Mingay, who claim
that the separation of people from the land improved their chances of
employment, do so from the perspective of a developed capitalism rather
than from the evidence of the period in which the capitalist system was
first installed. Sylvia Thrupp deals with The Merchant Class of Medieval
London in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries ( 1962), while Ralph
Davis summarizes his many papers on the trade abroad in English Overseas
Trade 1500-1700 (1973). The subsequent development of England is well
covered in Maurice Dobb's Studies in the Development of Capitalism
(1947), in Christopher Hill's Reformation to Industrial Revolution
(1967), and in Charles H. Wilson's England's Apprenticeship (1965).

408 Bibliographic Notes

Wilson has also written a fine book on English-Dutch rivalry, Profit and
Power (1957). Both Moore (1966) and Wallerstein ( 1974) make
perspicacious use of the voluminous literature on the class alliances
and fissions of England from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries.

   In gaining an overview of European overseas expansion, I have drawn
on a number of writers. Wallerstein, as always, provides information and
insight. Andre Gunder Frank's World Accumulation (1978) details the
global scope of the stockpiling of mercantile wealth, although he calls
capitalist what I would, with Marx, treat as "the prehistory of
capital." I have learned a great deal from Oliver C. Cox's Foundations
of Capitalism ( 1959), even though I part company with him when he
traces the roots of capitalist development back to the Italian
city-states. Frédéric Mauro furnishes a temporal frame for European
expansion between 1600 and 1870 ( 1967), and provides a useful model of
"intercontinental" economic connections from 1500 to 1800 ( 1961). John
H. Parry has written on the establishment of European hegemony between
1415 and 1715 (1966) and on European overseas empires in the eighteenth
century (1971).

5. Iberians in America

Since I first began to read and write on Iberian America in the 1950s,
research has opened up new sources of information and novel
interpretations. It is now clear, after the work on silver mining by
Peter J. Bakewell (1971), D. A. Brading (1971), and Bradingand Cross
(1972), that there was little or no relation between the massive decline
of the native American population and the level of silver production. It
now also seems that while the seventeenth century was a period of
depression for the Iberian mother countries, the colonies prospered,
although in contradictory ways. One of the important sources of this
prosperity was contraband. This suggests that much of world history
needs to be rewritten in light of what is now politely called "the
informal economy." Further research on areas beyond the main centers of
colonial government has also revealed unexpected variation and
interesting differences. The organization and functioning of the
hacienda now also seem more variable than they once did. See, on this
point, Magnus M?rner (1973) and the volume on Haciendas, latifundios y
plantaciones brought together by Enrique Florescano (1975).

   I have found valuable the two volumes by James Lang on Spain and
England in the Americas (1975) and on Portuguese Brazil (1979). These
works, by a historical sociologist with a firm grounding in economic
realities, focus on the different kinds of states created by European
colonization. Other productive general treatises are Stein and Stein

(1970), which views Latin America through the optic of dependency
theory; Carmagnani (1975), specifically useful for its discussion of
trade and economic rationality; and the provocative essays compiled by

Bibliographic Notes 409

Florescano (1979), including one that has been especially important for
my own thinking, Palerm's "Sobre la formación del sistema colonial."

   There now exists a growing body of work by anthropologically informed
historians and historically informed anthropologists on particular
populations and regions. To name the most important, there is Charles
Gibson's now classic work on the colonial Aztecs (1964); William
Taylor's book on Oaxaca (1972); Murdo MacLeod on Central America (1973);
Juan and Judith Villamarin on Colombia (Juan Villamarin 1972, 1975; J.
and J. Villamarin 1979); James Lockhardt on the first century of the
Spanish conquest of Peru (1968, 1972); Karen Spalding on colonial Indian
society in Peru (1967, 1972); Frederick Bowser on slavery in Peru (1974)
and William Frederick Sharp on slavery in the Chocó (1976); Michael
Craton and James Walvin on a Jamaican plantation (1970); and Manuel
Moreno Fraginals on the Cuban sugar mill (1978).

6. The Fur Trade

The development of the fur trade runs like a thread of blood and gold
through the history of North America. Anthropological ethnohistory has
now begun to converge with the research of social and economic
historians to produce a clearer picture of the ways that the expanding
trade involved local populations and was affected by them in turn.

   One of the most useful books I have come by for understanding the
historical encounters of different populations in North America during
the colonial period is Gary Nash's Red, White, and Black (1974). Some
good standard works on the fur trade are those by Murry Lawson (1943),
E. E. Rich (1959), Paul Phillips (1961), and especially Harold Innis
(1956, a revised edition of a 1930 classic). Useful papers dealing with
the trade appear in several collections, among them the contributions to
two conferences (American FurTrade Conference, 1967; Bolus, ed., 1972);
two special issues of the Western Canadian Journal of Anthropology, in
1972, and in 1976, under the editorship of Bishop and Ray; and a volume
edited by Hauptman and Campisi (1978). Eleanor Leacock and Nancy Lurie
have brought together a number of case histories of North American
Indians in Historical Perspective (1971), some of them dealing
explicitly with the effects of the trade.

   On the Northeastern populations, Alfred Bailey wrote in 1937 a
general account of The Conflict of European and Eastern Algonkian
Cultures 1504-1700 (1969). Leacock (1954), writing on the Montagnais,
was the first to detail the impact of fur trapping on the organization
of family hunting territories. Francis Jennings (1976) has dealt with
the European invasion of the Atlantic coast, concentrating specifically
on New England. The Iroquois have played an important part in American
anthropology, as they have in American history, but informed synoptic
treatments of Iroquois development, such as Quain (1937) and Fenton

410 Bibliographie Notes

(1971), are rare. Volume V of the new Handbook of North American
Indians, dealing with the Northeast (Trigger 1978), synthesizes the
results of Iroquois research by William N. Fenton, Elizabeth Tooker,
Anthony Wallace, and others; it also contains an unparalleled
bibliography. George Hunt (1940), Allen Trelease ( 1960), and Barbara
Gray- mont ( 1972 ) have illuminated the external political involvements
of the Iroquois. On the Huron there is now the truly outstanding work by
Bruce Trigger, The Children of Aataentsic ( 1976); see also the review
by Fenton (1978).

   Great Lakes ethnography is covered in traditional fashion in Kinietz

(1965), but our new understandings of the Ojibwa and their neighbors owe
everything to Harold Hickerson and, more recently, to Charles Bishop. I
have relied on Hickerson ( 1960, 1962a) for the interpretation of the
Feast of the Dead and the Midewiwin, and also on his Southwestern
Chippewa (1962b) and his fine ethnohistory. The Chippewa and Their
Neighbors (1970). I have drawn on Bishop (1976) for a discussion of the
development of the northern Ojibwa. Peckham (1970) is a study of
Pontiac's revolt by a historian. The Indian role in the trade of the
Hudson Bay Company has been examined by Arthur Ray ( 1974). There are
fine papers on subarctic hunters and trappers by Edward Rogers, Richard
Slobodin, and June Helm in the volumes edited by David Damas (1969a,
19696).

   The literature on Plains Indians is rich, exciting, and uneven.
Perhaps the best overview of Plains adaptation is provided by Symmes
Oliver's ''Ecology and Cultural Continuity" (1974). H. Clyde Wilson
(1963) has analyzed Plains pastoralism, and Frank Secoy's doctoral
dissertation ( 1953) is a masterful account of the emergence of Plains
social, political, and military organization. Edward Bruner (1961) has
looked at Mandan development in connection with the growth of trade, and
Preston Holder (1970) has outlined the contradictions produced by fully
specialized horse pastoralism within Plains horticultural societies. Two
contributions deal specifically with the external linkages of Plains
groups: Oscar Lewis's monograph on the effects of the fur trade on the
Blackfoot (1942), and Joseph Jablow's fine Cheyenne in Plains Trade
Relations, 1795—1840 (1951). The spread of slave raiding in the
Southwest is discussed by L. R. Bailey (1966); its wider implications
still need to be defined. The changed logistics of the fur trade, with
its expansion from the Great Lakes toward the drainage of the
Saskatchewan, only became clear to me after reading Robert Merriman, The
Bison and the Fur Trade (1926). On the Red River métis, an interesting
source is Joseph Howard's Strange Empire ( 1952); see also McHugh (
1972) and Hickerson

(1956).

   Philip Drucker's little book on The Indians of the Northwest Coast
(1963) remains a useful introduction full of insight. Erna Gunther
(1972) has gathered together the reports—most of them not easy to come
by—of early European travelers to the region. The Noticias de Nutka of
1792 by the Spanish naturalist José Mariano Mozino is now available in
transla

Bibliographic Notes 411

tion (1970). Robin Fisher (1977) offers an account of the contacts
between native Americans and newcomers over time.

   Joyce Wike completed an outstanding thesis on the maritime trade and
its effects at Columbia University in 1947, when I was in my first year
of graduate studies there. All her later papers (1952, 1957, 1958a,
1958b) have proven invaluable. Wayne Suttles and the scholars he has
influenced have deepened our understanding of regional ecology; an
article on environmental and cultural variability in the Northwest Coast
area (1960) exemplifies his approach. Abraham Rosman and Paula Rubel’s
study of potlatching (1971) fruitfully examines the role of gift
exchange in succession and marriage. For me, the ecological approach of
Suttles and the structuralist approach to group relations of Rosman and
Rubel are complementary rather than opposed. I have also used the work
of Frederica De Laguna on the Yakutat Tlingit (1972); Kalervo Oberg on
the Chilcat Tlingit (a 1933 dissertation, published in 1973); Viola
Garfield on the Tsimshian (1939); “Bella Coola" Mcllwraith on the Bella
Coola (1948); Philip Drucker on the Nootka (1951); Helen Codere (1950,
1961) and Irving Goldman (1975) on the Kwakiutl; and June Collins on the
Skagit (1974). I have always thought that Goldman's paper on the
Alkatcho Carrier (1940), a contribution to Linton's volume on
acculturation among North American Indians, was a small masteroiece.

   My interest in the Russian fur trade goes back to childhood, when I
read stories of the Russian explorer Arseniev and Dersu the Trapper,
along with The Last of the Mohicans and Winnetou. Coming into
anthropology, I was intrigued by the seemingly apocryphal story about
the fish-eating horses of the Yakuts; James Gibson (1969; 191) provides
bona fide evidence that they were real. Robert Kerner's The Urge to the
Sea (1942) is a basic source on Russian expansion and fur trading. John
Baddeley's book on Russia, Mongolia, and China (1919) contains a copy of
the 1673 map from the Remezoff Atlas. Raymond Fisher (1943) covers the
Russian trade between 1500 and 1700; Mark Mancall (1971) is informative
about the trade with China until 1728; and Clifford Foust (1961, 1969)
deals with the Chinese segment of the trade in the eighteenth century.
E. E. Rich, in "Russia and the Colonial Fur Trade"

(1955), sheds light on the international linkages of the trade. James R.
Gibson (1969) touches on much Siberian ethnology in showing how the fur
trade was provisioned in Russia's Asiatic maritime provinces. Some of
the effects of the trade on the Yakuts are discussed in Nelson Graburn
and B. Stephen Strong's Circumpolar Peoples (1973).

7. The Slave Trade

As an adolescent I read Leo Frobenius's Kulturgeschichte Afrikas (1933);
I remained fascinated by it long afterward, while growing increasingly
suspicious of its conjectural history and subjective interpretations of
"cultural morphology." Reading Robert Stevenson's book on Population

412 Bibliographic Notes

and Political Systems in Tropical Africa (1968) first persuaded me that
a real history of African societies was possible, and that the results
of such a history would alter the perspectives developed by social
anthropologists working in Africa. The book, which in criticizing
functionalist demography also criticized functionalist anthropology, has
been both challenged (see Goody 1973) and successfully defended (Harris
1979: 306307). Since about 1960, there has been an upsurge of writings
on African history, much of it truly excellent and deserving of a wide
audience.

   The question of whether slavery in Africa antedates the arrival of
the Europeans or was a phenomenon largely generated by European demand
for coercible labor is a difficult one that requires further research.
Igor Kopytoff and Suzanne Miers (1977) argue that African slavery
represents but an extension of the quest to augment rights over persons,
a drive at the root of African systems of kinship and marriage. In their
view, slavery allowed kin groups to increase their scope by adding
persons who did not have the backing of a corporate group of kin; the
opposite of slavery is thus not "freedom," but "belonging." Mary Douglas
argues in the same direction in her valuable paper on pawning (1964).
Various researchers have also pointed out—properly so—that rights over
slaves and the rights of slaves varied greatly from society to society.

   It would be erroneous, however, to conjure up a vision of an Africa
wholly composed of egalitarian kin groups. Tributary states and kin-
ordered societies in the process of stratification existed before 1400,
as did the trade in African slaves across the Sahara and the Indian
Ocean. Much more needs to be learned about slavery in the Islamic world,
from the eighth century on. Raymond Mauny (1961: 379) and Tadeusz
Lewicki (cited in Hopkins 1973: 82, n. 11) both suggest that slave
exports across the Sahara involved millions of people. The sustained
European demand for slaves certainly intensified enslavement and
furnished the structural impetus for the growth of slave-raiding
aristocracies and states. Some other contributions to the elucidation of
slavery in Africa are Meillassoux (1975) and Watson (1980).

   For a grasp of the slave trade in West Africa, I turned to Philip
Curtin on Senegambia (1975), Walter Rodney on the Upper Guinea Coast
(1970), Kwame Daaku on the Gold Coast (1970), and Kwame Arhin

(1967) and Ivor Wilks (1967, 1975) on the development of Asante. Peter
Morton-Williams’s paper on the role of trade in shaping the policies of
Asante and Oyo (1969) provided major insights, as did I. A. Akinjogbin
on the linked development of Oyo and Dahomey (1972). Both
Morton-Williams (1964, 1965, 1967, 1969) and Robin Law (1975) were
helpful for my understanding of Oyo, while Akinjogbin (1967,

1972) added to what I had learned earlier about Dahomey from Melville
Herskovits (1938), Stanley Diamond (1951), and Karl Polanyi (1966).
Peter Lloyd (1954, 1965, 1968), as well as William Bascom (1969) are

Bibliographic Notes 413

important sources for the Yoruba kingdoms; R. E. Bradbury has written on
Benin (1957, 1964). The literature on the Niger Delta is rich and full
of surprises. In addition to G. I. Jones (1963) and K. O. Dike (1956) on
trade and politics in the Delta region, there is Robin Horton's social
history of New Calabar (1969), A. J. Latham on Old Calabar 1600-1891

(1973), and Richard N. Henderson's The King in Every Man (1972) on
Onitsha Ibo. David Northrup is informative about Ibo trade (1972), and
Simon Ottenberg is excellent on oracles and intergroup relationships
among the Ibo (1958).

   For Central Africa, Jan Vansina's Kingdoms of the Savannah (1968)
provides a pioneering effort and the basis for further research. Also
important are his papers on long-distance trade routes in Central Africa

(1962) and on the origin of the Congo kingdom (1963). The great archives
of Lisbon and Rome will undoubtedly yield still unsuspected riches, but
Jean Cuvelier and Louis Jadin have begun to collect the Roman documents
on the Congo. Their L 'Ancien Congo (1954) furnishes the basis for
Georges Balandier's account of Congo history in Daily Life in the
Kingdom of the Congo (1968). I have relied heavily on Kajsa Ekholm's
insightful structural study (1977), which relates matriliny to political
relations based on the circulation of prestige goods. For Angola, I read
David Birmingham's The Portuguese Conquest (1965) and Trade and Conflict
(1966), as well as his thoughtful re-evaluation of some earlier
interpretations (1972). Joseph C. Miller's works on the Mbundu States in
Angola (1975) and on "The Slave Trade in Congo and Angola" (1976) made
me wish that I had read him long ago. Vansina's Kingdoms also provided a
basis for understanding the Luba-Lunda expansion, along with Jean-Luc
Vellut's "Notes sur le Lunda" (1972). Ian Cunnison deals with the
eastern marches of Lunda expansion (1956, 1957, 1961), and Malyn Newitt
discusses Portuguese Settlement on the Zambesi (1973). Andrew Roberts's
History of the Bemba (1973) places this group firmly in the context of
the expanding trade in slaves and ivory.

   Figures on slave exports from Africa are drawn from Philip Curtin's
The Atlantic Slave Trade, a Census (1969).

8. Trade and Conquest in the Orient

European penetration into Asian waters must be understood as a
continuation of past European involvements with Asia. J. Innis Miller

(1969) offers a detailed treatise on the Roman-Asian spice trade. The
book by Lopez and Raymond on trade in the Mediterranean (1955) includes
a great deal of information about European commercial dealings in Asia.
Lopez, in his little book on The Commercial Revolution of the Middle
Ages (1971), speaks of the "explosion of Italian trade" from Greenland
to Peking. The Islamic expansion into southern and Southeast Asia is
sketched out in Hall's History of South-East Asia (1968, Chap. 10) and
discussed in Wertheim (1973: 13). C.G.F. Simkin (1968) deals

414 Bibliographic Notes

with the "traditional" trade of Asia before the advent of the Europeans.
The first part of Carlo Cipolla's book on European overseas expansion
(1970), on "guns and sails," offers an excellent introduction to the
naval and military logistics of European sea-borne commerce. Niels
Steensgard (1973) is masterly on the impact of that commerce on the
continental caravan trade of Asia.

   For an understanding of Portuguese expansion in Asia, I have drawn on
Godinho (1969), Boxer (1948, 1953, 1973a), T'ien-tse Chang (1934), and
Diffie and Winius (1977). On Dutch expansion I have consulted Masselman
(1963), Boxer (19736), Kristof Glamann (1958), and especially M.A.P.
Meilink-Roelofz (1962).

   The agrarian system of Mughal India was first described in detail by
W. H. Moreland (1963, first pub. 1929), but Irfan Habib has added
greatly to our knowledge of it with his recent Agrarian Systems (1963).
Habib stresses commercialization and class conflict; he has also
discussed the prevalent money economy in a paper on "Banking in Mughal
India" (1960), included in Raychaudhuri's Contributions. Howard Spodek
emphasizes the role of independent merchants and moneylenders, among
other urban-based social segments, in his "Rulers, Merchants and Other
Groups" (1974). Percival Spear offers an excellent introduction to the
governing structure of the Mughal realm in his contribution to the
volume edited by Leach and Mukherjee (1970).

   The role of the English in India is illuminated by Philip Woodruff's
two-volume The Men Who Ruled India (1964). This work is enjoyable and
useful, as long as one balances its celebration of the British raj
against other works, such as Romesh Dutt's Economic History of India
(1960), originally published in 1901, and Ramkrishna Mukherjee's
appraisal of the English East India Company (1958). A new economic
history of India by Indians is represented in the two volumes of essays
edited by Ganguli (1964) and Raychaudhuri (1960). Morris D. Morris and
Burton Stein have written a helpful bibliographic essay on Indian
economic history (1961); Morris's own attempt to evaluate positively
Indian industrialization and commercialization in the nineteenth century
has been reprinted, together with critical comments by Japanese and
Indian economists, in the Indian Economic and Social History Review (see
Morris 1963). The papers in Leach and Mukherjee (1970) portray various
Indian mercantile and governmental elites. J. H. Broomfield's excellent
article on "Regional Elites" (1966) offers insight into the rise and
succession of such elites under British rule. Spear delineates the
lifestyle adopted by the English in India in his book The Nabobs (1963).

   Bernard S. Cohn has given us several fine studies on the effects of
British rule at the local level in northern India. I have drawn on his
discussions of legal change (1959, 1961) and on his analyses of the
interplay of political systems in the Benares region (1960, 1962). For
information on English-held Madras, I have used Holden Furber

Bibliographic Notes 415

(1970). Kathleen Gough (1978) deals with the changes initiated in
Thanjavur.

   My understanding of how British control of India related to the
commercial penetration of China has benefited greatly from the large-
scale, exciting, Braudel-like work of Louis Dermigny, La Chine et
L'Occident (1964). This book also gave me a sense of the importance of
clandestine trade and politics along the South China coast in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Bromley and Kossman have compiled a
useful set of papers on Dutch-English relations and competition (1964,
1968).

   There are many books on the opium trade. Michael Greenberg points out
that trade in opium was "probably the largest commerce of the time in
any single commodity" (1951: 104). Frederic Wakeman depicts the
resulting social disorders in his excellent Strangers at the Gate
(1974). John Fairbank's Trade and Diplomacy on the China Coast (1953)
has become a classic statement on the subject for the nineteenth
century.

   A wholly satisfactory account of commodity trade and cultural
encounters in the Pacific seems to have escaped me. Oliver (1961) and
Dodge (1976) provide good introductions. Two books by historians—H.

E. Maude (1968) and R. Gerard Ward, ed. (1972)—furnish more detailed
accounts of certain trades. Ward's collection contains his own essay on
the beche-de-mer, or trepang, trade (pages 91 — 123). The implications
of this trade for relationships between Malay fishermen and Australian
aborigines is dealt with by C. C. MacKnight (1972); but I remember an
earlier treatment of the subject by W. Lloyd Warner in his book on the
Murngin (1958, original ed. 1937, especially Appendix 1). Dorothy
Shineberg has written on the sandalwood trade in Melanesia (1966, 1967);
she is also the author of a perceptive paper on the difficulty of using
musketry in the wet tropics (1970). J. C. Furnas's Anatomy of Paradise
(1947) is useful for Hawaii. Webb (1965), Levin

(1968), and Davenport (1969) all explore why Hawaii abolished its
complex taboo system, an event that Kroeber had ascribed to "cultural
fatigue" (1948: 403-405).

9. Industrial Revolution

Many authors have questioned the uniqueness of the period beginning
around 1750, suggesting either that the industrial revolution was but
one industrial revolution among many, or that it was simply a phase in
an ongoing cumulative process. I have nevertheless adopted the term
industrial revolution in this chapter, because it indicates a
qualitative change both in the forces and in the relations of
production. This view is based on Maurice Dobb (1947) and Paul Mantoux
(1928); both the titles and the substance of Polanyi's Great
Transformation (1944) and David Landes's Unbound Prometheus (1969) carry
the same conviction. I learned a great deal from Kriedte, Medick, and
Schlumbohm (1977),

416 Bibliographic Notes

which builds on Franklin Mendels’s concept of proto-industrialization

(1972). The section by Schlumbohm (pages 194—257) dealing with the
limitations of the putting-out system was especially useful. I think
these authors have a sound analytic grasp of the phenomena involved,
although Pierre Jeannin (1980) has taken them to task for
underestimating the variability caused by geographic and social
differentiation.

   Dobb (1947) and Hobsbawm (1962, 1969, 1975) provided the guiding
threads of my presentation; but I have also consulted Lampard

(1957), Flinn (1966), and Hartwell (1970) for differing perspectives.
The social background of the first factory masters is now fairly well
understood, especially through the work of S. D. Chapman (1967,

1973), on whose findings I have relied. Harold Perkin (1969) offers a
sociologically oriented discussion of English society in the century
after 1780; see also Thompson (1978).

   In explicating the development of cotton manufactures, the "carrying
industry" of the industrial revolution, I drew on knowledge accumulated
in my own patriline, in the textile trades for generations. My basic
sources included Mantoux's Industrial Revolution (1928), A. P. Wadsworth
and Julia de L. Mann's classic The Cotton Trade and Industrial
Lancashire (1931), Mann's Cloth Industry (1971), and the valuable
booklet by S. D. Chapman (1972). On factory organization and management,
I read Sidney Pollard (1965) and Reinhard Bendix (1956), and benefited
from the insistence by Bowles and Gintis that "authority at the point of
production must be used to evince worker behaviour not guaranteed by the
wage labour contract" (1977: 177).

   A now-classic work dealing with the growth of the English working
class has been written by E. P. Thompson (1966). Duncan Bythell

(1969) deals specifically with the handloom weavers, from a point of
view opposed to Thompson's. To gain an acquaintance with the growing
literature on working-class recruitment, families, and kinship ties, I
read Neil Smelser (1959), who stresses the continuity between domestic
work and factory employment, as well as his (to me, convincing) critics,
Michael Edwards and R. Lloyd-Jones (1973); Arthur Redford (1926) on
labor migration; and Michael Anderson (1971) and David Levine

(1977) on family transformation among increasingly proletarianized
cultivators and artisans. John Foster's Class Struggle and the
Industrial Revolution (1974) is an excellent study of the developing
working-class communities in three English towns, including Oldham.
Steven Marcus, in Engels, Manchester, and the Working Class (1974),
presents a sympathetic view of Engels as an interpreter of the new
capitalist industrialism.

   Since 1960 many outstanding works on Black slavery and the American
Cotton South have appeared. I have steered away from the moralis-
tically tinged literature on race relations and concentrated instead on
empirically-based historical studies, such as those by Eugene Genovese
(1966, 1969), Edmund Morgan (1975), Robert Fogel and Stanley

Bibliographic Notes 417

Engerman (1974), Edgar Thompson (1975), and Gavin Wright (1978), in
order to better understand the relation between slavery and plantation
agriculture. I think rather better of Fogel and Engerman than many of
their critics for raising important questions, and have relied on them
for quantitative information, although I would not agree with some of
their conclusions. I have drawn on Bruchey, ed.. Cotton and the Growth
of the American Economy (1967), as well as Moore (1966: Chap. 3), Dowd

(1956), North (1961), and Bruchey (1965), to place Southern cotton
production within the larger context of the developing economy of the
United States. To get a sense of “the world the slaves made," I turned
to Genovese (1972), Herbert Gutman (1976), John Blassingame (1972), and
George Rawick (1972). Sidney Mintz and Richard Price (1976) offer a
useful approach to Afro-American culture patterns, and Gutman (1976:
Chap. 8) suggests how such patterns might have been generated.

   The literature on the native American populations of the southeastern
United States is rich and suggestive, although uneven. John Swanton
(1946) and Charles Hudson (1976) provide ethnological overviews. William
Willis (1980) draws on archaeological and ethnohistori- cal evidence to
discuss the formation of native multicommunity systems. On the
interaction between European settlers and native American groups in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, I found Verner Crane (1956) and
David Corkran (1962, 1967) helpful. G. Foreman's The Five Civilized
Tribes (1934) and R. S. Cotterill's The Southern Indians (1954) have
become standard sources. Fred Gearing's Priests and Warriors (1962)
analyzes Cherokee society and politics. Gary Nash (1974: Chap. 10)
offers a summary statement of Creek and Cherokee social and political
change, and discusses Indian strategies in the face of the encroachment
of Whites. More needs to be learned about the enslavement of Indians in
the Southeast, building on the work of Lauber (1913) and Winston (1934);
about the interaction of Africans, Indians, and Whites (Willis 1963,
1970); and about the enslavement of Blacks among Indian populations
(Willis 1955; Perdue 1979). William Sturtevant has written on
Indian-Spanish relations (1962), and has published an excellent article
on the development of the Seminole, "Creek into Seminole" (1971). I have
also benefited from an unpublished manuscript on the Southeast by Gerald
Sider, based on his doctoral thesis (1970). The question of Indian
removal is treated in Debo (1941). I have drawn on Michael Rogin (1975)
for historical information about the role of Andrew Jackson in the
forcible displacement of the native Americans from the region, without
relying in any way on Rogin's psychohistorical interpretation.

   On the topic of Egypt, I used Alan Richards's brilliant analysis of
Egypt's separation from the Ottoman Empire, the attempt of Muhammad Ali
to set in motion an autonomous process of modernization, and the gradual
conversion of Egypt to the production of cotton, in "Primitive
Accumulation in Egypt, 1798- 1882" (1977). E. R. J. Owen (1969)

418 Bibliographic Notes

deals specifically with the role of cotton in the Egyptian economy, and
Gabriel Baer (1962) details the displacement of the peasantry by cotton-
growing large estates. Elsewhere, Baer (1969: Chaps. 2, 3) sketches the
dissolution of the Egyptian village community and the growing power of
the local sheikhs who became landowners. David Landes (1958) has studied
the impact of international finance on Egypt, a topic explored earlier
by Leland Jenks in a splendid chapter, "Bankrupting the Near East," in
his Migration of British Capital to 1875 (1973, first pub. 1927).

   On the British cotton trade, Michael Edwards (1967) deals with the
development of the trade; D.C.M. Platt (1973) provides information on
the limitations of Latin America as a market for cotton goods; and Peter
Harnetty (1972) discusses the relation between Lancashire and the Indian
market. Morris D. Morris (1965) has written a major work on the
development of the Bombay cotton mills and the growth of their labor
force; Morris's essay on "The Recruitment of an Industrial Labor Force
in India" (1960) provides interesting comparisons with labor-force
recruitment in England and America. Amalendu Guha (1972, 1973) was my
major source on Indian production of raw cotton between 1750 and 1901.
Richard Schermerhorn (1978: 268-272) discusses the background of the
Parsi business elite involved in the cotton industry and trade. The
impact of cotton growing on Uganda is delineated in Lucy F. Mair's An
African People in the Twentieth Century (1934) and David Apter's
Political Kingdom of Uganda (1961). Cotton production is also a theme in
Beverly Gartrell's doctoral dissertation on British officials in Uganda

(1979).

   The role of railroad construction in restarting the engine of capital
accumulation is dealt with convincingly in Jenks (1973: Chap. 5); both
Dobb and Hobsbawm acknowledge their debt to him. Daniel Thorner (1950)
has written on railroad building in India, and George Taylor's
Transportation Revolution (1951) is an outstanding contribution to the
economic history of the United States. William Woodruff discusses the
role of land and maritime transport in unifying the world in a chapter
entitled "The Conquest of Distance" (1966: Chap. 6). The development of
transport and trade in the Far East is examined by Francis Hyde

(1973). Both Bairoch (1975) and Latham (1978) discuss the decline of
transportation costs in the second half of the nineteenth century.

10. Crisis and Differentiation in Capitalism

While I am persuaded by Marx's argument that the process of capitalist
accumulation entails a tendency for the rate of profit to decline, I
also think that Otto Bauer (1907), Paul Sweezy (1942), and Ernest Mandel

(1978) are correct in arguing that particular crises may be set off by a
variety of causes and may issue in a variety of responses. Crisis may be
endemic, but the form of crises and the manner of their resolution are
variable and contingent. I find convincing Mandel's argument (1978:

Bibliographie Notes 419

Chap. 1) that Marx's theory of the capitalist crisis was intended to
explain why capitalism, with all its inherent tendencies toward chaos,
could function at all.

   In contrast to the position of Lenin (1939), Luxemburg (1922), and
also Sternberg (1929), I would argue that aggressive warfare,
imperialism, colonialism, and neocolonialism are contingent and not
structural phenomena. Roger Owen and Bob Sutcliffe (1972) have brought
together a useful reader on different theories of imperialism and on the
different imperialist strategies pursued by various European nations. I
find the recent attempt by Giovanni Arrighi (1978) to develop a
structural model for analyzing and predicting these various responses to
be full of insights, but overly "Cartesian” and typological. For me, two
facts stand out. First, England secured its dominion over world trade in
the nineteenth century through imperialism and colonialism in India,
while exercising only indirect "neocolonial" influence in Latin America;
on the crucial economic role of India, see Barratt Brown (1970) and
Latham (1978). Second, the success of the first capitalist nation
altered the conditions encountered by nations launched into capitalist
development later, a point first raised explicitly by the "first
National Socialist," Friedrich List (1789—1846), and later by Alexander
Gerschenkron (1962: Chap. 1). While the competition between capitalist
cohorts, segments, or fractions may be structural, moreover, there is no
inherent reason why such competition ought to involve nations rather
than city-states, regions, or multinational firms.

   The division of the competitive arena among a number of rivalrous
nation-states is one of the moot points of Marxian analysis. We can now
see, more clearly than was possible in the nineteenth century, that
nations and nation-states may be but historical products, built up over
time and perhaps withering away in the face of new, transnational
processes. I know of no fully satisfactory argument that can explain why
a particular form of "thick" state is essential or even functional for
capitalist accumulation during strategic phases of its growth, or why
the historic articulation of classes requires the development of just
this kind of political-economic apparatus. There remains valuable ore to
be mined on this question in Otto Bauer's wrongly maligned
Nationalit?tenfrage (1907), as well as in Karl Deutsch's Nationalism and
Social Communication (1966). I have tried my own hand at explanation in
a paper available only in Spanish (Wolf 1953). Some progress in
comprehending what the capitalist state does has been achieved by Nicos
Poulantzas (1968, 1978) and by James O'Connor (1974).

   On changes of phase in capitalist development, I have used Mandel's
discussion of "long waves" in Late Capitalism (1978: Chap. 4). I also
accept, in general terms, his explanation of the phenomenon, although I
am mindful of the criticisms of it (e.g., Rowthorn 1976). Mandel, like
many others, continues the tradition of Nikolai D. Kondratieff, an
economist and statistician who headed the Moscow Business Condi

420 Bibliographic Notes

tions Institute between 1920 and 1928 but who disappeared in the
subsequent Stalinist purges. Kondratieff formulated his hypothesis in
1919—1921. A paper by him in Russian appeared in 1925, was translated
into German in 1926, and translated once again into English for a
special issue of Review devoted to “Cycles and Trends" (Kondratieff
1979). Schumpeter used the Kondratieff concept in Business Cycles
(1939). Walt W. Rostow's discussion of Kondratieff cycles (1978)
coincides with Mandel's interpretation from an opposed political
position (see Wallerstein 1979: 665). Hans Rosenberg, in his Grosse
Depression

(1967), uses the concept to interpret the multifaceted German reaction
to the Great Depression in the last third of the nineteenth century.

11. The Movement of Commodities

In tracing the flow of particular products from production to market, my
intention was to bring together three aspects usually dealt with
separately: the imperatives deriving from the requirements of capital
accumulation; the ecological implications of collecting or raising a
given crop or extracting a given substance; and the consequences for the
people whose labor is mobilized for these endeavors. Particular
commodities were included in the discussion because these commodities
were quantitatively significant in world markets; because economists,
economic geographers, or historians had paid some attention to the
transformations wrought by the large-scale production of these
commodities; and because anthropologists had something to say about the
populations caught up in these transformations.

   My discussion of plantations owes much to an interest shared by
Sidney Mintz and me in the dialectic between plantations and
peasantries, an interest that goes back to our common participation in
Julian Steward's study of Puerto Rico; see Steward et al. (1956: Chaps.
7,9), as well as the reappraisals of the study in Duncan, ed. (1978),
especially William Roseberry's contribution. Among our various writings
on the topic are those by Mintz on the plantation type (19596), on
peasantries in the Caribbean (1961, 1979a), and on "the definition of
peasantries"

(1973); by Wolf on subcultures and classes in plantation systems (1959)
and on peasantry in general (1966); and by Wolf and Mintz on different
kinds of large estates (1957). Edgar Thompson has made major
contributions to an understanding of plantation agriculture, and his
many writings on the subject are now collected in one volume (1975).
Also useful are Lloyd Best's model of the “pure plantation economy"
(1968) and George Beckford's book on the plantation as a source of
underdevelopment (1972).

   Among the many studies of peasant marketing by anthropologists, I
have been especially influenced by Mintz's attempt to understand market
systems as “mechanisms of social articulation" (1959a). For me, the
market is constituted by relations between classes, not by house

Bibliographic Notes 421

holds acting as “market agents." In contrast to neoclassical economic
theory, which treats the initial factor endowments of households as
givens and argues that competition in the market sorts them according to
the relative efficiency with which they employ these factors, I accept
Edward Nell's contention that "markets distribute income according to
relative power" (1973: 95). Nell's juxtaposition of the opposing
paradigms of orthodox neoclassical economics and what he calls
"Classical- Marxian" economics is superlatively clear and concise.

   On wheat production in North America, I consulted Paul Gates's
Prairie Frontier (1973), the now-classic book by Walter Webb on The
Great Plains (1931), and Charles Kraenzel's Great Plains in Transition
(1955). Especially helpful was the brilliant paper by Harriet Friedmann
on "World Market, State, and Family Farm" (1978). James Scobie (1964)
has written an excellent history of wheat production in Argentina.
Junker wheat farming has been discussed by Max Weber (1979) and by
Alexander Gerschenkron (1943). On commercial grain farming in Russia, I
relied on Peter I. Lyashchenko's economic history (1949) and on a paper
by Patricia Herlihy on the role of Odessa in the grain export trade
(1972). The development of rice production in Burma is well discussed by
Michael Adas in The Burma Delta (1974). On Thailand, see Lucian Hanks's
Rice and Man (1972); on Vietnam, Charles Robe- quain's Economic
Development (1944) and the historically oriented chapter 2 in Robert
Sansom's Economics of Insurgency (1970).

   My understanding of the growth of livestock production after 1860
owes a great deal to Arnold Strickon's paper on "The Euro-American
Ranching Complex" (1965), which compares the western United States and
Argentina. Webb (1931) is again indispensable for understanding cattle
herding in North America, as is E. S. Osgood's Day of the Cattleman

(1957). Joe Frantz and Julian Choate (1955) have written on the myths
and realities of the American cowboy, a topic that demands further
inquiry; on Black cowboys, see Durham and Jones (1965). Strickon's paper
and his dissertation (1960) are most useful on Argentina, as is Tulio
Halperin-Donghi's reinterpretation of Sarmiento's polarity of
Civilization and Barbarism in his Aftermath of Revolution (1973: Chap.
3). On Australia I read the volume edited by G. Greenwood (1955), which
contains a very good paper by Ronald Hartwell on the "pastoral
ascendancy." I have also benefited by comments in Rosecrance (1964) and
in Burt (1957) on the political implications of Australian pastoralism.

   The literature on banana cultivation is strong with regard to
business and company history; much less attention has been paid to the
fate of affected local populations. I have drawn on Charles Kepner and
Jay Soothill's Banana Empire (1935), Kepner's Social Aspects of the
Banana Industry (1936), Charles Wilson's Empire in Green and Gold
(1947), and Watt Stewart's biographical study of Minor C. Keith, the
founder of the United Fruit Company (1964). Michael Olien (1970)
discusses the role of Black populations, with specific reference to
Costa Rica.

422 Bibliographie Notes

   There are a great many works on sugar. Some that were of special
importance for my understanding of the issues involved were Noel Deerr's
voluminous History of Sugar (1949); Fernando Ortiz's Cuban Counterpoint
(1947); Mintz's writings on sugar plantations in Puerto Rico (especially
1956, 1974); Solomon Miller's study of sugar plantations in coastal Peru
(1967); and Clifford Geertz's discussion of the interdigitation of
plantation-grown sugar and subsistence rice fields in Java (1963).
Mintz's "Time, sugar and sweetness" (19796) marks an interesting new
departure into the question of the cultural dynamics of diet.

   A practical guide to coffee production and marketing that contains
much information is William Ukers's All About Coffee (1935). Case
studies of coffee-growing regions include my doctoral thesis on highland
Puerto Rico (Steward et al. 1956: Chap. 7), William Roseberry's fine
work on Andean Venezuela (in press), and the excellent historical
account of southern Brazil by Warren Dean (1976) described in chapter
12. Alain Dessaint, in his paper on the impact of coffee production on
native American communities (1962), was perhaps the first anthropologist
to stress labor migration in Mesoamerica. We still need a history of the
coffeehouse and its effects on European patterns of politics and
sociability; Braudel's comments (1973b: 184—187) are suggestive. On tea
drinking in England, see Forrest (1973).

   In addition to the sources on the opium trade listed for chapter 8, I
have relied heavily on Alain and William Dessaint for a grasp of the
mechanics and consequences of opium production (A. Dessaint 1971, 1972;
W. Dessaint and A. Dessaint 1975). The volumes edited by Peter
Kunstadter on Southeast Asian Tribes. Minorities, and Nations (1967)
include ethnographic data on opium raising among the hill-dwelling
populations of mainland Southeast Asia. Alfred McCoy's Politics of
Heroin (1972) traces the growth of heroin production after World WarH.

   I have drawn on Robert Murphy's discussion of changes wrought by
rubber cultivation among the Mundurucu (1958, 1960); however, his
account of early Mundurucu history has been challenged by Alcida Ramos
(1978). There is need for a detailed study of the impact of the rubber
trade on Amazonian populations. In the meantime, we must rely on
dramatic accounts such as Richard Collier's story of the Amazon rubber
barons (1968). On rubber production in Malaya, I have used G. C. Allen
and A. G. Donnithorne's Western Enterprise in Indonesia and Malaya
(1962), James Jackson's work on Planters and Speculators (1968), and the
study of a rubber plantation by Ravindra Jain (1970). On cocoa
production in West Africa, I read A. Hopkins's economic history (1973),
Polly Hill's excellent book on migratory cocoa planters in Ghana (1963),
and Rodolfo Stavenhagen's summary of research on the Ivory Coast (1975:
Part II), which interprets much of the available French literature.
Keith Hart also allowed me to read his as yet unpublished manuscript on

Bibliographic Notes 423

the development of commercial agriculture in West Africa (1979).

   For a grasp of what transpired in South Africa, I turned to the
useful historical geography by N. C. Pollock and Swanzie Agnew (1963)
and to the fine two-volume Oxford History of South Africa, edited by
Monica Wilson and Leonard Thompson (1969—1971). I greatly benefited from
Benjamin Magubane's paper, "The Politics of History in South Africa"

(1978). On the specific events of the Xhosa cattle killings, see Keller

(1978).

12. The New Laborers

This chapter draws on several different, though convergent, sources. One
of these is the "new urban sociology," which is interested in cities as
loci of capital accumulation and investment, as reservoirs of labor, and
as nodes of intervention by the state. Major contributions to this
development are Manuel Castells's Urban Question (1977) and David
Harvey's Social Justice and the City (1973). I have also benefited from
Castells's discussion of trends of research in his "Urban Sociology and
Urban Politics" (1975) and the literature cited there. An outstanding
discussion and overview of this direction in research is Sharon Zukin's
"A Decade of the New Urban Sociology" (1980). Some recent work in urban
anthropology shares similar concerns; see Jack Rollwagen's review of
"New Directions in Urban Anthropology" (1980).

   A second body of material relevant to this chapter is provided by the
new labor history. This approach is exemplified by such works as
Thompson's The Making of the English Working Class (1966), Hobsbawm's
Labouring Men (1964), Rolande Trempe's Les mineurs de Carmaux (1964),
and Alan Dawley's study of Lynn, Massachusetts (1976). These scholars
write a social history that tries to locate working classes in a wider
and historically changing social and cultural matrix, rather than
focusing only on working-class or labor organizations. A programmatic
statement of the approach is given in Georges Haupt's paper, "Why the
History of the Working-Class Movement?" (1978). For an overview of this
trend in the United States, see David Brody on "The Old Labor History
and the New" (1979). In anthropology, there was an early move in this
direction by Godfrey Wilson, the embattled head of the Rhodes-
Livingstone Institute, 1938—1941. What Wilson called "detribaliza- tion"
in The Economics of Detribalization (1941 — 1942) was none other than
the process of working-class formation in the Rhodesian Copper Belt. On
Wilson and his attempt to effect "a marriage of Marx and Malinowski,"
see the evenhanded account by Richard Brown (1973).

   A third inspiration for this chapter was the new literature on
migration. The older work on the subject dealt with migration primarily
as the collective outcome of attempts by individuals or groups to better
their life chances, and sought explanations for their success or failure
in the cultural processes of assimilation or pluralism. The new research
on

424 Bibliographic Notes

migration attempts to see it in international terms, as the result of
political and economic changes in the "sending" societies as well as of
shifts in the demand for labor on the part of the "recipient" societies.
Among the contributions that have been especially helpful to me are
Marios Nikolinakos's attempt to develop a general theory of migration in
"late" capitalism (1975), together with Teodor Shanin's critique of this
study (1978); Saskia Sassen-Koob's papers on migrant and immigrant labor
(1978, 1981); and Alejandro Portes's "Migration and Underdevelopment"
(1978). Some interesting comments from an anthropological viewpoint
appear in Anthony Leeds's article on "Women in the Migratory Process"
(1976). A successful attempt to apply the perspectives of the new
approach to the particular case of Puerto Rico can be found in the
volume by the History Task Force (1979).

   A fourth research direction I drew on is the work on labor market
segmentation. This concept first appeared in Clark Kerr's "Balkanization
of Labor Markets" (1954), but it has since been elaborated in various
writings. The most significant for me were David Gordon's Theories of
Poverty and Underemployment (1972) and the book on Labor Market
Segmentation edited by Edwards, Reich, and Gordon (1975). Edna Bonacich
(1972) has made an innovative attempt to relate the "splitlabor market"
to issues of ethnic antagonism. This general approach, which takes
account of changing labor markets and shifting group placement within
them, avoids the static and confining model of a hierarchy of
occupations serving as niches for supposedly stable, culturally marked
groups.

   Among publications on migration to the United States, I found most
helpful Maldwyn Jones's book on American Immigration (1960) and Gerald
Rosenblum's Immigrant Workers (1973). I also learned from Shirley Hune's
Pacific Migration to the United States (1977). The main source for the
Chinese labor trade is still Persia Crawford Campbell's Chinese Coolie
Emigration (1923). Hugh Tinker, in A New System of Slavery

(1974), deals with the Indian labor trade; I have also drawn on Kathleen
Gough's account of the impact of the trade on Thanjavur (1978).

   In reading on South Africa, I returned to S. H. Frankel (1938) on
capital investment and to the section on southern and eastern Africa by
H. J. Simons in Linton, ed.. Most of the World (1949), both of which I
had first read in graduate school. The book Simons later coauthored with
Ruth Simons, Class and Color (1969), also proved useful. Benjamin M.
Magubane has written a fine work on the Political Economy of Race and
Class (1979); see also the interesting review by David Kaplan (1979).
The chapters by D. Hobart Houghton and by David Welsh in the Oxford
History of South Africa (Wilson and Thompson, eds., 1971; Vol. II) are
informative, and two articles in the collection edited by Palmer and
Parsons (1977), Martin Legassick on the shift from mining to industry
and Colin Bundy on the Transkei peasantry, are most valuable. Charles
Van Onselen, who is also the author of a book on African mine labor in

Bibliographic Notes 425

Southern Rhodesia ( 1976), has written on the creation of the dual Black
and White labor force on the Rand (1979), and Francis Wilson (1972) has
dealt specifically with labor in the gold mines. Harold Wolpe ( 1972)
and Michael Burawoy (1976) both discuss, from somewhat different
perspectives, the interdigitation of labor reserves and mining locations
so characteristic of southern and central African development under
capitalist auspices.

   The section of this chapter on Rio Claro in Brazil is based on Warren
Dean's historical study (1976). William Roff (1967), dealing with Malay
nationalism, and Maurice Freedman on Chinese migrants ( 1960), offer
information and insight into Singapore.

   The concept of "plural societies" was first proposed by J. S.
Furnivall in writings on Indonesia and Burma (1939, 1948), and
elaborated by M. G. Smith, especially in his Plural Society in the
British West Indies ( 1965). The literature on the concept and its uses
has grown large; a convenient entry into the relevant problematic, with
bibliography, is the volume edited by Leo Despres, Ethnicity and
Resource Competition in Plural Societies

(1975).

Afterword

The Afterword represents an attempt to rethink the anthropological
culture concept in the light of the Marxian notion of ideology and of
the sociology of knowledge. The gamut of writers on the subject range
from Friedrich Engels, August Thalheimer, Franz Borkenau, Antonio
Gramsci, Louis Althusser, and Stuart Hall on the Marxian side to
sociologists of knowledge who trace their lineage to Max Weber and
Wilhelm Dilthey. Georg Lukács, Lucien Goldmann, and Karl Mannheim have
combined the two traditions, albeit in different ways. Talal Asad, Steve
Barnett and Martin Silverman, Maurice Bloch, Stephan Feuchtwang,
Jonathan Friedman, Maurice Godelier, and Joel Kahn have variously used
the Marxian concept of ideology in anthropological discussions.

   The concept of ideological alternatives or variants, produced within
and between societies, informs the work of Claude Lévi-Strauss; but
Lévi-Strauss sees the relation of Nature and Culture as passing directly
through the human mind. I hold that thought is mediated by the
prevailing mode of production. The concept of hegemony derives from the
writings of Antonio Gramsci. Raymond Williams (1973) has brilliantly
elaborated the notion of alternative and oppositional forms. The concept
of differential accents appears in Volosinov (1973), that of
counterpoints in Willem Wertheim (1974). I continue to believe that the
human sciences cannot do without a conception of culture. I think of the
present discussion as a contribution to an ongoing debate on how the
concept can be recast in the light of new understandings.

Bibliography

ABRAHAM, D. P. 1961. Maramuca: An Exercise in the Combined Use of
Portuguese Records and Oral Tradition. Journal of African History 2:
211—245.

1962. The Early Political History of the Kingdom of Mwene Mutapa

(850—1589). In Historians in Tropical Africa: Proceedings of the
Leverhulme Inter-Collegiate History Conference Held at the University
College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, 1960. Pp. 61-92. Salisbury:
International African Institute.

1964. Ethno-Hjstory of the Empire of Mutapa, Problems and Methods. In

The Historian in Tropical Africa. Jan Vansina, R. Mauny, and L. V.
Thomas, eds. Pp. 104—121. London: Oxford University Press.

1966. The Roles of the 'Chaminuka' and the Mhondoro-Cults in Shona

Political History. In The Zambezian Past. Eric T. Stokes and R. Brown,
eds. Pp. 28—46. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

ABUN-NASR, JAMIL M. 1971. A History of the Maghrib. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

ADAMS, ROBERT McC. 1965. Land Behind Baghdad: A History of Settlement on
the Diyala Plain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ADAS, MICHAEL 1974. The Burma Delta: Economic Development and Social
Change on the Rice Frontier, 1852-1941. Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press.

AJAYI, J. F. ADE, and MICHAEL CROWDER, eds. 1972. History of West
Africa, Vol. 1. New York: Columbia University Press.

AKINJOGBIN, I. A. 1967. Dahomey and Its Neighbors, 1708-1818. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

1972. The Expansion of Oyo and the Rise of Dahomey 1600-1800. In

History of West Africa, Vol. 1. J. F. Ade Ajayi and Michael Crowder,
eds. Pp. 304—343. New York: Columbia University Press.

ALBION, ROBERT G. 1939. The Rise of New York Port, 1815—1860. New York:
Scribner's.

ALLEN, G. C? and A. G. DONNITHORNE 1962. Western Enterprise in Indonesia
and Malaya. London: Allen 6- Unwin.

ALPERS, EDWARD 1968. The Mutapa and Malawi Political Systems. In Aspects
of Central African History. Terence O. Ranger, ed. Pp. 1-28. Evanston,
IL: Northwestern University Press.

ALTHEIM, FRANZ 1954. Gesicht vom Abend und Morgen. Frankfurt a.M.:
Fischer Biicherei.

1960. Zarathustra und Alexander. Frankfurt a.M.: Fischer Biicherei.

428 Bibliography

ALTHUSSER, LOUIS, and ?TIENNE BALIBAR 1970. Reading Capital. New York:
Pantheon Books.

AMERICAN FUR TRADE CONFERENCE 1967. Selected Papers of the 1965 American
Fur Trade Conference. St. Paul: Minnesota Historical Society.

AMIN, SAMIR 1973a. Neo-Colonialism in West Africa. Harmondsworth:
Penguin Books.

1973b. Le dévéloppement inégal. Paris: Les ?ditions de Minuit.

ANDERSON, MICHAEL 1971. Family Structure in Nineteenth Century
Lancashire. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ANDERSON, PERRY 1974. Lineages of the Absolutist State. London: New Left
Books.

1978. Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism. London: Verso.

ANSTEY, ROGER 1977. The Profitability of the Slave Trade in the 1840s.
In Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in New World Plantation
Societies. Vera Rubin and Arthur Tuden, eds. Pp. 84—93. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 292. New York: New York Academy of
Sciences.

APTER, DAVID E. 1961. The Political Kingdom of Uganda: A Study in
Bureaucratic Nationalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Arhin, KWAME 1967. The Structure of Greater Ashanti (1700-1824). Journal
of African History 8: 65-85.

ARRIGHI, GIOVANNI 1978. The Geometry of Imperialism: The Limits of
Hobson's Paradigm. London: New Left Books.

ASAD, TALAL, ed. 1973. Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter. London:
Ithaca Press.

BADDELEY, JOHN F. 1919. Russia, Mongolia, and China. 2 vols. London:
Macmillan.

BAER, GABRIEL 1962. A History of Landownership in Modem Egypt. London:
Oxford University Press.

1969. Studies in the Social History of Modern Egypt. Publication of the

Center for Middle Eastern Studies, No. 4. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

BAGWELL, PHILIP S., and G. E. MINGAY 1970. Britain and America
1850-1939: A Study of Economic Change. New York: Praeger.

BAILEY, ALFRED G. 1969. The Conflict of European and Eastern Algonkian
Cultures 1504—1700: A Study in Canadian Civilization. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press. (First pub. 1937.)

BAILEY, F. G. 1957. Caste and the Economic Frontier. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

1960. Tribe, Caste, and Nation. Manchester: Manchester University

Press.

BAILEY, L. R. 1966. Indian Slave Trade in the Southwest: A Study of
Slave-taking and the Traffic in Indian Captives from 1700—1935. Great
West and Indian Series, Vol. 32. Los Angeles: Westemlore Press.

BAIROCH, PAUL 1975. The Economic Development of the Third World Since
1900. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.

BAKEWELL, PETER J. 1971. Silver Mining and Society in Colonial Mexico:
Zacatecas, 1546—1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

BALANDIER, GEORGE 1968. Daily Life in the Kingdom of the Congo From the
Sixteenth to the Eighteenth Century. New York: Pantheon Books.

1970. The Sociology of Black Africa: Social Dynamics in Central Africa.

New York: Praeger.

Bibliography 429

BALAZS, ?TIENNE 1964. Chinese Civilization and Bureaucracy. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

BANU, ION 1967. La formation sociale 'tributaire.' Recherches
Internationales à la Lumière du Marxisme, No. 57—58. Special number:
Premières sociétés des classes et mode de production asiatique. Pp.
251—253. Paris: Editions de la Nouvelle Critique.

BARBOUR, VIOLET 1963. Capitalism in Amsterdam in the Seventeenth
Century. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

BARLOEWEN, WOLF-DIETRICH VON 1961. Abriss der Geschichte Antiker
Randkulturen. Munich: Oldenbourg.

BARRATT BROWN, MICHAEL 1970. After Imperialism. New York: Humanities
Press.

BARRETT, WARD J., and STUART B. SCHWARTZ 1975. Comparación entre dos
economías azucareras coloniales: Morelos, México y Bahía, Brasil. In
Haciendas, latifundios y plantaciones en América Latina. Enrique
Florescano, ed. Pp. 532—572. Mexico City: Siglo Veintinuno Editores.

BASCOM, WILLIAM 1969. The Yoruba of Southwestern Nigeria. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

BAUER, Otto 1907. Die Nationalit?tenfrage und die Sozialdemokratie.
MarxStudien, Vol. 2. Max Adler and Rudolf Hilferding, eds. Vienna:
Volksbuchhandlung Ignaz Brand.

BEAN, RICHARD 1974. A Note on the Relative Importance of Slaves and Gold
in West African Exports. Journal of African History 15: 351-356.

BECKFORD, GEORGE L. 1972. Persistent Poverty: Underdevelopment in
Plantation Economies of the Third World. New York: Oxford University
Press.

BENDA, HENRY J. 1972. Continuity and Change in Southeast Asian History.
Yale University Southeast Asian Studies Monograph Series, No. 18, New
Haven, CT: Yale University Southeast Asian Studies.

BENDIX, REINHARD 1956. Work and Authority in Industry: Ideologies of
Management in the Course of Industrialization. New York: Wiley.

BERREMAN, GERALD 1979. Caste and Other Inequities. Meerut, India:
Folklore Institute.

BERTIN, JACQUES, SERGE BONIN, and PIERRE CHAUNU 1966. Les Philippines et
le Pacifique des Ibériques, XVle—XVIIe—XVIIIe siècles. Construction
Graphique. Paris: Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Vie Section,
S.E.V.P.E.N.

BEST, LLOYD A. 1968. Outlines of a Model of Pure Plantation Economy.
Social and Economic Studies 17: 282-326.

B?TE1LLE, ANDRE 1969. Castes: Old and New. Bombay: Asia Publishing
House.

BINDOFF, S. T. 1966. Tudor England. The Pelican History of England, Vol.
5. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

BIRMINGHAM, DAVID 1965. The Portuguese Conquest of Angola. London:
Oxford University Press.

1966. Trade and Conflict in Angola: The Mbundu and Their Neighbors

Under the Influence of the Portuguese 1483-1790. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

1972. The African Response to Early Portuguese Activities in Angola. In

Protest and Resistance in Angola and Brazil. Ronald Chilcote, ed. Pp.
11—28. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.

BISHOP, CHARLES A. 1976. The Emergence of the Northern Ojibwa: Social
and Economic Consequences. American Ethnologist 3: 39—54.

BISHOP, CHARLES A., and ARTHUR J. RAY, eds. 1976. The Fur Trade and
Culture

430 Bibliography

Change: Resources and Methods. Special Issue. Western Canadian Journal
of Anthropology 6(1).

BLASSINGAME, JOHN 1972. The Slave Community: Plantation Life in the
Antebellum South. New York: Oxford University Press.

BLOCH, MARC 1961. Feudal Society. 2 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. (First pub. in French 1939-1940).

1970. French Rural History: An Essay on Its Basic Characteristics.
Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press. (First
pub. in French 1931.)

BOAS, FRANZ 1921. Ethnology of the Kwakiutl Based on Data Collected by
George Hunt. 35 th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology.
Pt. 2. Pp. 795-1481. Washington, DC.

BOLUS, MALVINA, ed. 1972. People and Pelts: Selected Papers of the
Second North American Fur Trade Conference. Winnipeg, Manitoba: Peguis.

BONACICH, E. 1972. A Theory of Ethnic Antagonism: The Split-Labor
Market. American Sociological Review 5: 533 — 547.

BOROCHOV, BER 1937. Nationalism and the Class Struggle: A Marxian
Approach to the Jewish Question. New York: Poale-Zion.

BOVILL, E. W. 1968. The Golden Trade of the Moors. New York: Oxford
University Press. (First ed. 1933, as Caravans of the Old Sahara.)

BOWLES, SAMUEL, and HERBERT GINTIS 1977. The Marxian Theory of Value and
Heterogeneous Labour: A Critique and Reformulation. Cambridge Journal of
Economics 1: 173—192.

BOWSER, FREDERICK P. 1974. The African Slave in Colonial Peru 1524—1650.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

BOXER, CHARLES B. 1948. Fidalgos in the Far East, 1550—1770; Fact and
Fancy in the History of Macao. The Hague: M. Nijhoff.

1953. South China in the Sixteenth Century, Being the Narratives of

Galeote Pereira, Fr. Gaspar da Cruz, O.P.Fr. Martin de Rada, O.E.S.A.,
1550— 1575. London: Hakluyt Society.

1973a. The Portuguese Seaborne Empire 1415— 1825. Harmondsworth:

Penguin Books.

1973b. The Dutch Seaborne Empire 1600- 1800. Harmondsworth: Penguin
Books.

BRADBURY, R. E. 1957. The Benin Kingdom and the Edo-Speaking Peoples of
South-western Nigeria, Ethnographic Survey of Africa: Western Africa,
Pt. 13. London: International African Institute.

1964. The Historical Uses of Comparative Ethnography: Data with

Special Reference to Benin and Yoruba. In The Historian in Tropical
Africa. Jan Vansina, R. Mauny, and L. V. Thomas, eds. Pp. 145-160.
London: Oxford University Press.

BRADBY, BARBARA 1975. The Destruction of Natural Economy. Economy and
Society 4: 127-161.

BRADING, D. A. 1971. Miners and Merchants in Bourbon Mexico 1768-1810.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1977. The Haciendas as an Investment. In Haciendas and Plantations in

Latin American History. Robert G. Keith, ed. Pp. 135-140. New York:
Holmes & Meier.

BRADING, D. A., and HARRY E. CROSS 1972. Colonial Silver Mining: Mexico
and Peru. Hispanic American Historical Review 52: 545-579.

Bibliography 431

B RAMSON, LEON 1961. The Political Context of Sociology. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

BRAUDEL, FERNAND 1972. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in
the Age of Philip II, Vol. 1. New York: Harper & Row.

1973<a. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of

Philip II, Vol. 2. New York: Harper & Row.

1973b. Capitalism and Material Life 1400—1800. New York: Harper &

Row.

BRENNER, ROBERT 1975. England, Eastern Europe, and France:
Socio-Historical Versus Economic Interpretation. In Failed Transitions
to Modem Industrial Society: Renaissance Italy and Seventeenth Century
Holland. Frederick Krantz and Paul M. Hohenberg, eds. Pp. 68-71.
Montreal: Interuniversity Centre for European Studies.

1976. Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in PreIndustrial
Europe. Past and Present, No. 70: 30-75.

BRODY, DAVID 1979. The Old Labor History and the New: In Search of an
American Working Class. Labor History 20: 111-126.

BROMLEY, J. S., and E. H. KOSSMANN, eds. 1964. Britain and the
Netherlands. Groningen: Wolters.

1968. Britain and the Netherlands in Europe and Asia. London:

Macmillan.

BROOMFIELD, J. H. 1966. The Regional Elites: A Theory of Modem Indian
History. In Modern India: An Interpretative Anthology. Thomas R.
Metcalf, ed. Pp. 60—70. London: Macmillan.

BROWN, JAMES A. 1975. Spiro Art and Its Mortuary Contexts. In Death and
the Afterlife in Pre-Columbian America. Elizabeth P. Benson, ed. Pp. 1 —
32. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collections,
Trustees for Harvard University.

BROWN, JUDITH K. 1975. Iroquois Women: An Ethnohistoric Note. In Toward
an Anthropology of Women. Rayna Rapp Reiter, ed. Pp. 235-251. New York:
Monthly Review Press.

BROWN, RICHARD 1973. Anthropology and Colonial Rule: Godfrey Wilson and
the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute, Northern Rhodesia. In Anthropology and
the Colonial Encounter. Talal Asad, ed. Pp. 173—197. London: Ithaca
Press.

BRUCHEY, STUART W. 1965. The Roots of American Economic Growth 1607—
1861: An Essay in Social Causation. New York: Harper & Row.

BRUCHEY, STUART W., comp, and ed. 1967. Cotton and the Growth of the
American Economy: 1790-1860, Sources and Readings. New York: Har- court.
Brace and World.

BRUNER, EDWARD M. 1961. Mandan. In Perspectives in American Indian
Culture Change. Edward H. Spicer, ed. Pp. 187—227. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

BULLIET, RICHARD 1975. The Camel and the Wheel. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

BUNDY, COLIN 1977. TheTranskei Peasantry, c.I890-1914: Passing Through a
Period of Stress. In The Roots of Rural Poverty in Central and Southern
Africa. Robin Palmer and Neil Parsons, eds. Pp. 201-220. Berkeley, Los
Angeles, London: University of California Press.

BURAWOY, MICHAEL 1976. The Functions and Reproduction of Migrant Labour:
Comparative Material from Southern Africa and the United States.
American

432 Bibliography

Journal of Sociology 81: 1050—1087.

1979. The Anthropology of Industrial Work. Annual Review of Anthropology
8: 231-266.

BURT, A. L. 1957. If Turner Had Looked at Canada, Australia, and New
Zealand When He Wrote about the West. In The Frontier in Perspective.
Walker D. Wyman and Clifton B. Kroeber, eds. Pp. 60—77. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

BYTHELL, DUNCAN 1969. The Handloom Weavers: A Study in the English
Cotton Industry During the Industrial Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

CAHEN, CLAUDE 1955. L'histoire économique et sociale de l'orient
musulmane médiéval. Studia Islamita 3: 93-116.

1957. Les facteurs économiques et sociaux dans l'ankylose culturelle de

l'Islam. In Classicisme et déclin culturel dans l'histoire de l'Islam.
Pp. 195—207. Paris: Besson et Chantemerle.

1959. Mouvements populaires et autonomisme urbain dans l'Asie

musulmane de moyen-àge. Arabica 5: 225—250; 6: 25-56, 233—265.

1965. Quelques problèmes concernant l'expansion économique musulmane
jusqu'au Xlle siècle. In Occidente e l'Islam nell' alto medioevo.
Vol. 1. Pp. 391-432. Spoleto: Centro Italiano di Studi sull' alto
Medievo.

CAIRNCROSS, A. K. 1953. Home and Foreign Investment, 1870—1913.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

CALDWELL, JOSEPH R. 1958. Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the
Eastern United States. American Anthropological Association, Memoir 88.

1962. Eastern North America. In Courses Toward Urban Life:
Archaeological Considerations of Some Cultural Alternatives. Robert J.
Braidwood and Gordon R. Willey, eds. Pp. 288—308. Viking Fund
Publications in Anthropology, Vol. 32. Chicago: Aldine.

CAMPBELL, MAVIS C. 1977. Marronage in Jamaica: Its Origin in the
Seventeenth Century. In Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in New World
Plantation Societies. Vera Rubin and Arthur Tuden, eds. Pp. 389-419.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 292. New York: New York
Academy of Sciences.

CAMPBELL, PERSIA CRAWFORD 1923. Chinese Coolie Emigration to Countries
Within the British Empire. Studies in Economics and Political Science,
London School of Economics, Monograph No. 72. London: P. S. King and
Son.

CARANDE y THOBAR, RAM?N 1943. Carlos V y sus banqueros. Madrid: Revista
de Occidente.

1949. La Hacienda real de Castilla. Madrid: Sociedad de Estudios y

Publicaciones.

CARMAGNANI, MARCELLO 1975. L'America latina dal '500 a oggi: Nascita,
espansione e crisi di un sistema feudale. Milan: Feltrinelli.

CARRASCO, PEDRO, et al. 1976. Estratificación social en la Mesoamérica
prehis- pánica. Mexico City: SEP-INAH.

CARRASCO, PEDRO, and JOHANNA BRODA, eds. 1977. Economía, política e
ideología en Mesoamérica. Mexico City: Editorial Nueva Imagen.

CASTELLS, MANUEL 1975. Urban Sociology and Urban Politics: From a
Critique to New Trends of Research. Comparative Urban Research 3: 7—13.

1977. The Urban Question. London: Edward Arnold. (First ed. in French

1972).

Bibliography 433

CASTLES, STEPHEN, and GODULA KOSACK 1973. Immigrant Workers and Class
Structure in Western Europe. London: Oxford University Press.

CENTRE D'?TUDES ET DE RECHERCHES MARXISTES 1969. Sur le 'mode de
production asiatique.' Paris: ?ditions Sociales.

1971. Sur le féodalisme. Paris: Editions Sociales.

CHAMBERS, MORTIMER, ed. 1963. The Fall of Rome: Can It Be Explained?
European Problem Studies. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

CHANEY, ELSA M. 1979. The World Economy and Contemporary Migration.
International Migration Review 13: 204-212.

CHANG, T'IEN-TSE 1934. Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514 to 1644. Leiden:
Brill.

CHAPMAN, S. D. 1967. The Early Factory Masters: The Transition to the
Factory System in the Midlands Textile Industry. Newton Abbot: David and
Charles.

1972. The Cotton Industry in the Industrial Revolution. Studies in

Economic History prepared for the Economic Historical Society. London:
Macmillan.

1973. Industrial Capital Before the Industrial Revolution: An Analysis
of

the Assets of a Thousand Textile Entrepreneurs c. 1730—50. In Textile
History and Economic History: Essays in Honour of Miss Julia de Lacy
Mann. N. B. Harte and K. G. Ponting, eds. Pp. 113 -137. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

CHAUNU, HUGUETTE, and PIERRE CHAUNU 1955-1959. Séville et L'Atlantique
1504-1650. 8 vols. Vol. 1, Paris: Lib. Armand Colin. Vols. 2—8, Paris:
S.E.V.P.E.N.

CHAUNU, Pierre 1960. Les Philippines et le Pacifique des Ibériques
(XVIe, XVIIe, XVIIle siècles). Introduction Méthodologique et indices
d'activité. Ports- Routes-Trafics, Vol. 11. Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N.

CHEONG, W. E. 1965. Trade and Finance in China: 1784- 1834; a
Reappraisal. In Les grandes voies maritimes dans le monde, XV-XIXe
siècles: Rapports présentés aux Xlle Congrès International des Sciences
Historiques par la Commission Internationale d'Histoire Maritime. Pp.
277—290. Paris: Biblioteque General de l'?cole Pratique des Hautes
?tudes, Vie Section.

CHESNEAUX, JEAN 1962. Le mouvement ouvrier Chinois de 1919 à 1927. ?cole
Pratique des Hautes ?tudes-Sorbonne, Sixième Section: Sciences
?conomiques et Sociales, Le Monde d'Outre-Mer Passé et Présent, Première
Série, ?tudes XVII. The Hague: Mouton.

1964. Le mode de production asiatique: quelques perspectives de

recherches. La Pensée, No. 114: 47—53.

CHILDE, V. GORDON 1946. What Happened in History. New York: Penguin
Books.

CHITTICK, H. NEVILLE 1972. The Coast Before the Arrival of the
Portuguese. In Perspectives on the African Past. Martin A. Klein and G.
Wesley Johnson, eds. Pp. 93—106. Boston: Little, Brown.

CIPOLLA, CARLO M. 1962. The Economic History of World Population.
Baltimore: Penguin Books.

1970. European Culture and Overseas Expansion. Harmondsworth:

Penguin Books.

Cobban, ALFRED 1964. The Social Interpretation of the French Revolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

CODERE, HELEN 1950. Fighting with Property: A Study of Kwakiutl
potlatching

434 Bibliography

and Warfare, 1792—1930. American Ethnological Society, Monograph No. 18.
New York: J. J. Augustin.

1961. Kwakiutl. In Perspectives in American Indian Culture Change.

Edward H. Spicer, ed. Pp. 431-516. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

COEDES, GEORGE 1962. Les peuples de la Péninsule Indochinoise. Paris:
Dunod.

1964. Les états hindouisés d'Indochine et d'Indonésie. Paris: E. de
Bocard.

COHEN, YEHUDI A. 1969. Ends and Means in Political Control: State
Organization and the Punishment of Adultery, Incest, and Violation of
Celibacy. American Anthropologist 71: 658-687.

COHN, BERNARD S. 1959. Some Notes on Law and Change in North India.
Economic Development and Cultural Change 8: 79—93.

1960. The Initial British Impact on India: A Case Study of the Benares

Region. Journal of Asian Studies 19: 419—424.

1961. From Indian Status to British Contract. Journal of Economic

History 21: 613-628.

1962. Political Systems in Eighteenth Century India: The Benares Region.

Journal of the American Oriental Society 82: 312-320.

1971. India: The Social Anthropology of a Civilization. Englewood
Cliffs,

NJ: Prentice-Hall.

COLEMAN, D. C. 1973. Textile Growth. In Textile History and Economic
History: Essays in Honour of Miss Julia de Lacy Mann. N. B. Harte and K.
G. Ponting, eds. Pp. 1-12. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

COLLETTI, Lucio 1973. Marxism and Hegel. London: New Left Books. (First
pub. in Italian 1969.)

COLLIER, RICHARD 1968. The River That God Forgot: The Dramatic Story of
the Rise and Fall of the Despotic Amazon Rubber Barons. New York:
Dutton.

COLLINS, JUNE MCCORMICK 1950. Growth of Class Distinctions and Political
Authority Among the Skagit Indians During the Contact Period. American
Anthropologist 6: 331 — 342.

1974. Valley of the Spirits: The Upper Skagit Indians of Western
Washington. American Ethnological Society, Monograph No. 56. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.

COLOMBIA TODAY 1979. La Ciudad Perdida—Major Colombian Archaeological
Find. Colombia Today 14 (4). New York: Colombian Information Service.

COOK, M. A., ed. 1970. Studies in the Economic History of the Middle
East. New York: Oxford University Press.

COPANS JEAN, ed. 1975. Anthropologie et imperialisme. Paris: Fran?ois
Maspéro.

CORKRAN, DAVID H. 1962. The Cherokee Frontier: Conflict and Survival,
17401762. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

1967. The Creek Frontier, 1540—1783. Norman: University of Oklahoma

Press.

COTTERILL, R. S. 1954. The Southern Indians: The Story of the Civilized
Tribes Before Removal. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Cox, OLIVER C. 1959. The Foundations of Capitalism. London: Peter Owen.

CRANE, VERNER W. 1956. Southern Frontier, 1670-1732. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.

CRATON, MICHAEL 1974. Sinews of Empire: A Short History of British
Slavery. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, Doubleday.

Bibliography 435

Craton, MICHAEL, and JAMES WALVIN 1970. A Jamaican Plantation: The
History of Worthy Park 1620—1970. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Crouzet, Fran?ois 1967. England and France in the Eighteenth Century: A
Comparative Analysis of Two Economic Growths. In The Causes of the
Industrial Revolution in England. Richard Hartwell, ed. Pp. 139—174.
London: Methuen.

CUNNISON, IAN 1956. Perpetual Kinship: A Political Institution of the
Luapula Peoples. Human Problems in British Central Africa 20: 28—48.

1957. History and Genealogies in a Conquest State. American
Anthropologist 59: 20—31.

1961. Kazembe and the Portuguese, 1789-1832. Journal of African

History 2: 61-76.

CURTIN, PHILIP D. 1969. The Atlantic Slave Trade, a Census. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

1975. Economic Change in Precolonial Africa: Senegambia in the Era of

the Slave Trade. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

1977. Slavery and Empire. In Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in

New World Plantation Societies. Vera Rubin and Arthur Tuden, eds. Pp. 3
-11. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 292. New York: New
York Academy of Sciences.

CUVELIER, JEAN, and LOUIS JADIN 1954. L'Ancien Congo d'après les
archives romaines <1518-1640). Institut Royal Colonial Belge (Brussels).
Section des Sciences Morales et Politiques, Mémoires, Vol. 36. Brussels:
Académie Royale des Sciences d'Outre-Mer.

DAAKU, KWAME YEBOA 1970. Trade and Politics on the Gold Coast 1600-1720:
A Study of the African Reaction to European Trade. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

DAMAS, DAVID, ed. 1969a. Contributions to Anthropology: Band Societies.
Proceedings of the Conference on Band Organization, Ottawa, 1965.
National Museums of Canada Bulletin No. 228. Anthropological Series No.
84.

19696. Contributions to Anthropology: Ecological Essays. Proceedings of

the Conference on Cultural Ecology, Ottawa, 1966. National Museums of
Canada Bulletin No. 230. Anthropological Series No. 86.

DAVENPORT, WILLIAM 1969. The 'Hawaiian Cultural Revolution': Some
Political and Economic Considerations. American Anthropologist 71: 1—20.

DAVIDSON, BASIL, with F. K. BUAH and J. F. ADE AJAYI 1966. A History of
West Africa to the Nineteenth Century. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books,
Doubleday.

DAVIS, DAVID BRION 1966. The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

DAVIS, KINGSLEY 1965. The Urbanization of the Human Population.
Scientific American 213: 41-53.

DAVIS, RALPH 1954. English Foreign Trade, 1660—1700. Economic History
Review 7: 150-166.

1962. English Foreign Trade, 1700— 1774. Economic History Review 15:

285-299.

1973. English Overseas Trade 1500-1700. London: Macmillan.

DAWLEY, ALAN 1976. Class and Community: The Industrial Revolution in
Lynn. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

DEAN, WARREN 1976. Rio Claro: A Brazilian Plantation System, 1820—1920.

436 Bibliography

Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

DEBO, ANGIE 1941. The Road to Disappearance. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.

DEERR, NOEL 1949—1950. The History of Sugar. 2 vols. London: Chapman and
Hall.

De LAGUNA, FREDERICA 1972. Under Mount Saint Elias: The History and
Culture of the Yakutat Tlingit. 3 parts. Smithsonian Contributions to
Anthropology, Vol. 7. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.

DERMIGNY, LOUIS 1964. La Chine et l'Occident: Le commerce a Canton au
XVIIIe siècle, 1719—1833. 3 vols. + album. Ports-Routes-Trafics, Vol.
18. Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Vie Section, Centre de Recherches
Historiques. Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N.

DESPRES, LEO A., ed. 1975. Ethnicity and Resource Competition in Plural
Societies. World Anthropology: An Interdisciplinary Series. The Hague:
Mouton.

DESSAINT, ALAIN Y. 1962. Effects of the Hacienda and Plantation Systems
on Guatemala's Indians. América Indígena 22: 323-354.

1971. Lisu Migration in the Thai Highlands. Ethnology 10: 329-348.

1972. The Poppies Are Beautiful This Year. Natural History 81: 31-37,

92-96.

DESSAINT, WILLIAM Y. and ALAIN Y. DESSAINT 1975. Strategies in Opium
Production. Ethnos, Nos. 1—4: 153—168.

DEUTSCH, KARL W. 1954. Political Community at the International Level:
Problems of Definition and Measurement. Doubleday Short Studies in
Political Science. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

1966. Nationalism and Social Communication: An Inquiry into the

Foundations of Nationality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (First pub. 1953).

DIAMOND, STANLEY, 1951. Dahomey: A Proto-State in West Africa. Ph.D.
dissertation. Department of Anthropology, Columbia University.

DIFFIE, BAILEY W., and GEORGE D. WINIUS 1977. Foundations of the
Portuguese Empire 1415— 1580. Europe and the World in the Age of
Expansion, Vol. 1 (Series). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

DIKE, K. ONWUKA 1956. Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta, 1830-1885.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

DILLON RICHARD 1962. The Hatchet Men: The Story of the Tong Wars in San
Francisco's Chinatown. New York: Coward-McCann.

Di PESO, CHARLES 1974. Casas Grandes: A Fallen Trading Center of the
Gran Chichimeca. 3 vols. Dragoon, AZ: Amerind Foundation; Flagstaff, AZ:
Northland Press.

DISRAELI, BENJAMIN 1954. Sybil, or The Two Nations. Harmondsworth:
Penguin Books. (First pub. 1845.)

DIXON, RUSSELL A., and E. KINGMAN EBERHARDT 1938. Economic Institutions
and Cultural Change. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Dobb, MAURICE 1947. Studies in the Development of Capitalism. New York:
International Publishers.

DOBYNS, HENRY F. 1963. An Outline of Andean Epidemic History to 1720.
Bulletin of the History of Medicine 37: 493-515.

DOCKER, EDWARD WYBERGH 1970. The Blackbirders: The Recruiting of South
Sea Labour for Queensland, 1863—1907. Sydney: Angus and Robertson.

DODGE, ERNEST S. 1976. Islands and Empires: Western Impact on the
Pacific and East Asia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Bibliography 437

DOUGLAS, DAVID C. 1969. The Norman Achievement, 1050-1120. Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press.

DOUGLAS, MARY 1964. Matriliny and Pawnship in Central Africa. Africa 34:
301-313.

DOUGLAS, PAUL 1930. Real Wages in the United States: 1890—1926. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.

DOWD, DOUGLAS F. 1956. A Comparative Analysis of Economic Development in
the American West and South. Journal of Economic History 16: 558—574.

1974. The Twisted Dream: Capitalist Development in the United States

Since 1776. Cambridge, MA: Winthrop.

DOWNS, RICHARD 1967. A Kelantanese Village of Malaya. In Contemporary
Change in Traditional Societies, Vol. 2. Julian H. Steward, ed. Pp.
107—186. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

DRUCKER, PHILIP 1951. The Northern and Central Nootkan Tribes. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 144.

1963. Indians of the Northwest Coast. American Museum Science Books.

New York: Natural History Press. (First pub. 1955).

DUMONT, LOUIS 1957. Une sous-caste de l'Inde du Sud. The Hague: Mouton.

1970. Homo Hierarchicus: An Essay on the Caste System. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press. (First pub. in French 1966.)

DUNCAN, RONALD J., ed. 1978. Social Anthropology in Puerto Rico. Special
issue. Revista/Review Interamericana 8: 3—64.

DURHAM, PHILIP, and EVERETT L. JONES 1965. The Negro Cowboys. New York:
Dodd, Mead.

DUTT, ROMESH CHUNDER 1960. The Economic History of India. 2 vols.
Classics of Indian History and Economics. New Delhi: Publications
Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India.
(First pub. 1901).

DUYVENDAK, J. J. L. 1949. China's Discovery of Africa. London:
Probsthain.

EBERHARD, WOLFGANG 1977. A History of China. Berkeley, Los Angeles,
London: University of California Press. (First pub. in German 1948).

EDWARDS, MICHAEL M. 1967. The Growth of the British Cotton Trade
17801815. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Edwards, Michael M., and R. Lloyd-Jones 1973. N. J. Smelser and the
Cotton Factory Family: A Reassessment. In Textile History and Economic
History: Essays in Honour of Miss Julia de Lacy Mann. N. B. Harte and K.
G. Ponting, eds. Pp. 304—319. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

EDWARDS, RICHARD, MICHAEL REICH and THOMAS E. WEISSKOPF, eds. 1972. The
Capitalist System. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

EKHOLM, GORDON F., and GORDON R. WILLEY, eds. 1966. Archaeological
Frontiers and External Connections. Handbook of Middle American Indians,
Vol. 4. Robert Wauchope, general ed. Austin: University of Texas Press.

EKHOLM, KAJSA 1978. External Exchange and the Transformation of Central
African Social Systems. In The Evolution of Social Systems: Proceedings
of a meeting of the Research Seminar in Archaeology and Related
Subjects, Institute of Archaeology, London University. Jonathan Friedman
and Michael J. Rowlands, eds. Pp. 115-136. London: Duckworth.

ELIAS, NORBERT 1939. Uber den Prozess der Zivilisation. 2 vols. Basel:
Haus zum Falken.

ELLIOTT, J. H. 1966. Imperial Spain 1469- 1716. New York: Mentor Books,
New American Library.

438 Bibliography

1970. The Old World and the New 1492— 1650. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

ELVIN, MARK 1973. The Pattern of the Chinese Past. London: Eyre Methuen.

EMBREE, JOHN F. 1950. Thailand, A Loosely Structured Social System.
American Anthropologist 52: 181-193.

ENGELS, FRIEDRICH 1971. The Condition of the Working Class in England.
W. O. Henderson and W. H. Chaloner, transí, and eds. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell. (First pub. in German 1845.)

ENGLER, ROBERT 1968. Social Science and Social Consciousness: The Shame
of the Universities. In The Dissenting Academy. Theodore Roszak, ed. Pp.
182 — 207. New York: Vintage Books.

EPSTEIN, A. L. 1958. Politics in an Urban African Community. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

FACE, J. D., and R. A. OLIVER, eds. 1970. Papers in African Prehistory.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

FAIRBANK, JOHN K. 1953. Trade and Diplomacy on the China Coast: The
Opening of the Treaty Ports, 1842-1854. 2 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

FAIRBANK, JOHN K., EDWIN O. REISCHAUER, and ALBERT M. CRAIG 1973. East
Asia: Tradition and Transformation. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

FALS BORDA, ORLANDO 1976. Capitalismo, hacienda y poblamiento en la
Costa Atlántica. 2d revised edition. Bogotá: Editorial Punta de Lanza.

FEINMAN, GARY 1978. The Causes of the Population Decline in Sixteenth
Century New Spain. Paper written for Ethnology and Ethnography of
Mesoamerica, U 732.02. Program in Anthropology, Graduate Center, City
University of New York.

FENTON, WILLIAM N. 1971. The Iroquois in History. In North American
Indians in Historical Perspective. Eleanor B. Leacock and Nancy O.
Lurie, eds. Pp. 129- 168. New York: Random House.

1978 Huronia: An Essay in Proper Ethnohistory. American Anthropologist
80: 922-935.

FEUCHTWANG, STEPHAN 1975. Investigating Religion. In Marxist Analyses
and Anthropology. Maurice Bloch, ed. Pp. 61—82. Association of Social
Anthropologists, Studies No. 2. London: Malaby.

FIELDHOUSE, D. K. 1967. The Colonial Empires: A Comparative Survey from
the Eighteenth Century. New York: Delacorte Press.

FINER, SAMUEL E. 1975. State- and Nation-Building in Europe: The Role of
the Military. /?The Formation of National States in Western Europe.
Charles Tilly, ed. Pp. 84—163. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.

FISHER, RAYMOND H. 1943. The Russian Fur Trade, 1550- 1700. University
of California Publications in History, Vol. 31. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California.

FISHER, ROBIN 1977. Contact and Conflict: Indian-European Relations in
British Columbia, 1774—1890. Vancouver: University of British Columbia
Press.

FLINN, M. W. 1966. The Origins of the Industrial Revolution. New York:
Barnes &■ Noble.

FLORESCANO, ENRIQUE, ed. 1975. Haciendas, latifundios y plantaciones en
América Latina. Simposio de Roma, org. por CLACSO. Mexico City: Siglo
Veintiuno Editores.

1979. Ensayos sobre el desarrollo económico de México y América Latina

(1500—1975). Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica.

Bibliography 439

FOGEL, ROBERT W., and STANLEY L. ENGERMAN 1974. Time on the Cross: The
Economics of American Negro Slavery, Vol. 1. Boston: Little, Brown.

FONER, PHILIPS. 1941. Business and Slavery: The New York Merchants and
the Irrepressible Conflict. New York: Russell and Russell.

FOREMAN, G. 1934. The Five Civilized Tribes. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.

FORREST, DENYS 1973. Tea for the British: The Social and Economic
History of a Famous Trade. London: Chatto and Windus.

FORTES, MEYER 1953. The Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups. American
Anthropologist 55: 17—41.

FOSTER, JOHN 1974. Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution: Early
Industrial Capitalism in Three English Towns. New York: St. Martin's
Press.

FOSTER-CARTER, AIDAN 1977. Can We Articulate Articulation? New Left
Review, No. 107: 47-77.

FOUST, C. M. 1961. Russian Expansion to the East Through the 18th
Century. Journal of Economic History 21: 469—482.

1969. Muscovite and Mandarin: Russia's Trade with China and Its Setting,
1727—1805. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

FOWLER, MELVIN L. 1971. Agriculture and Village Settlement in the North
American East: The Central Mississippi Valley Area, a Case History. In
Prehistoric Agriculture. Stuart Struever, ed. Pp. 391-403. Garden City,
NY: Natural History Press.

Fox, EDWARD 1971. History in Geographic Perspective: The Other France.
New York: W. W. Norton.

Fox, RICHARD G. 1971. Kin, Clan, Raja, and Rule: State-Hinterland
Relations in Preindustrial India. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London:
University of California Press.

1976. Lineage Cells and Regional Definition in Complex Societies. In

Regional Analysis, Vol. 2. Carol A. Smith, ed. Pp. 95—121. New York:
Academic Press.

FRANK, ANDRE GUNDER 1966. The Development of Underdevelopment. Monthly
Review 18: 17—31.

1967. Sociology of Development and Underdevelopment of Sociology.

Catalyst (Buffalo), No. 3: 20-73.

1978. World Accumulation 1492-1789. New York: Monthly Review

Press.

FRANKEL, S. H. 1938. Capital Investment in Africa. London: Oxford
University Press.

FRANTZ, JOE B? and JULIAN E. CHOATE, JR. 1955. The American Cowboy: The
Myth and the Reality. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

FREEDMAN, MAURICE 1960. Immigrants and Associations: Chinese in
Nineteenth-Century Singapore. Comparative Studies in Society and History
3: 25-48.

FREEMAN-GRENVILLE, G. S. P. 1962. The Medieval History of the Coast of
Tanganyika. London: Oxford University Press.

FRENCH, DAVID 1961. Wasco-Wishram. In Perspectives in American Indian
Culture Change. Edward H. Spicer, ed. Pp. 337-430. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

FRIED, MORTON H. 1952. Land Tenure, Geography and Ecology in the Contact
of Cultures. American Journal of Economics and Sociology 11: 391-412.

1957. The Classification of Corporate Unilineal Descent Groups. Journal

440 Bibliography

of the Royal Anthropological Institute 87: 1—29.

1960. On the Evolution of Social Stratification and the State. In
Culture in

History. Stanley Diamond, ed. Pp. 713-731. New York: Columbia University
Press.

1966. On the concepts of 'tribe' and 'tribal society.' Transactions of
the

New York Academy of Sciences, (Ser. 2) 28: 527-540.

1967. The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political
Anthropology. New York: Random House.

1975. The Notion of Tribe. Menlo Park, CA: Cummings.

FRIEDMAN, JONATHAN 1974. Marxism, Structuralism and Vulgar Materialism.
Man 9: 444-469.

1975. Tribes, States, and Transformation. In Marxist Analyses and Social

Anthropology. Maurice Bloch, ed. Pp. 161—202. Association of Social
Anthropologists, Studies No. 2. London: Malaby Press.

1979. System, Structure and Contradiction: The Evolution of 'Asiatic'

Social Formations. Social Studies in Oceania and South East Asia, No. 2.
Copenhagen: The National Museum of Denmark.

FRIEDMANN, HARRIET 1978. World Market, State, and Family Farm: Social
Bases of Household Production in the Era of Wage Labor. Comparative
Studies in Society and History 20: 545-586.

FROBENIUS, LEO 1933. Kulturgeschichte Afrikas: Prolegomena zu einer
historischen Gestaltenlehre. Zurich: Phaidon-Verlag.

FURBER, HOLDEN 1970. Madras Presidency in the Mid-Eighteenth Century, ln
Readings on Asian Topics: Papers Read at the Inauguration of the
Scandinavian Institute of Asian Studies 16—18 September 1968. Kristof
Glamann, ed. Pp. 108 —121. Scandinavian Institute of Asian Studies
Monograph Series, No. 1. Lund: Studentlitteratur.

FURNAS, J. C. 1947. Anatomy of Paradise: Hawaii and the Islands of the
South Seas. New York: William Sloane Associates. (First pub. 1937).

FURNIVALL, J. S. 1939. Netherlands India: A Study of Plural Economy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1948. Colonial Policy and Practice: A Comparative Study of Burma and

Netherlands India. London: Cambridge University Press.

FURTADO, CELSO 1963. The Economic Growth of Brazil: A Survey from
Colonial to Modern Times. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.

GANGULI, B. N., ed. 1964. Readings in Indian Economic History:
Proceedings of the First All-India Seminar on Indian Economic History,
1961. London: Asia Publishing House.

GARFIELD, VIOLA E. 1939. Tsimshian Clan and Society. University of
Washington Publications in Anthropology, Vol. 7, No. 3. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.

GARTRELL, BEVERLY 1979. The Ruling Ideas of a Ruling Elite: British
Colonial Officials in Uganda, 1944—52. Ph.D. dissertation. Program in
Anthropology, Graduate School, City University of New York, New York.

GATES, PAUL W. 1973. Landlords and Tenants on the Prairie Frontier:
Studies in American Land Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

GEARING, FRED 1962. Priests and Warriors: Social Structures for Cherokee
Politics in the 18th Century. American Anthropological Association,
Memoir 93, Vol. 64, No. 5, Pt. 2.

GEERTZ, CLIFFORD 1963. Agricultural Involution: The Processes of
Ecological

Bibliography 441

Change in Indonesia. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.

GENICOT, LEOPOLD 1966. Crisis: From the Middle Ages to Modem Times. In
The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Vol. 2: The Agrarian Life of
the Middle Ages. M. M. Postan, ed. Pp. 660-741. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

GENOVESE, EUGENE D. 1966. The Political Economy of Slavery: Studies in
the Economy and Society of the Slave South. New York: Pantheon Books.

1969. The World the Slaveholders Made: Two Essays in Interpretation.

New York: Pantheon Books.

1972. Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made. New York: Pantheon
Books.

GERSCHENKRON, ALEXANDER 1943. Bread and Democracy in Germany. Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

1962. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. New York:

Praeger.

GEYL, PIETER 1932. The Revolt of the Netherlands (1559-1609). London:
William and Norgate.

GHIRSCHMAN, ROMAN 1954. Iran, from the Earliest Times to the Islamic
Conquest. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

GIBBS, MARION 1949. Feudal Order: A Study of the Origins and Development
of English Feudal Society. London: Cobbett Press.

GIBSON, CHARLES 1964. The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule: A History of the
Indians of the Valley of Mexico 1519- 1810. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

GIBSON, JAMES R. 1969. Feeding the Russian Fur Trade: Provisionment of
the Okhotsk Seaboard and the Kamchatka Peninsula 1639—1856. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

GLAMANN, KRISTOF 1958. Dutch Asian Trade, 1620—1740. The Hague: M.
Nijhoff.

1971. European Trade 1500-1750. In The Fontana Economic History of

Europe, Vol. 2: 1500- 1700, The Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries.
Carlo M. Cipolla, ed. separatum. London: Fontana.

GODELIER, MAURICE 1965. La notion de mode de production asiatique. Temps
Modernes 20: 2002-2027.

1966. Rationalité et irrationalité en économie. Paris: Fran?ois Maspéro.

1977. Dead Sections and Living Ideas in Marx's Thinking on Primitive

Society. In Perspectives in Marxist Anthropology. Maurice Godelier, ed.
Pp. 99—124. Cambridge Studies in Social Anthropology, No. 18. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. (First pub. in French 1973.)

GODINHO, VITORINO MAGALHAES 1963-1965. Os descobrimentos e a economia
mundial. 2 vols. Lisbon: Editoria Arcadia.

1969. L'économie de l'empire Portugais aux XVe et XVIe siècles. Ecole

Pratique des Hautes ?tudes, Vie Section, Centre de Recherches
Historiques. Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N.

GOITEIN, S. D. 1956-1957. The Rise of the Near Eastern Bourgeoisie in
Early Islamic Times. Cahiers d'histoire mondiale 3: 583—604.

1964. Artisans en Méditerranée orientale au haut Moyen Age. Annales

15: 847-868.

GOLDMAN, IRVING 1940. The Alkatcho Carrier of British Columbia. In
Acculturation in Seven American Indian Tribes. Ralph Linton, ed. Pp.
333-389. New York: Appleton-Century.

442 Bibliography

1975. The Mouth of Heaven: An Introduction to Kwakiutl Religious

Thought. New York: Wiley.

GOODY, JACK 1971. Technology, Tradition, and the State in Africa.
London: Oxford University Press.

1973. British Functionalism. In Main Currents in Cultural Anthropology.

R. Naroll and F. Naroll, eds. Pp. 185—215. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts.

GORDON, DAVID M. 1972. Theories of Poverty and Underemployment:
Orthodox, Radical, and Dual Labor Market Perspectives. Lexington, MA:
Lexington Books, D.C. Heath.

GORDON, MANYA 1941. Workers Before and After Lenin. New York: Dutton.

GOUGH, KATHLEEN 1968. World Revolution and the Science of Man. In The
Dissenting Academy. Theodore Roszak, ed. Pp. 135— 158. New York: Vintage
Books

1978 Agrarian Relations in Southeast India, 1750-1976. Review 2:

25-53.

GOULDNER, ALVIN 1980. The Two Marxisms. New York: Seabury Press.

GOUROU, PIERRE 1936. Les paysans du delta tonkinois. Paris: Editions
d'art et d'histoire.

GRABURN, NELSON H. H., and B. STEPHEN STRONG 1973. Circumpolar Peoples:
An Anthropological Perspective. Pacific Palisades, CA: Goodyear.

GRAHAM, GERALD S. 1970. A Concise History of the British Empire. London:
Thames and Hudson.

GRAYMONT, BARBARA 1972. The Iroquois in the American Revolution.
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.

GREENBERG, MICHAEL 1951. British Trade and the Opening of China 1800-42.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

GREENFIELD, SIDNEY M. 1977. Madeira and the Beginnings of New World
Sugar Cane Cultivation: A Study in Institution Building. In Comparative
Perspectives on Slavery in New World Plantation Societies. Vera Rubin
and Arthur Tuden, eds. Pp. 536—552. Annals of the New York Academy of
Science, Vol. 292. New York: New York Academy of Sciences.

GREENWOOD, G., ed. 1955. Australia: A Social and Political History. New
York: Praeger.

GREGG, DOROTHY, and ELGIN WILLIAMS 1948. The Dismal Science of
Functionalism. American Anthropologist 50: 594-611.

GROUSSET, REN? 1970. The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central
Asia. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. (First pub. in French
1939).

GUHA, AMALENDU 1972. Raw Cotton of Western India: Output, Transportation
and Marketing, 1750- 1850. Indian Economic and Social History Review 9:
1-41.

1973. Growth of Acreage Under Raw Cotton in India 1851- 1901—A

Quantitative Account. Artha Vij?ána 15: 1 — 56.

GUNTHER, ERNA 1972. Indian Life on the Northwest Coast of North America
as Seen by the Early Explorers and Fur Traders During the Last Decades
of the Eighteenth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

GUNTHER, JOHN 1953. Inside Africa. New York: Harper 6- Brothers.

GUTMAN, HERBERT G. 1973. Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing
America, 1815-1919. American Historical Review 78: 531-587.

1976. The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750-1925. New York:

Pantheon Books.

Bibliography 443

HABAKKUK, H. J. 1962. American and British Technology in the Nineteenth
Century: The Search for Labour-Saving Inventions. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

HABIB, IRFAN I960. Banking in Mughal India. In Contributions to Indian
Economic History, Vol. 1. Tapan Raychadhuri, ed. Pp. 1—20. Calcutta:
Mukhopadhyay.

1963. The Agrarian System of Moghul India 1556—1707. NewYork:Asia

Publishing House.

1964. The Structure of Agrarian Society in Mughal India. In Readings in

Indian Economic History: Proceedings of the First All-India Seminar on
Indian Economic History, 1961. B. N. Ganguli, ed. Pp. 37-43. London:
Asia Publishing House.

1969. An Examination of Wittfogel's Theory of Oriental Despotism. In

Studies in Asian History: Proceedings of the Asian History Congress, New
Delhi, 1961. K. S. Lai, ed. Pp. 378—392. London: Asia Publishing House.

HADJINICOLAOU-MARAVA, ANNE 1950. Recherches sur la vie des esclaves dans
le monde byzantin. Athens: L'Institut Fran?ais.

HALL, D.G.E. 1968. A History of South-East Asia. 3d revised edition.
London: Macmillan.

HALPERIN-DONGHI, TULIO 1973. The Aftermath of Revolution in Latin
America. New York: Harper & Row.

HAMILTON, E. J. 1934. American Treasure and the Price Revolution in
Spain 1501 — 1650. Harvard Economic Studies, Vol. 42.

HANKS, LUCIEN M. 1972. Rice and Man: Agricultural Ecology in Southeast
Asia. Chicago and New York: Aldine and Atherton.

HARNETTY, PETER 1972. Imperialism and FreeTrade: Lancashire and India in
the Mid-Nineteenth Century. Vancouver: University of British Columbia
Press.

HARRIS, MARVIN 1972. Portugal's Contribution to the Underdevelopment of
Africa and Brazil. In Protest and Resistance in Angola and Brazil.
Ronald H. Chilcote, ed. Pp. 210—223. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London:
University of California Press.

1979. Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture. New

York: Random House.

HART, KEITH 1979. The Development of Commercial Agriculture in West
Africa. Discussion paper prepared for the United Nations Agency for
International Development.

HARTWELL, R. M., ed. 1970. The Industrial Revolution. New York: Barnes &
Noble.

HARVEY, DAVID 1973. Social Justice and the City. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

HAUPT, GEORGES 1978. Why the History of the Working-Class Movement?
Review 2: 5-24.

HAUPTMAN, LAURENCE M. and JACK CAMPISI, eds. 1978. Neighbors and
Intruders: An Ethnohistorical Exploration of the Indians of Hudson's
River. Canadian Ethnology Service, Paper 39. National Museum of Man
Mercury Series. Ottawa: National Museums of Canada.

HAYS, HOFFMAN R. 1975. Children of the Raven: The Seven Indian Nations
of the Northwest Coast. New York: McGraw-Hill.

HECHTER, MICHAEL 1975. Internal Colonialism: The Celtic Fringe in
British National Development 1536—1966. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London:
University of California Press.

444 Bibliography

HEESTERMAN, J. C. 1973. India and the Inner Conflict of Traditions.
Daedalus, Winter: 97-113.

HEICHELHEIM, FRITZ H. 1956. Effects of Classical Antiquity on the Land.
In Man's Role in Changing the Face of the Earth. William L. Thomas, ed.
Pp. 165— 182. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

HELMS, MARY 1976. Ancient Panama: Chiefs in Search of Power. Austin:
University of Texas Press.

HEMMING, JOHN 1978. Red Gold: The Conquest of the Brazilian Indians.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

HENDERSON, RICHARD N. 1972. The King in Every Man: Evolutionary Trends
in Onitsha Ibo Society and Culture. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

HENIGE, DAVID 1977. John Kabes of Komenda: An Early African Entrepreneur
and State Builder. Journal of African History 18: 1 — 19.

HERLIHY, PATRICIA 1972. Odessa: Staple Trade and Urbanization in New
Russia. Paper presented at the Symposium "Italian, Russian and Balkan
Cities," 87th Meeting of the American Historical Association, New
Orleans, December 29th, 1979.

HERSKOVITS, MELVILLE J. 1939. Dahomey, an Ancient West African Kingdom.
2 vols. New York: J. J. Augustin.

HEYD, W 1885. Histoire du commerce du Levant au Moyen-Age. 2 vols.
Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz.

HICKERSON, HAROLD 1956. The Genesis of a Trading Post Band: The Pembina
Chippewa. Ethnohistory 3: 289-345.

1960. The Feast of the Dead Among the Seventeenth Century Algonkians

of the Upper Great Lakes. American Anthropologist 62: 81 — 107.

1962?. Notes on the Post-Contact Origin of the Midewiwin. Ethnohistory

9: 404-423.

1962?>. The Southwestern Chippewa: An Ethnohistorical Study. American
Anthropological Association, Memoir 92. Menasha, WI: American
Anthropological Association.

1970. The Chippewa and Their Neighbors: A Study in Ethnohistory. New

York: Holt, Rinehart 6- Winston.

HILL, CHRISTOPHER 1949. The English Revolution and the State. The Modem
Quarterly 4: 110— 128.

1967. Reformation to Industrial Revolution, 1530- 1780. The Making of

English Society, Vol. 1. New York: Pantheon.

HILL, POLLY 1963. Migrant Cocoa Farmers in Southern Ghana: A Study in
Rural Capitalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

HILTON, RODNEY 1951. Y eut-il une crise générale de la feodalité?
Annales 6: 23-30.

1969. The Decline of Serfdom in Medieval England. London: Macmillan.

HINDESS, BARRY, and PAUL Q. HIRST 1975. Pre-Capitalist Modes of
Production. London and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

HINTZE OTTO 1929. Wesen und Verbreitung des Feudalismus. Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Berlin, Philosophisch-historische Klasse,
Sitzungsberichte. Pp. 321—347. (Reprinted in Die Welt als Geschichte 4:
157—190, 1938. Reproduced in part in English transí, in Lordship and
Community in Medieval Europe. Fredric Cheyette, ed., 1968. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.)

HISTORY TASK FORCE, CENTRO DE ESTUDIOS PUERTORRIQUE?OS 1979. Labor
Migration Under Capitalism: The Puerto Rican Experience. New York:
Monthly Review Press.

Bibliography 445

Ho, PING-TI 1965. The Introduction of American Food Plants into China.
American Anthropologist 57: 191—201.

1966. The Geographical Distribution of hui-kuan (Landsmannschaften)

in Central and Upper Yangtze Provinces. Tsing Hua Journal of Chinese
Studies 5: 120-152.

HOBSBAWM, ERIC J. 1962. The Age of Revolution: Europe 1789- 1848.
London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

1967. Labouring Men: Studies in the History of Labour. New York:

Anchor Books, Doubleday.

1969. Industry and Empire. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

1973. Karl Marx's Contribution to Historiography. In Ideology in Social

Science. Robin Blackburn, ed. Pp. 265-283. New York: Vintage.

1975. The Age of Capital 1848-1875. New York: Scribner's.

HOBSBAWM, Eric J., ed. 1964. Karl Marx. Precapitalist Economic
Formations. New York: International Publishers.

HODGSON, MARSHALL G. S. 1974. The Venture of Islam. 3 vols. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

HOLDER, PRESTON 1970. The Hoe and the Horse on the Plains: A Study of
Cultural Development Among North American Indians. Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press.

HOOKER, J. R. 1963. The Anthropologist's Frontier: The Last Phase of
African Exploitation. Journal of Modem African Studies I: 455-459.

HOPKINS, A. G. 1973. An Economic History of West Africa. London: Longman
Group.

HORTON, ROBIN 1969. From Fishing Village to City-State: A Social History
of New Calabar. In Man in Africa. Mary Douglas and Phyllis M. Kaberry,
eds. Pp. 37—58. London: Tavistock.

HOUGHTON, D. HOBART 1971. Economic Development, 1865-1965. In The Oxford
History of South Africa, Vol. 2: South Africa 1870-1966. Monica Wilson
and Leonard Thompson, eds. Pp. 1—48. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

HOWARD, JOSEPH K. 1952. Strange Empire, a Narrative of the Northwest.
New York: Morrow.

Hu, HSIEN CHIN 1948. The Common Descent Group in China and Its
Functions. Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology, No. 10. New York:
Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.

HUDSON, CHARLES M. 1976. The Southeastern Indians. Knoxville: University
of Tennessee Press.

HUDSON, CHARLES M., ed. 1971. Red, White and Black: Symposium on Indians
in the Old South. Southern Anthropological Society Proceedings, Series
No. 5. Athens, GA: Southern Anthropological Society (distributed by
University of Georgia Press).

HUGHES, H. STUART 1958. Consciousness and Society: The Reorientation of
European Social Thought 1890-1930. New York: Random House.

1966. The Obstructed Path: French Social Thought in the Years of

Desperation, 1930- 1960. New York: Harper & Row.

1975. The Sea Change: The Migration of Social Thought, 1930—1965.

New York: Harper & Row.

HUNE, SHIRLEY 1977. Pacific Migration to the United States: Trends and
Themes in Historical and Sociological Literature. RUES Bibliographic
Studies, No. 2. Washington, DC: Research Institute on Immigration and
Ethnic Studies,

446 Bibliography

Smithsonian Institution.

HUNT, GEORGE T. 1940. The Wars of the Iroquois: A Study in Intertribal
Trade Relations. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

HUNTINGTON, SAMUEL P. 1968. The Bases of Accommodation. Foreign Affairs
46: 642-656.

HUTCHINS, FRANCIS G. 1967. Illusion of Permanence: British Imperialism
in India. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

HUTTON, JOHN H. 1951. Caste in India, Its Nature, Function and Origins.
2d edition. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hyde, FRANCIS E. 1973. Far Eastern Trade, 1860- 1914. The Merchant
Adventurers Series. New York: Harper & Row/Barnes & Noble.

HYMES, DELL, ed. 1969. Reinventing Anthropology. New York: Pantheon.

INALCIK, HALAL 1969. Capital Formation in the Ottoman Empire. Journal of
Economic History 29: 97-140.

1973. The Ottoman Empire: The Classical Age, 1300- 1600. New York:

Praeger.

INIKORI. J. E. 1977. The Import of Firearms into West Africa, 1750-
1807: A Quantitative Analysis. Journal of African History 18: 339—368.

INNIS, HAROLD A. 1956. The Fur Trade in Canada: An Introduction to
Canadian Economic History. 2d revised edition, by Mary Q. Innis.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press. (First pub. 1930.)

ISLAMO?LU, HURI, and ?AGLAR KEYDER 1977. Agenda for Ottoman History.
Review 1: 31—55.

ISSAWI, CHARLES, ed. 1966. The Economic History of the Middle East
18001914. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

JABLOW, JOSEPH 1951. The Cheyenne in Plains Trade Relations 1795—1840.
American Ethnological Society Monograph, No. 19. New York: J. J.
Augustin.

JACKSON, JAMES S. 1968. Planters and Speculators: Chinese and European
Enterprise in Malaya. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press.

JACOBS, WILBUR R. 1972. Dispossessing the American Indian: Indians and
Whites on the Colonial Frontier. New York: Scribner's.

JAIN, RAVINDRA K. 1970. South Indians on the Plantation Frontier in
Malaya. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

JAYAWARDENA, CHANDRA 1971. The Disintegration of Caste in Fiji Rural
Society. In Anthropology in Oceania: Essays Presented to Ian Hogbin. L.
R. Hiatt and C. Jayawardena, eds. Pp. 89— 119. San Francisco: Chandler.

JEANNIN, PIERRE 1980. La protoindustrialisation: développement ou
impasse. Annales 35: 52-65.

JENKS, LELAND R. 1973. The Migration of British Capital to 1875. New
York: Harper & Row/Barnes & Noble. (First pub. 1927.)

JENNINGS, FRANCIS 1976. The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism,
and the Cant of Conquest. New York: W. W. Norton.

JENNINGS, JESSE D., and EDWARD NORBECK, eds. 1963. Prehistoric Man in
the New World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

JEROMIN, ULRICH 1966. Die ?berseechinesen: Ihre Bedeutung für die
wirtschaftliche Entwicklung Südostasiens. ?konomische Studien, Vol. 12.
Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer.

JESSOP, BOB 1977. Recent Theories of the Capitalist State. Cambridge
Journal of Economics 1: 353-373.

JONES, G. I. 1963. The Trading States of the Oil Rivers. London: Oxford
University Press.

Bibliography 447

JONES, GWYN 1968. A History of the Vikings. New York: Oxford University
Press.

JONES, MALDWYN ALLEN I960. American Immigration. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

JORDAN, WINTHROP D. 1968. White over Black: American Attitudes Toward
the Negro, 1550- 1812. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

JOSHI, P. C. 1970. Social Change in Traditional India. In Neue
Indienkunde— New Indology, Festschrift Walter Rubin zum 70. Geburtstag.
Horst Kriiger, ed. Pp. 287—306. Berlin: Akademie Verlag.

KAPLAN, DAVID 1979. Toward a Marxist Analysis of South Africa: Review of
Bernard Makhosezwe Magubane, The Political Economy of Race and Class in
South Africa. Socialist Review 9: 117-137.

KEA, R. A. 1971. Firearms and Warfare on the Gold and Slave Coasts from
the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Centuries. Journal of African History
12: 185-213.

KELLER, BONNIE B. 1978. Millenarianism and Resistance: The Xhosa Cattle
Killing. Journal of Asian and African Studies 13: 95— 111.

KELLEY, J. CHARLES 1966. Mesoamerica and the Southwestern United States.
In Archaeological Frontiers and External Connections. Gordon F. Ekholm
and Gordon R. Willey, eds. Pp. 95-110. Handbook of Middle American
Indians, Vol. 4. Robert Wauchope, general ed. Austin: University of
Texas Press.

KEMP, TOM 1971. Economic Forces in French History. London: Dobson Books.

KEPNER, CHARLES D., JR. 1936. Social Aspects of the Banana Industry. New
York: Columbia University Press.

KEPNER, CHARLES D? JR., and JAY H. SOOTHILL 1935. The Banana Empire. New
York: Vanguard Press.

KERNER, ROBERT J. 1942. The Urge to the Sea: The Course of Russian
History. The Role of Rivers, Portages, Ostrogs, Monasteries, and Furs.
New York: Russell and Russell.

KERR, CLARK 1954. The Balkanization of Labor Markets. In Labor Mobility
and Economic Opportunity. E. Wight Bakke, et al. Pp. 92— 110. New York:
Wiley.

KEY, V. O. 1949. Southern Politics in State and Nation. New York: Knopf.

KEYDER, ?a6lar 1976 xhe Dissolution of the Asiatic Mode of Production.
Economy and Society 5: 178-196.

KINIETZ, W. VERNON 1965. The Indians of the Great Lakes 1615-1760. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press. (First pub. 1940).

KIRCHHOFF, PAUL 1959. The Principles of Clanship in Human Society. In
Readings in Anthropology, Vol. 2. Morton H. Fried, ed. Pp. 260-270. New
York: Thomas Y. Crowell.

KLASS, MORTON 1980. Caste: The Emergence of the South Asian Social
System. Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues.

KLEIN, A. NORMAN 1969. West African Unfree Labor Before and After the
Rise of the Atlantic Slave Trade. In Slavery in the New World. L. Foner
and E. D. Genovese, eds. Pp. 87—95. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

KOENIGSBERGER, H. G. 1971. Estates and Revolutions: Essays in Early
Modem European History. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

KOLKO, GABRIEL 1963. The Triumph of Conservatism: A Reinterpretation of
American History, 1900- 1916. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.

KONDRATIEFF, N. D. 1979. The Long Waves in Economic Life. Review 2:
519-562.

KONETZKE, RICHARD 1971. América Latina II: La época colonial. Historia
Uni-

448 Bibliography

versal Siglo XXI. Madrid and Mexico City: Siglo XXI. (First pub. in
German 1965).

KOPYTOFF, IGOR, and SUZANNE MIERS 1977. African 'Slavery' as an
Institution of Marginality. In Slavery in Africa: Historical and
Anthropological Perspectives. Igor Kopytoff and Suzanne Miers, eds. Pp.
3—81. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

KOSAMBI, D. D. 1969. Ancient India: A History of Its Culture and
Civilization. New York: Meridian Books—World Publishing Company.

KRADER, LAWRENCE 1955. Principles and Structures in the Organization of
the Steppe-Pastoralists. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 11: 67—92.

1957. Culture and Environment in Interior Asia. In Studies in Human

Ecology. ?ngel Palerm, et al. Pp. 115-138. Social Science Monographs
III. Washington, DC: Pan American Union.

1958. Feudalism and the Tatar Polity of the Middle Ages. Comparative

Studies in Society and History 1: 76—99.

1975. The Asiatic Mode of Production: Sources, Development and Critique
in the Writings of Karl Marx. Assen: Van Gorcum.

KRADER, LAWRENCE, ed. 1972. The Ethnological Notebooks of Karl Marx
(Studies of Morgan, Phear, Maine, Lubbock). Assen: Van Gorcum.

KRAENZEL, CFIARLES F. 1955. The Great Plains in Transition. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.

KRIEDTE, PETER, HANS MEDICK, and J?RGEN SCHLUMBOHM 1977.
Industrialisierung vor der Industrialisierung: Gewerbliche
Warenproduktion auf dem Land in der Formationsperiode des Kapitalismus.
Ver?ffentlichungen des Max-Planck-Instituts für Geschichte 53.
G?ttingen: Vandenhoek and Ruprecht.

KROEBER, ALFRED L. 1948. Anthropology. New York: Harcourt Brace.

1952. Basic and Secondary Patterns of Social Structure. /?The Nature of

Culture. Pp. 2 10 — 218. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Article
first pub. 1938).

1952. The Nature of Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

KUBLER, GEORGE 1946. The Quechua in the Colonial World. In Handbook of
South American Indians, Vol. 2: The Andean Civilizations. Julian H.
Steward, ed. Pp. 331—410. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 143.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.

KULA, WITOLD 1970. Teoria economica del sistema feudale. Turin: Einaudi.
(First pub. in Polish 1962.)

KUNSTADTER, PETER, ed. 1967. Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities, and
Nations.

2 vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

KUWABARA, JITSUZO 1928—1935. On P'u Shou-keng, a Man of the Western
Regions Who Was the Superintendent of the Trading Ships Office in
Ch'üan- chou Towards the End of the Sung Dynasty, Together with a
General Sketch of Trade of the Arabs in China During the T'ang and Sung
Eras. Memoirs of the Research Department oftheToyo Bunko, No. 2: 1-79;
No. 7 (1935): 1-102.

LACOSTE, YVES 1974. General Characteristics and Fundamental Structures
of Medieval North African Society. Economy and Society 3: 1 — 17.

LAMPARD, ERIC R. 1957. Industrial Revolution: Interpretations and
Perspectives. Service Center for Teachers of History, Publication No. 4.
Washington, DC: American Historical Association.

LANDES, DAVID 1958. Bankers and Pashas: International Finance and
Economic

Bibliography 449

Imperialism in Egypt. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

1969. The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial

Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

LANE, FREDERICK C. 1973. Venice: A Maritime Republic. Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press.

LANG, JAMES 1975. Conquest and Commerce: Spain and England in the
Americas. New York: Academic Press.

1979. Portuguese Brazil: The King's Plantation. New York: Academic

Press.

LAPIDUS, IRA M. 1969. Muslim Cities and Islamic Societies. In Middle
Eastern Cities. Ira M. Lapidus, ed. Pp. 47—79. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.

LAPIDUS, IRA M? ed. 1969. Middle Eastern Cities. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.

LAROUI, ABDALLAH 1976. The Crisis of the Arab Intellectual:
Traditionalism or Historicism? Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University
of California Press.

LATHAM, A. J. H. 1973. Old Calabar 1600- 1891: The Impact of the
International Economy Upon a Traditional Society. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

1978. The International Economy and the Underdeveloped World

1865-1914. London: Croom Helm.

LATHRAP, DONALD 1970. The Upper Amazon. London: Thames and Hudson.

LATTIMORE, OWEN 1951. Inner Asian Frontiers of China. 2d edition. New
York: American Geographic Society. (First pub. 1940.)

1962. Studies in Frontier History: Collected Papers 1928- 1958. London:

Oxford University Press.

LATTIMORE, OWEN, and ELEANOR LATTIMORE 1944. The Making of Modern China.
Washington, DC: The Infantry Journal.

LAUBER, ALMON W. 1913. Indian Slavery in Colonial Times Within the
Present Limits of the United States. New York: Columbia University
Press.

LAW, ROBIN 1975. A West African Cavalry State: The Kingdom of Oyo.
Journal of African History 16: 1—15.

LAWSON, MURRY G. 1943. Fur: A Study in English Mercantilism, 1700—1775.
University of Toronto Studies, History and Economics Series, Vol. 9.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

LAZONICK, WILLIAM 1974. Karl Marx and Enclosures in England. Review of
Radical Political Economics 6: 1 — 59.

LEACH, EDMUND R. 1954. Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of
Kachin Social Structure. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

1961. Rethinking Anthropology. London School of Economics Monographs on
Social Anthropology, No. 22. London: Athlone Press.

LEACH, EDWARD R., and S. N. MUKERIEE, eds. 1970. Elites in South Asia.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

LEACOCK, ELEANOR B. 1954. The Montagnais 'Hunting Territory' and the Fur
Trade. American Anthropological Association Memoir 78. Menasha, WI:
American Anthropological Association.

1972. Introduction. To Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family,
Private

Property, and the State. Pp. 7—67. New York: International Publishers.

LEACOCK, ELEANOR B., and NANCY O. LURIE, eds. 1971. North American
Indians in Historical Perspective. New York: Random House.

450 Bibliography

LEBAR, FRANK M., GERALD C. HICKEY, and JOHN K. MUSGROVE, eds. 1964.
Ethnic Groups of Mainland Southeast Asia. New Haven, CT: Human Relations
Area Files Press.

Lee, CALVIN 1965. Chinatown, U.S.A. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

LEEDS, Anthony 1976. 'Women in the Migratory Process': A Reductionist
Outlook. Anthropological Quarterly 49: 69-76.

LEES, SUSAN H., and DANIEL G. BATES 1974. The Origins of Specialized
Pastoral- ism: A Systemic Model. American Antiquity 39: 187—193.

LEGASSICK, MARTIN 1977. Gold, Agriculture, and Secondary Industry in
South Africa, 1885—1970; from Periphery to Sub-Metropole as a Forced
Labour System. In The Roots of Rural Poverty in Central and Southern
Africa. Robin Palmer and Neil Parsons, eds. Pp. 175—200. Berkeley, Los
Angeles, London: University of California Press.

LEHMAN, FREDERIC K. 1957. Anthropological Parameters of a Civilization:
The Ecology, Evolution and Typology of India's High Culture. 2 vols.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Columbia University, New
York.

LEKACHMAN, ROBERT 1976. Economists at Bay. New York: McGraw-Hill.

LENIN, V. I. 1939. Imperialism: The Highest State of Capitalism. Little
Lenin Library, Vol. 15. New York: International Publishers. (First pub.
in Russian 1917.)

LE Roy LADURIE, EMMANUEL 1977. Occitania in Historical Perspective.
Review 1: 21-30.

LESSER, ALEXANDER 1961. Social Fields and the Evolution of Society.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 17: 40—48.

LEUR, JACOB CORNELIS VAN 1955. Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in
Asian Social and Economic History. The Hague and Bandung: W. van Hoewe.

LEVIN, STEPHANIE SETO 1968. The Overthrow of the Kapu System in Hawaii.
Journal of the Polynesian Society 74: 402-430.

LEVINE, DAVID 1977. Family Formation in an Age of Nascent Capitalism.
New York: Academic Press.

LEVTZION, NEHEMIA 1972. The Early States of the Western Sudan to 1500.
In History of West Africa, Vol. 1. J. F. Ade Ajayi and Michael Crowder,
eds. Pp.

120—157. New York: Columbia University Press.

LEWIS, ARCHIBALD R. 1951. Naval Power and Trade in the Mediterranean,
500— 1100. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

1958. The Northern Seas: Shipping and Commerce in Northern Europe,

A.D. 300— 1100. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

LEWIS, OSCAR 1942. The Effects of White Contact Upon Blackfoot Culture:
With Special Reference to the Role of the Fur Trade. American
Ethnological Society, Monograph No. 6. New York: J. J. Augustin.

LINARES, OLGA T. 1979. What Is Lower Central American Archaeology?
Annual Review of Anthropology 8: 21-43.

LINDBLOM, CHARLES E. 1977. Politics and Markets: The World's Political
Economic Systems. New York: Basic Books.

LINTON, RALPH 1955. The Tree of Culture. New York: Knopf.

LLOYD, PETER C. 1954. The Traditional Political System of the Yoruba.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 10: 235—251.

1965. The Political Structure of African Kingdoms. In Political Systems

and the Distribution of Power. Michael Banton, ed. Pp. 25—61.
Association of Social Anthropologists, Monograph No. 2. London:
Tavistock Publications.

1968. Conflict Theory and Yoruba Kingdoms. In History and Social

Bibliography 451

Anthropology. I. M. Lewis, ed. Pp. 25—61. Association of Social
Anthropologists, Monograph No. 7. London: Tavistock Publications.

LOCKHART, JAMES 1968. Spanish Peru, 1532-1560: A Colonial Society.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

1972. The Men of Cajamarca: A Social and Biographical Study of the First

Conquerors of Peru. Austin: University of Texas Press.

LOPEZ, ROBERT S. 1971. The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages,
9501350. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

LOPEZ, ROBERT S., HARRY A. MISKIMIN, and ABRAHAM UDOVITCH 1970. England
to Egypt, 1350-1500: Long-Term Trends and Long-Distance Trade. In
Studies in the Economic History of the Middle East from the Rise of
Islam to the Present Day. Michael A. Cook, ed. Pp. 93—128. London:
Oxford University Press.

LOPEZ, ROBERT S., and IRVING W. RAYMOND 1955. Medieval Trade in the
Mediterranean World, Illustrative Documents Translated with Introduction
and Notes. New York: Columbia University Press.

LOVE, THOMAS F. 1977. Ecological Niche Theory in Sociocultural
Anthropology: A Conceptual Framework and an Application. American
Ethnologist 4: 27-41.

Lowie, ROBERT H. 1920. Primitive Society. New York: Boni and Liveright.

1937. The History of Ethnological Theory. New York: Rinehart.

LUXEMBURG, ROSA 1922. Die Akkumulation des Kapitals. Ein Beitrag zur
?konomischen Erkl?rung des Imperialismus. Berlin: Vereinigung
Internationaler Verlags-Anstalten. (First pub. 1913).

LUZZATTO, GINO 1961. An Economic History of Italy from the Fall of the
Roman Empire to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century. London:
Routledge 6- Kegan Paul.

LYASHCHENKO, PETER I. 1949. History of the National Economy of Russia to
the 1917 Revolution. New York: Macmillan. (First pub. in Russian 1939.)

LYBYER, A. H. 1915. The Ottoman Turks and the Routes of Oriental Trade.
Economic History Review 30: 577-588.

LYND, ROBERT S. 1939. Knowledge for What? Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

1949. The Science of Inhuman Relations. The New Republic 121:22—24.

MCCALL, DANIEL F. 1969. Africa in Time-Perspective. New York: Oxford
University Press.

1971. Islamization in the Western and Central Sudan in the Eleventh

Century. In Aspects of West African Islam. Daniel F. McCall and Norman
R. Bennett, eds. Pp. 1 — 30. Boston University Papers on Africa, Vol. 5.
Boston: African Studies Center, Boston University.

MCCOY, ALFRED W., with CATHLEEN B. READ and LEONARD P. ADAMS II 1972.
The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia. New York: Harper &? Row.

MCEVEDY, COLIN, and RICHARD JONES 1978. Atlas of World Population
History. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

MACFARLANE, ALAN 1979. The Origins of English Individualism: The Family,
Property and Social Transition. New York: Cambridge University Press.

MCHUGH, TOM, with VICTORIA HOBSON 1972. The Time of the Buffalo. New
York: Knopf.

MCILWRAITH, T. F. 1948. The Bella Coola Indians. 2 vols. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.

MACKNIGHT, C. C. 1972. Macassans and Aborigines. Oceania 42: 283—321.

452 Bibliography

MACK Smith, DENIS 1969. Italy: A Modem History. (2d revised edition.)
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

MACLEOD, MURDO J. 1973. Spanish Central America: A Socioeconomic
History, 1520- 1720. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of
California Press.

MCNEILL, WILLIAM H. 1963. The Rise of the West: A History of the Human
Community. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

McPherron, ALAN 1967. On the Sociology of Ceramics: Pottery Style
Clustering, Marital Residence, and Cultural Adaptations of the
Algonkian-Iroquoian Border. In Iroquois Culture, History and Prehistory:
Proceedings of the 1965 Conference on Iroquois Research. Elizabeth
Tooker, ed. Pp. 101-107. Albany: State Education Department, University
of the State of New York, and New York Museum and Science Service.

MACPHERSON, C. B. 1962. The Political Theory of Possessive
Individualism: Hobbes to Locke. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

MAGUBANE, BERNARD M. 1978. The Politics of History in South Africa.
Notes and Documents No. 11 /78. New York: Centre Against Apartheid,
Department of Political and Security Council Affairs, United Nations.

1979. The Political Economy of Race and Class in South Africa. New York:

Monthly Review Press.

MAIR, LUCY P. 1934. An African People in the Twentieth Century. London:
Routledge.

MANCALL, MARK 1971. Russia and China: Their Diplomatic Relations to
1728. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

MANDEL, ERNEST 1968. Marxist Economic Theory. 2 vols. New York: Monthly
Review Press (First pub. in French 1942.)

1978. Late Capitalism. London: Verso. (First pub. in German 1972.)

MANN, JULIA DE LACY 1971. The Cloth Industry in the West of England from
1640 to 1880. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

MANTOUX. PAUL 1928. The Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth Century:
An Outline of the Beginnings of the Modern Factory System in England.
London: Jonathan Cape.

MAQUET, JACQUES J. 1961. Une hypothèse pour l'étude des féodalités
africaines. Cahiers d'études africaines 2: 292-314.

1964. Objectivity in Anthropology. Current Anthropology 12:419—430.

MARAN LA RAW 1967. Towards a Basis for Understanding the Minorities in
Burma: The Kachin Example. In Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities, and
Nations, Vol. 1. Peter Kunstadter, ed. Pp. 125— 146. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

MARCUS, STEVEN 1974. Engels, Manchester, and the Working Class. New
York: Random House.

MARX, KARL 1942. The Marx-Zasulich Correspondence. The New
International, November: 298-302 (Dated 1881.)

1967. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. Vol. 3: The Process of

Capitalist Production as a Whole. New York: International Publishers.
(First pub. in German 1894.)

1972. Ireland and the Irish Question: A Collection of Writings. New
York:

International Publishers.

1973. Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy,

Rough Draft. Martin Nicolaus, transi. London: Allen Lane. (Manuscript
written in 1857-1858; first pub. in German 1939.)

Bibliography 453

1977. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. Vol. 1. David Fernbach,

transi. Marx Library. New York: Vintage-Random House. (First pub. in
German 1867.)

MASSELMAN, GEORGE 1963. The Cradle of Colonialism. New Haven, CT: Yale
University.

Mathew, Gervase 1963. The East African Coast Until the Coming of the
Portuguese. In The History of East Africa, Vol. I. Roland Oliver and
Gervase Mathew, eds. Pp. 94— 127. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

MAUDE, H. E. 1968. Of Islands and Men: Studies in Pacific History.
Melbourne: Oxford University Press.

MAUNY, RAYMOND 1961. Tableau géographique de l'ouest africain au Moyen
Age, d'après les sources ecrites, la tradition et l'archéologie.
Mémoires de l'Institut Fran?ais d'Afrique Noire, No. 61, Dakar.

MAURO, FREDERIC 1961. Toward an 'Intercontinental Model': European
Overseas Expansion Between 1500-1800. Economic History Review 14: 1 —
17.

1967. L'expansion européenne (1600—1870). Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France.

MEGGERS, BETTY J. 1966. Ecuador. New York: Praeger.

MEGGERS, BETTY J., and CLIFFORD EVANS, eds. 1963. Aboriginal Culture
Development in Latin America: An Interpretive Review. Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 146. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution.

MEGGITT, MERVYN J. 1962. Desert People: A Study of the Walbiri
Aborigines of Central Australia. Sydney: Angus and Robertson.

MEHRING, FRANZ 1935. Karl Marx, the Story of His Life. New York: Covici,
Friede.

MEILINK-ROELOFSZ, M.A.P. 1962. Asian Trade and European Influence in the
Indonesian Archipelago Between 1500 and About 1630. The Hague: M.
Nijhoff.

MEILLASSOUX, CLAUDE 1960. Essai d'interpretation du phénomène économique
dans les sociétés traditionelles d'auto-subsistence. Cahiers d'?tudes
Africaines, No. 4: 38-67.

1972. From Reproduction to Production: A Marxist Approach to Economic
Anthropology. Economy and Society 1: 93-105.

1973. The Social Organization of the Peasantry: The Economic Basis of

Kinship. Journal of Peasant Studies 1: 81—90.

1974. Are There Castes in India? Economy and Society 2: 89— 111.

MEILLASSOUX, CLAUDE, ed. 1971. The Development of Indigenous Trade and
Markets in West Africa. London: Oxford University Press.

1975. L'esclavage en Afrique Précoloniale. Paris: Fran?ois Maspéro.

MENCHER, JOAN 1974. The Caste System Upside Down: Or the Not So
Mysterious East. Current Anthropology 15: 469-494.

MENDELS, FRANKLIN F. 1972. Proto-Industrialization: The First Phase of
the Industrialization Process. Journal of Economic History 32: 241-261.

MERRIMAN, ROBERT O. 1926. The Bison and the Fur-Trade. Departments of
History and Political and Economic Science in Queen's University,
Bulletin 53, Kingston, Ontario.

MEYEROWITZ, EVA L. R. 1951. The Sacred State of the Akan. London: Faber
and Faber.

MILLER, ERIC 1954. Caste and Territory in Malabar. American
Anthropologist 56: 410-420.

454 Bibliography

MILLER, J. INNIS 1969. The Spice Trade of the Roman Empire, 29 B.C. to
A.D. 641. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

MILLER, JOSEPH C. 1973. Requiem for the 'Jaga.' Cahiersd'Etudes
Africaines 13:

121-149.

1975. Kings and Kinsmen: Early Mbundu States in Angola. London:

Oxford University Press.

1976. The Slave Trade in Congo and Angola. In The African Diaspora:

Interpretive Essays. Martin L. Kilson and Robert I. Rotberg, eds. Pp.
75— 113. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

MILLER, SOLOMON 1967. Hacienda to Plantation in Northern Peru: The
Processes of Proletarianization of a Tenant Farmer Society. In
Contemporary Change in Traditional Societies, Vol. 3: Mexican and
Peruvian Communities. Julian H. Steward, ed. Pp. 133—225. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.

MILWARD, A., and S. B. SAUL 1977. The Development of the Economics of
Continental Europe. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

MINGAY, G. E. 1973. English Landed Society in the Eighteenth Century.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

MINTZ, SIDNEY W. 1956. Ca?amelar: The Subculture of a Rural Sugar
Plantation Proletariat. In The People of Puerto Rico. Julian Steward, et
al. Pp. 314—417. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

1959a. Internal Market Systems as Mechanisms of Social Articulation. In

Intermediate Societies, Social Mobility, and Communication. Proceedings
of the 1959 Annual Spring Meeting of the American Ethnological Society.
Verne

F. Ray, ed. Pp. 20—30. Seattle: University of Washington.

1959b. The Plantation as a Socio-Cultural Type. In Plantation Systems of

the New World. Angel Palerm and Vera Rubin, eds. Pp. 42-49. Social
Science Monographs VII, Pan American Union. Washington, DC: Pan American
Union.

1961. The Question of Caribbean Peasantries: A Comment. Caribbean

Studies 1: 31-34.

1973.ANoteon the Definition ofPeasantry. Journal of Peasant Studies 1:

91-106.

1974. Caribbean Transformation. Chicago: Aldine.

1979?. Slavery and the Rise of Peasantry. Historical Reflections 6:

215-242.

1979b. Time, Sugar and Sweetness. Marxist Perspectives 2: 56—73.

MINTZ, SIDNEY W., and RICHARD PRICE 1976. An Anthropological Approach to
the Study of Afro-American History: A Caribbean Perspective.
Philadelphia: ISHI.

MOHR, E. C. J. 1933. Tropical Soil Forming Processes and the Development
of Tropical Soils with Special Reference to Java and Sumatra. Peking:
National Geological Survey of China.

1944. The Soils of Equatorial Regions. Ann Arbor, MI: Edwards Brothers.

MOORE, BARRINGTON, JR., 1966. Social Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston:
Beacon Press.

1978. Injustice: The Social Bases of Obedience and Revolt. White Plains,

NY: M. E. Sharpe.

MORELAND, W. H. 1963. The Agrarian System of Moslem India. Bombay:
Oriental Book Reprint Corporation. (First pub. in 1929.)

MORENO FRAGINALS, MANUEL 1978. El ingenio: complejo económico social

Bibliography 455

cubano del azúcar. 2 vols. La Habana: Editorial de Ciencias Sociales.

MORGAN, EDMUND S 1975. American Slavery—American Freedom: The Ordeal of
Colonial Virginia. New York: W. W. Norton.

M?RNER, MAGNUS 1973. The Spanish American Hacienda: A Survey of Recent
Research and Debate. Hispanic American Historical Review 53: 183—216.

MORRIS, MORRIS D. I960. The Recruitment of an Industrial Labor Force in
India, with British and American Comparisons. Comparative Studies in
Society and History 2: 305-328.

1963. Towards a Reinterpretation of Nineteenth Century Indian Economic
History. Journal of Economic History 23: 606-618. (Reprinted with
critical comments by Torn Matsui, Bipan Chandra, and T. Raychaudhuri,
Indian Economic and Social History Review, 1968: 1—100, 319—388.)

1965. The Emergence of an Industrial Labor Force in India: A Study of
the

Bombay Cotton Mills 1854—1947. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.

MORRIS, MORRIS D., and BURTON STEIN 1961. The Economic History of India:
A Bibliographic Essay. Journal of Economic History 21: 179—207.

MORTON-WILLIAMS, PETER 1964. The Oyo Yoruba and the Atlantic Slave
Trade, 1670— 1830. Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria 3:
24-45.

1965. The Fulani Penetration into Nupe and Yoruba in the Nineteenth

Century. In Political Systems and the Distribution of Power. Michael
Banton, ed. Pp. 1—24. Association of Social Anthropologists, Monograph
No. 2. London: Tavistock Publications.

1967. The Yoruba Kingdom of Oyo in the Nineteenth Century. In West

African Kingdoms in the Nineteenth Century. Daryll Forde and Phyllis
Kaberry, eds. Pp. 36—69. London: Oxford University Press.

1969. The Influence of Habitat and Trade on the Polities of Oyo and

Ashanti. In Man in Africa. Mary Douglas and Phyllis Kaberry, eds. Pp.
79-98. London: Tavistock Publications.

MOZI?O. JOS? MARIANO 1970. Noticias de Nutka: An Account ofNootka Sound
in 1792. American Ethnological Society, Monograph No. 50. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.

MUDENCE, S. I. 1974. The Role of Foreign Trade in the Rozvi Empire: A
Reappraisal. Journal of African History 15: 373—391.

MUKHERJEE, RAMKRISHNA 1958. The Rise and Fall of the East India Company:
A Sociological Appraisal. Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag der
Wissenschaften.

MUKHERJEE, S. N. 1970. Class, Caste and Politics in Calcutta, 1815-38.
In Elites in South Asia. E. R. Leach and S. N. Mukherjee, eds. Pp.
38—78. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

MURDOCK, GEORGE P. 1949. Social Structure. New York: Macmillan.

MURPHEY, RHOADS 1977. The Outsiders: The Western Experience in India and
China. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

MURPHY, ROBERT F. 1958. Matrilocality and Patrilineality in Mundurucu
Society. American Anthropologist 58: 414-434.

1960. Headhunters' Heritage: Social and Economic Change Among the

Mundurucú Indians. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.

MURRA, John V. 1972. El control 'vertical' de un máximo de pisos
ecológicos en la economía de las sociedades andinas. In I?igo Ortiz de
Zú?iga, visitador, visita de la provincia de León de Huánuco en 1562,
Vol. 1. John V. Murra, ed. Pp. 427—476. Documentos para la Historia y
Etnología de Huánuco y la Selva

456 Bibliography

Central. Huánuco, Peru: Universidad Hermilio Valdizán.

1975. Formaciones económicas y políticas dei mundo andino. Lima:

Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.

NACLA-East Apparel Project, North American Congress for Latin America
1977. Capital on the Move: An Overview. NACLA's Latin American and
Empire Report 11: 2-3.

NASH, GARY B. 1974. Red, White, and Black: The Peoples of Early America.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Nehnevajsa, Jiri, and Albert Frances 1959. Automation and
Stratification. In Automation and Society. Howard B. Jacobson and Joseph
S. Roucek, eds. Pp. 394-415. New York: Philosophical Library.

NEKICH, SANDRA 1974. The Feast of the Dead: The Origin of the
Indian-White Trade Ceremonies in the West. Western Canadian Journal of
Anthropology 4: 1-20.

NELL, EDWARD 1973. Economics: The Revival of Political Economy. In
Ideology in Social Science: Readings in Critical Social Theory. Robin
Blackburn, ed. Pp. 76—95. New York: Vintage Books/Random House.

NEWELL, WILLIAM H. 1974. Comment on "The Caste System Upside Down," by
Joan P. Mencher. Current Anthropology 15: 487—488.

NEWITT, MALYN D. D. 1973. Portuguese Settlement on the Zambesi:
Exploration, Land Tenure and Colonial Rule in East Africa. New York:
Africana.

NIKOLINAKOS, MARIOS 1975. Notes Towards a General Theory of Migration in
Late Capitalism. Race and Class 17: 5-17.

NORTH, DOUGLASS C. 1961. The Economic Growth of the United States
17901860. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

NORTHRUP, DAVID 1972. The Growth of Trade Among the Igbo Before 1800.
Journal of African History 13: 217—236.

NUGENT, David 1980. Closed Systems and Contradiction: The Kachin In and
Out of History. Manuscript, files of the author. Department of
Anthropology, Columbia University, New York.

OBERG, KALERVO 1973. The Social Economy of the Tlingit Indians. American
Ethnological Society, Monograph No. 55. Seattle: University of
Washington.

O'CONNOR, JAMES 1974. The Corporations and the State: Essays in the
Theory of Capitalism and Imperialism. New York: Harper & Row.

O'LAUGHLIN, BRIDGET 1975. Marxist Approaches in Anthropology. Annual
Review of Anthropology 4: 341 — 370.

OLIEN, MICHAEL D. 1970. The Negro in Costa Rica: The Role of an Ethnic
Minority in a Developing Society. Developing Nations Monograph Series,
No. 3. Winston-Salem, NC: Overseas Research Center, Wake Forest
University.

OLIVEIRA MARQUES, A. H. DE 1972. History of Portugal. 2 vols. New York:
Columbia University Press.

OLIVER, DOUGLAS L. 1962. The Pacific Islands. Revised edition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

OLIVER, ROLAND A. 1970. The Problem of Bantu Expansion. In Papers in
African Prehistory. J. D. Fage and R. A. Oliver, eds. Pp. 141 — 156.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

OLIVER, ROLAND A., and BRIAN FAGAN 1975. Africa in the Iron Age, 500
B.C. to A.D. 1400. London: Cambridge University Press.

OLIVER, ROLAND A., and J. D. FAGE 1962. A Short History of Africa. New
York: New York University Press.

Bibliography 457

OLIVER, SYMMES C. 1974. Ecology and Cultural Continuity as Contributing
Factors in the Social Organization of the Plains Indians. In Man in
Adaptation: The Cultural Present. 2d edition. Yehudi A. Cohen, ed. Pp.
302-322. Chicago: Aldine.

OLLMAN, BERTELL 1976. Alienation. 2d edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

ONSELEN, CHARLES VAN 1976. Chibaro: African Mine Labour in Southern
Rhodesia 1900—1933. London: Pluto Press.

1979. The World the Mineowners Made: Social Themes in the Economic

Transformation of the Witwatersrand, 1886-1914. Review 3: 289-302.

ORIGO, IRIS 1955. The Domestic Enemy: The Eastern Slaves in Tuscany in
the 14th and 15th Centuries. Speculum 30: 321 — 366.

1957. The Merchant of Prato, Francesco Di Marco Datini, 1335— 1410.

London: Jonathan Cape.

ORLOVE, BENJAMIN 1977. Integration Through Production: The Use of
Zonation in Espinar. American Ethnologist 4: 84-101.

ORTEGA Y GASSET, JOSE 1937. Invertebrate Spain. New York: W. W. Norton.
(First pub. in Spanish 1921.)

ORTIZ, FERNANDO 1947. Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar. New York:
Knopf. (First pub. in Spanish in 1940.)

OSGOOD E. S. 1957. The Day of the Cattleman. Chicago: Phoenix Books.

OSTROGORSKY, GEORG 1957. History of the Byzantine State. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press. (First pub. in German 1940.)

OTTENBERG. SIMON 1958. Ibo Oracles and Intergroup Relations.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 14: 295-317.

OTTERBEIN, KEITH F. 1964. Why the Iroquois Won: An Analysis of Iroquois
Military Tactics. Ethnohistory 11: 56—63.

OWEN, E. R. J. 1969. Cotton and the Egyptian Economy 1820-1914: A Study
in Trade and Development. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

OWEN, ROGER, and BOB SUTCLIFFE, eds. 1972. Studies in the Theory of
Imperialism. London: Longman.

PALERM, ANGEL 1949. El industrialismo y la decadencia. Presencia (Mexico
City), Nos. 5-6: 38-80.

1979. Sobre la formación dei sistema colonial: apuntes para una
discusión. !n Ensayos sobre el desarrollo económico de México y América
Latina ( I 500— 1975). Enrique Florescano, ed. Pp. 93— 127. Mexico City:
Fondo de Cultura Económica.

PALMER, ROBIN, and NEIL PARSONS, eds. 1977. The Roots of Rural Poverty
in Central and Southern Africa. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London:
University of California Press.

PARRY, J. H. 1966. The Establishment of the European Hegemony 1415 -1715
: Trade and Exploration in the Age of the Renaissance. 3d revised
edition. New York: Harper Torchbooks/Harper & Row.

1971. Trade and Dominion: The European Overseas Empires in the

Eighteenth Century. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

1973. The Spanish Seaborne Empire. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

PARTRIDGE) WILLIAM L. 1979. Banana County in the Wake of the United
Fruit: Social and Economic Linkages. American Ethnologist 6: 491-509.

PECKHAM, HOWARD H. 1970. Pontiac and the Indian Uprising. New York:
Russell and Russell. (First pub. 1947.)

458 Bibliography

PELZER, KARL 1945. Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic Tropics: Land
Utilization and Agricultural Colonization in Southeast Asia. American
Geographical Society, Special Publication No. 29. New York: American
Geographical Society.

PENDLE, GEORGE 1963. A History of Latin America. Baltimore: Penguin.

PERDUE, THEDA 1979. Slavery and the Evolution of Cherokee Society
15401866. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.

PERKIN, HAROLD J. 1969. The Origins of Modern English Society 1780—1880.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

PHILLIPS, PAUL C. 1961. The Fur Trade. 2 vols. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press

PHILLIPSON, D. W. 1977. The Spread of the Bantu Language. Scientific
American 286: 106-114.

PIKE, Ruth 1966. Enterprise and Adventure: The Genoese in Seville and
the Opening of the New World. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

PIRENNE, HENRI 1937. Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe. New
York: Harcourt Brace. (First pub. in French 1933.)

PLATT, D. C. M. 1973. Latin America and British Trade, 1806- 1914. The
Merchant Adventurers Series. New York: Harper & Row/Barnes & Noble.

POLANYI, KARL 1957. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic
Origins of Our Time. Boston: Beacon Press. (First pub. 1944.)

1966. Dahomey and the Slave Trade. American Ethnological Society,

Monograph No. 42. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

POLLARD, SIDNEY 1965. The Genesis of Modern Management: A Study of the
Industrial Revolution in Great Britain. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

POLLOCK, N. C., and SWANZIE AGNEW 1963. An Historical Geography of South
Africa. London: Longmans.

POPPINO, ROLLIE 1968. Brazil: The Land and People. London: Oxford
University Press.

PORTES, ALEJANDRO 1978. Migration and Underdevelopment. Politics and
Society 8: 1—48.

POTTER, JACK M. 1976. Thai Peasant Social Structure. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

POULANTZAS, Nicos 1973. Political Power and Social Classes. London: New
Left Books. (First pub. in French 1968.)

1978. Classes in Contemporary Capitalism. London: Verso. (First pub. in

French 1974.)

Prawer, Joshua, and Shmuel N. Eisenstadt 1968. Feudalism. In
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. 5. David Sills,
ed. Pp. 393-403. New York: Macmillan and Free Press.

QUAIN, BUELL 1937. The Iroquois. In Cooperation and Competition Among
Primitive Peoples. Margaret Mead, ed. Pp. 240-281. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

RAGATZ, LOWELL J. 1928. The Fall of the Planter Class in the British
Caribbean, 1763—1833. New York: Century.

RAMOS, ALCIDA R. 1978. Mundurucú: Social Change or False Problem?
American Ethnologist 5: 675-689.

RANDLE, MARTHA C. 1951. Iroquois Women, Then and Now. Bulletin of the
Bureau of American Ethnology, No. 149: 167-180.

RANGER, TERENCE O., ed. 1968. Aspects of Central African History.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

Bibliography 459

RAWICK, GEORGE P. 1972. From Sundown to Sunup: The Making of the Black
Community. Contributions in Afro-American and African Studies, No. 11.
Westport, CT: Greenwood.

RAWSKI, EVELYN SAKAKIDA 1972. Agricultural Change and the Peasant
Economy of South China. Harvard East Asian Series, No. 66. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

RAY, ARTHUR J. 1974. Indians in the Fur Trade: Their Role as Hunters,
Trappers and Middlemen in the Lands Southwest of Hudson Bay 1660— 1870.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

RAYCHAUDHURI, TAPAN, ed. 1960. Contributions to Indian Economic History,
Vol. 1. Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay.

REDFORD, ARTHUR 1976. Labour Migration in England, 1800-1850. 3d
edition. Manchester: Manchester University Press. (First pub. 1926.)

Rees, ALBERT 1961. Real Wages in Manufacturing: 1890—1914. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

REICHEL-DOLMATOFF, GERARDO 1961. The Agricultural Basis of the Sub-
Andean Chiefdoms of Colombia. In The Evolution of Horticultural Systems
in Native South America: Causes and Consequences. A Symposium. Johannes
Wilbert, ed. Pp. 83—100. Supplement Publication No. 2, Antropológica.
Caracas: Sociedad de Ciencias Naturales La Salle.

1965. Colombia. New York: Praeger.

REY, PIERRE-PHILIPPE 1976. Les alliances de classes. Paris: Fran?ois
Maspéro.

REYNOLDS, ROBERT L. 1957. The Mediterranean Frontiers, 1000- 1400. In
The Frontier in Perspective. Walker D. Wyman and Clifton B. Kroeber,
eds. Pp. 21-34. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

1961. Europe Emerges. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

RIBEIRO, DARCY 1968. The Civilizational Process. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.

RICH, E. E. 1955. Russia and the Colonial Fur Trade. Economic History
Review 7: 307-328.

1959. History of the Hudson's Bay Company 1670—1870. 2 vols. London:
Hudson's Bay Record Society.

RICHARDS, ALAN R. 1977. Primitive Accumulation in Egypt, 1798—1882.
Review 1: 3—49.

RICHARDS, CARA B. 1957. Matriarchy or Mistake: The Role of Iroquois
Women Through Time. In Cultural Stability and Cultural Change.
Proceedings of the 1957 Annual Spring Meeting of the American
Ethnological Society. Verne F. Ray, ed. Pp. 36—45. Seattle: American
Ethnological Society, University of Washington.

RICHARDS, D. S., ed. 1970. Islam and the Trade of Asia: A Colloquium.
Oxford: Bruno Cassirer; Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

RICHARDS, W. 1980. The Import of Firearms into West Africa in the 18th
Century. Journal of African History 21: 43-59.

ROBEQUAIN, CHARLES 1944. The Economic Development of French Indo-China.
London: Oxford University Press. (First pub. in French 1939.)

ROBERTS, ANDREW D. 1973. A History of the Bemba: Political Growth and
Change in North-eastern Zambia Before 1900. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.

ROBINSON, K. R. 1966. The Archaeology of the Rozwi. In The Zambezian
Past: Studies in Central African History. EricT. Stokes and R. Brown,
eds. Pp. 3—27.

460 Bibliography

Manchester: University of Manchester Press.

ROBINSON, RONALD 1972. Non-European Foundations of European Imperialism
: Sketch for a Theory of Collaboration. In Studies in the Theory of
Imperialism. Roger Owen and Bob Sutcliffe, eds. Pp. 118— 140. London:
Longman.

RODINSON, MAXIME 1966. Islam et capitalisme. Paris: Editions du Seuil.

RODNEY, WALTER 1970. A History of the Upper Guinea Coast. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

ROFF, WILLIAM R. 1967. The Origins of Malay Nationalism. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.

ROGERS, EDWARD S. 1969. Band Organization Among the Indians of Eastern
Subarctic Canada. In Contributions to Anthropology: Band Societies.
Proceedings of the Conference on Band Organization, Ottawa, 1965. David
Damas, ed. Pp. 21-50. National Museum of Canada Bulletin No. 228,
Anthropological Series No. 84. Ottawa: National Museums of Canada.

ROGIN, MICHAEL P. 1975. Fathers and Children: Andrew Jackson and the
Subjugation of the American Indian. New York: Knopf.

ROHRBOUGH, MALCOLM J. 1968. The Land Office Business: The Settlement and
Administration of American Public Lands, 1789—1837. New York: Oxford
University Press.

ROKKAN, STEIN 1975. Dimensions of State Formation and Nation-Building: A
Possible Paradigm for Research on Variations Within Europe. In The
Formation of National States in Western Europe. Charles Tilly, ed. Pp.
562-600. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

ROLLWAGEN, JACK 1980. New Directions in Urban Anthropology: Building an
Ethnography and an Ethnology of the world system. In Urban Life:
Readings in Urban Anthropology. George Gmelch and Walter P. Zenner, eds.
Pp. 370382. New York: St. Martin's Press.

ROSAS, PAUL 1943. Caste and Class in India. Science and Society 7: 141—
167.

ROSEBERRY, WILLIAM 1978. Historical Materialism and The People of Puerto
Rico. In Social Anthropology in Puerto Rico. Special issue. Robert
Duncan, ed. Revista Interamericana (San Germán, Puerto Rico) 8: 26-36.

ROSECRANCE, RICHARD N. 1964. The Radical Culture of Australia. /?The
Founding of New Societies. Louis Hartz, ed. Pp. 275—318. New York:
Harcourt, Brace and World.

ROSENBERG, HANS 1967. Grosse Depression und Bismarckzeit:
Wirtschaftsablauf, Gesellschaft und Politik in Mitteleuropa.
Ver?ffentlichungen der Historischen Komission zu Berlin beim
Friedrich-Meinecke-Institut der Freien Universit?t Berlin, Vol. 24;
Publikationen zur Geschichte der Industrialisierung, Vol. 2. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter.

ROSENBERG, HARRIET G. 1978. The Experience of Underdevelopment: Change
in a French Alpine Village from the Old Regime to the Present. Ph.D
dissertation, Departments of Anthropology and History, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

ROSENBLUM, GERALD 1973. Immigrant Workers: Their Impact on American
Labor Radicalism. New York: Basic Books.

ROSMAN, ABRAHAM, and PAULA RUBEL 1971. Feasting with Mine Enemy: Rank
and Exchange Among Northwest Coast Societies. New York: Columbia
University Press.

ROSTOW, WALT WHITMAN 1960. The Stages of Economic Growth: A NonCommunist
Manifesto. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bibliography 461

1975. How It All Began: Origins of the Modern Economy. New York:

McGraw-Hill.

1978. The World Economy: History and Prospect. Austin: University of

Texas Press.

ROTBERG, ROBERT I., and H. NEVILLE CHITTICK, eds. 1975. East Africa and
the Orient: Cultural Syntheses in Pre-Colonial Times. New York:
Africana.

ROTHENBERG, DIANE 1976. Erosion of Power: An Economic Basis for the
Selective Conservatism of Seneca Women in the Nineteenth Century.
Western Canadian Journal of Anthropology 6: 106- 122.

ROWE, JOHN H. 1957. The Incas Under Spanish Colonial Institutions.
Hispanic American Historical Review 37: 155—199.

ROWE, William L. 1973. Caste, Kinship, and Association in Urban India.
In Urban Anthropology. Aidan Southall, ed. Pp. 211-249. New York: Oxford
University Press.

ROWTHORN, BOB 1976. Late Capitalism. New Left Review, No. 98: 59—83.

RUSSELL, JOSIAH C. 1958. Late Ancient and Medieval Populations.
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, Vol.
43, No. 3.

1972. Medieval Regions and Their Cities. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.

RUYLE, EUGENE 1973. Slavery, Surplus, and Stratification on the
Northwest Coast: The Ethnoenergetics of an Incipient Stratification
System. Current Anthropology 14: 603—631.

SAHLINS, MARSHALL D. 1960. Political Power and the Economy in Primitive
Society. In Essays in the Science of Culture in Honor of Leslie A.
White. Gertrude E. Dole and Robert L. Carneiro, eds. Pp. 390-415. New
York: Thomas Y. Crowell.

1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.

SAHLINS, MARSHALL D., and ELMAN R. SERVICE, eds. 1960. Evolution and
Culture. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

SAINI, KRISHAN G. 1971. A Case of Aborted Economic Growth: India, 1860—
1913. Journal of Asian History 5: 89—118.

SANDERS, WILLIAM T., and JOSEPH MARINO 1970. New World Prehistory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

SANDERS, WILLIAM T., and BARBARA J. PRICE 1968. Mesoamerica: The
Evolution of a Civilization. New York: Random House.

SANSOM, ROBERT L. 1970. The Economics of Insurgency in the Mekong Delta
of Vietnam. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

SANTAMAR?A, DANIEL J. 1977. La propriedad de la tierra y la condición
social del indio en el Alto Perú, 1780— 1810. Desarrollo Económico:
Revista de Ciencias Sociales (Buenos Aires, Argentina) 17: 253-271.

SASSEN-KOOB, SASKIA 1978. The International Circulation of Resources and
Development: The Case of Migrant Labour. Development and Change 9:
509-545.

1981. Notes Towards a Conceptualization of Immigrant Labor. Social

Problems, 29: 65-85.

SAUER, CARL O. 1966. The Early Spanish Main. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.

SCHAPERA, ISAAC 1940. The Political Organization of the Ngwato of
Bechuana- land Protectorate. In African Political Systems. Meyer Fortes
and E. E. Evans- Pritchard, eds. Pp. 56-82. London: Oxford University
Press.

462 Bibliography

SCHERMERHORN, RICHARD A. 1978. Ethnic Plurality in India. Tucson:
University of Arizona Press.

ScHLUMBOHM, J?RGEN 1977. Produktionsverh?ltnisse—Produktivkr?fte— Krisen
in der Proto-Industrialisierung. In Industrialisierung vor der
Industrialisierung: Gewerbliche Warenproduktion auf dem Land in der
Formationsperiode des Kapitalismus. Peter Kriedte, Hans Medick, and
Jürgen Schlum- bohm, eds. Pp. 194—257. Ver?ffentlichungen des
Max-Planck-Instituts ür Geschichte 53. G?ttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht.

SCHMIDT, ALFRED 1971. The Concept of Nature in Marx. London: New Left
Books.

SCHNEIDER, DAVID M. 1972. What Is Kinship All About? ln Kinship Studies
in the Morgan Centennial Year. Priscilla Reining, ed. Pp. 32—63.
Washington, DC: Anthropological Society of Washington.

SCHNEIDER, JANE 1977. Was There a Pre-Capitalist World System? Peasant
Studies 6: 20-29.

SCHNEIDER, JANE, and PETER SCHNEIDER 1976. Culture and Political Economy
in Western Sicily. New York: Academic Press.

SCHUMPETER, JOSEPH 1939. Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and
Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process. 2 vols. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

SCOBIE, JAMES R. 1964. Revolution on the Pampas: A Social History of
Argentine Wheat, 1860—1910. Austin: University of Texas Press.

SCOTT, JOAN WALLACH 1974. The Glassworkers of Carmaux: French Craftsmen
and Political Action in a Nineteenth-Century City. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

SECOY, FRANK R. 1953. Changing Military Patterns on the Great Plains
(17th Century Through Early 19th Century). American Ethnological
Society, Monograph No. 21. New York: J. J. Augustin.

SEDDON, DAVID, ed. 1974. Relations of Production: Marxist Approaches to
Economic Anthropology. London: Frank Cass.

SEE, HENRI 1937. Origen y evolución del capitalismo moderno. Mexico
City: Fondo de Cultura Económica. (First pub. in French 1926.)

SELLNOW, IRMGARD 1961. Grundprinzipien einer Periodisierung der
Urgeschichte. Berlin: Akademie Verlag.

SEREN?, EMILIO 1968. II capitalismo nelle Campagne (1860-1900). Turin:
Einaudi.

SERVICE, ELMAN R. 1962. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary
Perspective. New York: Random House.

1968. War and Our Contemporary Ancestors. In War: The Anthropology

of Armed Conflict and Aggression. Morton H. Fried, Marvin Harris, and
Robert F. Murphy, eds. Pp. 160—167. Garden City, NY: Natural History
Press.

SHANIN, TEODOR 1978. The Peasants Are Coming: Migrants Who Labour,
Peasants Who Travel, and Marxists Who Write. Race and Class 19: 277-288.

SHAPIRO, SEYMOUR 1967. Capital and the Cotton Industry in the Industrial
Revolution. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

SHARP, LAURISTON, and LUCIENM. HANKS 1978. Bang Chan: Social History of
a Rural Community in Thailand. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

SHARP, LAURISTON, HAZEL M. HAUCK, KAMOL JANLEKHA, and ROBERT B. TEXTOR
1953. Siamese Rice Village: A Preliminary Study of Bang Chan, 1948-
1949. Bangkok: Cornell Research Center.

SHARP, WILLIAM FREDERICK 1976. Slavery on the Spanish Frontier:
TheColom-

Bibliography 463

bian Chocó 1680—1810. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

SHARROCK, SUSAN R. 1974. Crees, Cree-Assiniboines, and Assiniboines:
Interethnic Social Organization on the Far Northern Plains. Ethnohistory
21: 95-122.

SHELVANKAR, K. S. 1943. The Problem of India. Harmondsworth: Penguin
Books.

SHINEBERG, DOROTHY 1966. The Sandalwood Trade in Melanesian Economics,
1841—65. Journal of Pacific History 1: 129—146.

1967. They Came for Sandalwood: A Study of the Sandalwood Trade in

the South-West Pacific 1830-1865. Carlton: Melbourne University Press.

1970. Guns and Men in Melanesia. Journal of Pacific History 5: 61-82.

SHIOZAWA, KIMIO 1965. Les historiens japonais et le mode de production
asiatique. La Pensée, No. 122: 63—78.

SIDER, GERALD M. 1970. The Political History of the Lumbee Indians of
Robeson County, North Carolina: A Case Study of Ethnic Political
Affiliations. Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Anthropology, New School
of Social Research, New York.

SILVERBERG, JAMES ed. 1968. Social Mobility in the Caste System in
India. Comparative Studies in Society and History: Supplement III.

SIMKIN, C. G. F. 1968. The Traditional Trade of Asia. London: Oxford
University Press.

Simons, H. J. 1949. Race Relations and Policies in Southern and Eastern
Africa. In Most of the World: The Peoples of Africa, Latin America, and
the East Today. Ralph Linton, ed. Pp. 271-330. New York: Columbia
University Press.

SIMONS, H. J., and R. E. SIMONS 1969. Class and Colour in South Africa.
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

SINDER, LEON 1964. Caste Instability in Moghul India. Seoul: Chung-ang
University.

SlNHA, SURAJIT 1962. Status Formation and Rajput Myth in Tribal Central
India. Man in India 42: 35—80.

SISKIND, JANET 1978. Kinship and Mode of Production. American
Anthropologist 80: 860-872.

SKOCPOL, THEDA 1979. States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative
Analysis of France, Russia, and China. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

SMELSER, NEIL J. 1959. Social Change in the Industrial Revolution: An
Application of Theory to the British Cotton Industry. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

SMIT, J. W. 1975. Holland: Comment. In Failed Transitions to Modem
Industrial Society: Renaissance Italy and Seventeenth Century Holland.
First International Colloquium 1974. Frederick Krantz and Paul M.
Hohenberg, eds. Pp. 61—63. Montreal: Interuniversity Centre for European
Studies.

SMITH, ABBOT E. 1947. Colonists in Bondage: White Servitude and Convict
Labor in America, 1607—1776. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press.

SMITH, ABDULLAHI 1972. The Early States of the Central Sudan. In History
of West Africa. J. F. Ade Ajayi and Michael Crowder, eds.. Vol. 1. Pp.
158-201. New York: Columbia University Press.

SMITH, C. T. 1967. An Historical Geography of Western Europe Before
1800. Praeger Advanced Geographies. New York: Praeger.

SMITH, M. G. 1965. The Plural Society in the British West Indies.
Berkeley and

464 Bibliography

Los Angeles: University of California Press.

SNOW, DEAN 1976. Abenaki Fur Trade in the Sixteenth Century. Western
Canadian Journal of Anthropology 6: 3— 11.

SOUTHALL, AIDAN W. 1953. Alur Society: A Study in Processes and Types of
Domination. Cambridge, MA: W. Heffer.

SPALDING, KAREN W. 1967. Indian Rural Society in Colonial Peru: The
Example of Huarochiri. Ph.D. dissertation. Department of History,
University of California, Berkeley.

1974. De indio a campesino: Cambios en la estructura social del Peru

colonial. Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.

SPEAR, PERCIVAL 1963. The Nabobs: A Study of the Social Life of the
English in Eighteenth Century India. London: Humphrey Milford/Oxford
University Press.

1970. The Mughal Mansabdari System. In Elites in South Asia. E. R. Leach

and S. N. Mukherjee, eds. Pp. 1-15. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

SPODEK, HOWARD 1974. Rulers, Merchants and Other Groups in the
City-States of Saurashtra, India, Around 1800. Comparative Studies in
Society and History 16: 448-470.

SRINIVAS, M. N. 1959. The Dominant Caste in Rampura. American
Anthropologist 61: 1-16.

1961. Social Change in Modern India. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.

STAVENHAGEN, RODOLFO 1975. Social Classes in Agrarian Societies. Garden
City, NY: Anchor Press/Doubleday.

STEENSGARD, NIELS 1973. Carracks, Caravans, and Companies: The
Structural Crisis in the European-Asian Trade in the Early 17th Century.
Monograph Series, Vol. 17. Copenhagen: Scandinavian Institute of Asian
Studies.

STEIN, STANLEY J., and BARBARA STEIN 1970. The Colonial Heritage of
Latin America. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

STENTON, DORIS M. 1952. English Society in the Early Middle Ages
(10661307). 2d revised edition. Pelican History of England, Vol. 3.
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

STERNBERG, FRITZ 1926. Der Imperialismus. Berlin: Malik.

STEVENSON, ROBERT F. 1968. Population and Political Systems in Tropical
Africa. New York: Columbia University Press.

STEWARD, JULIAN H. 1947. American Culture History in the Light of South
America. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 3: 85- 107.

STEWARD, JULIAN H., ed. 1946—1959. Handbook of South American Indians. 7
vols. U.S. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 143. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

1956. The People of Puerto Rico: A Study in Social Anthropology.

Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

STEWARD, JULIAN H? and Louis G. FARON 1959. Native Peoples of South
America. New York: McGraw-Hill.

STEWART, WATT 1951. Chinese Bondage in Peru: A History of the Chinese
Coolie in Peru, 1849—1874. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

1964. Keith and Costa Rica: The Biographical Study of Minor Cooper

Keith. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

STRACHEY, JOHN 1935. Nature of the Capitalist Crisis. New York: Covici
Friede.

STRAYER, JOSEPH R. 1970. On the Medieval Origins of the Modern State.

Bibliography 465

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

STRICKON, ARNOLD 1960. The Grandsons of the Gauchos: A Study in
Subcultural Persistence. Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Anthropology,
Columbia University, New York.

1965. The Euro-American Ranching Complex. In Man, Culture, and

Animals. Anthony Leeds and Andrew P. Vayda, eds. Pp. 229-258. American
Association for the Advancement of Science, Publication 78. Washington,
DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.

STURTEVANT, WILLIAM C. 1962. Spanish-Indian Relations in Southeastern
North America. Ethnohistory 9: 41-94.

1971. Creek into Seminole. In North American Indians in Historical

Perspective. Eleanor B. Leacock and Nancy O. Lurie, eds. Pp. 92— 128.
New York: Random House.

SUMMERS, ROGER 1961. The Southern Rhodesian Iron Age. Journal of African
History 2: 1 — 13.

1963. Zimbabwe: A Rhodesian Mystery. Johannesburg: Nelson.

1970. The Rhodesian Iron Age. In Papers in African Prehistory. J. D.
Fage

and R. A. Oliver, eds. Pp. 157-172. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

SUNDSTROM, LARS 1974. The Exchange Economy of Pre-Colonial Tropical
Africa. New York: St. Martin's Press. (Reprint of The Trade of Guinea,
1965).

SUTTLES, WAYNE 1960. Variation in Habitat and Culture in the Northwest
Coast. Akten des 34. Internationalen Amerikanisten-Kongresses, Vienna.
Pp. 522 — 537. Horn, Vienna: Ferdinand Berger.

SWANTON, JOHN R. 1946. The Indians of the Southeastern United States.
U.S. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 137. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

SWEEZY, PAUL M. 1942. The Theory of Capitalist Development: Principles
of Marxian Political Economy. New York: Oxford University Press.

TAWNEY, R. H. 1967. The Agrarian Problem in the Sixteenth Century. New
York: Harper & Row. (First pub. 1912.)

TAYLOR, GEORGE ROGERS 1951. The Transportation Revolution 1815—1860. The
Economic History of the United States, Vol. 4. New York: Rinehart.

TAYLOR. WILLIAM B. 1972. Landlord and Peasant in Colonial Oaxaca.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

TEGGART, FREDERICK J. 1939. Rome and China: A Study of Correlations in
Historical Events. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.

TENG, Ssu-yü, and JOHN K. FAIRBANK 1961. China's Response to the West: A
Documentary Survey 1839— 1923. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

TERRAY, EMMANUEL 1973. Technologie, état et tradition en Afrique.
Annales 28: 1331-1338.

1975. Classes and Class Consciousness in the Abron Kingdom of Gyaman.

In Marxist Analyses and Social Anthropology. Maurice Bloch, ed. Pp.
85—135. Association of Social Anthropologists, Studies No. 2. London:
Malaby Press.

Thirsk, Joan 1974. The Disappearance of the English Peasantry. Paper
presented at the Peasant Seminar, Centre of International and Area
Studies, University of London, March 15. Mimeographed version P.74/37.

THOMPSON, EDGAR T. 1975. Plantation Societies, Race Relations, and the
South : The Regimentation of Populations. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.

THOMPSON, E. P. 1966. The Making of the English Working Class. New York:
Vintage Books.

466 Bibliography

1978?. Eighteenth-Century English Society: Class Struggle Without

Class? Social History 3: 133-165.

1978b. The Poverty of Theory and Other Essays. New York and London:

Monthly Review Press.

Thompson, Leonard 1969. Cooperation and Conflict: The Zulu Kingdom and
Natal. In The Oxford History of South Africa, Vol. I: South Africa to
1870. Monica Wilson and Leonard Thompson, eds. Pp. 334-390. New York and
London: Oxford University Press.

THORNER, DANIEL 1950. Investment in Empire: British Railway and Steam
Shipping Enterprise in India, 1825-1849. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.

1964. Agricultural Cooperatives in India: A Field Report. London: Asia

Publishing House.

THORNER, DANIEL, and ALICE THORNER 1962. Land and Labour in India.
Bombay: Asia Publishing House.

THRUPP, SYLVIA L. 1962. The Merchant Class of Medieval London (1300-
1500). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

TILLY, CHARLES 1964. The Vendée: A Sociological Analysis of the
Counterrevolution of 1793. New York: Wiley.

1975. Food Supply and Public Order in Modern Europe. In The Formation of
National States in Western Europe. Charles Tilly, ed. Pp. 380-455.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

1976. Sociology, History, and the Origins of the European Proletariat.

Center for Research on Social Organization, Working Paper No. 148. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan.

TILLY, CHARLES, ed. 1975. The Formation of National States in Western
Europe. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

TINKER, HUGH 1974. A New System of Slavery: The Export of Indian Labour
Overseas 1830—1920. London: Oxford University Press.

TITIEV, MISCHA 1943. The Influence of Common Residence on the Unilateral
Classification of Kindred. American Anthropologist 45: 51 1 — 530.

TOGAN, A. ZEKI VALIDI 1939. Ibn Fadlan's Reisebericht. Abhandlungen für
die Kunde des Morgenlandes (Leipzig) 24 (3).

T?KEI, FERENC 1966. Sur le mode de production asiatique. Paris: Centre
d'?tudes et de Recherches marxistes. (First Hungarian ed. 1965; first
German transi. 1969.)

T?PFER, BERNHARD 1974. Zu einigen Grundfragen des Feudalismus. Ein
Diskussionsbeitrag. ln Feudalismus. Heide Wunder, ed. Pp. 221—254.
Munich: Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung.

TOUSSAINT, AUGUSTE 1966. History of the Indian Ocean. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

TRELEASE, ALLEN W. 1960. Indian Affairs in Colonial New York: The
Seventeenth Century. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

TREMPE, ROLANDE 1971. Les mineurs de Carmaux. Paris: ?ditions Ouvrières.

TRIGGER, BRUCE G. 1976. The Children of Aataentsic: A History of the
Huron People to 1660. 2 vols. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.

TRIGGER, BRUCE, ed. 1978. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 5:
The Northeast. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.

TRIMBERGER, ELLEN K. 1978. Revolution from Above: Military Bureaucrats
and Development in Japan, Turkey, Egypt, and Peru. New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction Books.

Bibliography 467

TURNER, BRYAN S. 1978. Marx and the End of Orientalism. Controversies in
Sociology, No. 7. London: Allen fr Unwin.

TURNER, VICTOR 1967. The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

TWICHETT, DENIS 1962. Land Tenure and the Social Order in T'ang and Sung
China. Inaugural Lecture, November 28th, 1961. London: School of
Oriental and African Studies, University of London.

UCHENDU, VICTOR C. 1965. The Igbo of Southeast Nigeria. New York: Holt,
Rinehart 6- Winston.

UDOVITCH, ABRAHAM L. 1970. Partnership and Profit in Medieval Islam.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

UDOVITCH, ABRAHAM L., ed. 1980. The Islamic Middle East, 700-1900:
Studies in Social and Economic History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

UKERS, WILLIAM H. 1935. All About Coffee. 2d edition. New York: Tea and
Coffee Trade Journal Company.

URE, ANDREW 1967. The Philosophy of Manufacturers or, an Exposition of
the Scientific, Moral, and Commercial Economy of the Factory System of
Great Britain. Reprints of Economic Classics. New York: Augustus M.
Kelley. (First pub. 1835.)

VANSINA, JAN 1962. Long Distance Trade-Routes in Central Africa. Journal
of African History 3: 375—390.

1963. Notes sur l'origine du royaume du Congo. Journal of African

History 4: 33-38.

1968. Kingdoms of the Savanna. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

VANSINA, JAN, R. MAUNY, and L. V. THOMAS, eds. 1964. The Historian in
Tropical Africa. London: Oxford University Press.

VASILIEV, L. S., and I. A. STUCHEVSKII 1967. Three Models for the Origin
and Evolution of Precapitalist Societies. Soviet Review: A Journal of
Translations 8: 26-39.

VELLUT, JEAN-LUC 1972. Notes sur le Lunda et la frontière Luso-Africaine
(1700—1900). ?tudes d'Histoire Africaine 3: 61-166.

VENABLE, VERNON 1945. Human Nature: The Marxian View. New York: Knopf.

VERCAUTEREN, FERNAND 1967. The Circulation of Merchants in Western
Europe from the 6th to the 10th Century: Economic and Cultural Aspects.
In Early Medieval Society. Sylvia L. Thrupp, ed. Pp. 185—195. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.

VERLINDEN, CHARLES 1955. L'esclavage dans l'Europe mediévale. Vol. 1 :
Penin- sule Ibérique, France. Bruges: De Tempel.

VICENS VIVES, JAIME 1969. Economic History of Spain. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. (First pub. in Spanish 1955.)

1970. Approaches to the History of Spain. Revised edition. Berkeley, Los

Angeles, London: University of California Press. (First pub. in Spanish
1952.)

VILLAMAR?N, JUAN A. 1972. Encomenderos and Indians in the Formation of
Colonial Society in the Sabana de Bogota, Colombia: 1537-1740. Ph.D.
dissertation. Department of Anthropology, Brandeis University, Waltham,
Mass.

1975. Haciendas en la Sabana de Bogota, Colombia, en la època colonial:

1539— 1810. In Haciendas, latifundios y plantaciones. Enrique
Florescano, ed. Pp. 327-345. Mexico City: Siglo XXI Editores.

VILLAMAR?N, JUAN, and JUDITH E. VILLAMAR?N 1975. Indian Labor in
Mainland Colonial Spanish America. University of Delaware Latin American
Studies

468 Bibliography

Program Occasional Papers and Monographs, No. 1. Newark: University of
Delaware Latin American Studies Program.

1979. Chibcha Settlement Patterns Under Spanish Rule 1537- 1810. In

Social Fabric and Spatial Structures in Colonial Latin America.
Dellplain Monograph Series in Latin American Studies, Vol. 1. David J.
Robinson, ed. Pp. 25—84. Syracuse, NY: Department of Geography, Syracuse
University.

VOLOSINOV, VALENTIN N. 1973. Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. New
York and London: Seminar Press. (First pub. in Russian 1930.)

VRIES, JAN DE 1974. Dutch Rural Economy in the Golden Age, 1500-1700.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

1975. Holland: Commentary: In Failed Transitions to Modem Industrial

Society: Renaissance Italy and Seventeenth Century Holland. First
International Colloqium 1974. Frederick Krantz and Paul M. Hohenberg,
eds. Pp. 55 — 57. Montreal: Interuniversity Centre for European Studies.

WADSWORTH, A. P., and JULIA DE LACY MANN 1931. The Cotton Trade and
Industrial Lancashire, 1600— 1780. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.

WAGLEY, CHARLES 1953. Amazon Town: A Study of Man in the Tropics. New
York: Macmillan.

WAKEMAN, FREDERIC, JR. 1974. Strangers at the Gate: Social Disorder in
South China 1839— 1861. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of
California Press.

1975. The Fall of Imperial China. New York: Free Press.

WALKER, MACK 1964. Germany and the Emigration, 1816—1885. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

1971. German Home Towns: Community, State, and General Estate

1648-1871. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

WALLACE, ANTHONY F. C. 1970. The Death and the Rebirth of the Senecas.
New York: Knopf.

WALLERSTEIN, IMMANUEL 1974. The Modern World-System: Capitalist
Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the
Sixteenth Century. New York: Academic Press.

1979. Kondratieff Up or Kondratieff Down? Review 2: 663—673.

WANG, YU-CH’UAN 1936. The Rise of the Land Tax and the Fall of Dynasties
in Chinese History. Pacific Affairs 9: 201—220.

WARD, R. GERARD 1972. The Pacific Beche-de-MerTrade with Special
Reference to Fiji. In Man in the Pacific Islands. R. Gerard Ward, ed.
Pp. 91—123. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

WARD, R. GERARD, ed. 1972. Man in the Pacific Islands. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

WARD, W.E.F. 1966. A History of Ghana. London: Allen 6- Unwin.

Warner, W. LLOYD 1958. A Black Civilization: A Social Study of an
Australian Tribe. Revised edition. New York: Harper & Row. (First pub.
1937.)

WARNER, W. LLOYD, and J. Low 1947. The Social System of a Modem Factory.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

WASHBURN, WILCOMB E., ed. 1964. The Indian and the White Man. Documents
in American Civilization Series. New York: Anchor Books.

WASSERSTROM, ROBERT 1977. Land and Labour in Central Chiapas: A Regional
Analysis. Development and Change 8: 441-463.

1978. Population Growth and Economic Development in Chiapas,

1524-1975. Human Ecology 6: 127-143.

WATROUS, STEPHEN D. 1966. John Ledyard's Journey Through Russia and

Bibliography 469

Siberia 1787— 1788. The Journal and Selected Letters. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

WATSON, ANDREW M. 1974. The Arab Agricultural Revolution and Its
Diffusion, 700— 1100. Journal of Economic History 34: 8-35.

WATSON, JAMES L., ed. 1980. Asian and African Systems of Slavery.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

WEBB, MALCOLM C. 1965. The Abolition of the Taboo System in Hawaii.
Journal of the Polynesian Society 74: 21-39.

WEBB, WALTER P. 1931. The Great Plains. New York: Grosset's Universal
Library.

WEBER, EUGEN 1976. Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural
France 1870—1914. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

WEBER, Max 1958. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. New
York: Scribner's. (First pub. in German 1904-1905.)

1968. On Charisma and Institution Building: Selected Papers. Shmuel N.

Eisenstadt, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

1979. Developmental Tendencies in the Situation of East Elbian Rural

Laborers. Economy and Society 8: 177—205. (First pub. in German 1894.)

WEBSTER, DAVID 1975. Warfare and the Evolution of the State: A
Reconsideration. American Antiquity 40: 464—470.

1976. On Theocracies. American Anthropologist 78: 812-828.

WEIGAND, PHIL C. 1978. La prehistoria del estado de Zacatecas: una
interpretación. Zacatecas No. 1: 203—248.

WELSH, DAVID 1971. The Growth of Towns. In The Oxford History of South
Africa, Vol. 2: South Africa 1870—1966. Monica Wilson and Leonard
Thompson, eds. Pp. 172—243. New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

WELSKOF, ELISABETH CHARLOTTE 1957. Die Produktionsverh?ltnisse im Alten
Orient und in der Griechisch-R?mischen Antike. Berlin: Akademie Verlag.

WERNER, ERNST 1966. Die Geburt einer Grossmacht—Die Osmanen: Ein Beitrag
zur Genesis des türkischen Feudalismus. Forschungen zur
Mittelalterlichen Geschichte, No. 13. Berlin: Akademie Verlag.

WERTHEIM, W. F. 1973. Dawning of an Asian Dream: Selected Articles on
Modernization and Emancipation. Antropologisch-Sociologisch Centrum van
de Universiteit van Amsterdam, Afd. Zuid-en Zuidoost Azie, Publication
No. 20.

1974. Evolution and Revolution: The Rising Waves of Emancipation.

Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

WESSMAN, JAMES W. 1981. Anthropology and Marxism. Cambridge, MA:
Schenkman.

WESTERN CANADIAN JOURNAL OF ANTHROPOLOGY 1972. Special Issue on the Fur
Trade. Vol. 3, No. 1.

WHEATLEY, PAUL 1961. The Golden Khersonese: Studies in the Historical
Geography of the Malay Peninsula Before 1500 A.D. Kuala Lumpur:
University of Malaya Press.

1975. Saty?nrta in Suvarnadvipa: From Reciprocity to Redistribution in

Ancient Southeast Asia. In Ancient Civilizations and Trade. Jeremy A.
Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, eds. Pp. 227-283. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press.

WHEELER, MORTIMER 1955. Rome Beyond the Imperial Frontiers.
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

WIRE, JOYCE 1947. The Effects of the Maritime Fur Trade on Northwest
Coast

470 Bibliography

Indian Society. Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Anthropology, Columbia
University, New York.

1952. The Role of the Dead in Northwest Coast Culture. In Indian Tribes

of Aboriginal America. Proceedings of the 29th International Congress of
Americanists, Vol. 3. Sol Tax, ed. Pp. 97—103. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

1957. More Puzzles on the Northwest Coast. American Anthropologist

59: 301-317.

1958a. Social Stratification Among the Nootka. Ethnohistory 5:

219-241.

1958b. Problems in Fur Trade Analysis: The Northwest Coast. American

Anthropologist 60: 1086-1101.

WILBUR, CLARENCE M. 1943. Slavery in China During the Former Han
Dynasty, 206 B.C.-A.D. 25. Field Museum of Natural History, Publication
525, Chicago.

WILKS, IVOR 1962. A Medieval Trade Route from the Niger to the Gulf of
Guinea. Journal of African History 3: 337—341.

1967. Ashanti Government. In West African Kingdoms in the 19th

Century. Daryll Forde and P. M. Kaberry, eds. Pp. 206-238. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

1975. Asante in the Nineteenth Century: The Structure and Evolution of

a Political Order. London: Cambridge University Press.

WILLEY, GORDON R. 1966. An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. I:
North and Middle America. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

1971. An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 2: South America.

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

WILLIAMS, ERIC 1944. Capitalism and Slavery. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.

WILLIAMS, RAYMOND 1973?. The Country and the City. New York: Oxford
University Press.

1973b. Base and Superstructure in Marxist Cultural Theory. New Left

Review, No. 82: 3—16.

WILLIS, WILLIAM S., Jr. 1955. Colonial Conflict and the Cherokee Indians
1710— 1760. Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Anthropology, Columbia
University, New York.

1963. Divide and Rule: Red, White, and Black in the Southeast. Journal

of Negro History 48: 157—176.

1970. Anthropology and Negroes on the Southern Colonial Frontier. In

The Black Experience in America. James C. Curtis and Lewis L. Gould,
eds. Pp. 33-50. Austin: University of Texas Press.

1980. Fusion and Separation: Archaeology and Ethnohistory in
Southeastern North America. In Theory and Practice: Essays Presented to
Gene Weltfish. Stanley Diamond, ed. Pp. 97—123. The Hague: Mouton.

WILMOTT, W. E., ed. 1972. Economic Organization in Chinese Society.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

WILSON, CHARLES H. 1957. Profit and Power: A Study of England and the
Dutch Wars. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1965. England's Apprenticeship, 1603-1763. London: Longmans,

Green.

WILSON, CHARLES MORROW 1947. Empire in Green and Gold. New York: Henry
Holt.

Bibliography 471

WILSON, FRANCIS 1972. Labour in the South African Gold Mines, 1911—1969.
African Studies 6. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

WILSON, GODFREY 1941— 1942. The Economics of Detribalization in Northern
Rhodesia. Rhodes-Livingstone Papers No. 5 (Part I, 1941) and No. 6 (Part
II, 1942). London: Oxford University Press, for the Rhodes-Livingstone
Institute.

WILSON, H. CLYDE 1956. A New Interpretation of the Wild Rice District of
Wisconsin. American Anthropologist 58: 1059- 1064.

1963. An Inquiry into the Nature of Plains Indian Cultural Development.

American Anthropologist 65: 355-369.

WILSON, MONICA, and LEONARD THOMPSON, eds. 1969-1971. The Oxford History
of South Africa. 2 vols. Vol. 1: South Africa to 1870 (1969); Vol. 2:
South Africa 1870—1966 (1971). New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

WINSTON, SANFORD 1934. Indian Slavery in the Carolina Region. Journal of
Negro History 19: 431-440.

WITTER, PAUL 1957. The Rise of the Ottoman Empire. London: Royal Asiatic
Society.

WITTFOGEL, KARL A. 1931. Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Chinas, Erster
Teil: Produktivkr?fte, Produkts- und Zirkulations-Prozess. Schriften des
Instituts für Sozialforschung an der Universit?t Frankfurt a.M. Vol. 3.
Leipzig: C. L. Hirschfeld.

1957. Oriental Despotism. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

WOLF, ERIC R. 1951. The Social Organization of Mecca and the Origins of
Islam. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 7: 329-356.

1953. La formación de la nación. Part I. Ciencias Sociales 4: 50-62.

1959. Specific Aspects of Plantation Systems in the New World: Community
Sub-cultures and Social Class. In Plantation systems in the New World.
Angel Palerm and Vera Rubin, eds. Pp. 136- 146. Social Science Monograph
No. 7. Washington, DC: Pan American Union.

1966. Peasants. Foundation of Modern Anthropology Series. Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

1969. Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century. New York: Harper &? Row.

Wolf, ERIC R., and SIDNEY W. MINTZ 1957. Haciendas and Plantations in
Middle America and the Antilles. Social and Economic Studies 6: 380-411.

WOLPE, HAROLD 1972. Capitalism and Cheap Labour-Power in South Africa:
From Segregation to Apartheid. Economy and Society 1: 425-456.

WOLTERS, O. W. 1967. Early Indonesian Commerce: A Study of the Origins
of Sriviyaya. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

1970. The Fall of Sriviyaya in Malay History. London: Lund Humphries.

WOODRUFF, PHILIP 1964. The Men Who Ruled India. 2 vols. New York:
Schocken Books.

WOODRUFF, WILLIAM 1966. The Impact of Western Man, a Study of Europe's
Role in the World Economy: 1760—1960. London: Macmillan.

1971. The Emergence of an International Economy 1700-1914. In The

Fontana Economic History of Europe, Vol. 4: The Emergence of Industrial
Societies. Carlo Cipolla, ed. separata. London: Fontana.

WORSLEY, PETER 1957. The Trumpet Shall Sound: A Study of'Cargo' Cults in
Melanesia. London: Macgibbon and Kee.

1961. The Analysis of Rebellion and Revolution in British Social
Anthropology. Science and Society 21: 26-37.

472 Bibliography

1964. The Third World. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

WRIGHT, GARY A. 1967. Some Aspects of Early and Mid-Seventeenth Century
Exchange Networks in the Western Great Lakes. Michigan Archaeologist 13:
181-197.

WRIGHT, GAVIN 1978. The Political Economy of the Cotton South:
Households, Markets, and Wealth in the Nineteenth Century. New York: W.
W. Norton.

WUNDER, HEIDE, ed. 1971. Feudalismus. Munich: Nymphenburger Verlag.

YALMAN, NUR 1971. Under the Bo Tree: Studies in Caste, Kinship, and
Marriage in the Interior of Ceylon. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London:
University of California Press.

YOUNG, PHILIP D. 1971. Ngawbe: Tradition and Change Among the Western
Guaymi of Panama. Illinois Studies in Anthropology, No. 7. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.

ZUKIN, SHARON 1980. A Decade of the New Urban Sociology. Theory and
Society 9: 575-601.

Index

A

Abenaki, Eastern, 163 Abidjan, 343 Aboh, 217,218 Abomey Plateau. 213
Abraham. D. P., 44. 397 Abun-Nasr. Jamil N., 40 Aburi,340 Acapulco, 153,
154 Accra, 212. 340 Accumulation of Capital. 300 Adams, Robert McC., 26,
103 Adams, Samuel, 339 Adanse, 210, 211 Adas, Michael. 421 Aden. 336
Aden, Gulf of, 31 Adriatic Sea, 104 Advances: fur trade. 305; system of,
159, 175,337, 370 Advertising, 383 Aegean, 102

Afghan Dynasty (North India), 45 Afghanistan, 27 Afghans, 50, 246 Afonso
I, 222

Africa, 109, 110, 129, 130, 145,

195, 197, 199, 201-204, 307,

313; agriculture and population. 204; areas of slave supply. 206;
capital investment in, 301; effects of trade with Europeans, 206;
European voyages to, 232; forest zone, 205, 208: labor migration. 383;
land tenure. 205; political consolidation in, 205-207; population, 204;
prehistory. 39. 41, 396, 397; resistance to plantation economy, 151;
royal control of resources, 205; slave exports from, 195- 196, 200-201;
sociopolitical organization. 205206; as source of slaves. 195. 201-204
Africa, Central. 150. 200. 201,208.

   413; slaving and state formation. 224-229 Africa. East, 31,41-44,
129, 201,

227, 228; and Islamic sphere, 234; Muslim merchants in, 236; as source
of slaves, 228 Africa, North. 26. 37-38. 129; cultivation in. 26;
pastoralists and power shifts in. 82 Africa. South, 423; Bantu-speakers
in, 347; Black and White working classes in, 368; Chinese exclusion
from, 378-379; control of African mobility, 367-368, diamond exports.
350; Dutch settlement in. 347; English in. 347, 350; European settlement
compared with North America, 347; industrialization. 368; labor
migration. 359; racial stratification in agriculture, 366—367; racial
stratification in mining, 366367; recruitment of skilled miners abroad,
367; working classes, 359 Africa, Southeast. 200. 235 Africa. West.
38-39. 111, 150, 155.

167. 196, 197, 198,200,204.

208.236. 318.412-413.422. 423; cocoa production, 340— 343; conflict over
railroad construction. 332; crisis of aristocracy. 330-332; European
companies trading in, 306; European conquest of, 332; expansion of
cash-crop agriculture, 318; palm oil exports. 3 30; population. 204;
rubber collecting, 340 Africa. West-Central: population, 204

Afrikaaner, 346. 367. See also Boers;

Dutch, in South Africa Afro-Americans, United States,

364, 378, 383; in cattle raising. 322; northward migration of.

   383

Agency houses, 257, 258, 287. 289.

   290, 318, 330, 376 Agnew, Swanzie, 423 Agni, 342-343 Agona, 211
“Agribusiness,'' 382 Agricultural regions. Old World, 25 Agriculture:
archipelagic distribution of, 26, 30; capitalization of,
383;atChequamegon, 171 .crisis in, and emigration. 313. 319,

364, 371; destruction of intensive, 134; France, 107-108, 117; and horse
postoralism, 177; Huron, 163, 164; in oases, 27; Petuns, 164; Portugal,
110-111; on ridged fields, 63, 64; severed from craft-production, 317;
south of St. Lawrence River. 164. 174; of South American tropical
forest, 65; Spain, 112, 113 Agriculture, cash-crop: and capitalist mode
of production, 310, 318; on plantations, 314, 315—317; on small farms.
317-318 Agriculture, commercial. See Agriculture. cash-crop Agriculture,
Hispanic America. 143- 145; Old World crops in.

   135; and pre-Conquest food production. 134. 135 Agriculture,
irrigation. 26. 27. 29.

30.48. 49; Central America. 5859.62. 134, 135; Ceylon, 340; China.
51-53.81; Colombia. 64; destruction of. 134; Ecuador. 63; Egypt. 286;
Hohokam. 68; India.

81 ; Iran. 81 ; Islamic sphere, 103; and Javanese sugar plantations,
334; Kelantan, 330; Madeira. 196; Mesoamerica. 59. 134, 135; Southeast
Asia. 56-57; Than- javur, 370; and tributary mode of production. 80

474 Index

Agriculture, slash-and-burn. 30.

53. 56. 166; Africa. 204. Ceylon. 340; China. 49; Colombia, 324;
combined with rubber production, Borneo. 330; combined with rubber
production, Indonesia, 330; combined with rubber production. Malaya.
330; combined with tobacco plantations. Sumatra, 330; Iroquois, 166;
Kachin, 345; Southeast Asia, 56; southern Brazil, 372 Agriculture, South
Africa. 367— 368; commercial by Whites. 368; subsistence on Native
Reserves,

   368 Ahanta, 209 Akan, 210 Akankpa, 220 Akbar, 241 Akha, 343

Akim Abuakwa, 340 Akinjogbin, I. A., 412 Akomani, 209 Akropong, 340

Akrosan Brothers. See Claessen. John

Akwamu. 209.210.211 Akwapim Ridge. 340 Akyem. 211

Akyem Abuakwa. 211. 212 Alabama. 280.282. 284. 285 Alafins, 213

Al-Andalus, 40, 112. See also Muslim Spain Alaska, 183 Albania, 286
Albany. 161. 169. 176 Albany Bay. 347 Albion. Robert G.. 283
Albuquerque. Alfonso de. 235.236 Alcantara order, 107 Aleppo. 31 Aleut,
184

Aleutian Islands. 183. 184 Alexandria. 103,236 Alfalfa. 323 Algarve. 112
Algeria, 26. 39.40. 41 Algonkin confederacy. 165 Algonkin-Huron
interaction.

   163-164 Algonkins, Algonkin-speakers. 160.

   163. 165, 167, 171, 187 Alkatcho Carrier. 189—190.411 Alladaxonu. 213
Allen. G. C.. 422 Almadén mercury mine, 142 Almohades. See Al-Muwihiddin
Almoravids See Al-Murabitun Al Mukhá (Mocha). 336 Al-Murabitun, 39,40
Al-Muwihiddin, 40

Alpers, Edward. 397 Alps. 25. 106. 107. 114 Al-Radhaniya (Radanites).
103.

405

Althcim, Franz. 395 Althusser, Louis, 401,402,425 Alum, trade in. 67.
206 Alur. 98 Amalfi. 104

Amazonia, 422; in-migration from Northeastern Brazil to, 325 — 326
Amazonian Indians, in rubber collecting, 325 Ambaka, 225 Amber, trade
in, 42, 158 Amboyna, 237,238, 240 American crops, and population growth
in China, 256 American Fur Company, 176 American Indians. See Indians,
Hispanic America; Indians, North America

America. North. 119. 130. 159.195.

196. 202. 203. 265. 296; Atlantic coast. 69. 160. 174. 203. 280.
enslavement of Indians. 203; European settlement compared with South
Africa, 347; German migration to, 363; Pacific coast, 71, 96, 174;
prehistory. 66-71; Scotch-Irish migration to. 363; Scottish highlanders'
migration to. 363

American Revolution. See American War of Independence America. Nuclear.
157 American War of Independence.

   168.255.257. 339. 363 Americas. 58-71, 109. 110. 119.

129. 130. 159. 199. 200. 201. 202. 292; demand for slaves. 195—201;
European voyages to.

   1 14.232; food collectors, 70-71; prehistory. 58-71. 399-400; sugar
cane, 115 America, South. 195. 265. 301.

306. 311; cotton imports from England. 278; English commercial houses
in, 278; labor migration in, 383; prehistory, 59-65; Italian migration
to, 371. See also Hispanic America; Portuguese America Amin, Samir, 81,
383,402 Amoy. 375

Amsterdam. 115. 116. 150. 159.

   197 Anasazi. 68 Anatolia. 24.26 Andean area, 59-65, 133, 134,

135, 145; absence of markets before A.D. 1400,60; ecological limits, 63,
65; ecological zones.

   59-60, 135; Late Intermediate period in, 60; religious motifs. 60
Andean-Tropical Forest interaction, 64, 65 Anderson, Michael, 359,
362,416 Anderson. Perry. 405 Andoni, 217 Andrah, 48 Angkor, 30 Angkor
Thom, 57 Angkor Wat, 57

Anglo-American Corporation. 350 Anglo-Americans, in cattle raising,

   322

Angola, 41, 197, 201, 204, 223,

   227,230, 265,413 Anhwei, 257 Ankara, 35 Anstey, Roger, 198
Anthropology, ix-x, 13-19, 394— 395; critiques of, 394; cross- cultural
comparison in, 17; diffu- sionism in, 15-16; ecological studies in. 16;
evolutionism in. 15—16; functionalism in, 15-16, 394; study of meaning
in, 16. See also Urban anthropology Antilles. 64, 131, 135. 139.265
Antioch. 26,27 Antwerp. 114. 150 Apache. 143. 176 Apalachee. 203
Appalachian Mountains. 69 Apter. David E.. 290.418 Aquitaine. 117 Arab.
26. 33. 42. 99. 234. 235 Arabia. 102 Aragon, 40 Aranda, 323 Arapaho.
177, 180, 181 Araucanian-speakers, 65, 143. 323 Araya (Venezuela), 152
Ardrah, 214

Argentina. 121, 278, 319, 322323; cattle raising. 322-323; Italian
immigration. 323. 371; livestock industry sponsored by England. 322-323;
meat packing industry. 322; wheat production for export. 319.323;
railroad construction financed by England. 322-323; Spanish immigration.
323; synchronization of ranching and agriculture, 323 Arguin I., 129,
196 Arhin, Kwame, 412 Arikara, 176, 177, 178, \80. See also "Village
Indians"

Aristocracies: predatory, 99; and state formation, 98-99 Aristocracy,
West Africa, crisis of.

   330-331 Arkwright. Richard. 273; 256

Index 475

Armenians, in Madras, 241, 370 Army: Egypt. 286; India. 249, 251. 252

Aro. 167. 219-220. 230, 332 Aro Chukwu oracle. 220, 332 Arrighi,
Giovanni. 419 Artha. 46,83

Articulation, among modes of production. 401.404 Aruba, 197 Asad. Talal.
394,425 Asante, 39. 200, 207, 209, 211 — 212,213,216, 220.230, 331,

   332, 342.412 Ashton. T. S.. 407 Asia, 115, 120. 130. 131, 158.232,

236.237, 265.278. 290. 301, 311,313; commercial development compared to
Europe, 85; crucial role of trade with. 125; pastoralists and power
shifts in,

82

Asia, East, 44-45. 50-56. 252258, 382 Asia, Monsoon, 131 Asian oceans,
294 Asia, South, 44,45-50.234-252. 319. 382

Asia. Southeast. 24,25, 30, 31, 32. 44.45, 56-58. 110. 130.236.

318. 319; Chinese in. 374-377, 378; expansion of cash-crop agriculture.
318; opium imports.

   343; political economy before a.d. 1400, 56-58; studies of, 399;
trade route through Indian Ocean, 44 Askeri. 36 Assam, 339. 369

Assiniboin. 17, 172, 173. 175, 177, 178

Astor, John Jacob. 176 Atacamehos, 65 Athabasca Brigade. Northwest
Company, 182 Athabasca Lake, 175 Athabascan-speakers, 173, 175,

   185, 189, 190,410 Atlanta. 283

Atlantic fringe. See Europe. Atlantic fringe Atlantic islands. 197
Atlantic Ocean. 29, 129. 131. 197 Atlas Mountains, 26. 27 Atrato River.
156 Augsburg, 114 Augusta. 283

Aukar. See Ghana (medieval) Aurangzeb. 244

Australia, 121,258,323,421; cattle raising. 323; Chinese exclusion, 378;
gold fields, 377-378; gold rush, 323; sheep raising, 323;

   wool exports, 323 Australian aborigenes. and livestock raising. 323
Austroasiatic languages, 48,49 Austro-Hungarian empire: emigration to
U.S.. 364; Italian immigration, 371; peasant emancipation,

   317

Automation. 382; and factories.

   382; and labor-intensity. 382 Automobile industry, 325 Automobiles.
381 A viz. Knights of. 107, 110, III Axim. 196, 197 Ayacucho Valley. 60
Ayans, 37 Ayllus, 62 Aymara, 64 Azcapozalco. 68 Azores, 111, 196 Azov,
27. 232

Aztecs. 59,68, 131, 133, 145, 147.

   409

B

Babas. 376, 378 Babur, 50. 241 Babylonia, 102 Baddeley, John F.. 183,411
Baer, Gabriel. 418 Baghdad, 26, 35, 102, 103. 105 Bagwell. Philip S..
313 Bahamas. 24.279 Bahia. 111. 134. 150.203 Baidya caste, 250 Bailey,
Alfred G.. 163 Bailey. F. G.. 398 Bailey, L. R., 143,410 Baines, E.. 271
Bairoch. Paul. 293.418 Bajio, 144

Bakewell. Peter J? 408 Bakongo, 220.222 Balandier. Georges. 207.222.412
Balazs. Etienne. 55, 399 Balboa, Vasco Nunez de, 129 Bali. 58. 234

Balibar. Etienne. 401.402 Balkh. 27, 50 Balopwe, 225. 226. 229 Baltic
Sea. 29.31. 103. 107, 115,

   116, 122, 159, 160 Baltimore, 283

Balitmore and Ohio Company, 291 Baluchistan. 27 Bambuk. 38, 39 Banana
plantations, 323—325; Central America, 324-325; Colombia, 324; Panama,
325 Bananas: cultivation, 204, 323-325.421; as peasant crop, 323

Band, as type of society, 76

Banda Islands, 195. 238.240 Bandeirantes, 134 Bang Chan, 320— 321:
origins of population, 321; rice production, 321; social structure, 321
Bangkok, 320, 321 Bani river, 39

Bankers: Bavarian, 114—115;

   Genoese, 114— 115 Bank of England, 117 Bantam, 237,238,239 Bantu-Boer
conflicts, 347 Bantu-speakers, 41 -42; in South Africa, 347 Banu, Ion,
402 Baoule. 343 Barbados. 130. 151 Barbed wire fencing, 322. 323
Barbosa. Duarte, 45 Barbot, Jean, 206 Barbour. Virginia, 406 Barloewen,
Wolf-Dietrich von, 395 Barnett, Steve. 425 Barotse. Rotse, 349
Barquisimeto. 156 Barratt Brown. Michael. 312.419 Barren Grounds. 178
Barrett. Ward J., 150 Basalt, trade in, 67 Bascom. William, 213,412
Basque provinces, Spain. 292 Bassein, 320 Basuto, 349, 350 Basutoland
(now Lesotho), 367 Batak, 330

Batavia. 195,237,238. 375 Bates, Daniel G.. 395 Bau. 259

Bauer, Otto, 418,419 Baynes, Rev. Paul, 202 Bay of Bengal. 195 Beads,
trade in, 39.43, 185, 197, 227

Bean. Richard. 198 Beans. 64, 164

Beaver. 158, 159-160, 161, 163, 169, 178, 195; decline in Europe. 159;
prices. 169 Beaver (Indians), 175 Bechuanaland (now Botswana).

   367

Beckford, George. 317,420 Begho, 39

Belgium: migratory movements in, 362; urbanization of, 362 Belize, 155,
301 Bella Coola. 189-190,411 Bemba, 228-229. 359.413 Bemba Plateau. 227
Benares, 257; changes in landed class. 248; changes in land tenure,
247.248; changes in taxation. 247,248; English law

476 Index

   in. 248; Rajadom of, 247; tax-collectors in, 247 Benda, Harry J., 399
Bende, 220 Bendix, Reinhard. 416 Benelux countries, labor migration from
Mediterranean region. 383 Bengal, 30.234.235,244,251; English East India
Company and trade in, 244; famine. 245; "Permanent Settlement" of, 247;
role in financing trade with Far East, 260; taxation in. 244-245. 246;
sugar exports. 316 Bengali. 58 Bengal Squad, 257 Benguela. 225 Beni
Marin, 40

Benin. 40.129,206.209,215 - 216.

   217, 220,230.332 Benue River, 217 Berar, 290

Berber, 33, 39.40,41 Bergen, 158 Berlin. 362

Berreman, Gerald. 398 Bertin, Jacques. 154 Best, Lloyd, 420 Béteille.
André. 45. 398 Betsimaraka, 155 Bhadralok. 250 Bhakti, 243,250 Bhamo, 51
Bhutan, 369 "Big Fix," 332

Bight of Benin, 129. 196. 200.201.

   208,215,216 Bight of Biafra, 201 Big Juju. See Aro Chukwu oracle
Bihar, Bihari, 30, 369. 370 Bijapur, 235

Bills of exchange. 272-273 Bindoff, S. T., 407 Bio-Bio River, 65 Birim
River, 210 Birmingham. 4. 312 Birmingham. David. 413 Bisa, 227, 228, 229
Bishop, Charles A.. 409.410 Bison hunt, 175,176,178,180,182 Black Ball
Line. 283 "Blackbirders," "blackbirding," 334

Black Death, 111

Blackfoot. 173. 176, 177, 181,410 Black Sea region, 26.27, 37,84,

   102, 103.202. 204 Blackwell Hall. 271-272 Blankets, as advances, 175;
trade in, 184 Blassingame, John, 417 Bloch. Marc, 403,407 Bloch,
Maurice, 425

Blue Funnel Line, 293 Boas, Franz, 191, 192 Boer-Bantu conflicts, 347
Boers, 347, 350 Boer War, 367

Bolivia. 59, 64, 135, 141; silver mines, 135 Bombay, 240, 241. 246.
251.257.

   287, 288 - 290, 295, 359, 370; Chinese contract laborers in, 378;
cotton mills, 288—290, 359 Bombay-Sind, 290 Bonacich, Edna. 381.424
Bonny, 215, 216, 217 Bordeaux. 117. 151 Boreal forest, 71 Borkenau.
Franz, 425 Borneo, 57. 375. 376; rubber production combined with
slash-and-bum agriculture. 330 Bornu. 210 Borobudur, 57 Borochov, Ber,
308 Bosman. William, 210 Boston. 184.255. 339 Botswana. 349, 367 Bourbon
Dynasty. 119 Bovill, E. W? 396-397 Bowles. Samuel, ix, 416 Bowser.
Frederick P., 409 Boxer. Charles. 110. 111. 116. 195.

   196. 197,406.414 Boyac?. 63

Brabant. 107, 114,296 Bradbury, R. E.. 209, 215.413 Bradby, Barbara. 404
Brading, David A., 144.408 Braganza, Catherine of, 240 Brahmin,
Brahmins, 46,47,49, 250; in English Indian army, 249, 370; models. 56
Bramson, Leon, 8, 393 Brandenburg, 362 Brandenburg Company, 209 Brandy,
trade in. 223 Braudel. Fernand, 109, 255. 292,

   333. 397.422 Brass (Nembe), 217 Brass, trade in, 39 Brass utensils,
trade in. 197 Brazil. 110. 116. 129. 130. 134. 149-151, 156. 157.278.
325-329. 337.422; American Indians as slaves in, 134. 150, 203; change
from slave to immigrant labor, 337, 371.372; coffee exports, 337, 373;
coffee plantations. 337, 363. 372.373; demand for slaves. 228. 373;
diversion of slaves to West Indies. 369; Dutch attempt to seize, 150,
197; end of slavery, 316. 3 37, 371, 373; European immigra

tion, 337; government support ol immigration. 371, 374; immigrants as
labor force, 337, 363, 373—374; intensification of slavery. 19th
century. 316; Italian immigration. 337, 363. 371; migration from
Northeast into Amazonia. 325-326; railroad construction, 373; rubber
collecting. 325; slave demography compared with West Indies and U.S.
South. 280-281; slave imports. 316. 337; slave plantations. 322.337.372;
slaves in, 200.201. 322, 337, 372, 373; source of dyewoods, 150; source
of hardwoods. 111; sugar cultivation. 129. 149-151, 197.203. 325;
tobacco grown in, 197; trade with Bolivia and Peru, 153 Brazil,
Northeastern. 134.149.195. 325; famine, 325; as source of labor supply
for rubber collecting. 325 Brebeuf, Father Jean de. 164 Brenner, Robert.
269.407 Bristol. 151. 198 Britain, 196. 292. 300. 312, 313, 314. 315.
316. 322. 323. 333,

   362, 363, 367. 368. 379; integration of. 379; urbanization of, 360.
362. See also British; England; English British. 117, 151, 159. 170.
175,

176, 184, 196, 198, 200. 201. 220. 227, 228. 229,239. 241.
245,247.251.260, 261.271. 276. 278. 279. 284. 288. 289.

   290. 292. 293. 309, 333. 343. in Egypt. 287; in Guyana. 334; in
Malaya, 376; in Mauritius, 333; in South Africa. 347, 350; in Thanjavur,
370; in Trinidad. 333 British Caribbean. 316. 317 British Columbia. 189,
192.377 British Empire. 260.287,290, 301; indentured laborers in
possessions. 333; key role of Indian in, 300. 312.419; "new."after
1815.316 British India: army. 249; government officials. 249-250;
regional elites in, 250 British Isles: emigration from. 291, 363;
urbanization of. 276 Brittany. 160 Broach. 288 Broda. Johanna. 400
Brody, David. 423 Bromley, J. S.. 406.415 Brooke Bond, 317 Broomfield.
J. H.. 250,414 Brotherhood of the Seventeen

Index All

Towns of Flanders and Brabant. 107

Brown, James A.. 69, 400

Brown, Judith K., 166

Brown, Richard, 423

Bruchey, Stuart W., 417

Bruner. Edward M.. 410

Buccaneers. 155

Buddhism. 250. 346

Buenos Aires. 301

Buffalo products, trade in. 178. 180

Bugis. 377

Building materials, 334 Bulgar. 158 Bulliet, Richard. 396 Bullion. 115.
116. 117, 135.255; exported to Asia. 153. 154; flow from west to east.
109, 125, 255-256; reversal of west-east flow. 260 Bullocks, in
transportation. 287 Bundy, Colin. 424 Burawoy. Michael. 358. 425 Buré,
38 Burgundy, 114 Burial Mound cultures, 69 Buriat, 183 Buritaca site,
64.400 Burma. 30.43. 51. 319-320.421; East Indians as indentured
laborers in, 369, 370; occupied by England. 319, 345-346; opium
production in. 343,

   344— 346. See also Lower Burma; Upper Burma Burmese. 320 Bursia
mines. 156 Burt. A. L.. 421 Bushmen. See San Bythell. Duncan, 416
Byzantine-Viking pincer, 405 Byzantium, 26, 35, 101. 102, 104, 105, 106,
129, 195,201.255.405

C

Caboto. Giovanni (John Cabot), 232

Cabral. Pero Alvares. 129 Cacao: cultivation, 140, 153; as currency, 67;
trade in, 67. 68. 109.152,153.155. See also Cocoa Cadiz. 139 Cahen.
Claude. 396 Cahokia. 69 Caimcross. A. K.. 301 Calabar. 215. 220. See
also Old Calabar Calatrava order, 107 Calcutta, 240, 241, 244, 246, 257,
369, 370 Caldwell. Joseph R.. 400 Calicoes, 270-271 Calicut. 232. 270

California. 185. 188. 192; antiChinese agitation in. 378; Chinese
laborers in. 377; Russians in, 183 Cambodia, 57 Camels, 31 Cameroons, 41
Campbell, Mavis C.. 155 Campbell, Persia Crawford, 377,

   378, 379. 424 Campisi, Jack, 409 Camwood, trade in. 217 Canada. 159.
170. 173. 176. 193 Canadian Pacific Railroad. 377 Ca?an federation, 63

Canary Islands. 196. 197. 204. 323 Cannon. 209. 217; use on ships.

   235-236 Canoe-houses. 217, 218. 331 Canoes, trade in. 155. 185. 188
Cantabria, ports of, 107, 113 Canton. 42, 153,254,257,258,259 Cao,
Diogo, 196 Cape Mount, 200 Cape of Good Hope, 129, 195, 347 Cape
Province, South Africa. 347. 350

Capetian Dynasty. 107 Capetown. 347 Cape Verde Islands. 131. 200 Capital
(by Marx). 402 Capital. 298; exports of, 301; flow in Singapore of. 376;
industrial, and merchants' wealth. 260.267; migration of German. 382;
migration of Japanese, 382; migration of U.S., 382 Capital, organic
composition of, 352, 356-357, 358, 380, 382 Capitalism: different views
of Marx and Weber on, 297-298; and ethnic differentiation, 380—381;
forces of expansion in, 299. 301; and international state system, 309;
long waves in development of. 304-305. 386.419-420; monopolistic
tendencies in, 300-301; and politics. 308. 309; and racial distinctions.
380-381; and sociocultural heterogeneity,

379, 380

Capitalist mode of production, 76, 77-79. 260, 296-309, 354, 357, 379,
380, 383, 386,401; and cities, 360- 361; and class formation, 79, 308,
315, 354-355,

358-383; and commerce. 306. 352—353; and commodity movements, 266; and
commodity production, 352; and crises,

291, 294, 299-300, 303, 304305, 311-313, 350, 364, 381382; and
differentiation, 266,

302-309; distinguished from capitalist world market, 297; and ecological
analysis, 78; and England, 266-278, 296; European origins of, 78, 266;
expands commercial production of foodstuffs, 310; expands raw material
production, 310, 311; expands regional specialization. 310. 313—314;
forms labor markets. 381; and ideology-making, 389— 390; and kin-ordered
mode. 311. 353; and labor migration. 266.

361 - 379, 383; and law, 266; and state. 100, 265-266; and surplus, 299;
and textile industry, 294—295; and tributary mode, 265-266, 311. 353;
V.I. Lenin on, 300; and working classes, 383; and world-wide spread,

   296. 383 Capitalist world economy, 353 Capitalist world market, 297,
298, 310

Capitalization: of cash-crop agriculture, 318, 383; of coffee
plantations in Brazil, 373; of Italian industry, 371; of plantation
agriculture, 317; of U.S. railroads,

291 —292; of rice production in Lower Burma, 318- 319; of sugar
production in Portuguese America. 150- 151; of South African mining
industry. 350; of textile industry. England. 272. 291; of textile
industry, India, 288

Capital mix. See Capital, organic composition of Carande y Thobar,
Ram?n, 406 Cara federation. 63 Caravan trade, diminished by maritime
competition, 260 Caribbean. 131,150,151.155.196,

197, 203, 368. 370. 382; decline of planter class in. 316. 317; decline
of sugar production in, 316-317; demand for slaves, 195; labor migration
to U.S.. 383; labor migration from, 383; source of British income. 151;
weak spot of Spanish dominions.

156

Caribbean borderlands. 64. 133,

154, 156

Caribbean, English, 200, 201; furnish labor for Central American
plantations, 324-325. Caribbean, French, 200,201 Caribbean Islands, 64,
119, 129.

130, 133, 149, 151, 155, 156,

157, 195, 196; affected by European wars, 316

478 Index

Caribbean. Spanish. 130 Caribou hum, 175 Carlyle, Thomas, 276
Carmagnani, Marcello, 141,408 Carmaux, 358

Carolinas. 196,203,279,280, 282 Carpathian Mountains, 25. 114 Carrasco.
Pedro. 400 Carrier industries. 297 Cartagena. 139 Carthagenians. 102
Cartwright, Edmund, 274 Cash-crop agriculture: and capital flow, 318;
expansion in Southeast Asia. 318; expansion in West Africa, 318 Caste,
45-50; and power, 46-47, 49—50; studies of, 396—397 Castells. Manuel.
423 Castile.Castilians. 107. 110. Ill, 112, 114, 118, 123, 129, 131.
196; land tenure. 112. See also Castile-Aragon; Hispanic America; Spain,
Spaniards Castile-Aragon, 110, 112-114, 131; in New World, 129-130; role
of crown, 113, 117, 135.S? also Castile, Castilians; Hispanic America:
Spain, Spaniards Castles. Stephen, 383 Catalonia, 108, 112— 113;
consolats.

   107; slave population. 202 Catawba. 203 Catholic Church. 83 Cattle.
135; feed. 330; feral. 322; trade in, 347; raising in Argentina,
322—323; raising in Australia. 323; raising limited by tsetse fly. 204;
raising in U.S. West. 322 Caucasus Mountains, 25, 102 Cavalry, use by
Oyo. 213 Cayuga. 165, 166, 168 Cedar bark and wood products. 185
Celebes, 377

Central America. 135. 140,203, 337; coffee production in. 337; labor
force on banana plantations. 324-325 Central Asia. 24,25, 30. 102
Central Pacific Railroad, 377 Centurioni family. 114 Century plant. 144
Cereals: cultivation of. 41; trade in.

   120. 140 Cervantes. Miguel. 113 Ceuta, 112. 129

Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). 30. 236. 237. 339-340, 370; changes in land
tenure, 339; irrigated rice agriculture. 340; peasantry and tea
plantations, 339- 340; rice imports from Burma. 320; rice

imports from Thanjavur. 370; slash-and-bum agriculture in, 340

Ceylon or Jaffna Tamil. 340 Chaco, 71

Chambers. J. D.. 407 Chambers. Mortimer, 405 Champagne Fairs, 107
Chamula, hired by Zinacantecos. 338

Chanchan, 60-61 Chandragupta Maurya, 45 Chaney, Elsa M., 383 Chang,
T'ien-Tse, 414 Chao Phraya River, 320 Chapman. S. D.. 272.273. 356. 357.

416

Charcas, Audiencia of. 134 Charles II. 240 Charles V. 114. 115. 139
Charleston. 283 Chartism, 277

Chateaubriand, Fran?ois René de. 71

Chattel slavery. 207 Chaunu, Huguette, 406 Chaunu. Pierre, 153-154.406
Chekiang, 52. 254. 257 Chemical industry, 312 Chen Ch'eng-Kung
(Coxinga), 252, 254

Cheng-Ho. 24. 55 Chengtu Plain. 51 Cheong, W. E.. 154 Chequamegon Bay,
171 Chcquamcgon, village of. 171. 172. 173

Cherokee. 69. 70, 203, 284, 285, 417; script. 285 Chesneaux, Jean.
359.403 Cheyenne. 177. 180 Chiapas, 337

Chibcha, 63-64, 133-145, 148 Chibcha-speakers, 155, 325.409 Chicago,
284, 313. 318 Chicago School, 11 Chicama, 60 Chichen Itza, 68
Chichimecas, 176 Chickasaw, 284

Chiefdoms, 96-99; Nguni, 347.

349

Chiefship: as Achilles' heel of kin- ordered mode. 94, 96, 99; and
redistribution. 96-99 Chikunda, 228 Childe, V. Gordon, 395 Chile. 119,
131. 143. 144; Central Valley of. 144; copper mining in, 346

Chilean archipelago. 71 Chilkat, 189

Chilkat blankets, trade in. 185, 188

Chilkat River, 185. 189 Chilkat Tlingit. 188, 189, 190,411 Chimu, 60, 62

China, 29. 42. 43, 44. 45, 50-56, 57. 71. 228. 232. 234, 236. 241.

246-261, 268, 278, 287. 288.

307, 320; administrative organization of, 53; Arab traders in, 234;
attempts to ban opium by. 343; Confucian model. 83; contact with India,
55; control of foreign trade, 254; cotton imports from India. 287, 288;
culture sphere of, 30, 33,44.49, 56; currencies of. 258; destinations in
labor trade from. 378; effects of opium use on. 258; expansion into
Southeast Asia, 57; Great Wall of. 25, 34, 50; influx of silver, 153,
255; jade imports. 345; labor trade. 375-379; land tenure, 54-55, 399;
opium exports, 343; opium imports from India,257-258,288, 343; opium
production in, 343; population, 42-53; in Pacific trade. 153;
restrictions on foreign contact, 254,

257, 374; role in global capitalist economy, 261, 288; scholargentry.
82,83, 254; slavery and serfdom in, 55; studies of. 398399; tea exports.
255-257. 261; tobacco cultivation, 256; trade route through Indian
ocean, 44; working classes, 358-359. See also dynasties under individual
names; Mandarins.

China, Northwestern, 256 China Seas. 56. 57.84. 109, 129, 153.234 China,
South. 24. 25, 29, 30, 54. 256; Han migration into. 29, 30, 52-53. 399
Ch'in dynasty. 52, 53. 54 Chinese: in Australian gold fields, 378; in
Cochinchina rice trade.

321; in commercial rice production in Thailand, 320; in construction.
369; as contract laborers. 369; as contract laborers in Bombay. 378; as
contract laborers in Cuba. 378; as contract laborers in Dutch Guyana.
378; as contract laborers in Guyana, 378; as contract laborers in
Hawaii, 378; as contract laborers in Tahiti. 378; as contract laborers
in West Indies. 378; exclusion from South Africa, 378-379; exclusion
from U.S.. 378; as indentured laborers. 363; as indentured laborers.
Peru. 377; as indentured laborers. South Africa.

Index 479

367; as laborers in railroad construction, 377; in Malacca, 58; in
Malaya. 375 — 376; in Manila. 153; as laborers in California, 377; as
merchants in Southeast Asia, 378; in mining, 369, 376; in Southeast
Asia, 374-377, 378; in U.S., 377; as workers on Sumatran rubber
plantations,

   330

Ch'ing dynasty. 54, 56, 252. 254, 377

Ching River, 29 Chinook, 185

Chinook trade language. 185, 186 Chipeweyans, 17, 175 Chira, 60 Chiti
Maluba, 229 Chittick, H. Neville. 397 Choate. Julian E.. Jr., 421
Choctaw. 284, 285 Chontal-speakers. 68 Chota-Nagpur Plateau. 369 Chou
dynasty, 51 Christendom: Eastern, 103; Western, 102, 103 Christians,
Indian. 370 Christiansborg Castle, 209 Chuicuito Province. 136 Churchill
River. 173, 178 Church of England. 278 Ch'u- Ts'ai. 33

Cinnamon, trade in, 236, 237 Cipangu,232

Cipolla, Carlo M., 355,412 Circassians, 34, 286 Civilizations as
interaction zones, 82-83 Claessen. John. 209 Clark, William. 176 Class:
and consumption. 333; formation and redistribution, 97-98 Cliometrics,
395 Clipper ships. 293. 339 Clive, Robert. 173 Cloth, as advances. 175
Clothing, trade in, 166. 184. 185.

   258. 327 Cloves: as plantation crop. 228;

   trade in. 236, 238, 239 Coal, as energy source. 292, 311,

   355

Coal miners. Pennsylvania. 364 Cobban. Alfred. 407 Coca, 59, 65, 144
Cochabamba, 144 Cochabamba Basin, 60 Cochinchina, 321; commercial rice
production in, 321; destination of rice exports from. 321 ; rice
exports. 321 ; rice exports in Chinese hands, 321

Cochineal. 140, 141, 147 Cocoa. 332, 340- 343,422, cultivation. Ghana.
383; exports from Ghana. 341; introduced in Africa by Dutch, 340;
production and class differentiation. 341 - 342; production and effects
on Agni states. 342-343; production and kinship. 340- 341. See also
Cacao Codere. Helen, 191, 192,411 Cod fish, 160 Coedès, George, 44, 399
Coffee, 314, 332, 336-339; expons, Brazil, 337; exports. Indonesia. 336;
on peasant holdings, Indonesia, 336; prices. 337; types, 335 Coffee
plantations, 314. 336-338. 373; in Brazil. 337. 363. 372.

373; capitalization of. Rio Claro. 373; in Central America, 337; in
Ceylon, 339; in Chiapas, and labor force, 337—338; in Java,

   336-337; in Outer Islands, Indonesia, 336 Cohen, Yehudi A.. 98 Cohn.
Bernard S.. 49. 247. 248,

   249, 397,414 Cohong foreign trade guild, 254, 257

Coleman, D. C.. 271 Colhua-Mexica. See Aztecs Colletti. Lucio, 74. 75
Collier, Richard. 422 Collins, June McCormick. 190 Cologne, 107

Colombia. 63-64, 135, 139, 152, 153, 154. 155, 156. 157.294.

   324. 409; banana plantations, 324; gold production. 135; labor
migration to Ecuador. 383; labor migration to Venezuela. 383; planters
in banana production, 324; planters in relation with United Fruit
Company, 324; railroad construction in. 324; slash- and-bum agriculture
in, 324 “Colonial tribes." 155 Colorado Plateau. 68 Colson, Cadwallader,
169 Columbia River, 176, 178, 185 Columbia, S.C., 283 Columbus,
Christopher. 24. 114.

   129. 131, 133,232 Comanche. 176

Commerce, 106-107, 119-120; and capitalism. 85-88. 120,268, 297-298,
352; limits on growth of. 265

Commodity production, 318-353 Communism, viewed as “disease of
modernization," 7 Compagnie Fran?aise de l'Afrique

   Occidental, 317 Company of Merchant Adventurers, 122 Company of New
France, 161 Compound system, 367 Comte, Auguste, 8 Congaree, 203 Congo,
201,230 Congo, Kingdom of. See Kongo Congo River, 41, 129, 196,200.

   206, 207, 220, 221 Constantinople, 24, 35, 103, 204 Consumer credit,
383 Consumer goods, durable. 381 Consumerism. 383 Consumption, and
class. 333 Continuous process technology.

   382

Contraband. 151-154. 155; in silver. 153 Contract Laborers: African, in
South Africa, 367; Chinese in Bombay. 378; Chinese in Cuba. 378; Chinese
in Dutch Guiana. 378; Chinese in Guyana. 378; Chinese in Hawaii. 378;
Chinese in South Africa, 379; Chinese in Tahiti, 378; Chinese in West
Indies, 378; Italians in Brazil, 373-374. See also Indentured Laborers
Contract, Law of. 248 Conversos. See New Christians Cook. James. 72.
182. 184 Cook. M. A., 396 "Coolie" trade. See Labor trade, China

Copal incense, trade in. 68 Copans. Jean, 394 Copper: bracelets, trade
in, 217; as currency, 332;. mining. Chile. 346; mining, Rhodesia. 359;
trade in. 39.43.67. 164. 185. 204. 218; as tribute, 226 Copper Belt. 229
Copper River, 185 Córdoba. 35, 103 Core-periphery distinction. 296 Cork,
trade in, 111 Corkran, David H.. 417 Cornell Thailand Project. 320- 321
Coromandel Coast. 48. 235. 241 Cortes. Hernán, 129, 131 Cossacks, 183

Costa Rica, 421; banana plantations, 324; railroad construction,

   323

Cotterill, R. S., 417 Cotton. 59. 147; cloth from Bengal. 244. 270;
cultivation. Egypt. 286-287, 310; cultivation,

India. 290.295. 310.418; cultivation. Peru, 377; cultivation.

480 Index

Uganda, 290. 418; cultivation, Uganda, and sociopolitical effects, 290;
cultivation, U.S. South, 280, 310,418; exports of. 278; gin, 279;
imports of, 278, 295; mills. 356; mills and labor force, Lancashire,
356; trade, organization, 282-284; trade. U.S.. 282-284; trade in raw.

   146.246,257,260,287; types of.

279

Cotton South. See U.S.. South Country Banks. 273 Country Traders, 257
Cowboys, 322

Cowries: as currency, 332; trade in. 227

Cox, Oliver C.. 408 Craft production. 136. 149,268. 269; Indian, in
competition with machine-made imports. 251; severed from subsistence
agriculture. 317 Crane. Verner W.. 417 Craton. Michael. 151, 198, 199,

   316,409 Cree. 17. 165. 171. 172. 173. 175.

   177.182 Creek. 70, 203, 284, 285. 417 Creek Town (Etunko). 218. 220
Crimea. 24

Crises, capitalist: 291. 294, 299300, 303, 304-305, 311-313, 350, 364,
381-382 Crisis of aristocracy. West Africa.

   330-331 Crisis of feudalism. 108-109, 119, 405-406 Crisis of
Fourteenth Century. See Crisis of feudalism Crisis of Seventeenth
Century, 119, 195-196 Crompton, Samuel, 273 Cross. Harry E.. 408 Cross
River, 218, 219, 220 Crouzet, Fran?ois. 407 Crusades. 105-106. 201.405
Cuatequitl. See Hispanic America, labor draft Cuba. 156.
196.201.228,335,409. Chinese contract laborers in, 378; end of slavery.
316; slave imports. 316; slavery intensified, 19th century, 316, 335;
sugar production in, 335 Cultivator-pastoralist interaction.

   32-33, 50 Culture: instrumentality and ideology in, 388; and
migration, 361 - 362; processual view of, 387; rethinking concept of.
387- 388 Culture System, 334 Cuna. 155-156

Cundinamarca. 63

Cunnison. Ian. 227.413

Cura?ao. 130. 197

Curtin, Philip D., 200,203,412,413

Cuvelier, Jean. 413

Cuzco. 59. 131

Cyprus, 195

Czechs, in U.S., 364

D

Daaku, Kwame Yeboa, 4. 209.412 Dagomba, 212

Dahomey, 206, 213-215,216, 220, 331, 332,412; response to declining
slaving, 331 Dakota, Dakota Sioux, 171, 173, 177, 180, 182 Dalles, the,
190 Damas, David, 410 Damascus, 26, 102 Dande River, 221, 223 Danes, 210
Danube River, 107 Danube Valley, 25, 26 Davenant, Charles, 125
Davenport, William. 259.415 Davidson, Basil, 206, 210 Davis, David
Brion, 198, 202 Davis, Kingsley, 360 Davis, Ralph, 200,407 Dawley, Alan,
423 Dean. Warren, 372,422.425 De Beers, 350

De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd.,

   350

Debo, Angie, 417 Deccan, Western, 246 Deccan Plateau, 48 Déculturation,
Cuna, 155-156 Deep South. U.S., 280 Deerr, Noel, 422 Deerskins, trade
in, 203 De-industrialization of rural areas, 360

Delagoa Bay, 347, 349 De Laguna, Frederica, 411 Delaware. 130 Delhi,
25,45 Deli, 330

Demerara. See Guyana Demography: slave trade, 194

   201,412,413. See also Population Denkyira, 210, 211 Denmark, 158

Dentalium shells, trade in, 185 Depot system, Chinese labor trade, 375

Dermigny, Louis, 245, 252, 254, 255,415 De-skilling, 358 Despres, Leo,
425 Dessaint, Alain Y., 422 Dessaint. William Y. 422

Detroit, 175

Deutsch, Karl W.. 102,419 Dhangar, 369 Dharma. 46, 83 Diaguita, 65

Diamond mining. South Africa: 347. 350. 366. 367 Diamonds 346. 350. 352
Diamond, Stanley, 412 Dias, Bartholomeu, 232 Dietary changes and
stimulants.

   333 Difaqane. 350

Differentiation under capitalism: and mercantile wealth, 305; and state,
307- 309; and waves of development, 304 Diffie. Bailey W., 406, 414
Dike, K. Onwunka, 413 Dillen, J. G. van der, 406 Dillon. Richard, 377
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 425 Dingiswayo, 347 Di Peso, Charles, 400 Disease,
133-134, 146; among Abenaki, 163; and fur trade, 193; among Huron, 165;
impact on Northwest Coast, 192; malaria,

133; and malnutrition, 134; measles, 133; mercury poisoning. 138;
respiratory ailments,

133; silicosis. 138; smallpox, 133; yellow fever and slave mortality,
281

Disraeli, Benjamin. 379 Diu, 236, 288 Diula. Dyula. 39. 342. 343 Dixon.
Russell A.. 402 DIamini. 349

Dobb. Maurice. 265. 272. 291. 407.

   415.416.418 Dobras. 196

Dobyns, Henry F.. 133, 134 Docker. Edward W., 259, 334 Dodge. Ernest S.,
415 Dogrib, 175

Dom Henrique. See Henry the Navigator Donnithorne, A. G.. 422 Don
Quixote. 114 Doria family. 114 Douglas Channel, 186 Douglas, David C..
108 Douglas, Mary. 208.412 Douglas. Paul. 366 Dowd, Douglas F.. 417
Downs, Richard, 330 Draperies, "new" and "old," 270 Dravidian-speakers.
340 Drucker, Philip. 185. 191,410.411 Dry Belt. Old World, 25, 29 Duke
Town (Atakpa), 218 Dumont, Louis, 45,46. 397-398

Index 481

Duncan, Ronald J.. 420

Durango, 135

Durham, 291

Durham, Philip, 421

Dutch, 71, 115, 124, 130. 149, 150,

151, 155, 159, 161, 165, 166,

195. 197,209,210,212.254, 255.406. in Africa. 197. 209; in Asia.
237-239. 240, 244. 259.

414; attempt to monopolize spice trade, 238-239; in Brazil, 150 — 151;
in Caribbean. 150-151,

152, 153; coffee planting in Java, 336; derangement of Asian sea trade,
239; development of sugar plantations, Indonesia. 334; diffusion of
cocoa to Africa. 340; diffusion of tea to Europe. 339; draw silver from
Hispanic America. 153; fishing. 115; flow of wealth to England. 119;
limit to development. 119.406; loss of Guyana, 334; reduce power of
Southeast Asian polities, 239; reliance on commerce, 116; sailors for
fleet. 238; shipping, 116,

119. 124. 238-239; in South Africa, 347, 350; in Southeast Asia, 153;
sources of slaves in Asia, 195; spice trade. 305; textile technology,
270; trade with Baltic. 115. 116, 159; trade with Spain. 116; use of
slaves. 238; wage levels. 270 Dutch East India Company, 130, 233. 237,
238, 239, 259, 270,

   305, 347, 374-375 Dutch East Indies, coffee exports.

336

Dutch-English rivalry. 116-117,

   119, 130, 150, 197, 240, 270, in textile trade, 270 Dutch Guiana,
Chinese contract laborers in. 378 Dutch-Portuguese rivalry, 150.

   197,237-239 Dutch West India Company. 130. 150. 152, 159. 161; links
fur trade of two continents, 159 Dutt, Romesh Chunder, 414 Duyvendak. J.
J. L., 399 Dwaben. 212 Dyaks. 377

Dyestuffs. trade in. 111, 112 E

East Anglia. 296 East India Company. See English East India Company East
Indians: as indentured laborers in Assam. 369; as indentured laborers in
Bhutan, 369; as indentured laborers in Burma. 369,

370; as indentured laborers in Ceylon. 340. 370; as indentured laborers
in Fiji. 334. 369; as indentured laborers in Guyana,

334, 369; as indentured laborers in Jamaica, 369; as indentured laborers
in Malaya, 369, 370; as indentured laborers in Mauritius,

333, 369; as indentured laborers in Natal, 334, 370; as indentured
laborers on plantations, 333, 334.

   363, 369; as indentured laborers in Trinidad, 334, 369; in Near
Eastern labor migration, 383 East-Iranian-speakers, 50 Eastland Company,
122 Eberhard, Wolfgang. 398 Eberhardt, E. Kingman, 402 Economics,
discipline of, 9— 10,421 Ecuador, 60, 63, 140, 156, 157; banana
plantations in, 324; labor migration from Colombia. 383 Edo-speakers,
215 Edwards. Michael M., 416,418 Edwards, Richard. 424 Efik. 218—219
Egufo. 209

Egypt. 26, 102, 103,236.286-287, 294. 417-418; army, 286; attempted
industrialization. 286; construction of Suez Canal. 286, 294; cotton
production. 286

   287. 291 ; foreign debt of. 294; irrigation agriculture, 286; land
tenure, 286, 287; in Near Eastern labor migration, 383; occupied by
England. 294. 301; peasantry. 286—287; railroad construction in. 294;
rebellion. 287. 294; tributary relations. 286 Eisenstadt, Shmuel N., 403
Ekholm, Gordon F., 400 Ekholm. Kajsa, 222,413 Eko (Lagos), 215 Ekpe
(Egbo) sodality, 219 Ekuono matrilineage. 211 Elburz Mountains, 25
Electrical appliances, 381 Electricity, use in industry, 304, 312
Electronic industry, 304 Electronic machines. 382 Electronics industry,
382 Elliott. John H., 113, 124. 139.406 Elmina, 129. 196, 197,209,210,
211

Elvin, Mark, 52. 53. 55, 398. 399 Embree. John F.. 321 Encomienda. 142,
143,243 Engels, Friedrich. 277.400.401, 416,424 Engerman. Stanley L..
280. 281. 417

England. 103, 105, 107, 108, 110,

117, 118, 119, 120-123. 124. 125, 150, 151. 160, 197, 198,

199, 206, 233, 246, 252. 257, 261. 265. 266, 267, 268. 270. 276. 278.
279. 284. 290. 291.

292. 294. 297. 301. 305. 306. 309. 364. 373.407-408; advantages of early
capitalist breakthrough. 309; agricultural crisis, 364; agriculture.
120-121. 122. 268; alliance between capitalist industrialists and
landowners, 308; Bank of. 312; capital-indus- try combines in, 300;
Civil War. 292; cloth manufacture and export, 121 — 122, 268; commercial
impetus to craft production, 122; competition in overseas markets. 296;
conquest of Canada by. 159; cotton exports to Latin America. 278;
country banks in. 273; and development of capitalist mode of production.
266. 268-278. 290, 296; and development of labor market. 269.277; and
development of national states, 309; domination of world trade, 419;
draws silver from Hispanic America. 153; effects of Great Depression,
364; end to serfdom in, 269; exports to Europe, 199, 200; food supply.
313-314; and imperialism, 301; income drawn from Caribbean. 151 ;
industrial downturn in. 312; impact on Kachin. 346; import controls.
122. 270-271. 290; investments in Argentina. 322-323; Irish immigration,
276-277; iron and steel industries, 292, 312; landless population, 269;
land tenure.

121, 123, 269; marginality of,

120, 123; from mercantile domination to capitalist mode of production,
266; merchants and nobility. 269—270; merchants' organizations. 122;
migratory movements, 276-277, 362; military development. 122; military
involvement, 120, 122; national debt, 117; naval development, 122, 240;
occupation of Egypt by, 287, 294; occupation of Lower Burma by, 319,
346; occupation of Upper Burma by. 346; policy towards Malay kingdoms,
369, 375-376; political influence of East Indian interests. 257;
political influence of West Indian interests. 257; population. 269;
reliance on indentured servitude by. 202; religious conflicts in. 278;
role of peasantry in.

482 Index

121, 123, 269; role of textile industry in capitalist development. 278.
296; royal control in.

120, 123; shift of cotton exports to Asia. 278; shipbuilding, 251;
supplementary rural crafts. 269; support of South American trade, 278;
taxation in. 118. 120. 122. 123; textile entrepreneurs. 271273; trade
shift to Far East, 241, 246, 260; trade with China, 241,

246, 252-258, 343; trade with Indonesia. 240; and transformation of
state. 122. 123; urbanization. 276-277. 360. 362; wage levels, 270. 272;
West Country.

160. 296; wool exports. 121.

278; working classes. 358; as "workshop of the world." 292.

312. See also English; Britain; British

Engler. Robert. 10 English. 72. 95. 106. 107. 108, 116,

117, 119, 120-123, 124, 130, 149, 151, 152, 153, 155, 197, 198, 199,
200, 202, 203, 204,

209.210,212,214,233,238. 239-241, 244-252, 254. 255,

257, 259, 260, 261, 269, 270, 271, 277, 280, 284. 286. 287.
288.290.291,292, 295, 312, 339, 356; in Asia. 233; in Assam. 339; in
Caribbean, 151, 152, 153; in India. 241, 244-252, 265, 369,414-415;
individualism. 407; and Irish workers, 277— 278; in North America, 161,
165, 166, 168. 169, 170, 173, 174.

   177. See also British English Amazon Company. 122 English-Dutch
competition, 116

   117, 119, 130, 150, 197, 240, 270, 295, 408, in textile trade, 270,
295 English East India Company, 117,

122, 130, 153, 173,210,233, 239-240, 241, 244-245, 246,

250, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 260,270-271; bills of credit of. 257;
monopoly on opium. 257; officialdom. 245-246; organizational changes in,
245-246. passes to Crown, 260

English-French competition, 130, 168-169, 173, 174, 175, 177. 192, 265;
in sugar production, 316

English-French wars, effects on Caribbean islands, 316 English-German
competition, 271 English-Indian competition, 287; in textiles, 249, 251,
270-271,295 English-Indian interaction, 245-

   246,251-252 English-Portuguese trade, Ricardo on. 314

English-U.S. war (1812), 182, 285;

   effects on Caribbean islands, 316 Epstein, A. L.. 359 Epthalites
(Ye-Tai). 50 Equatoria, 204 Erie. 165

Erie Canal. 283.284. 291 Ermine fur. 158 Eromanga, 258 Espa?ola. 133,
204 Essen. 356, 360

Estates, Eastern Germany, labor force of, 319 Ethiopia, 336

Ethnic differentiation: and capitalism. 380— 381; and labor markets.
380-381 Ethnic identities, and labor markets. 381 Ethnic segmentation.
379-381 Ethnohistory. 19 Euphrates River. 26 Eurasians, 370

Europe. 100-130, 158,232,233,

265, 267-268, 292; affects Africa through trade. 206; agricultural
intensification in, 105; and Asia, 125; Atlantic fringe of,

117; and capitalist development, 78,79,266,267,268, coffee consumption,
336; commercial expansion, 265; compared with Asia. 85, 232-233, 267;
core regions, 29; crisis in agriculture and out-migration, 313-319;
decline after a.D. 1300. 108; before expansion, 101 —125; expansion,
352; forces of expansion, 101, 129; forest clearance, 105; imports from
England, 199, 200; interaction with Asia, 81, 125; interaction with
Levant,

101-103, 104; labor migration, 383; marginal before a.d. 1000, 71,
101-103, 123, 267; merchants in, 85,267-268; merchants and state in,
109-110.

118, 123; migration overseas, 363; migration within. 362363; nation
formation and supposed cultural homogeneity in. 379; naval policy,
233-234; occupation of West Africa by, 332; and opportunities for trade.
85; political consolidation in,

101, 104-108, 117; political expansion. 265; political alternatives,
108; proximity to waterways, 29, 31, 85; role in creation of modem
world. 385; shipbuild

ing. 2 3 5 - 2 36; as source of slaves, 103, 104, 195, 201; state
formation and expansion. 109 -118. 120-125; state formation and supposed
cultural homogeneity, 379; sugar beet production, 316; tea introduced,
339; textile imports from India, 312; timber exports, 103, 104; use of
slaves in Asia. 195; wheat imports, 312 —

   313, 318-319; emigration to U.S.. 364 Europe, northern. 197 Europe,
southern, emigration to U.S.. 364 Europe, Western. 209 European nation
states and "plural societies" compared. 379 Europeans, position in Asia.
234 Evans. Clifford. 400 Ewe. 341

"Export platforms," 382 F

Factories. 274-277; and automation, 382; discipline in. 275. 276, 278;
organization, 274—276; size of, 355-356 Fagan, Brian, 396 Fage, J. D.,
207, 396 Fairbank, John K.. 255,415 Fals Borda. Orlando, 156 Famine:
Bengal. 245; Northeastern Brazil, 325 Fante, 211.212. 331 Fante-English
alliance, 212 Faron, Louis G., 156, 399 Fayetteville, 283 Feast of the
Dead, 164, 170, 171,

   172, 186, 194; compared with Midewiwin, 172; compared with potlatch,
186-187 Feathers, trade in, 67 Feinman, Gary, 134 Fen River, China, 29
Fenton. William N., 409-410 Fernando Po. 196, 340 Ferrous minerals,
rising use of, 355 Fetu, 209

Feuchtwang, Stephan, 83,425 Feudalism. 106, 113,403-404; "classic,"
117;crisisof. 108- 109, 119,405-406 Feuerbach. Ludwig, 75 Fez, 24

Fieldhouse, D. K., 246 Fiji. 258. 259. 369. 370; use of indentured
laborers in, 334, 369 Finer, Samuel E., 118 Finland, 183 Finland, Gulf
of, 31 Finlayson, Roderick, 188 Firearms: Aro control of, 220; and

Index 483

Asante expansion. 211; Da* hornean control over trade in, 215;
development of. 209-210; distribution of. 210. 223; and expansion in
East Africa, 228, 229; and political power. 210; role of. 209; trade in,
4, 155, 166, 172, 173, 177, 178, 180, 181, 185,

186, 188. 206. 209,210,215,

217, 218, 220, 259, 285, 334; training in use of. 210; use in
“blackbirding." 334; use by I jaw. 217

Fish, trade in. 111, 140. 164. 217;

   trade in dried. 185 Fisher, Raymond H., 411 Fisher. Robin. 186.
192.411 Fishing, Dutch, 115; Niger Delta.

   217, 218; North Atlantic. 160 Fish River. 347 Flagelados. 325

Flanders. 106. 107, 116, 121, 197, 296 Flathead, 177

Fleet: Chinese. 236; Egyptian Mamluk. 236; Gujarati. 236; Turkish. 233
Flemings. 121, 150 Flinn,M. W.,416 Florence. 37

Florescano. Enrique. 408.409 Florida. 69. 119.284.285 Fogel. Robert W..
280, 281,416,

417

Folk-Urban Continuum. 11. 14 Fon, 213,214 Foner, Philip S.. 283 Food,
advances of. 175: trade in.

   163, 327; tribute in, 226 Food processing, automated. 382 Foodstuffs,
as commodities. 318

   325. 352 Foreign debt. Egypt. 287 Foreman, G.. 417 Forest products,
trade in. 59. 65 Forrest. Denys, 422 Fort Astoria, 176 Fort Benton. 180
Fort Churchill. 173, 175 Fort Duquesne. 173 Fort Edmonton. 178 Fortes,
Meyer, 89, 93 Fort McLoughlin, 189 Fort Nassau. Albany. 161 Fort Pitt.
173

Fort Rupert. 182. 189. 190. 191, 192

Fort Rupert Kwakiutl, 191

Fort St. George. 241

Fort Selkirk. 190

Fort Simpson, 182. 189. 190. 191

FortStikine. 188

Foster. John, 276. 278, 356, 359,

   416

Foster-Carter, Aidan. 404 Foust. Clifford M.. 411 Fowler. Melvin L.. 400
Fox, Edward W.. 107, 117, 406 Fox, Richard G.. 363, 398 Fox (Indians).
170 Fra Mauro. 232

France. 105. 107-108. 117- 118.

119, 120, 121, 122, 124, 130, 149, 151, 155, 156, 196, 197,

198, 228. 238. 284. 339. 406407; bourgeoisie of, 118; compared to
England. 118; colonization in North America by, 130; Egyptian credits,
294; industrialization of, 118; income drawn from Saint Domingue. 151;
Italian immigration, 371 ; integration of, 379. 406-407; iron and steel
industry, 292; king and nobility in, 118; labor migration from
Mediterranean region. 383; peasant emancipation. 317; peasantry,
117-118; political consolidation, 117-118, 119; royal control and
merchant activity.

   117, 118; working classes. 358 France. Southwestern, 358 France,
Western. 296 Frances. Albert. 382 Frank, André Gunder, 22-23,85,
297-298, 408 Frankel, S. H., 424 “Franks" (Feringhi, Fo-lang-ki),

   71, 103 Frantz. Joe B.. 421 Fraser River. 178. 192 Free and servile
labor. 295, 316 Freedman, Maurice. 425 Free labor. 295 Freeman. C., 382
Freeman-Grenville, G. S. P.. 397 Free trade, 261

Freight rates: decline of maritime, 293, 313; decline of overland,
293,313 French: access to Great Lakes region, 169, 171, 173; in Asia.
244. 246. 259; in Egypt, 286; in North America, 161, 163, 164, 165, 166,
168, 169, 170, 171,

   173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 192; introduce cocoa on Ivory Coast, 342;
occupy Cochinchina, 321; Revolution, 118. 161 French, David, 185 French
and Indian War. See Seven Years' War French-Canadians. in U.S., 364.

   366

French East India Company, 130,

   173

French-English competition. 130.

164, 168-169, 173, 174, 175,

177, 192, 265, 271; in sugar production, 316

Fried, Morton H., 76, 398, 404 Friedman. Jonathan, 345.400.403. 425

Friedmann, Harriet, 319, 421 Frobenius, Leo, 411 Fuggers, 114 Fukien.
254. 257, 362 Functionalism. 15—16. 394. 412 Funza, 63

Furber, Holden. 415.440 Furnas. J.C., 258, 259,415 Furnivall.J. S..
379,425 Furs: key role in Russian economy, 159; trade in. 109, 119, 158,
164, 185

Furtado, Celso, 337, 369 Fur trade, 158-194, 305, 409411; in Asia, 109,
159; changes in, 173, 182, 189, 192-194; to China, 159, 182, 183, 184;
and destruction of fur-bearing animals. 183-184. 189; and disease, 193;
effects on Indians of, 161 — 163, 174, 194; financing. Norway, 158; and
gift exchange.

165, 193; history of. 158-163.

192— 194; and hunting territories, 163,409; Hurons in, 163 —

165, 169; Indians in. 161-162.

193— 194; international, 159; and Iroquois, 165- 170; key role of beaver
in, 159-160, 169; and kin-ordered mode of production, 193; maritime,
182-189; New Amsterdam in. 161 ; North American, 17, 109, 130, 159-194;
and Northwest Coast, 182- 192; and Northwestern Athabascans, 175; Ottawa
in. 170- 171; and Plains Indians, 176- 181; and political competition.
95, 161, 165, 167,

168, 193; and population decline, 193; as putting-out system, 194;
Quebec in, 161 ; and rise of new groups, 193— 194; routes of,

161, 163, 172, 173, 174, 176,

177, 189, 190; Russian, 159, 182- 184, 190; Russian, compared with North
American. 183; sea otter fur in. 182, 184. 185,

186. 188. 189; and slavery on Northwest Coast. 188. 190; shift from
maritime to inland trade. 189; state organization of Russian, 183; and
subsistence activities, 163, 164, 166, 175, 177, 193, 194; supplies for,
161, 171, 174,

178, 179, 181, 182, 184. 193; transportation in, 178, 182; and

484 Index

   warfare. 161, 169. 186. 190, 193 Fustian. 271

G

Gallissot. René, 403 Gama. Vasco da. 129.232 Gambier, 376

Ganges River, Gangetic Plain, 25,

   30,48, 49, 244 Ganguli, B. N? 414 Gao, 31,39 Gap of Benin, 200 Garcia
Marques, Gabriel, 324 Garfield. Viola E.. 411 Garrell. Beverly. 418
Ga-speakers. 210, 340 Gates. Paul W? 421 Gauchos. 323 Gearing. Fred. 417
Geertz, Clifford, 334,422 Gender relations, 93 Generational relations,
92,93-94 Génicot, Leopold, 405 Genoa, Genoese, 37. 104. 112. 114,
115.124.129.232; merchantsof. 114-115; slave trade. 201-202 Genovese.
Eugene D., 416. 417 Gent, John H., 124 George III, 255 Georgia, 69, 279
Georgia. Georgian Bay, 163, 164 German-English competition, 271 Germanic
invasions, 112 Germans, as indentured laborers in Brazil, 373; Northern,
116 Germany; agricultural crisis, 364; alliance between capitalist
indus* trialists and landowners, 308; bank-industry' combines in,
300-301; effects of Great Depression on, 364; emigration to Brazil, 364;
emigration to North America, 363; emigration to Russia. 364;
industrialization. 362; integration of, 379; iron and steel industry,
292. 312; Italian immigration, 371 ; state policy against Polish farm
settlement. 319; technology and industrialization, 312; working classes.
358 Germany, eastern, 296, 319, 362, 371; emigration from, 362 Germany,
southern, 106, 107, 114, 296

Germany, West: labor migration from Mediterranean region, 383; refugee
influx, 383 Gerschenkron, Alexander, 319.

   419, 421 Gè-speakers, 150 Geyl, Pieter, 406 Ghana (medieval), 39, 40
Ghana (present-day). 230, 340;

   cocoa exports, 341; labor migration to, 383 Ghats. 48 Ghazi. 34, 35
Ghazipur, 257 Ghirshman, Roman, 102 Ghorids, 50 Gibbs, Marion, 407
Gibraltar, 129 Gibson, Charles, 133, 409 Gibson, James R., 184, 411 Gift
exchange, 164; and fur trade,

   165, 193; Iroquois, 166; Nipis- sing, 164 Gila River Basin, 68
Gintis. Herbert. 416 Gitskan, 189 Giustiniani family, 114 Glamann,
Kristof, 116, 414 Glasgow, 279

Glass, trade in, 39, 104, 227, 234 Glassblowers, Carmaux, 358 Glorious
Revolution, 161 Goa, 110, II1. 235, 238; Archbishop of. 110 Godavari
River, 246 Godelier, Maurice, 394, 401, 402, 403, 425 Godinho, Vitorino
Magalháes, 237, 414

Godunov, Boris, 183 Goitein. S. D., 396 Golconda. 240

Gold, 38-39, 43, 64, 67, 68, 135,

158, 195, 196,205,236, 352; deposits of, Antilles. 135: deposits of.
Australia. 377—378; deposits of, California, 377; deposits of, Fraser
River, 192; deposits of. Jívaro, 65; deposits of. southern Andes, 65;
deposits of. West Africa, 41, 103; flow of, from Americas to Europe,
135; mining, Colombia, 135; mining. East Africa, 42-43; mining. South
Africa, 347. 350. 366. 367; mining. West Africa, 38-39, 197-198; rush,
Australia, 258. 323; rush, British Columbia. 192,377; trade in. 38-39,
41, 42-43, 64, 109, 112, 119, 155, 206. 209. 211 Gold Coast. 197. 198.
200. 207.

   208-212, 216, 340, 412 Goldman. Irving, 190, 411 Goldmann, Lucien,
425 Gonja: Eastern, 212; Western, 212 Goody, Jack. 210. 397, 412 Gordon,
David M? 357, 424 Gordon, Manya, 358 Gough, Kathleen, 250, 370, 371,
394, 415, 424 Gouldner, Alvin, 393, 394 Gourou, Pierre, 399

Grabum. Nelson H. H., 411 Grain, trade in. 111. 120 Grain Coast, 200
Gramsci, Antonio. 425 Granada, 40 Graymont. Barbara, 410 Great Accra.
210

Great Depression. 294, 303, 304—

   305, 311-313, 332. 350, 364; effect on England of, 364; effect on
Germany of, 364; and imperialism, 313; and market for palm oil, 332
Greater Antilles. See Antilles Great Lakes, 130, 161, 164, 165. 169,
171. 174. 265; fishing, 171, 174; French access to, 169, 171;
populations on, 170-172 Great Plains. 165. 176-177, 193. 318

Great Slave Lake, 175 Greece. Ancient, 5; city-states of, 81, 102;
expansion, 102; Persian wars of. 81, 102; Modem, 292 Greeks, as slaves,
202; in U.S.. 364. 366

Green Bay, 170 Greenberg, Michael, 255, 415 Greenfield, Sidney W.. 196
Greenland. 106 Greenstone, trade in. 185 Greenwood, G., 421 Gregg,
Dorothy, 394 Griffin, James B., 400 Grijalva River, 338 Griqualand, 350
Gros Ventre. 173. 177, 181 Grousset, René. 33, 183, 395 "Grunshi," 230
Guadalquivir River, 139 Guales, 203 Guanajuato, 135, 138 Guanche, 196
Guano, 59, 377

Guatemala. 59, 68, 146. 337; land tenure, 337 Guatemala City. 66 Guaymi,
325; as laborers on banana plantations, 325 Guha. Amalendu,
287,288,290,418 Gujaras, Gujaratis. 50, 58. 234.236 Gujarat. 48, 234,
236, 288 Gulf Coast, North America, 203 Gulf of Guinea, 150, 196, 340
Gum, trade in, 196 Gunther, Ema. 188, 410 Gunther, John, 350 Gupta
dynasty, 48, 49 Gutman, Herbert G.. 281, 417 Guyana, 368, 370; Chinese
contract laborers in. 378: East Indians as indentured laborers in, 334,
369; England ousts Dutch from, 334;

Index 485

slavery ended in, 368

H

Habakkuk, H. J., 366 Habib, Irfan. 243. 403, 414 Haciendas. 143—145,408
Hadjinicolaou-Marava, Anne, 405 Hafsids, 40

Haida. 184, 185, 186, 188 Haiti, 151

Hall, D. G. E.. 399. 413 Hall, Stuart, 425 Halperin-Donghi, Tulio, 421
Hamburg, 107, 317 Hamilton, E. J., 406 Hammocks, trade in, 155 Han
dynasty, 25, 54 Han people. 29, 399 Handbook of North American Indians,

410

Handbook of South American Indians,

399

Hanks. Lucien M.. 320, 421 Hanoi. 51

Hansa, Hanse, 107, 114, 121, 158 Harappa, 30

Hardware, trade in, 206. 218, 258,

334

Hargreaves, James, 273 Harnetty, Peter, 418 Harris. Marvin. 412
Harrisons and Crosfields Ltd.. 317 Hart, Keith, 422 Hartwell. R. M? 416
Hartwell, Ronald, 421 Harvester-thresher, 319 Harvey, David, 423
Hat-making. 159-160 Haupt. Georges, 423 Hauptman. Laurence M., 409
Hausa. 39, 40. 312. 331 Havana. 139

Hawaii. Hawaiians. 258, 259. 362; Chinese contract laborers in. 378; as
workers in Peru. 377 Hawkins. John. 204 Hayakawa. Jiro. 402 Hays,
Hoffman R? 188, 189 Heberle. Rudolph. 8 Hechter. Michael. 278. 379
Heesterman, J. C., 47, 50. 398 Hegel. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 21, 51,
75 Hegelian dialectic, 401 Heichelheim, Fritz H., 405 Heine-Geldern,
Robert von, 399 Helm, June, 410 Helms, Mary, 155, 400 Hemming, John, 134
Henderson, Richard N., 217, 413 Henige, David, 209 Henry the Navigator,
111 — 112,

232

Herat, 50 Herero, 349 Herlihy, Patricia, 421 Herodotus, 81

Herring fishing, 115, 160, 184 Herskovits, Melville J., 412 Heyd, W.,
396, 404 Hickerson, Harold. 410 Hickey. Gerald C.. 399 Hidalgo. 67

Hidatsa. 176. 177. See also "Village Indians"

Hides. 322; trade in, 151. 155. 185 Hill, Christopher, 407 Hill. Polly,
342. 422 "Hill People," in opium production, 343-346 Hill Shans (Tai
Loi). 346 Hilton. Rodney, 405 - 406, 407 Himalaya Mountains, 25 Hindess,
Barry. 402, 403, 404 Hinduism, 243, 250 Hintze. Otto. 404 Hirst, Paul Q?
402. 403. 404 Hispanic America, 131—149, 151 —

157, 408-409; administration.

131, 133. 140. 142-143, 145 —

149, 157; agriculture. 141, 144. 157; Catholicism, 148; demand for
slaves. 195; encomiendas, 142-143; haciendas. 143-145. 408; haciendas as
adjuncts of other enterprises, 144; Indian tribute, 136. 140. 143, 146,
149; king and nobility, 142-143; loss of silver through contraband. 153;
labor draft. 136-137. 142-143, 149; land tenure, 142, 143-145; livestock
keeping, 135, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147; markets, 144; mining, 135-140.
141. 149. 157. 400; royal support of towns and mines. 142; silver. 113,
114. 115.

130, 141. 151-152, 257. 260. 408; slavery, 143, 203; town organization,
133; town system of supplies, 142, 144, warfare and slavery, 143. See
also Castile. Castilians: Castile-Aragon; Indians, Hispanic America;
Spain. Spaniards.

Historical sociologists. 393-394 History, and modes of production. 391

History Task Force. 424 Hmong. See Miao, Mong Ho, Ping-Ti, 256. 377
Hobbes. Thomas, 125 Hobsbawm, Eric J.. 274, 278. 293.

   312. 333. 355. 356. 401, 407, 416, 418, 423 Hobson. John A., 300
Hodgson. Marshall D.. 395

Hohokam, 68 Holder, Preston, 410 Holy Roman Empire, 106, 107 Honduras,
68; banana plantations in, 324 Honduras. British. See Belize Hong Kong.
321, 358. 375, 377. 382 Hooker, J. R? 394 Hopkins. A. G., 39. 332. 397.
412, 422

Hormuz, 235, 238 Horse pastoralism. Great Plains, 94; change from
cultivation to, 177; Cree-Assiniboin, 175; Spanish origins of, 176
Horses, 135; in Plains Indian culture, 176-177, 180, 181; raising in
Africa limited by tsetse fly, 204; in Siberian fur trade. 184; trade in,
39. 213 Horton, Robin, 413 Hottentot. See Khoi-Khoi Houghton, D. Hobart.
424 Households, lose functions to industry and commerce. 383 Howard,
Joseph K.. 410 Hu, Hsien Chin, 54 Huancavelica mercury mine, 142 Hudson,
Charles M.. 417 Hudson River, 161. 172 Hudson's Bay, 173, 175 Hudson
Bay, Hudson's Bay Company, 172, 173, 175, 177,

   178. 182. 183. 188, 189. 190 Hughes, H. Stuart. 393 Hughli, 235
Huilliche. 65 Hulagu Khan, 26 Hum, 223

Human species: and intentionality. 75; sociality of. 73—74; relation to
nature through labor. 73. 74. 386

Humboldt. Wilhelm von, 16 Hune, Shirley, 378, 424 Hungarians, in U.S..
364 Hungarian Steppe. 29 Hunt, George T., 410 Hunting gear, trade in,
164 Hunting territories. North America, 163, 409 Huntington, Samuel P.,
7 Huron, 163- 165, 167. 170. 174.

   187, 410; as middlemen, 164, 169, 170 Huron, as lingua franca, 164
Huron-Algonkin interaction, 163-164 Hutchins. Francis G., 252 Hutton.
John H., 47 Hwai River, 50 Hwei (Hui). 374 Hyde. Francis E.. 293. 418

486 Index

Hyderabad, 290 Hydraulic engineering. Cochin- china, 321 Hymes, Dell,
394 [

lasak. See Tribute, fur

Iberian Peninsula, 107. 108, 113.

   119. 123; slavery in, 201 Iberians. See Portugal. Spain Iberians in
America. See Hispanic America; Portuguese America Ibibio-speakers, 218
Ibn Battutah. 24 Ibn Fadlan, 158 Ibn Hawqal. 304 Ibn Khaldun. 38. 120.
298 I bo, 217, 220. 230, 413 Idah, 217

Ideology and interests. 390 Ideology and power, 390 Ideology-making, 388
Igala. 217 lgbo. 217. 230 Ijaw-speakers. 217 Ile-Ife, 206. 213. 215
Illinois. 170

Imbangala, 224-225, 226, 227 Imperialism, 300, 313: and Great
Depression, 313; Lenin on, 300-301; Luxemburg on, 302; Schumpeter on,
301—302; "social," 302, 313; in West Africa. 332 Imperialism (by Lenin),
300 Imperialism: A Study (by Hobson), 300

Import controls, 309 Import substitution. 271 Inalcik, Halal. 396 Inca,
59, 60. 61. 63. 131. 133. 134. 145, 147; empire. 59. 60. 61; political
economy, 62-63; redistribution among, 82 Incense: production of, 258;
trade in. 67 Incest taboo. 90. 98 Indentured laborers: Assam, 369;
Bhutan, 369; Bihar, 369; Burma, 369; Brazil. 373; Fiji. 334. 369;
Guyana. 334, 369; Jamaica. 369; Malaya, 369; Mauritius. 333, 369;
migrations of, 363; Natal,

334, 369; Peru, 377; on plantations, 369; Queensland, 334; in
sea-cucumber collecting, 259; South Africa, 367; in sugar plantations,
333; Trinidad, 334, 369

Indentured servants, U.S., 363 Indentured servitude. 202—203 India, 24,
25, 30. 31. 42. 43, 44, 45-50, 57. 102. 119, 129, 173.

228, 235, 239-252, 265. 268, 278, 307; army. 249. 251. 252;
capitalization of textile industry. 288; caste. 45-50. 260. 396397;
cotton cultivation. 257.290; cotton exports to China, 287, 288; costs of
English occupation,

260, 312; disruption of textile crafts, 249, 251; ecological divisions,
48-49; exports and English trade deficits, 261, 312; exports of raw
cotton, 287; imports of Japanese yarn, 290, influx of bullion from
Islamic sphere, 155; interaction with Southeast Asia, 56; Islamic
state-making in, 234, 241; labor-trade, 370; land tenure.

247-249. 251. 260; moneylenders. 247. 248. 250. 251; opium exports to
China. 346; power shifts in rural areas, 249; railroad construction,
251. 260-261; rice imports from Burma, 320; role in British Empire.
260.288. 301. 312.419; role in international economic system, 261, 288,
312; Roman gold in, 255; ship-building. 288; as source of indentured
laborers, 333; studies of, 397-398; taxation, 247-249, 251. 260; textile
crafts, 249.2 51,270- 271; textile exports to Europe, 312; textile
exports to Japan, 312; trade route though Indian ocean. 44. See also
East Indians; English, in India

India, North, changes in land tenure, 248, 260 India. South, changes in
land tenure. 250—251; changes in taxation, 250—251; as source of
laborers. 330 India, West, changes in land tenure,

   248, 260 "Indian" (term), 131, 380 Indian culture sphere, 30,44.49,56
Indian-English competition, in textiles, 270-271. 287 Indian-English
interaction.

   245-246, 251-252 Indian Ocean, 41,42,43,55.56.57. 84, 109. 129.
153.227.228.232.

233, 234. 333; plantations on islands of, 315 Indian Removal, 284-285
Indians, American. See Indians, Hispanic America; Indians, North
America; Indians, Portuguese America; Indians. Southeastern U.S.

Indians, Hispanic America: civil-

religious organization, 147—148, 157; communities of, 145-149. 157;
conflicts within communities, 147, 148; elite, 145—148; nobility under
Spanish rule. 145— 146; and outsiders, 145-149; religion, 147-148; in
slavery, 143. 203; status under Spanish rule, 131-132. 136,

140. 143. 145-149, 157; tribute,

   136. 140, 143, 146, 149 Indians. North America: after a.d. 1400.
160-194, 284-285, 409-411,417; before A.D. 1400. 66-71, 400 Indians,
Portuguese America, 134.

   150. 203 Indians, southeastern U.S.. 203, 284-285, 417 India Tamil.
See Tamil speakers Indigo, as cash product, 244; on plantations in
Bihar, 369; production in Central America, 140; trade in, 67. 240
Indirect rule, 145- 146, 376 Indirect surplus value. 309 Indonesia. 240,
241. 259. 378; rubber production combined with slash-and-burn
agriculture on small farms. 330; sugar plantations in. 334 Indus River
Valley, 30. 48 Industrial capitalism, and merchants. 306, 309; and
tropical slavery. 316 Industrial city, rise of, 276—277 Industrial
crops, 325-332. 352 Industrialization. 355; Berlin. 362; Brandenburg,
362; and capitalist development, 304; Egypt attempts, 286; and food
supplies, 267; Germany, 261. 312, 362; "peripheral,” 290; and raw
material supplies, 266; Rhine province, 362; South Africa, 368; United
States, 312; and urbanization, 276-277, 360; Westphalia,

362

Industrial Revolution, 199, 200,

   266, 415-416; and urbanization. 276-277 Industry, chemical. 312;
electricity in. 304, 312; electronic, 304; migration of, 358 Ingombe
Ilede. 43 Inikori. J. E., 210 Innis, Harold A.. 409 Interaction areas,
58 Internal combustion engine. 304,

312

International state system and capitalism, 309 Iqta, 36, 243

Index 487

Iran, Iranians. 24,25. 34. 102. 103.

   235, 238, 242, 288 Iranian Plateau, 27 Iraq, 26

Ireland, 197; as source of labor migration, 276-277,296; migration to
Australia, 364; migration to Canada, 364; migration to U.S., 364;
southern, 296 Irish, in conflict with English workers, 277—278; in
servitude. 202 Irkutsk. 184

Iron, as currency, 332; trade in, 42, 43, 104, 120, 185, 218 Iron and
steel industry, expansion of, 292; role in warfare. 292; technology of,
292 Iron ore. deposits. 205; trade in, 204 Ironworking, 204 Iroquois,
4,69,165-170,193,220, 409—410; cultivation, 166; confederacy, 165,166,
167—168, 169, 170; languages, 165, 167; political alliances. 165. 167,
168, 169, 170; role of women, 166, 167

lrrawady River. 319 Isandhlwana, 350 Islamic caliphate, 83. 101 Islamic
sphere, 29, 34—36, 37—44, 50, 55, 57-58; 102-103; and agricultural
revolution, 103; and bullion flow from Africa, 103; bullion flow from
Europe, 255; bullion flow to India, 255; and East Africa, 234; expansion
in Asia, 50, 55, 57, 58, 234; and irrigation. 103; slave trade, 201;
social and economic history of, 396; state formation in India,

234, 242; trade network,

   102—103; urban-rural relations, 396. See also Muslims Islamoglu,
Huri, 37, 396 Issawi, Charles, 39 Ita, 326

Italians, in U.S., 364. 365, 366 Italy. 104, 105, 108. Ill, 133, 197,
255, 405; agricultural crisis, 371; capitalization of industry, 371;
destination of migration, 371; emigration to Australia. 323, 271;
emigration to Austria- Hungary, 371; emigration to Brazil, 371;
emigration to France, 371; emigration to Austria- 371; emigration to
Switzerland, 371; emigration to U.S.. 364,

365, 371; integration of, 379; land tenure, 371; merchants, 106;
port-cities, 104, 106; trade expansion, 106. 107; urban

   centers, 118 Italy, southern, 296; decline of textile industry. 337;
source of emigration. 364 lu Mien. Yu Mien (Yao, Man). 30, 53. 343

Ivory, European uses for, 228; trade in, 39,42,43, 104, 112, 158. 196.
217, 227-229. 234 Ivory Coast. 200, 342; cocoa production, 342—343;
labor migration from Upper Volta. 383

J

Jablow, Joseph, 410 Jackson, Andrew, 285, 417 Jackson, James S., 330,
422 Jacobs. Wilbur R., 174 Jade, deposits controlled by Kachin chiefs,
345; trade in, 68. 345 Jadin. Louis. 413 Jaga. 225 Jagatai. 242 Jagath
Seth. 257 Jagirs. Jagirdars, 243. 247 Jain. Ravindra K.. 330. 422
Jakarta. 237 Jakin (Porto Novo). 214 Jamaica, 130. 151. 152. 153. 155.

196. 409; East Indians in. 369; England seizes. 130. 152. shift from
slavery to small-scale farming, 316; slavery ended. 333,

   369

Jamaicans, as laborers on plantations in Central America, 324325; as
laborers in Panama, 294 Jamestown, 161

Japan. 240, 254, 255, 296; exports of yarn to India, 290; textile
imports from India, 312 Japanese-Chinese competition.

   288. 290 Japanese Current. 184 Jat, 243 Jati. See Caste Jaunpur
District, 247 Java, 237,238,239,255. 356.422; capitalization of sugar
plantations. 334; coffee planted by Dutch. 336; Dutch in. 195; Islam in,
234; kingdoms of. 30. 56-57; sugar plantations, 334 Javanese, as
laborers on rubber plantations in Sumatra, 320 Jayawardena. Chandra. 47,
398 Jeannin, Pierre, 416 Jefferson, Thomas, 6. 176,284.285 Jehol, 50

Jenghiz Khan. 33. 34. 35. 50 Jenks. Leland R.. 292.293.294.418 Jenne, 39

Jennings. Francis, 4, 409

Jennings, Jesse D., 400 Jeromin. Ulrich. 378 Jessop. Bob, 394 Jesuit
Relations. 163 Jesuits. 71

Jewelry, trade in. 166. 227. 241

Jewitt. John. 186. 188

Jews, 103, 115, 116. 197. 241.364.

   366, 370. See also New Christians Jívaro (Shuara), 65 Jolof states.
200 Jones. E. L., 269 Jones. Everett L.. 421 Jones. G. I.. 413 Jones.
Gwyn. 158. 405 Jones, Maldwyn A., 363. 364. 366,

   424

Jones. Richard (19th century economist), 403 Jones, Richard. 204, 378
Jordan. Winthrop D.. 202, 204 Joshi, P. C.. 397 Junkers. 308. 319. 362,
371 Jurchen. 50-51, 56

K

Kabcs, Johnny, 209 Kabir, 243

Kachin, 344— 346; English occupation and, 346; income of chiefs. 345;
and opium. 346; political alliances of chiefs among, 345 "Kaffir Wars,"
350 Kahn, Joel, 425 Kalahari, 217 Kalingas. 58 Kalundwe, 225 Kamchadal.
184 Kamchatka. 183. 184 Kamchameha, 259 Kaminaljuyú, 66 Kanem-Bomu. 39
Kangaba, 39 Kaniok. 225 Kano, 39 Kanongesha. 227 Kansas City. 322 Kansu.
27. 29 Kaplan, David, 424 Karashar, 27

Kasai River, 221, 224, 225 Kasanje. 225, 226, 227 Kashgar, 24. 27. 31.
34 Katsina, 39 Kay, J. P.. 273 Kayastha caste, 250 Kazembe, 227. 228
Kea, R. A., 209. 210 Keith. Minor C.. 421 Kelantan, 330 Keller, Bonnie
B., 423 Kelley, J. Charles, 68, 400

488 Index

Kemp. Tom. 407 Kenya, 41

Kepner, Charles D., Jr., 421 Kerala, 48, 246 Kerner, Roben J., 159, 411
Kerosene, trade in, 334 Kerr, Clark, 424 Kettles, trade in, 166, 181 Kew
Gardens, London. 329 Key, V. O., Jr.. 393 Keyder, ?aglar. 37, 396 Khitan
(Liao). 50 Khmer, 57 Khmer kingdom, 30 Khoi-Khoi ( "Hottentot"), 41, 347
Khoisan-speakers, 41 Kiangsi, 257 Kiangsu, 52 Kickapoo, 170 Kiev. 159
Kikonja, 225 Kilwa, 42. 227, 228, 229 Kimberley diamond mines, 367
Kingship, ritual. 205. 222 Kinietz. W. Vernon. 410 Kinship. 89; among
Chinese in Southeast Asia. 378; and coresidence. 89; "extensions" of.
89. 92; and ideology. 95; ranking, 93 — 94; and slavery, 207—

   208, 412; as social. 90-91; and stratification, 98; as symbolic.
90—91; among West African cocoa growers, 340-341 Kin-ordered mode of
production, 76, 88-99, 141, 356, 386; and chiefship, 97—98; and class
formation. 97-98; and ideology - making. 389; and problems of conflict.
93-96 Kiowa. 176, 177 Kirchhoff, Paul. 404 Kirghiz Steppe, 29 Kisimani
Mafia, 42 Klass, Morton, 398 Klingberg, Frank J.. 198 Knights of Labor,
378 Kodiak Island. 183 Koenigsberger. H. G.. 117 Kokomba. 230 Kola nuts.
39. 331 Kolko. Gabriel, 301 Kololo, 349 Komenda, 209 Kondratieff,
Nikolai D.. 419 Konetzke, Richard. 154 Kongo, kingdom of, 196, 206,
207-221.224,413; royal control of resources. 222 Konkan Coast, 48, 235
Konny, Johnny, 209 Kopy toff. Igor. 412 Korea. 358

Kosack. Godula. 383 Kosambi. D. D.. 49 Kossman. E. H., 406, 415 Kotu. 27
Kpembe, 212

Krader, Lawrence. 395. 403 Kraenzel, Charles F.. 421 Kraton. 83 Kriedte,
Peter, 415 Krishna River, 246 Krobo. 340

Kroeber, Alfred L.. ix. 89. 285. 327, 394, 395, 415 Kru, 201

Krupp Works, 356 Kshatriya, 46-47, 56, 252 Kubam. 349

Kubier, George. 134. 136 Kucha. 27 Kula. Witold. 404 Kumalo, 349 Kumasi,
212

Kung-tse (Confucius). 53 Kunlun Mountains, 25 Kunstadter, Peter, 399,
422 Kurakas. 145, 146 Kurile Islands, 183 Kushnan, 50 Kutenai, 177
Kuwabara, Jitsuzo. 399 Kwaisulia, 334

Kwakiutl, 182, 185, 186, 189, 190191, 411 Kwamen, 211 Kwango. 225 Kwango
River, 221, 225 Kwantung, 377 Kwanza River, 223 Kweichow, 53

L

Labor, under capitalism. 267. 311.

358. 380 Labor aristocracy. 357, 358, 380 Labor force: on banana
plantations, Colombia, 324; in cattle raising, U.S., 322; on coffee
plantations, Rio Claro. Brazil. 372. 373; in commercial rice production,
Cochinchina, 321; in commercial wheat farming, Argentina. 319; in
commercial wheat farming. Russia, 319; in cotton mills, Lancashire. 356;
immigrants as, in Brazil, 337; indentured servants as, 333; in opium
production. 344; on rubber plantations. Malaya, 330; in sheep raising,
Australia, 323; in textile industry, India, 289-290 Labor history, 355,
423 Labor-intensity and automation,

382

Labor market, 354, 362, 380; and capitalist mode of production. 381;
segmentation of. 357-358, 368, 380 Labor markets. 355-361; and cities,
277; and ethnic differentiation, 380-381; and ethnic identities, 381;
and "racial" distinctions, 380-381; in U.S..

   383

Labor migration. 361-379; Africa, 383; Bemba, 229; to Bombay mills.
289-290; and capitalist mode of production, 266, 361, 362-363; Colombia.
383; Ecuador. 383; Europe. 383; Ghana, 383; international since World
War II, 383; Italians to Brazil, 363; Ivory Coast, 383; Latin America.
383; from Mediterranean region to Benelux countries. 383; from
Mediterranean region to France. 383; from Mediterranean region to
Switzerland. 383; from Mediterranean region to West Germany. 383;
Mexico, 383; Middle East. 383; South Africa, 359; 363; Thanjavur. 251;
U.S.. 363-366; Venezuela. 383. See also Indentured laborers; Migratory
workers

Labor power. 77.78.267.298.299. 354. 356. 362; and machines.

   356

Labor recruitment, and merchants.

   306. 307 Labor supply, regions of. 307. 314. 360

Labor theory of value. 386 Labor trade: China, 375-379; destinations of
Chinese, 377—

   379, India, 370 Labrador, 160 Lacoste, Yves, 395 Lacroix, A., 294
Ladang, 56

Lahontan, Louis Armand de, 169 Lake Bangweulu, 227 Lake Erie, 164 Lake
Huron, 163. 171 Lake Kisale, 207, 221. 225 Lake Malawi (formerly Lake
Nyasa). 227. 228, 229 Lake Michigan, 170, 232 Lake Meru, Mweru, 227, 229
Lake Ontario, 161, 164 Lake Superior. 69. 165. 171, 177. 285

Lake Titicaca. 60. 136 Lake Victoria, 41 Lalemant, Jér?me, 164, 167
Lampard, Eric R.. 416

Index 489

Lancashire. 357. 362

Landes. David. 274. 276. 355. 356.

   357. 415. 418 Land tenure: Bengal, 247; Ceylon. 339. China. 54-55,
399; Egypt. 286, 287; England, 121, 123, 269; Germany, 362, 371;
Guatemala, 337; India, 47, 247249,251; Ireland. 363; Italy. 371; Mexico,
337; Mughal empire. 243; Rio Claro. Brazil. 372. 373; Scotland. 363;
Thanjavur, 250251, 370 Lane. Frederic C.. 32 Lang. James. 153, 408
Langsdorff. G. H. von. 188 Laos, 30

Lapidus, Ira M.. 37, 396

Lapps. 158

Laroui. Abdallah. 37

Late Capitalism. 304

Latham, A. J. H.. 219, 288, 413.

   418. 419 Lathrap, Donald. 400 Lattimore. Eleanor. 398 Lattimore,
Owen. 33. 34. 54. 395. 398

Lauber. Almon W.. 417 Law: and capitalist mode of production, 266; of
Contract. 248; English, in India. 247-248; of Status, 248 Law, Robin,
412 Lawson, Murry G., 409 Lazonick, William, 407 Leach. Sir Edmund. 89.
344. 345,

   346, 414 Leacock. Eleanor B.. 163. 394. 409 Lead, trade in, 254-255
League of the Iroquois. See Iroquois Leather goods, trade in, 39, 196
Lebar. Frank M.. 399 Le Creusot, 356 Lee, Calvin, 377 Leeds, Anthony.
424 Lees. Susan H.. 395 Legaic (Tsimshian chiefly title). 189 Legassick,
Martin. 424 Leghorn (Livorno). 241 Legnano. 106

Lehman. Frederic R.. 47. 50. 397 Lekachman, Robert, 10 Lemtuna Berbers,
39 Lenin, Vladimir I., 300, 301, 302, 303, 419; on capitalism. 300; on
Russia, 303 León, León-Castile, 105, 110. See also Castile, Castilians
Lesotho, 349, 367 Lesseps, Ferdinand Marie de. 286.

   294

Lesser, Alexander. 19, 385 Leur, J. C. van. 44. 57. 399

Levant Company, 122

Levels of sociocultural integration.

   concept of, 14-15 Levin, Stephanie Seto, 415 Levine. David. 416
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. 91. 385. 388.

   425

Levtzion. Nehemia. 397 Lewicki, Tadeusz. 412 Lewis, Archibald R., 103.
405 Lewis. Meriwether, 176 Lewis. Oscar. 181. 410 Liberia, 201 Libya. 39
Liège, 292 Lifu, 258

Lignite, rising use of. 355 Lima. Audiencia of, 134; city. 131.

   139; merchant guild. 140 Limpopo River, 43, 349 Linares, Olga R.. 400
Lindblom, Charles E.. 393 Linen, trade in, 183 Linton. Ralph, ix. 395.
424 Liquor, as advances. 175; trade in

   166. 169. 175. 181, 183 Lisbon. 110. Ml. 114. 115. 129.

   150.222 List, Friedrich. 419 "Little Japans," 382 Liverpool. 151,
198. 279. 313 Livestock: Feral. 155, 156; "frontiers," 321; introduction
of Old World species in Americas. 135; trade in. 120. 155. 217 Livestock
raising: in Africa. 204; in Argentina. 323; and Australian aborigenes.
323; and effect of native food production. Hispanic America. 135; in
Hispanic America. 141. 142. 143. 144.

   147; in Spain. 112. 113; to supply mines. 142; and transportation.
142. 321 Llamas, 59. 65. 136 Lloyd, Peter C.. 412 Lloyd-Jones, R.. 416
Lockhardt, James. 409 LoDagaa, 2 30

Loire River valley. 107. 117 Lombard city-states, 106 London. 198, 257,
268. 270. 272.

   273.279. 317 London Mercers' Company, 122 Long Island, 130 Long waves
of capitalist development. 304-305, 386.419-420 Lopez. Robert S.. 104.
106, 255,

   396,405.413 Louisiana. 280. 282 Louisiana Colony. 173 Louisiana
Territory, 176 Love, Thomas F., 78

Low, J., 358 Low Countries. 29 Lower Burma: immigration from Upper
Burma. 319; occupation by England. 319; peasant production of rice. 319
Lowie. Robert H.. 15. 387 Lualaba River. 221. 224. 225. 227.

   229 Luanda, 150 Luanda Island, 222 Luapula River, 227, 228 Luba. 99.
207. 221.225. 226. 228.

   413 Liibeck. 107 Lukács, Georg, 425 Lunda. 99, 207, 225, 226-227,

   230.413 Lurie. Nancy O., 409 Luxemburg, Rosa. 300. 302, 303,

   419 Luzon, 153 Luzzatto, Gino, 405 Lwembe River, 225 Lyashchenko,
Peter I., 319, 358.

   421

Lybyer, A. H., 396 Lynd. Robert S.. 393

M

Macao, 71, 153,235,236,238.253.

   374, 375, 377 McCall. Daniel F., 396, 397 Macassar, 238 McCoy. Alfred
W.. 343. 422 Mace, trade in, 236 McEvedy, Colin, 204, 378 Macfarlane,
Alan, 407 Machines: and labor power, 356; role of, 266, 267, 355; types
of. 304

Machinofacturc, 355. 360 McHugh, Tom. 410 Mcllwraith. T. F.. 411
Mackenzie River, 178 Macknight, C. C., 415 Mack Smith, Denis, 371, 379
MacLeod, MurdoJ., 134, 146, 339,

   409

McNeill, William H., 35, 395 Macon, 283 Macondo, 324 McPherron, Alan.
164 Macpherson. C. B., 394 Madagascar. 155. 195.228 Madeira. 111. 129.
150. 196 Madison, James, 20 Madjapahit, 57, 58 Madras, 240, 241,246,
250, 370; as home of Chettiars, 320 Mae Nam River, 321 Magellan,
Ferdinand (Fernao de Magalhaes). 45

490 Index

Magubane, Benjamin M., 423. 424 Maharashtra, 250 Mahican, 165 Maine, Sir
Henry, 11, 248 Maine Coast, 163 Mair, Lucy P., 290,418 Maize.
59,62,63,64, 135, 163, 164. 171, 204, 226, 227; brought to Africa, 204,
226, 227; trade in, 178

Malabar Coast. 48. 129. 236 Malacca. 58, 1 10, 234,235,236.

   237.238. 378 Malaguette. 236 Malawi, 368

Malaya. 422; Chinese in, 375-376; and Chinese labor trade. 375; East
Indians as indentured laborers in, 369, 370; English rule in, 375-376;
kingdoms of. 375376; maintenance of peasantry. 369; Malay-Chinese
relations. 377; rice imports from Burma. 320; rice imports from Than-
javur. 370; rubber plantations in, 329—330; rubber production and
slash-and-burn agriculture on small farms, 330; Tamil workers on rubber
plantations in, 3 30; tin mining, 346, 376; tributary relations in, 369.
375-376. Malay Peninsula, 57.71.238, 239, 375

Malays, 42,234, 330, 375-376;

   role in Singapore, of, 376- 377 Malay Straits, 234, 255 Maldive
Islands, 24 Mali. See Kangaba Mali, 24

Malindi, 42, 232 Malinke, 39

Malinowski, Bronislaw. 423 Malwa, 257 Maly nes, Gerard, 124 Mama Chi,
325 Mamluk, 236, 286 Mamprussi, 212 Mancall, Mark, 159,411 Manchester,
276-277, 360 Manchu, demand for furs. 184 Manchu dynasty. SrcCh'ing
Mandan, 69, 176, 177, 180.410.Sef also "Village Indians”

Mandarins, 53-54, 55 Mandel, Ernest, 78, 297, 304, 353, 382,402,418,419
Mani Kongo, 222 Manila, 153. 154.253.255 Manioc, 64, 65; brought to
Africa.

204. 226; Mundurucii production for Luso-Brazilians, 326; production by
slaves for Mwaant Yaav, 227

Manitoba, 182 Mann, Julia de Lacy. 416 Mansabdars. 241 -243 Manta. 60.
63 Mantaro River, 60 Mantoux. Paul, 202,415,416 Manuel I, 196
Manufacture, defined, 355 Manufactories. 265 Mapuche. 65 Maquet.
Jacques, 394 Maquinna, 18th century (Nootka chiefly title), 186, 188
Maquinna, 19th century (Nootka chiefly title), 189 Maran La Raw, 346
Maranon River, 60 Marathas, 240, 244, 246, 251 Marathi-speakers, 244
Marcus, Steven, 416 Margarine, 330 Marino. Joseph. 400 Marismas, 107

Market: and cash crop agriculture, 318; labor, 354; and linkage among
modes of production,

297, 312; as mechanism of social articulation, 310.420; model of the. 9-
10. 298; and power, 314. 421; worldwide. 22-23; worldwide. and transport
technology.

295

Markets. Hispanic America. 144 Maroons. 155, 156; in U.S. South.

   285. See also Marronage Marquesas. 258 Marronage. 156. 157 Marx.
Karl. 19-21. 386, 394, 395, 400, 401, 402, 403, 408, 423; on class
struggle. 20; on conflict between English and Irish workers. 277; and
Feuerbach, 75; on food collectors, 91; and Hegel, 75; on industry and
commerce, 267, 386; letter to Zasulich of, 303; on peasantry, 303; on
power in tributary mode, 80; on "prehistory of capital," 85; on
production,

21,73—75; on "the really revolutionary road." 79.290. 296; theory of
capitalism of. 297299, 302-303, 304, use of England as model, 300; view
of capitalism compared with Weber, 297-298 Marxian ideas. 386, 394-395,
400-401,403,418-420, 425 Marxism: and nation-state, 419;

   and structuralism, 400,401,402 Maryland. 130, 166,280,282 Mascouten,
170

Masmuda Berber confederacy, 40 Massachusetts Bay Company. 122

Masselman, George. 406.414 Masulipatam, 240 Matamba. 225 Mataram, 237,
238, 239 Mathew, Gervase, 42 Maude. H. E..415 Maule River. 60

Mauny. Raymond. 221. 396, 397,

412

Mauritania, 129, 196 Mauritius, 228, 370; East Indians as indentured
laborers in, 333, 369; rice imports from Burma, 320; rice imports from
Thanjavur. 370 Mauro, Frederic. 408 Maurya polity. 48.49 Mauss. Marcel,
193 Maya. 59. 66. 67 Mayapan. 68

Mbanzakongo. 220. 221, 222 Mbundu, 222,413. See also Ovimbundu Meat:
expons of, 321-323; packing industry, Argentina. 322; packing industry,
U.S., 322; salted. 322; trade in. 155. 314 Mecca, 24. 102; pilgrimage
to, 240 Mechanical reaper, 319 Mechanization, on banana plantations, 325
Medicines, trade in, 254, 334 Medick, Hans. 415 Mediterranean region,
26, 29, 31, 84, 101. 102, 103, 104, 107, 112,

114, 116, 129, 149,202,204,

   205, 236. 255, 307; as source of labor migration, 383 Medjerda Plain,
26 Meggers, Betty J.. 400 Meggitt, Mervyn J., 323 Megis shell. 172
Mehemet Ali, 286-287 Mehring, Franz, 394 Meilink-Roelofz, M. A. P..
239.414 Meillassoux, Claude. 48. 89. 397.

   398. 404.412 Mekong Delta, 30 Melanesians, as indentured laborers,
334 Memphis, 283 Mencher, Joan. 398 Mendels. Franklin F.. 416 Merchant
capital. See Money- begetting money; Merchant wealth; Commerce Merchant
confederations, 107 Merchant guild. New Spain, 140;

Spain, 140 Merchant origins: Aegean, 102; Arab, 234; Asante, 212; Bugi.
377; Chinese, 234, 236; Chinese in Singapore. 376; Chinese in Southeast
Asia. 374, 378; Chris

Index 491

tian. in China, 55; Diula, on Ivory Coast, 343; Dyak. 377; Genoese,

114 - 115; Gujarati. 234. Hindu. 240; Hispanic America, and Indian
communities, 146- 147; Indian. at Manila. 153; Indian, in Southeast
Asia, 56; Italian, 106; international, 114-115; Jewish, in China, 55;
Lebanese, on Ivory Coast. 343; at Malacca, 58; Malay, 234; Minankabau,
377; Muslim, in China. 55; Muslim, in Ghana, 39; Muslim, Indian Ocean,
234, 236; Muslim, at Macassar, 238; Muslim Swahili. 228; Northwest Coast
chiefs as. 185, 186; among Ottoman. 36; Parsi, 288; Peruvian, at
Acapulco. 153; Portuguese. 111-112; Portuguese, at Macao. 153; Russian,
183; Scandinavian, 158; Scottish, 257; Syrian, 103 Merchants: and
commodity frontiers, 306; and industrial capital, 306, 309; and kin-

ordered relations under capitalism. 306-307; and labor frontiers, 306;
and labor recruitment.

306, 307; at margins of capitalist advance, 306; in non-industrial
regions, 306; and palm oil, 331 — 332; and plantations, 317; and power,
109- 110, 118. 124; and regional specialization, 310; and royal control
in France. 117. 118: in rubber trade. 329; and slave- grown sugar. 305;
and slavery. 87-88; and sociopolitical instability, 305; and state in
European expansion, 109- 110, 118, 123; and surpluses. 86; and tributary
mode of production. 82. 84-85. 86; and tributary relations under
capitalism. 306-307; and warfare, 86; and waves of capitalist
development, 306 Merchants' wealth. 83-88; and capitalism, 119- 120,
267; and differentiation under capitalism, 305. limits to. 118-120
Mercury. 138. 142 Merriman. RobertO.. 178.410 Merv, 27

Mesoamerica. 59. 63. 66-68. 134. 145. 340; impact of European economy
on, 135 Mesoamerican-Southwest interaction, 68-69 Mesopotamia. 26, 102
Mesta. 113

Metal and metal goods, trade in,

   115. 181,206,256,288, 327 Methuen Treaty, 118

Metlakatla Pass. 190 Mexica. See Aztec

Mexicans, in U.S. cattle raising. 322 Mexico. 59. 129. 134. 137- 138.

139. 140, 143.255.257,292; border region of, 382; capital inflow from
U.S., 382; changes in land tenure. 337; labor migration to U.S.. 383;
silver mines, 135138; silver production. 255; and Tzeltal-and
Tzotzil-speakers in Chiapas. 337 Mexico City, 131. 153 Mexico. Valley
of, 66, 67, 68, 137. 144

Miami (Indians), 174

Miao, 30, 53, 343. See also Mong;

   Hmong Michigan, 170 Micmac, 195

Middle East. See Near East, Levant Midewiwin, 171-172. 194; compared
with Feast of the Dead, 172 Miers, Suzanne, 412 Migration:
Afro-Americans to northern U.S.. 383; of Bantuspeakers. prehistoric, 41;
of Bantu-speaking populations. South Africa. 350; in Belgium, 362; Boer,
350; from British Isles. 291; Caribbean settlers to mainland, 151; into
cities. 276-277. 360; and culture. 361 - 362; Eastern Europeans to U.S.,
364; in Europe. 362-363; from Europe. 363; from Europe to Brazil, 337;
from Europe to U.S.. 283, 359; Germans to North America. 363. 364; Han
Chinese. 29. 30. 5253, 399; of indentured laborers, 333, 334. 363: Irish
to Australia, 364; Irish to Canada, 364; Irish to England. 276-277;
Irish to U.S.. 363; Italians to Argentina. 323, 271; Italians to
Austria-Hungary, 371; Italians to Brazil, 337. 371,

372 - 374; Italians to France.

371; Italians to Germany. 371; Italians to Switzerland, 371: Italians to
Switzerland, 371; Italians to U.S.. 371; new literature on, 423—424;
from Northeastern Brazil into Amazonia, 325-326; in Prussia. 362; Puerto
Rican. 424; Scandinavians to U.S.. 364; Scottish highlanders to North
America. 363. 364; Scotch-Irish to North America. 363; southeastern
Europeans into Levant. 102; southern Europeans to U.S., 364; types of,
361; from Upper Burma to Lower Burma, 319; of U.S. slaves, 280; waves
of, 362.

See also Indentured laborers; Labor migration. Migratory workers

Migratory workers: in agriculture, 382; Polish, in Germany, 319; in
South Africa. 363. 367. 368 Milbanke Sound. 189 Military bondsmen. 34.
35 Military expenditures. 382 Military orders: in Muslim Africa, 40;
Portuguese. 107. 110, 111; in Spain. 107. 110 Mill. John Stuart. 403
Millar, John. 202 Mijler, Eric. 398 Miller. J. Innis, 413 Miller, Joseph
C.. 225.413 Miller. Solomon. 422 Millets, 29, 204 Mills. C. Wright. 393
Milward. A.. 362 Mina. See Elmina Minankabau. 377 Mindanao. 195 Mingay.
G. E.. 269. 313.407 Ming dynasty, 51, 55-56. 252. 253 Mining. 1 14,
135-136, 363; Carmaux, 358; East Africa, 4243; Oldham. 356; West Africa.
38- 39. See also Copper; Gold; Mining industry; Silver Mining industry.
Hispanic America: capitalization of, 141. 145; in Colombia, 135; effect
on native population of. 135-138. 141142, 145; and key economic areas,
141; mercury supplies,

138, 142; in Mexico. 137- 138; at Potosí. 136; supplies for mines.
141-142. 144 Mining industry. South Africa. 350; capitalization of. 350;
labor force in 347, 350; racial segmentation in, 366-367 Minnesota, 173

Mintz, Sidney W.. ix, 310. 333,417.

   420. 422 Miskimin, Harry A., 255 Misquito, 155, 156 Mississippi. 280,
284; flood plain,

280

Mississippian cultures, 68; expansion, 69; relation to Mesoamerica. 68 —
69; sphere of, 69; subsistence base of. 69 Mississippi River. 68. 69.
173. 177, 285

Missouri River. 68. 177; Upper, 173 Mita. See Hispanic America, labor
draft Mitidja Plain. 26 Moche valley. 60 Mode of production. 75. 100.
386,

492 Index

400-402; Asiatic, 75, 81 -82, 401.403; capitalist (see Capitalist mode
of production); communitarian, 75, 401 ; conceptual issues, 76-77, 100,
386, 401; feudal, 75, 81-82, 401, 403404; Germanic, 75; kin-ordered (see
Kin-ordered mode of production); peasant, 75; and political dimension.
99; slaveholding, 75; Slavonic, 75; tributary (seeTributary mode of
production) Modernization theory, 12,23 Modes of production,
articulation among, 401,404; and genesis of rebellions, 389; and
history. 391; and ideological contradictions. 389; and ideology-making.
389390

Mogadishu, 42

Mohammed (Muhammad, the Prophet), 41 Mohawk. 165, 166, 168, 169
Mohenjo-Daro, 30 Mohr, E.C. J., 399 Mojos Plain, 64 Moluccas, 235, 237,
238 Money-begetting money. 85, 86. 298

Moneylenders: Burma, 318-319; Chettiar caste. 320; Chinese in Thailand,
320; Egypt. 287; India.

   247, 248, 250, 251; Malaya. 377 Mong, Hmong (Meo. Miao). 30, 53, 343

Mongol empire. 33- 34. 50—51, 55 Mongolian Steppe, 29 Mongols. 25, 26,
33, 34, 35, 50, 96, 99, 183, 374. as slaves. 202 Mongol-Turkish khans,
183 Monocrop production, 310; and food crops. 310 Monopoly capitalism,
300 Montagnais, 409

Montaigne, Michel Eyquem de, 81

Montana, 176

Monteria, 156

Montgomery. 283

Montreal. 130. 169

Moore, Barrington, Jr., 248, 358.

   394, 407, 408,417 Moreland, W. H., 414 Moreno Fraginals, Manuel. 409
Morgan, Edmund S., 416 Morgan. Lewis H., 15 Morner, Magnus, 408 Morocco,
24,26, 39,40,41 ; destroys Songhay, 41.210; use of war prisoners as
troops, 210 Morris, Morris D., 289, 359, 414,

   418

Mortality: of indentured laborers, 370; of indentured servants and

   slaves in Caribbean. 202 Morton-Williams. Peter. 412 Mosetene, 65
Mosquito shore, 155 Mossi, 343; in labor migration to Ivory Coast, 383;
states of, 39 Mountain chains. Old World, 25 Mount Fairweather, 183
Mozambique. 110. 197, 201, 367,

   368

Mozino, José Mariano. 410-411 Mpinda. 223 Mpumbu. 222 Mthetwa. 347
Mudenge, S. G.. 397 Mughal dynasty, 50 Mughal empire, 233, 240. 241244,
246. 247. 25 I. 260. 414; contract servants in. 369; elite of. 241 -243;
land tenure, 243; military organization. 241, 249; opium as revenue.
257; religious conflicts, 243-244; successor states of, 246; and
tributary mode. 247 Mukherjee, Ramkrishna. 414 Mukherjee. S. N.. 250,414
Mundas, 30, 369 Mundurucu, 17. 326-329,422; gender division of work.
326327; in slave raiding, 326-327; social structure, 327, 329; and
traders, 329 Murdock. George P.. 327 Murngin, 415 Murphey, Rhoads. 233
Murphy. Robert F.. 327, 328, 422 Murra, John V., 59. 60, 400 Muslims: in
English Indian army.

   249; expulsion from Spain. 113 Muslim Spain. 105. 108. 110. 112, 123

Mussamba, 226, 227 Mwaant Yaav. 226, 227 Mwene Mutapa, 44 Myitkina, 346
Mysore, 246

N

NACLA-East Apparel Project. 382 Nagasaki. 265 Nagpur. 288 Nahuatl, 147
Nanakh,243 Nantes. 117. 151. 198 Napier. Sir James Charles. 277
Napoleonic wars. 278. 296. 316.

   363

Nash. Gary B.. 203, 409. 416 Nashville, 283 Nass River, 182, 185. 190
Natal, 334, 369, 370 Natchez, 69, 70

Nation formation and supposed cultural homogeneity, 379 Nation states:
economic competition among; 313; and Marxism,

   419; as reaction to English hegemony, 309,419 "Native Reserves." 307,
367, 368 Natural gas. rising use of. 355 Nature and culture, opposition
between, 389 Navaho, 143

Naval stores, trade in, 104, 116, 140 Ndebele (Matabele), 349 Ndembu,
227 Ndenié, 342

Ndongo. 200, 223, 224, 225 Near East. Levant, 34-37, 101 —

   103, 104, 129, 158, 268. 286; labor recruitment in. 383; source of
cotton for Europe. 286; as source of firearms. 209 "Negro," as term. 380
Nehnevajsa, Jiri, 382 Nekich. Sandra. 165 Nell, Edward, 421 Nestorians,
55

Netherlands. 109. 114. 115, 339; Rebellion of the. 114, 115-116, See
also Dutch; United Provinces of the Netherlands Neutrals, Neutral
Nation, 164. 165 Nevis. 151

New Amsterdam. 130, 161 New Calabar, 413 New Caledonia, 258 New
Christians. 115. 129 New Dowlais, 356 Newell. William H.. 48 New
England. 130, 160, 165, 173,

   358, 359; ethnic origins of textile workers. 364 Newfoundland. 160
New France. 169

New Hebrides. 258. 259; as source of indentured laborers. 334 Newitt,
Malyn D. D.. 44, 413 New Lanark, 356 New Orleans. 173 New Plymouth. 161
New South Wales. 259 New Spain, Viceroyalty of. 131 New World. See
Americas; America.

   North; America, South New York. 169. 173.251,317, 324; banking, 283;
commodity market. 283; role in cotton trade. 283; source of credit to
southern planters, 283 Nez Percé, 179 Ngadidji, 323

Nguni chiefdoms, 347, 349 Ngwato. 349 Niagara, 4. 175

Index 493

Nicaragua, 68. 134. 153. 155 Nicolet. Jean, 232 Niger Delta. 167. 201.
208. 216

   220.230. 331,413 Niger River. 32. 39. 167. 196. 206.

   213, 215. 216. 217, 230; contrast between riverine and upland
populations along, 217 Nigeria. 39. 204. 206; Middle Belt of. 230
Nikolinakos, Marios. 424 Nile River, 26. 39 Nipissing, 164 Nkalaany
River. 226 Nomads. See Pastoral nomads Nootka. 184. 185. 186, 188. 189.

   411

Nootka Sound. 182 Norbeck. Edward. 400 Normandy. 103. 108. 160 Norman
dynasty. 123 North. Douglass C., 279. 417 Northrup. David. 413 North
Sea. 29. 107 Northwest Coast. North America. 182. 184-192. 193, 194.
410411; coast-hinterland relations, 189; islander-mainlander
interaction, 185; native trade network, 185, 186; potlatch, 186189, 190,
191-192, 194; slavery,

   188, 189, 190; sociopolitical organization, 186- 190, 190-91, 192;
subsistence patterns. 184 Northwest Company. 175-176.

   178. 182 Norway. Norwegians. 158 Novgorod. 159 Nugent, David. 345
Nupe. 213

Nutmeg, trade in. 236 Nyamwezi. 228 Nyasaland (now Malawi). 367 Nzimbu
shells. 222. 223 Nzinga Nvemba. See Afonso I

O

Oases. Old World. 25 Oaxaca. 140,409 Obas.215.217 Oberg, Kalervo. 185,
188. 411 Obsidian production and trade. 66, 67, 68 Occitania, 117
O'Connor. James. 309.419 Ocono. 60 Oda River, 210 Odessa. 319,421
Odoakar, 102 Odua. 213,215 Oghuz Turks. 35 Ogodai Khan. 33 Ohio. 170

Ohio Canal, 284 Ohio River. 68. 69. 170 Ojibwà. 17, 170. 171-172, 173,

   174, 182,410 Ojibwà-Dakota relations. 171, 173 Okoyong. 220 Okrika.
217

Olachen fish, olachen oil: fishing.

   185; trade in, 185 O'Laughlin. Bridget. 400 Old Calabar. 217-219.413
Oldham. 356. 359 Old Town (Obutong). 218 Old World: agricultural regions
of, 25; dry belt of, 25. 29; mountain chains of. 25; oases in. 25;
political geography of. 25—58 Olien. Michael D.. 421 Oliveira Marques.
A. H. de. 406 Olive oil. trade in. 111, 140 Oliver, Douglas L.. 415
Oliver. Roland A.. 207. 396 Oliver. Symmes C.. 410 Oilman, Bertell, 394,
401 Omani, 228

One Hundred Years of Solitude. 324 Oneida. 165. 166, 167, 168 Onidada,
213, 215 Onondaga, 4, 166. 167. 168 Onselen. Charles Van, 424-425 Opium,
244, 246, 255-258. 260.

288. 343-346.415.422; as currency. 346; production in China. 343;
production of "hill people." 343 — 346; production in India, 257; among
Kachin. 346; labor force in production of, 344; techniques and
requirements of production, 343—344; production in Thailand. 343 Opium
War. 343, 375 Oporto. 111

Orange Free State. 346. 350 Orange River. 366 Oraons. 30. 369 Origo.
Iris. 298. 405 Orlove. Benjamin. 59 Ortega y Gasset. José. 379 Ortiz.
Fernando. 422 Osgood. E. S.. 421 Ostrogorsky. Georg. 405 Oswego. 161
Otomi-speakers. 68 Ottar. 158. 159 Ottawa. 169. 170-171. 174 Ottenberg.
Simon. 413 Otter. 158

Otterbein, Keith F., 166 Ottomans. 26. 35-37. 129.204. coffee
consumption of. 336: and Egypt. 286; historical study of, 396; naval
power of, 233; warfare patterns, 210

Otusi, 220

Oudh. 370; Navab of. 247 Ovimbundu. 225, 230 Owen. E. R.J.,417 Owen.
Robert. 356 Owen. Roger. 419 Oyo kingdom. 201. 206. 212-214.

   215.216,230, 332,412; use of cavalry by. 213 Oyoko matrilineage. 211

P

Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui. 62 Pachuca. 135 Pacific islands. 258. 306
Pacific Ocean. 130. 153. 154. 313;

   trade in, 258-259, 260 Palembang. 57 Palerm. ?ngel, x, 406,409
Palestine. 26

Palestinians, in Near Eastern labor migration. 383 Palmer. Robin. 424
Palm oil. 330-332; and all-purpose money, 332; effects of trade in.

   331 - 332; industrial uses for. 330; production by small-scale
cultivators, 330 Palm products, trade in. 204. 217 Pamir Plateau, 25
Pampa. 71, 323 Pampanga, 1.53

Panama. 129. 139. 152, 155. 294. 324. 325; banana plantations in, 324,
325. See also Panama Canal; Panama, Isthmus of Panama Canal, 294 Panama,
Isthmus of, 129, 131, 139, 156,294 Paraguay River, 64 Parintintin, 326
Paris, 117, 317 Parry, John H., 154,408 Parsi, 241,257, 288, 289
Parsons, Neil, 424 Parsons, Talcott, 12 Partridge. William L.. 324
Pasai. 58

Pass laws. South Africa. 368 Pastoral nomads. 25. 26.29. 31. 32—34;
interaction with cultivators. 32-33. 50. 395; interaction with
pastoralists, 34; military capability of. 33-34; and shifts of power.
82, 260; and trade shifts. 260. See also Horse pastoralism Patna, 257

Pawnee. 69. 176. 177. 178. 180. See also "Village Indians"

Pawnship. and enslavement, 207—

   208,412 Peanuts, diffused to China. 256

494 Index

Peasantry. 420; Catalan. 113; Ceylon, 339—340; economic differentiation
and entry into industrial labor force among. 318. Egypt. 286-287;
England. 121. 123; Europe, and resistance to tribute. 108. 406; France.
117 —

118. 121; Malaya. 375 Peasants: change to farmers. 317; cultivation of
bananas by. 323; economic differentiation and cash-crop production
among. 318; emancipation of, Austro- Hungarian empire. 317; emancipation
of. Europe, 317—318; emancipation of, France. 317; emancipation of
Russia. 317; in indebtedness. Burma. 312; in rice production. Lower
Burma. 319 Peckham. Howard H.. 171. 174.

   410

Pegolotti. Francesco di Balduccio.

   233

Peking. 24. 106. 252 Peloponnesus. 35 Pelzer. Karl. 399 Pemmican. 178.
179. 180 Penang. 375 Pendle, George. 323 Pennsylvania. 166 Pennsylvania
Canal, 284 Pepper: cultivation of, 376; importance of. 236; trade in,
39, 196,

   206,215,236.237. 241.255 Perak. 376 Peranakans. 378 Perdue. Theda.
203,417 Perkin, Harold J., 272,416 Pernambuco. 150 Persia. See Iran

Persian Gulf. 24. 31.234.235.236. 237

Peru. 59, 129. 131, 134. 154. 157. 356.409. 422; Chinese as indentured
laborers in. 377; cotton cultivation in, 377; employment of Hawaiians
in. 377; guano beds in, 377; railroad construction in.

   377

Peru, Lower, 134

Peru, Upper, 134.139, 144. 153. See also Bolivia Peru. Viceroyalty of,
131 Peten, 66,67 Peter the Great, 159, 183 Petroleum, rising use of. 355
Petuns. 164

Philippines. 57. 1 19. 129. 153.238.

   241,255.259. 375 Philip II. 139, 161 Phillips, Paul C., 409
Phillipson. D. W.. 42. 396 Phoenicians. 102

Phylloxera. 371

Picunche. 65

Pigafetta. Filippo. 222

Pigs. 135; trade in. 258, 259

Pike, Ruth, 114, 406

Pinelo, Francisco, 114

Piracy. 40, 154-157.202

Pirate Republic of Libertalia. 155

Pirenne, Henri. 121

Pires. Tomé, 58

Pisa. 104

Pitt, William, the Younger. 151.257 Pittsburgh, 173. 175 Pizarro.
Francisco. 129. 131 Plains. See Great Plains Plains Indian culture.
180-181.

   194.410 Plantation America. 157 Plantations. 140. 157, 363. 420;
banana. 323-325; capital-intensive, 335-336; capitalization of,

317. 330; Caribbean. 151; cotton, 279-282; geography of,

315; on Indian Ocean islands. 228; and markets. 149; as market. 199-200;
and merchants,

317; in North and South Carolina. 196; and marronage. 156.

   157; rice consumption on South Asian. 251. 320; rubber, in Malaya,
329; shift from slaves to indentured laborers on. 368369; size of. 356;
in Virginia, 196 Plantation slavery, 279-282, 315— 316; in Brazil,
150,157; in Caribbean region, 151; in Ecuador and Venezuela, 140; in
tobacco cultivation, 196 Planter class, decline of: Caribbean, 316;
Indonesia, 335; worldwide. 317. 335 Plassey, 173, 244, 245 Platt. D. C.
M.,418 Platte River, 177 Pliny the Elder, 255 "Plural societies," 379;
compared with European nation-states, 379 Plymouth Colony, 163 Pokoso.
209

Polanyi. Karl. 214.412,415; on industrialization. 267 Poles: farm
settlement by. impeded by German state policy. 319; as estate workers in
Germany. 319, 371; in U.S.. 364 Political consolidation: and firearms.
210, 259; France. 117118; and slavery in Africa. 208; in West Africa.
209 Political economy, 7-8, 393 Political fragmentation and
centralization, 81-82 Political geography. Old World,

25-58

Political power and markets, 314 Political science, 10- 11, 393-394
Political theory. 394 Pollard, Sidney. 274. 275. 276. 416 Pollock. N. C,
423 Polo. Marco. 24, 27,233 Pomare II, 259 Pombeiros. 223 Pontiac. 169.
174-175 Pontiac's revolt, 174-175,410 Poppino, Rollie, 325 Population:
Abenaki, 163; Africa, 204; Amazonia, 65; Antwerp,

114; Baghdad, 103; and "black - birding," 334; Bombay, 288; Chequamegon,
171; China, 4253; China, and New World crops, 256; Chinese, in Southeast
Asia, 378; Constantinople. 103; Cordoba. 103; East Indian, in Burma,
370; East Indian, in Caribbean region. 369; East Indian, in Ceylon, 370;
East Indian, in Fiji, 370; East Indian, in Guyana, 370; East Indian, in
indentured labor force, 369; East Indian, in Malaya, 370; East Indian,
in Mauritius, 370; East Indian, in Natal, 370; East Indian, in Trinidad,
370; England. 269; Huron. 163; India. 49; Indians, eastern U.S., 285;
Indians, southeastern U.S., village size of, 284; Iroquois recruitment
of, 167; in Italian emigration, 371; Kongo kingdom. 221; Kumasi, 212;
London. 276; Malacca, 58; Manchester, 276; Manila, 153; Mauritius, 369;
Netherlands, 116; Portugal, 111; Potosi. 135; Preston, 362; slave,
Brazil, 337; slaves. U.S. South. 280; Teotihuacan. 66; in U.S.
immigration. 363—366; urban, in British Isles, 276; Zipa domain. 63

Population decline: Abenaki, 163; Americas. 133.135.146; Andean region.
134. 135; Central America, 134; Colombia, 324; and fur trade, 193;
Hispanic America, 133-137, 141. 146,408; Hurons, 165; Mesoamerica, 134,
135; Nicaragua, 134; southern Kwakiutl, 192 Porcelain, trade in. 43.
153.254. 256

Po River valley. 29 Portes, Alejandro, 424 Portland Canal, 183
Portobelo, 139

Portugal, 41.71. 105. 107. 109, 110-112, 114, 115, 117, 118,

Index 495

123. 129. 130. 131. 134. 149

151. 153. 156. 196. 197. 200.

201. 204. 209. 210. 215. 222225. 227. 228. 253, 256. 265.

292. 339. 406; agriculture in. 110-111; in Asia. 233. 234

236, 237. 238. 239. 240. 256. 258; attempt to control South Asian
shipping by. 236; crown of. in trade. 112. 237; in Central Africa.
222-225. 227; dependence on foreign bankers. 123— 124; entry into South
and Southeast Asian trade. 236-237; fishing. 111. 160; incorporation
into Spain. 130. 150; limits to power in Asia. 236-237; naval power.
Ill; slave trade. 197. 222-223. 224; use of slaves. UI. 197 Portuguese:
in Asia, 414; in Chinese labor trade, 374; at Delagoa Bay. 347; in East
Africa. 234; as indentured laborers in Rio Claro. Brazil, 373; Ricardo
on English trade with, 314; in Southeast Asia. 153; trade network. 112.
115. 153. 197; in U.S.. 364, 366 Portuguese America: Brazil. 156.

157,408-409; capitalization of sugar production. 150. demand for slaves.
195; influx of Spanish silver, 153; labor regime. 150.

157

Postlethwayt. Malachy. 4. 198 Potato. 59. 63. 65. 109. 135 Potawatomi.
170. 171, 174 Potter, Jack M.. 321 Poulantzas, Nicos. 394.419 Power and
ideology. 390; shift of. and pastoral nomads, 82. 260; shift of. in
rural India. 249 Prawer, Joshua. 403 Prehistory. American, 58-71 Prester
John, 232 Price, Barbara J., 400 Price. Richard. 417 Primitive, critique
of term. 88-89 Primitive accumulation. 109 Prince Rupert, 190 Potiguar,
150

Potosí, 135-136, 137, 138, 153; illegal outflow of silver, 153 Preston,
362 Principals. 145, 146, 153 Principe Island. 196. 197 Profit
maximization, and differentiation under capitalism, 303 Profit, rate of.
See Rate of profit Prussia, migration in, 362 Ptolemy, 232

Puerto Rico, 335-336.422; sugar workers in, 336

Puerto Rico Project. 420 Puget Sound. 188, 190 Punjab. 50. 243.251
Puritans. 159 Putun. 68

Putting-out systems, 87, 265, 317, 360; in agriculture, India. 248; in
England. 270, 271, 272. 274275; and fur trade. 194; in Hispanic America.
141; and spread of industry. 360; and urbanization. 360 Pyrenees. 25

Q

Qanat irrigation. 27 Quain. Buell. 167, 168.409 Quebec. 130. 161. 173;
role in fur trade. 161 Quechua. 143. 147 Queen Charlotte Sound. 185
Queensland. Australia, indentured laborers in, 334 Queiras, 407 Quinoa,
59. 63

R

Rabat. 40

"Racial" distinctions and labor markets, 380-381 Radanites. See
Al-Radhaniya Radcliffe-Brown. A. R.. 93. 344.

394

Ragatz. Lowell J.. 316 Rai (Iran), 27

Railroad construction, 251, 260261, 266, 280, 284. 288. 291

293. 295. 304. 418; in Brazil.

373; in British Columbia. 377; capitalization of, in England, 292;
capitalization of, in U.S., 291 — 292; in Colombia, 324; conflict over,
in West Africa, 332; in Costa Rica, 323; in England. 291-292; in India.
251. 260

261, 288; and iron and steel industry. 292.311; organization of, 293; in
Peru. 377; as source of capital accumulation. 291.295.

311; as source of English exports. 293; in U.S., 284. 291-292. 377; and
U.S. wheat exports, 318 Railroads, growth of, 292-293.

   355 Raja. 47.83

Rajputs, 50, 243, 247, 249, 370 Ramos, Alcida R., 422 Rand. 379

Randle. Martha C., 166 Rangoon.319

Rate of profit. 78.299. 252-253, 356,418; and long waves of capitalist
development. 304. 312

Rawick. George P.. 281.417 Raw material production: and capitalist mode.
310; and industrialization. 266. 295. 310 Rawski. Evelyn Sakakida. 255.
256 Ray, Arthur J.. 178.409.410 Raychaudhuri. Tapan. 414 Raymond. Irving
W.. 104. 396.405.

   413

Rebellion: in Egypt. 287. 294; in India, 2 51 ; and modes of production,
389; by Red River Métis. 182; Taiping. 375; Tzeltal. 337. See also Slave
rebellions Recife. 150

Reconquista. 105. 113, 119 Redfield. Robert, 11.14 Redford, Arthur, 416
Redistribution: and chiefship, 9798; and class formation. 97-98 Red
River. 182

Red River Métis. 181-182.410 Red Sea. 31.236. 240 Rees. Albert. 366
Reformation. 115 Regional specialization: and capitalist mode of
production. 310.

   313 - 314; and merchants. 310; and trade. 119-120. 260. 283284. 295.
310 Regions of labor supply, 307, 314, 360

Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo. 64.

   400

Relationship, concept of, 386 Remezoff Atlas. 183 Report on the State of
the Irish Poor in Great Britain. 277 Reserve army of labor. 353. 358,
380 Réunion. 228

Review of Radical Political Economics,

   402

Revolution of the Cabanas. 327 Rey. Pierre-Philippe. 404 Reynolds.
Robert L.. 405 Rharb. 26

Rhenish League. 107 Rhineland. 106. 107 Rhine Province. 362 Rhine River.
107. 114 Rhine River basin. 29. 107. 108 Rhodes, Cecil, 350 Rhodesia,
42, 359. See also Zimbabwe Rhodes-Livingstone Institute, 423 Rhone
River, 107 Ribat. 40

Ribeiro, Darcy. 394 Ricardo. David. 314 Rice: as cash crop. 244. 314,
319321; cultivation of, 29, 30, 319321; cultivation in Ceylon. 340;

496 Index

   cultivation in China, 52-53; cultivation in Cochinchina, 321;
cultivation in India, 48; cultivation in Kclantan. 3 30; cultivation in
Lower Burma, 318-319; cultivation in Thailand. 320— 321; as export crop,
319; exports. Burma. 320; exports. Cochin- china. 321; and indentured
laborers. 320. trade in. 238, 239, 251,255 Rice. wild. 170 Rich, E. E..
159.409.411 Richards, Alan R., 417 Richards, Cara B.. 167 Richards. D.
S., 396 Richards. VV? 210 Riel. Louis. 182 Rift Valley. 41 Rio Claro.
372-374 Rio de Janeiro. 150 Rio Grande (Rio Bravo). 382 Rituals; and
social scope. 194; of succession, 164, 170 Robequain, Charles. 421
Roberts. Andrew D. 413 Roberts. Richard. 272. 273. 274 Robinson. K. R..
397 Robinson. Ronald. 301 Rocky Mountains. 176. 182 Rodinson. Maxime.
120. 396 Rodney. Walter. 412 Roff. William R.. 376. 425 Rogers. Edward
S., 171,410 Rogin. Michael P.. 284. 417 Rohrbough. Malcolm J.. 284
Rokkan. Stein. 107 Rollwagen. Jack. 423 Roman: gold in India. 255; trade
route in Indian ocean. 44 Roman empire. 26. 44. 101. 102.

104. 158.405. flow of bullion out of. 109. 125.255; fortified border of.
34. Province of Hispania of.

   112

Roorda. J. D.. 406 Root crops. 41 Rosas. Paul. 397 Roseberry. William.
420.422 Rosecrance. Richard N.. 421 Rosenberg. Hans. 420 Rosenberg.
Harriet G.. 407 Rosenblum, Gerald, 363. 366 Rosman. Abraham. 411 Rostow.
Wall Whitman. 271.420 Rotberg. Robert I., 397 Rothenberg, Diane. 166
Rothschild Bank. 294 Rowe. John H., 134, 137. 146 Rowe. William L., 289
Rowthorn, Bob. 419 Royal Adventurers into Africa. 122. 197

Royal African Company. 122. 197. 199

Royal domain, and European political consolidation. 107- 108,

   117

Royal Kandyan Peasantry Commission. 340

Royal power and international merchants. 117. 124 Rozwi dynasty. 44
Rubber. 314. 325-330.422; industrial uses of. 325; products. 325; trade
in. 327. 329 Rubber collecting: and Amazonian Indians. Brazil. 325;
Luso-Brazil- ian cultivators in, 325, Mun- durucii and. 327—329; in West
Africa. 340 Rubber production: on plantations.

   314, 329; on plantations. Malaya. 330; on plantations. Sumatra. 330;
by small holders. 330; combined with subsistence crops. Indonesia. 330;
combined with subsistence crops. Malaya. 330 Rubel. Paula, 411 Rum.
trade in, 169, 185. 206. 258 Rupert's House. 172 Rupert's River. 172
Russell. Josiah C., 103. 114 Russia. 103. 158-159. 319; end to serfdom.
317; expansion. 313; German migration to. 364; labor force in wheat
larming. 319; reliance on fur tribute. 159; role of fur trade in
expansion. 159; Siberian migration from. 364; wheal farming in southern.
3 19. wheat exports. 319; working classes. 358 Russia Company. 122
Russian Revolution. 303 Russian Steppe. 29 Ruyle. Eugene. 188. 191,404

S

Sa’adian dynasty. 41 Saen Saeb Canal. 320- 321 Safawi order. 35 Sago.
239 Sahara. 31, 38,412 Sahlins. Marshall D.. 404 Sailing ships. 293
Saini. Krishan G.. 288. 290 Saint Domingue (Haiti), 151. 155.

   196. 316. 333. 337; as source of French income, 151 Saint Kitts. 151

Saint Lawrence River, 130, 161.

   163. 170, 172, 174 Saint Louis, 176, 177, 178, 322 Saint Simon, Comte
de (Claude Henri de Rouvroy), 8

Saint-Simonians, 286 Sakas. 50 Salem. 258 Salerno. Gulf of. 104 Salish,
190 Salmon fishing, 184 Salonica, 35

Salt: control of. 205. 209; trade in, 67,68, 111. 115, 151. 155,204.
217, 223; production, 218; as tribute, 226 Salteaux, Salteurs. See
Ojibwà Saltpeter, trade in. 244. 255 Samarkand. 27

San ( "Bushmen"). 41. 347. 349 San Cristobal Las Casas. 337. 338
Sandalwood, trade in. 258. 260; repaid in trade goods?258 Sanders.
William T.. 400 Sanhaja Berber confederacy. 40 Sankuru River, 221
Sanskrit texts, 49 Sansom. Robert L.. 421 Santals, 369

Santamaria. Daniel J.. 137 Santiago (city), 131 Santiago order, 107
Santidade Rebellion. 134 Santo Domingo. 155 Santos. 373 Sanwi, 342 Sa?ne
River. 107

S?o Paulo. 1 34. 203. 337. 372, 373 SaoTome. 150, 196, 197.223. 340;
role in slave trade of. 197; role in sugar trade of. 197 Sào Tomé de
Meliapor. 235 Sarai. 27

Sarmiento. Domingo. 421 Saskatchewan Brigade. Northwest Company. 182
Saskatchewan River. 173 Sassanian state. 82 Sassanid dynasty, 26
Sassen-Koob. Saskia. 424 Satnamis. 243 Sauer. Carl. 135 Sauk. 170 Saul,
S. B-, 362 Sault Sainte Marie, 164, 171 Saussure. Ferdinand de, 16
Savanna, 283 Savi, 214

Scandinavia. Scandinavians. 108.

   116. 122, 158, 209,238 Schapera, Isaac. 349 Scheldt River. 114
Schermerhorn. Richard A . 418 Schlumbohm, Jürgen. 274. 415. 416

Schmidt, Alfred, 394 Schneider, David M., 90. 404 Schneider. Jane. 84.
371

Index 497

Schneider. Peter. 371 Schneider Company. 356 Schorger. William D.. 395
Schumpeter. Joseph. 301. 420 Schwartz. Stuart B.. 15 Scobie. James, 421
Scotch-Irish, 363 Scotland. 363 Scots, in Canada. 176 Scottish:
highlanders. 363; merchants. 257; servitude. 202 Scott. J.. 343 Scott.
Joan Wallach. 358 Sea-cucumber (trepang): collection. 259; trade in.
258-259.260 Sea-otter. 182. 184. 185. 186. 188.

   189. 260 "Second slavery." 369 Secoy. Frank R.. 410 Secret societies,
Chinese: in California. 377; in Singapore, 376 Seddon. David. 402 See.
Henri. 407 Seine River, 107 Seine River basin. 29. 117 Sekani. 189
Selangor, 376 Seljuk Turks. 34. 35. 129 Sellnow. Irmgard. 402 Seminole.
284. 285.417 Seneca. 165, 166. 167. 168. 169.

   174 Senegal. 204 Senegal River. 39. 200 Scnegambia, 200, 229,412
Sepoys, 249, 251 Sequoya, 285 Sereni, Emilio, 371 Serfdom: China. 55;
England. 269, Russia, 188. 317 Sergipe do Conde. 150 Service, Elman R.,
15, 76.97 Service castes, 48 Setubal. UI, 152 Seven Years'War. 173
Seville. 114, 115. 135. 138. 139,

   140. 144 Shaka. 347. 349 Shakes. Tlingit chief. 189 Shama. 197
Shan.345. 346 Shanin. Teodor. 424 Sharp. Lauriston, 320, 321 Sharp,
William Frederick. 409 Sharrock. Susan R.. 17 Shawnees. 174.203 Sheep.
135, 147. 363; raising. Australia, 323 Sheffield. 312 Shelif Plain. 26

Shell and shell ornaments, trade in.

185, 223,258 Shelvankar. K. S.. 397

Shensi, 51

Shineberg, Dorothy. 415 Shiozawa. Kimio. 402 Shipbuilding: European,
235—236;

   Indian, 288; technology of. 293 Shipping: Dutch, 116, 119, 124,
238-239, English. 122. 240; Manta. 63; ocean. 173; Portuguese. UI;
Spanish. 138- 139. 141; trans-Atlantic. 138- 139. 283.312 Shona.
43-44.83 Shona-speakers, 43. 349 Shoshoni. 143, 176 Shreveport, 283
Siam. 240. See also Thailand Siberia, 183. 364 Siberian fur trade. See
Fur trade.

Russia Sibir. 183

Sicily. 102. 103, 195 Sider, Gerald M.. 417 Sierra Leone. 155. 200
Sierra Madre, Mexico. 141 Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, 64,

   324 Sijilmassa, 40 Sikhism. 243 Slave and free labor. 316 Slave
breeding. 281 Slave Coast. See Bight of Benin Slave (Indians). 175 Slave
raiding, 134; Angola. 94; Brazil. 134; by Chichimecas. 176; by Misquito.
155; by Mun- durucu. 326-327; in Nicaragua.

   134; on Northwest Coast. 186. 190; by Snake. 176; by Spaniards. 203;
and warfare in North America. 203 Slave rebellion. 157; Haiti. 151.

333. 337; Jamaica. 155; Iraq. 234 Slavery. 203-204. 207-208. 356;
Africans in. 14 3.202-204.412; in America. 87. American Indians in. 134.
138. 143. 150, 156. 203; in the Azores. 87; in Brazil.

200. 201. 322, 337. 372, 373; in Byzantium, 405; Canary Islands. 87;
Christian captives in. 201; in Crete. 87; in Cuba. 316. 335; in Cyprus,
195; Greeks in, 202; in Hispanic America, 143; in Iberian peninsula,
201; and industrial capitalism. 316; and industrial revolution. 199,
200; and kinship. 207-208, 412; and merchants, 87-88; Lunda. 226227; in
Madeira. 87; Mongols in, 202; Moslem captives in, 201; and piracy, 202;
and political consolidation in Africa. 208; in Portuguese America. 150.
157; in

pre-European Africa, compared to slavery in the Americas. 207.

412; in Puerto Rico. 336; and racial distinctions. 195. 196. 197.

202. 203; in Scotland. 202; in Sicily, 195; and sugar cane, 195; Turks
in, 202; in Tuscany, 202, 405; in U.S., 279-285, 363, 416-417; and
warfare, 207208; in West Africa. 87 Slavery, emancipation from:
Barbados. 368; Brazil, 316, 337; Cuba, 316; Guyana. 368; Jamaica. 333.
368; Saint Kitts. 368; Trinidad. 368 Slaves: in Africa. 205; taken from
Africa to Brazil. 129. 157; among Agni. 342; from Angola. 223; taken by
Aro. 167; given to Asante. 212; in Brazil, 322; of Dutch in Banda
Islands. 238; in Kachin opium production. 345; in mining. 138, 195; sent
to Mwaant Yaav, 226.227; in North America, 280; from Kongo.

222 — 223; from Ndongo. 223; in Portugal. Ill, 112; runaway, 203; Slavs
as. 202 Silk: exports from Bengal. 244; hats. 161; trade in. 104. 153.
183, 254

Silk Road, 24, 27, 29, 31, 34, 50, 55 Silver, 109, 153, 158; flow to
China, 153,255; in Hispanic America, 113, 114, 115, 130,

141, 151-152.257,260,408; search for, 135- 138; trade in.

   119. 153. 194.257; transfer to Spain. 138-140 Silverberg, James. 398
Silver dollars, trade in. 241. 258 Silverman. Martin, 425 Silverman.
Sydel, xi Si Ives. 110 Simkin, C. G. F.. 413 Simons, H. J., 42 Simons,
Ruth E.. 424 Sinder, Leon. 398 Singapore. 375-377, 382 Sinha. Surajit.
47 Sinhalese. Kandyan, 339- 340 Sinhalese-Tamil conflicts. 340 Sinu
River. 156 Siouan-speakers, 172 Siskind. Janet. 404 Sivaji, 244

"Six Companies." 377 Skagit. 411

Skeena River. 189. 190 Skocpol, Theda. 394.407 Slave trade. 4.17, 18,
39,41,42,43,

119, 120, 130, 150, 151, 157.

158, 195-231; African role in.

498 Index

204. 206. 209. 229-231; Aro in, 220; and Asame. 212; and Asante
political cohesion, 212; Bemba in, 228-229; Benin in,

215; in Central Africa. 230; Dahomey in, 214-215; demography of.
194-201,412,413; downturn in. and effect on Asante. 212. 330-332; Dutch
in. 150.204; in East Africa. 228; East African middlemen in, 227—229;
Efik in, 219; English. 152. 153,

197, 198.200,201,203,204; European, 102-103, 201-202, 405; European role
in 204, 231; French. 198. 200. 201. 204. 238; Igala in, 217; indirect
effects of. 198- 199. 200; by Indians. 176; on Northwest Coast. 185.
190; Old Calabar in, 218 - 219. Omani in, 228, organization of, 204.

209, 229; and Ottomans. 204; Oyo in, 213; political effects of, 230-231;
Portuguese, 115, 196.

197. 198. 200.201.204.215, 222-224. 225; profits in. 198

   199, 316; routes of. 201.213. 220; sociopolitical effects of decline
of, 330-332; sources of supply for. 200; sources of supply and effects
on Americas. 200; and state formation. Central Africa. 224-229; supplies
for. 209; trans-Saharan, 39,412; Viking, 158,405 Slave trade abolition.
201, 228; England, 315; France, 315; Netherlands. 315; reasons for.
315316; United States, 315 Slavs, 35; as slaves, 202 Slobodin, Richard.
410 Slovaks, in U.S.. 364 Small holders in rubber production. 330

Smelser. Neil J.. 416 Smit, J. W., 270 Smith, Abbot E., 202 Smith.
Abdullahi. 397 Smith. Adam. 74. 314.403 Smith. C.T., 114.406 Smith,
Michael G., 425 Smuggling: opium, 343, 346; rubber seeds, 329; tea. 255
Smyrna. 279 Snake. 176. 177 Snow. Dean. 163 Sociability, new patterns
of. 333 Social fields. 76 Social history, x, 355 Socialism, as mode of
production.

   401

Social labor, 74-75

Social Sciences, 7-19, 354, 355;

   critique of, 393 Social structure: Mundurucii, 327-329; Thailand.
John Embree on, 321 ; Thailand, Jack Potter on, 321 Société Commerciale
de l'Ouest Africain, 317 Society, critique of concept of, 387
Sociocultural heterogeneity and capitalism. 379. 380 Sociology. 8-9,
11-13, 354, 394; development of theory in. 11 — 13, 354; of knowledge,
425; and political economy, 8; postulates of, 8 — 9. See also Urban
sociology, "new"

Sofala. 129.235 Solomon Islands, 258, 259 Sombrerete, 135 Songhay. 39,
41 Songye, 221 Soninke. 39 Soothill. Jay H.. 421 Sotho. 349

Southall, Aidan W., 98

South Carolina, 203

Southern Cult. 69

South Korea. 382

Southwest, U.S.. cultures of. 68

Soviet socialism. 401

Spain. Spaniards. 109. Ill, 115.

118. 119. 130, 131, 151, 153, 155, 156, 159, 173, 184, 186.

203, 204, 210, 237, 238, 253, 265. 284. 323. 406; in Asia. 256;
dependence on foreign bankers of. 123—124, 140; effect of silver imports
on, 139-140; emigration to Argentina from. 323; fleet of. 138-139, 152,
158; flow of wealth out of, 113; integration of. 379; livestock keeping
in.

112- 113; loss of Cuba by. 335; loss of Jamaica by, 130, 152; loss of
Puerto Rico by. 336; loss of Trinidad by. 333 — 334; merchant guild,
140; Muslims expelled from, 113; organization of trade. 138. 141 ; royal
income from New World. 139. 151 - 152. shipping of, 138-139, 141;
southern, 296; trade with New World of. 140- 141; unproductive
investment in, 113; wool exports. 113. See also Hispanic America Spain.
Muslim. 105. 108, 110. 112. 123

Spalding, Karen W., 409 Spanish Company, 122 Spanish conquerors,
conquest, 131, 133, 325; effect on pre-Hispanic tributary systems.
134-135, 157 Spanish empire, 118-119. 156

Spear. Percival. 245,414 Spengler, Oswald. 395 Spices. 196; Asian. 104.
112, 119, 129, 153, 158; trade in. 104. 112. 1 19. 129, 153.
158.235,236,

   237,238, 305; trade in. by Chinese, 236; trade in, by Dutch. 238-239,
305. trade in. by Muslim merchants. 236; as tribute. 305; uses of. 236.
See also Cloves; Mace; Malaguette; Nutmeg; Pepper Spinning: technology.
272. 273. 274; and weaving, 272,273,274. 275,279 Spinola family, 114
Spiro Mound, 69 Spodek, Howard. 414 Srinivas, M. N.. 46. 249. 398
Sriviyaya, 57, 58 Stalin, Stalinism, 401. 403.420 Stanley Falls, 221
Stanley pool, 221, 223 State: and class. 308; and differentiation under
capitalism, 307309; formation, 71; formation, and aristocracies, 98-99,
formation and supposed cultural homogeneity, 379; formation, Hawaii,
259; formation, Tahiti. 259; and fund of bullion, 124125; and merchants.
109- 110.

   118. 124 Status, Law of. 248 Stavenhagen, Rodolfo. 422 Steam engine.
273 Steam power, rising use of, 355 Steamships, 293-294, 321, 339.

   355; and wheat exports. 318 Steam thresher. 318-319 Steensgard.
Niels. 32. 414 Stein, Barbara, 408 Stein. Burton, 414 Stein, Lorenz von.
8 Stein. Stanley J.. 408 Stenton, Doris M., 407 Sternberg, Fritz, 419
Stevenson. Robert F.. 229. 411 —

   412

Steward, Julian H.. 14-15, 156. 399,420,422; concept of levels of
sociocultural integration. 1415; role in Puerto Rico Project. 420

Stewart. Watt. 377.421 Stikine River. 189. 190 Stimulants, 332- 346,
352; and dietary change, 333 Strachey, John, 402 Strayer, Joseph R., 407
Strickon, Arnold, 421 Stroganov, House of, 183 Strong, B. Stephen, 411

Index 499

Stroudwater Valley. Gloucestershire. 4 Structural causality. 401
Structuralism and Marxism. 400.

   401,402 Strygowski. Joseph. 395 Stuchevskii, 1. A.. 81 Sturtevant.
William C.. 417 Styria. 292

Suarez de Figueroa. Cristobal. 124 Subia. 349 Sucre, 144 Sudanic belt,
41

Suez Canal. 286.294. 301. 311, 3 39 Suez Canal Company. 294 Suez.
Isthmus of. 31, 294 Sufi preachers. 58. 243 Sugar. 314. 332.
333-336.422;

   trade in. 112. 115. 158. 197.288 Sugar beet production. 316 Sugar
cane, as cash crop, 244. 256; cultivation of. 129. 149-151. 333—336;
cultivation. Brazil.

   129. 149-151. 197. 203. 372; cultivation. Caribbean. 195.265. 310;
cultivation. Caribbean, capitalization of. 151. 197.335-336.
cultivation, and slavery. 195. 196 Sugarcane plantations; 314. 334336.
372; in Cuba. 335; in Fiji. 334; in Guyana. 333-334; indentured laborers
as labor force on. 333; in Java. 334; in Mauritius. 334; in Natal. 334;
in Puerto Rico, 335 — 336; in Queensland, Australia, 334; in Trinidad.
334 Sui dynasty. 54 Sulu Islands. 58 Sulu Vou. 334

Sumatra. 24.42. 56. 57. 330. 377; Chinese on rubber plantations. 330;
Javanese on rubber plantations, 330; rubber plantations in, 330; tobacco
plantations in. 330; tobacco plantations combined with slash-and-burn
agriculture in. 330 Summers. Roger. 43. 397 Sun Dance. 180. 194
Sundstrom, Lars. 397 Sung dynasty. 51, 53, 54, 55 Supe, 60

Sural. 240, 241.288 Surplus, in the capitalist mode of production. 299;
value. 355. See also Indirect surplus value Susquehanna. Susquehannock.

   166. 168 Sus Valley. 26.41 Sutcliffe. Bob. 419 Suttles. Wayne. 411
Swabian League. 107 Swahili Coast. 229. 234

Swahili-speakers, 228. 229 Swanton. John R.. 417 Swatow. 375 Swazi. 349.
350 Swaziland. 349. 367 Sweden: agricultural crisis in, 364; iron and
steel industry of. 292; metal exports from, 115 Swedes, in U.S.. 364
Swedish Company. 209 Sweezy. Paul M.. 78. 299. 402. 418 Swiss
Confederation. 107 Switzerland: Italian immigration. 371; labor
migration from Mediterranean region. 383; as source of indentured
laborers for Brazil.

   373 Sydney. 258 Syria. 102. 103.236 Syrians, in U.S.. 364 Syrian
Steppe. 26 Szechwan. 51. 53. 343

T

Tabasco. 68

Taboo system. Hawaii, 259.415 Tacksmen. 363 Tafo. 211

Tahiti. Chinese contract laborers in,

378 Taiga. 26

Taiping Rebellion. 375 Tairona. 63. 64. 325 Tai-speakers. 30 Taiwan.
254. 358. 382 Taklamakan Desert. 27 Taku.189 Taku River. 189'

Tallensi. 230 Tamerlane. See Timur Tamilnad, Tamilnadu. 48. 250
Tamil-Sinhalcse conflicts. 340 Tamil-speakers: as indentured laborers in
Burma. 370; as indentured laborers in Malaya.

370; as indentured laborers in Natal. 370; as indentured laborers on
rubber plantations in Malaya; 330; as laborers on Ceylon tea
plantations. 340, 370 Tana (medieval Black Sea port),

   202

Tana (New Hebrides). 258 T'ang dynasty. 53. 54. 55.82 Tanjore. See
Thanjavur Tanzania, 41 Tapuia, 150

Tawney, Richard H.. 407 Taxation: Benares. 247-248, Bengal, 244-246; and
capitalist state, 309; in Dutch Indonesia, 334; Hawaii. 258; India. 247

249. 251; on tea. 255; used to

   control Indian industry. 290 Taxco, 135

Taylor. George R.. 418 Taylor. William B.. 409 Tea, 314. 332. 333. 339-
340. as advances. 175; exports, from China. 255-257. 261; plantations,
314; plantations. Assam. 369; plantations, Bhutan, 369; plantations,
Ceylon. 339. 340; plantations. Ceylon, labor force, 340; production,
Assam, 339; production, China, 256-257; production, India, 339; smug-
glingof, 255; taxeson, 255; trade in. 183.241.255-257.260 Technology: on
capital-intensive sugar plantations, 335 — 336; capital investment in.
304. 312; in cattle raising, U.S. West, 322; in commercial wheat
farming, 318—319; "continuous process." 382; in Germany. 312; in iron
and steel industry. 292; in meat packing, 322-323; "Renaissance," 406;
in sheep raising. Australia. 323; in shipbuilding.

   293, in U.S.. 312 Teggart, Frederick J.. 34. 395 Tejo River valley,
29 Tcke, 222 Teng. Ssu-Yü, 255 Tenochtitlan, 131 Teotihuacan. 66, 67,71
Tepanec, 68 Ternate, 235, 238 Terray, Emmanuel. 208. 397 Tete. 227
Teutons. 103 Texas. 280. 321

Textile crafts: Bengal. 244; England, 274, 277; India, destruction of.
249, 251,287. 290; Madras. 241 ; and textile industry. England. 296
Textile factories. 274. 295; labor force in. 274, 276, 277. 295;
organization of. in India. 289-290 Textile industry. 266. 267.
270277.416; and capitalist mode of production. 294-295; capitalization
of. 272. 291 ; as "carrier" of industrial revolution. 278. 291; England.
266. 271 -278. 294.

3 57.416; England, and regions of textile craft production. 296;
England, and role of provinces in, 271 —273; on European continent. 357;
India, 287-290,418; India, capitalization of, 288; India, as example of
"peripheral" industrialization, 291; India.

500 Index

labor force in. 289-290; Japan.

288. 290; New England. 358. 359; southern Italy, decline of.

337

Textile production. 147. 266. 267. 270.271.287-291. 382; Catalan.
112-113; China. 256. 257; England. Ill; Flanders. 107; Hispanic America.
147; Western Guatemala. 146 Textiles: export. 240; exports from England.
118; trade in, 39.4 3.68.

1 15, 120, 153. 154. 175. 185.

197. 206.218. 223.234. 244.

   258. 270; trade in Indian. 260. 270; trade in. Pacific. 154 Textile
technology: 270-271. 272.

   273-274. 357 Thailand, 30. 421; Chinese role in rice marketing, 320;
debate on social structure, 321; opium production, 343; rice production
for export. 320-321 Thalheimer. August. 425 Thames River valley. 29
Thanjavur district, 250. 370-371; changes in land tenure. 250251, 370;
changes in taxation. 250-251; labor migration from.

   251, 370-371; rice production for export, 251. 370; as source of
indentured laborers, 370 Third World, concept of. 7, 12 Thirsk, Joan.
269 Thomas. L. V., 221,296 Thomassen a Thuessinck. Anj., 399 Thompson.
Edgar T.. 315, 417, 420 Thompson. E. P.. 277,402,416,423 Thompson.
Leonard. 349.423.424 Thorner. Alice. 249. 287 Thorner. Daniel. 249.
287.418 Thrupp. Sylvia L.. 407 Tiahuanaco, 60 Tidore. 237 Tigris River,
26

Tilly. Charles. 269. 360. 394. 407 Timber, trade in. 115, 116. 196
Timbuctu, 31, 39 Timucua, 203

Timur (Tamerlane), 35,45, 50 Timurids, 241

Tin: mining. Malaya, 346, 376;

   trade in, 140, 255 Tinker, Hugh, 369, 424 Titiev, Mischa, 89 Tlingit,
185, 186, 187, 188, 189,

190,411; trade with Russians. 190

Tobacco: as advances. 175; Brazilian. in slave trade. 197; Caribbean.
196; on plantations. Dutch Sumatra 330; trade in. 109. 151,

155. 181. 197.206.223.258

Tobajara. 150 Tocqueville. Alexis de. 277 Togan, A. Zeki Validi, 405
Toions. 184 Tokei, Ferenc. 403 Toltecs. 67. 68.99 Tonnies. Ferdinand.
11.12 Tooke. Thomas. 292 Tooker. Elizabeth. 410 Tools, iron. 204; trade
in, 166 Topfer, Bernhard. 81.404 Tordesillas Treaty. 131 Tortoise shell,
trade in, 42. 155.

234.258 Toulouse. 117

Toussaint. Auguste, 155,294 Toynbee, Arnold, 395 Trade, 30-32; between
Andes and tropical lowlands. 64; "constrained," 141; between India and
Near East, 288; maritime, and caravan decline. 32. 260; Ottoman, 36 —
37; and political consolidation in Africa. 206; and politics. 84; and
redistribution, 82; and regional specialization,

119— 120; between Spain and Americas, 140— 141; shifts in long-distance,
77- 104 Trade networks; 71, 268. Africa, 204-205, 206; China-India.

154; China-South America, 154; Europe-Africa, 206; Indian Ocean. 240.
397; Near East- India. 288; Pacific Ocean. 153 Trade routes:
Acapulco-Mexico City. 153; over Asian seas. 234; Asian seas, and
Portuguese.

236-237; Central African. 227; China-Burma. 345. 346; Europe,
north-south. 107; Hispanic America. 138-139; MacaoManila, 153;
Manila-Acapulco, 153; Indian ocean, 41 -43,44. 234-235; Muslim, in
Indian ocean and Southeast Asia. 234235; Pacific ocean. 153; and
pastoral nomads. 32 — 33. 37- 38; Peru-Acapulco. 153; of spice trade,
236; transcontinental. Old World. 32; trans-Saharan, 3839, 40, 205,412
Trade Unions: England, 278; South Africa, 366-367 Transoxeania, 35,45
Transportation: by birch bark canoe, 164; bullock-carts, 287; by camel,
31; by canal. 52, 56, 283, 284. 291; by caravan. 31,

32, 38, 39, 260; and declining freight rates. 293. 313; energy costs of.
84; Inca, 62; and livestock raising, 321; on Northwest

Coast, 185; in Northwest Territory fur trade, 178; by railroad. 280.
292-293. 318. 355; by sailing ships, 293; slaves in, 208; by steamship.
280, 283-284. 293

   294. 321. 339. 355. and world market. 295 Transvaal. 41. 346. 350
Travel time, maritime. 293-294 Trelease. Allen W.. 166, 168. 169 Trempe.
Rolande, 358,423 Triangle Area, Kachin Hills, 346 Tribe, as a type of
society, 76 "Tribes," in India, 49 Tributary mode of production, 76,
79-88, 99- 100, 356, 386, 402404; and exchange. 82. 83-88; and
ideology-making. 389. 390; and irrigation. 80; and merchants, 82, 266;
and political fragmentation or centralization,

   81 - 82; and relations of power. 80. 267, 356; and state, 99-100
Tribute: among Agni. 342; among Asante, 212; of Dahomey to Oyo; 213; end
to, through peasant emancipation. Europe. 317— 318; in Egypt, 286; fur
(iasak), in Russia, 158, 159, 183; by India to England, 246; by Indians
to Spaniards, 136, 140, 143, 146, 149; Lapp, 158; Lunda domain, 226; in
Mughal empire. 247; in Philippines. 153 Trigger, Bruce G., 410
Trimberger, Ellen K.. 394 Trinidad, 333, 370; East Indians as indentured
laborers in, 369 Tripoli. 26,210 Trotsky, Leon. 303 Tsetse fly. 204. 213
Tsimshian, 185. 186. 189. 190

   191,411 Tswana, 349, 350 Tula, 67, 68 Tundra. 26 Tungus, 183
Tunhwang, 27 Tunis, Tunisia, 26, 39,40,41 Tupi, Tupian, 372 Turbines,
312 Turkestan, 25, 241, 242 Turkey: as source of cotton, 279; as source
of opium, 257. See also Ottomans Turkoman, 35

Turks. 25, 33, 34, 35, 50. 99. 237, 241, 286; as slaves, 202. See also
Oghuz Turks; Ottomans; Seljuk Turks Turner, Bryan S., 396 Turner,
Victor, 227 Turquoise, trade in. 67

Index 501

Turtle. See Tortoise Tuscany, slave population in. 202, 405

Tuscarora. 165. 168 Twi-speakers. 211 Tyrol. 107 Tyrrhenian Sea. 104
Twichett. Denis. 399 Tylor. Edward B.. 15 Tzeltal and Tzotzil Indians:
com* mercial economy. 339; part of Mexican state. 339; regarded as
survivors of Maya. 338 Tzeltal- and Tzotzil-speakers,

   337-339 Tzeltal rebellion. 337

U

Ucayali River. 64 Uchendu. Victor C.. 331 Udovitch. Abraham L.. 255. 396
Uganda: cotton cultivation, 290; cotton growing and sociopolitical
organization. 290 Uganda Agreement. 290 Uigur. 55

Ukers. William. 422 Ulema. 36. 37 Ulster. 296. 363 Ulundi. 350. 351
Umayyad dynasty, 35 Underdevelopment. A. G. Frank on, 22 Unequal
exchange, 305 Union of South Africa, Land Act (1913), 367-368 United
Africa Company, 317 United Fruit Company. 317. 324325.421 United
Provinces of the Netherlands. 108. 110. 115-117. 118.

119, 122. 124. See also Dutch; Netherlands United States of America
(abbrev. U.S.), 193,201, 321, 363-366; acquisition of Alaska by. 183;
Afro-Americans in. 322. 364, 378, 383; Chinese in, 377; Chinese
Exclusion Act of. 378; clothing industry of, 364; cotton cultivation for
England in, 279285,295; cotton exports as key to economic growth, 279;
cotton trade of. 282-284; expansion of. 313; foreign debts of. 292;
immigration into, 363-366; Immigration Commission, 366; immigration from
Austro-Hungarian empire, 364; immigration from Balkan countries, 364;
immigration from British Isles, 364; immigration from Eastern

Europe. 364; immigration from Germany, 364; immigration and
industrialization. 364; immigration from Ireland. 364; immigration from
Italy, 364, 365; immigration from southern Europe. 364; immigration and
technological innovation. 366; industrialization. 261. 366; iron and
steel industry in, 312; and Iroquois. 168. 170; and labor markets. 383;
labor migration from Caribbean to, 383; labor migration from Mexico to.
383; land grants in. 364; meat packing industry in. 322; merger movement
among big firms. 301; naval development of. 293; northward migration of
Afro- Americans in. 383; and Northwestern fur trade. 176; ousts Spain
from Cuba and Puerto Rico, 335; racial distinctions and labor markets
in. 378; railroad construction in. 284. 291 -292.

364. 377; relations between Afro-Americans and immigrants. 364; role in
Panama. 294; slave imports in. 201; technology and industrialization in.
312. 366; views on history of. 5 - 6, 12-13; wage levels in. 366; wheat
exports of, 313, 364; wheat exports and transportation facilities in.

318

U.S. Civil War (War between Union and Confederacy). 280. 308. 318.
321,377 U.S. Colonial Period: imports during, 339 U.S. Midwest: land
grants in. 364;

as wheat-producing area, 318 U.S. Northeast: emigration of industrial
firms from, 382; supplies southern states with manufactures, 283. 314
U.S. South: class relations in, 281; cotton production in, 69. 280,

313, 363; cotton production for England. 279.283.286.291; cotton
production and Indian removal from. 284-285; cotton production for U.S.
Northeast in, 283; disadvantaged in regional interchange, 284; family
and kinship among slaves in, 281; free Afro-Americans in, 282;
immigration of industrial firms into, 382; imports into. 283-284;
Indian-European interaction in, 284-285; slave demography of. compared
with Brazil and West Indies. 281; slave rentals in. 282

U.S. Southeast. 284-285.417 U.S. West: cattle raising in. 321 — 322;
land grants in, 364; supplies foodstuffs to U.S., East and South,
283,284, 314; wheat production in. 318 U.S. War of Independence, 168,

   255,257, 339, 363 Untouchables. 45.48. 289. 370.

   398

Upper Burma, migration to Lower Burma. 319 Upper Guinea Coast, 412 Upper
Peru. See Bolivia Upper Volta. 230, 383 Ural Mountains, 25. 26. 183
Urban anthropology. 423 Urbanization, 360-361. in Belgium. 362; in
England, 276-277, 360, 362; in Europe, 360; and industrialization,
276-277. 360; and industry. 276; and putting- out systems, 360; in
Wales, 360 Urban sociology, "new," 423 Urdeutschland (original German
home provinces), 106 Urdu,242 Ure, Andrew. 275 Urubamba basin. 62 Utah.
377 Ute. 176

Utrecht Treaty, 153, 173 Uttar Pradesh. 244 Uzbek. 35. 50. 242

V

Vaal River. 366

Vansina. Jan. 221. 225.226. 227.

   396.413 Varangian Rus. 103. 158. 220 Vasiliev. L. S.. 81 Vasquez de
Ayllon. Lucas. 203 Vcllala caste. 250 Vellut. Jean-Luc. 227.413 Venable.
Vernon. 394.401 Venezuela. 140. 152. 153.422;

   labor migration to, 383 Venice, Venetians. 24. 37, 104, 105, 114,
115, 124, 129, 232; merchants, 236; slave trade of. 201-202 Veracruz.
139, 365 Vercauteren. Fernand. 103 Verlinden, Charles, 405 Vicens Vives,
Jaime. 406 Victoria, 192, 377 Vietnam. 30.43.51. 305. 321.421.

   See also Cochinchina Vietnam War. 7 Vijanagar. 234. 243 Viking Rus.
See Varangian Rus Vikings, 108, 120, 158; and Byzantines, 405; expansion
of, 103,

502 Index

   405

"Village Indians." 66, 177-178, 180. See also Ankara; Hidatsa; Mandan;
Pawnee Villamarin, Juan A., 63. 136. 409 Villamarin. Judith E.. 63. 136.
409 Virginia, 130, 166, 196,280,282 Virginia Company. 122, 161 Vivaldi
Brothers. 232 Vlekke. B. H. M.. 399 Volga Germans. 364 Volga River. 31.
158. 183 VoloSinov, Valentin N.. 16- 17.425 Voltaire. Francois Marie
Arouet. 81 Volta River, 39. 341 Vossler. Karl. 16 Voyageurs. 176. 178
Vries. Jan de, 270,406 Vulcanization. 325

W

Wadsworth, A. P., 416 Wage labor. 267, 355; and Kwa- kiutl, 192; on
Puerto Rican sugar plantation. 336; and Walbiri, 323 Wage levels. 270.
272. 312, 356.

   357. 366, 367, 368, 380, 382 Wagley, Charles. 326 Wakeman, Frederic.
258,415 Walbiri, 323 Walker, Mack, 319, 358 Wallace, Anthony F. C,
174.410 Wallerstein, Immanuel, 22—23, 85,

118, 158,297-298, 405,408,

   420 Wallonia, 116 Walloon-speakers. 362 Walvin. James, 409 Wang,
Yii-ch'uan, 52 Ward. R. Gerard. 259.415 Warfare. 106- 107; and
agricultural crisis, 108- 109; Asante, 212; Colombia, 64; by English
East India Company, 244. 245. 246; and enslavement. Africa. 207—208; and
fur trade, 161,

169, 186, 190, 193; Inca.62,63. 65; Iroquois, 165, 166, 168, 169, 170;
and merchants, 86; Ottoman, 210; and political consolidation. Africa,
206; and slave raiding. North America. 203; and tributary lords, 119.
See also Warfare, naval Warfare, naval. 104; by Dutch,

   239; by Portuguese, 239 War industry, 304 Warner, W. Lloyd, 358,415
Washburn. Wilcomb E.. 169 Wasserstrom. Robert, 338 Wa states, 346

Water power, rising use of. 355 Watrous, Stephen D.. 183

Watson. Andrew M.. 396 Watson. James L.. 412 Watt, James, 273 Weaving
technology. 274 Webb. Malcolm C., 259.415 Webb. Walter P.. 421 Weber.
Eugen, 379 Weber, Max. 12,85,297-298, 319, 421,425; view of capitalism
compared with Marx. 297-298 Webster, David, 404 Weigand, Phil C.. 66
Wei-Pei Plain. 51 Wei River. 29 Welse rs. 114 Welsh. David. 424
Welskopf. Elisabeth Charlotte. 403 Werner, Ernst, 396 Wertheim, Willem
F., 234.413,425 Wessman. James W., 394.400 West Ceram. 238 West Indies.
115. 151, 199. 280.

   281; Chinese contract laborers in. 378; cotton production in. 279;
rice imports from Burma. 320; slave demography compared with U.S..
280-281; slaves sent to Brazil diverted to, 369; sugar plantations in,
334 Westos, 203 Westphalia, 362 West Riding, 296 Weydemeyer, Joseph. 20
Whaling, 184,259 Wheat, 26. 135. 144. 318-319; exports from Russia. 313.
371; exports from U.S.. 371.421; farming. 318 — 319; farming, Argentina.
319.421; farming. Germany, 319.421; farming, labor force in, 318-319,
farming. technology of, 318 — 319; farming. U.S.. 318-319; imports,
European, 312-313; prices of. 313. 319; trade in, 197, 312-314 Wheatley,
Paul. 399 Wheeler. Mortimer, 44, 255 White. Leslie A.. 15 Whitefish. 171
Whitney. Eli. 279 Whydah, 200, 211,214, 215 Wickham. Sir Robert, 329
Wike.Joyce. 186, 192, HI Wilbur. Clarence M., 55 Wilks, Ivor. 211.212,
397,412 Willey. Gordon R., 58, 60,400 Williams. Elgin, 394 Williams.
Eric. 199, 200 Williams, Raymond, 276.425 William the Conqueror. 108
Willis. William S.. Jr.. 317 Wilmott. W. E., 399

Wilson. Charles H.. 407.408 Wilson. Charles Morrow. 421 Wilson, Francis,
425 Wilson. Godfrey. 423 Wilson. H. Clyde. 410 Wilson. Monica, 423, 424
Windward Coast, 201 Wine, trade in, 111,118, 140, 223 Winius, George D.,
406 Winnebago, 171,232 Winston. Sanford. 417 Wisconsin. 69 Wittek. Paul.
396 Wittfogel. Karl A.. 51. 54, 80. 398,

403

Witwatersrand. 346 Wolf. Eric R.. 395, 300, 419, 420,

422

Wolpe, Harold. 425 Wolters. O. W., 399 Woodruff, Philip. 252,414
Woodruff, William. 314. 355.418 Woolen cloth, trade in. 121 - 122.

   181.227,254 Wool exports: Australia, 323; England. 107. 121. 278;
Spain. 113, 140

Working classes, 315, 354-355,

358-383; in Africa. 359; in China. 358-359; differential composition of.
358-359; in France. 358; generated by capitalist accumulation. 383; in
Germany, 358; in India. 359; international recruitment of, 383; in Near
East, 383; social context of,

359-360; in South Africa, 366-368

Working-class politics, 276, 277— 278, 360 World-system. Wallerstcin's
view of, 22-23 World War I. 303. 321. 381 World War II, 304, 305, 375,
382,

383

Worsley, Peter. 394 Wrangell, 189 Wright, Gary A., 164 Wright, Gavin,
417 Wunder, Heide, 404 Wyoming. 69. 176

X

Xhosa. 349. 350. 422

Y

Yaka.225

Yakut. Yakuts. 183. 184,411 Yakutat Tlingit. 411 Yalman. Nur. 340
Yamasee. 203 Yanaconas. 136

Yangtze River and valley. 29, 30,

Index 503

   50.51.52-53,256 Yanktonai. 172 Yao (Africa). 201.228 Yao, 30, 5 3.
See also Mong; lu Mien Yarkand,27 Yellowknife. 175 Yellow River. 29
Yemen, 336 Yeniseisk. 184

Yoruba, 39, 206, 212,213,215, 342,413; response to decline of slaving,
331 Young, Philip D.. 325 Yucatan, 14, 68, 140

Yukon Valley. 190 Yu Mien. See Iu Mien; Mong Yunnan. 53,256. 343. 345

Z

Zacatecas, 135

Zagros Mountains. 27

Zaire. 41. 204. 230

Zambezi River. 43. 227, 228, 349

Zambia. 41, 230

Zamindars. 243, 247, 248. 249

Zanata Berber confederacy. 40

Zanzibar. 42,228

Zaque domain. 63 Zasulich, Vera. 303 Zayanids. 40 Zimbabwe. 41

Zimbabwe (formerly Rhodesia). 349

Zinacantan, 338 Zinacanteco, employment ot Chamula laborers, 338 Zipa
domain, 63 Zukin, Sharon. 423 Zulu. 96. 347-350. 362; army of. 347. 349.
350; development of,

347, 349; expansion of. 347, 349
