WRITING WOMEN'S WORLDS
Portions of the introduction were previously published in "Writing Against Culture," in
Recapturing Anthropology, edited by Richard Fox (Santa Fe: School of American
Research Press, 1991); and in "Can There Be a Feminist Ethnography?" Women and
Performance 5 (1990): 7-27. A version of chapter I is appearing simultaneously as
"Migdim: A Bedouin Matriarch," in Struggle and Survival in the Modern Middle East,
edited by Edmund Burke III (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1993). I reuse them with permission. All photographs, including the jacket illustration,
by Lila Abu-Lughod/Anthro-Photo.

        University of California Press
        Berkeley and Los Angeles, California
        University of California Press, Ltd.
        London, England
        © 1993 by The Regents of the University of California

        Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
        Abu-Lughod, Lila.
        Writing women's worlds: Bedouin stories / Lila Abu-Lughod.
        p. cm.
        Includes bibliographical references.
        ISBN 0-520-08304-0 (alk. paper)
        1. Women, Muslim Egypt Social conditions. 2. Bedouins Egypt.
        3. Ethnology Egypt Biographical methods. I. Title.
        HQI793.A68 1992
        305.48'6971'0962 dc20 91-39685
        CIP
        Printed in the United States of America
        08 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 00
        98765

The paper used in this publication is both acid-free and totally chlorine-free (TCF). It
meets the minimum requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (R 1997) (Permanence
of Paper).
For Fajriyya,
          whose daughters may one day read this
Contents




           List of Illustrations                        i
           Preface                                    iii
           Acknowledgments                            xi
           Keeping the Names Straight                 xv



           INTRODUCTION                                1

   ONE PATRILINEALITY                                 37

  TWO POLYGYNY                                        73

 THREE REPRODUCTION                                  107

  FOUR PATRILATERAL PARALLEL-COUSIN MARRIAGE         141

   FIVE HONOR AND SHAME                              175



           Transcription of Arabic Poems and Songs   210
           Bibliography                              226
                                   i




                                                           Illustrations




1.   Winding yarn on an upturned table                  frontispiece

2.   Two sisters                                                 xvi

3.   Chopping khubbayza for dinner                               36

4.   Posing with son, grandson, and Toyota                       72

5.   Displaying purchases from the fair                         106

6.   Eccentric relative of the groom dressed as a man           140
     to tease the bride

7.   Drawing of a wedding procession, the bride's               142
     furniture being carried in a truck

8.   One young woman has adopted modern Islamic dress           174
(this page intentionally left blank)
                                     iii

PREFACE

         On a windy day in December 1989, just over eleven years since I
had first taken the desert highway from Cairo to Alexandria, I sat with
my aunt by the side of the road. My father had disappeared with the
driver of our rented car, an agricultural engineer, and my husband to pick
out the sheep we had just arranged to purchase. Meanwhile, my aunt and
I bided our time.
         Now, as in 1978, my father was accompanying me to visit a
Bedouin family who lived not far off this desert road, people we had
initially met together but with whom, in the intervening decade, I had
lived on and off for more than two years. This was his first return visit to
the community. Agreeing with me that it was only proper that he pay a
call to express his appreciation for what they had done to help me, my
father had routed himself through Egypt while on a trip to the Middle
East. My father's sister had flown over from Jordan to see us and was
curious to know the people with whom I had spent so much time. And
my husband, although he had read most of what I had written about the
families we were going to visit, including a draft of this book, had never
met them. I wanted finally to introduce him to them.
         When we set off again I was excited and proud. I was proud that
we would pull up to the house in a Mercedes; it would confirm that I
came from a good family and had, moreover, made a good marriage. (On
my own, I had always straggled in from the bus and hot taxis that left me
off on the road.) I was even prouder that we had a sheep of respectable
size knocking about in the trunk of the car and that I sat wedged in the
back seat with cartons full of unshelled peanuts, green tea, candy, and a
jumble of combs, mirrors, kerchiefs, colognes, hairclips, pens, and
cigarette lighters. My Bedouin friends would recognize that these were
no ordinary gifts. This combination was the appropriate offering on the
important occasion of a bride's first postmarital visit home, and I was
pleased with myself for having arranged everything so well.
         I was, I knew, a bit old for all this, and I wondered at my own
reaction. Why should returning not just with members of my own family
but as a daughter and new bride – a consummately patriarchal
configuration – make me feel good? Had I not, years ago, established
myself as a scholar and developed with the Bedouin family a relationship
that was quite independent of these people who were accompanying me?
Had I not distanced myself from that first encounter in which, shy,
                                     iv

embarrassed, and feeling distinctly unlike an anthropologist, I had sat in
the back of a van while my father discussed with the men of this family
my need for hosts to help me learn about "the traditions and customs" of
the Awlad 'Ali Bedouin? Had I not moved far enough beyond the dutiful
daughter role I had once played to disagree with my host when he,
assuming I shared his prejudices, criticized Europeans for their moral
failings? On my last visit, when he complained about the lack of concern
Europeans showed for their families, I had argued that the progressive
breakdown of the extended family could be attributed to the need for
mobile labor under modern capitalism; it could, I said, happen even to
the Awlad 'Ali. As a feminist, I had also chided him for leaving his wives
and daughters undernourished while he lavished attention on his guests.
Had this community not registered its new view of me when some had
asked me, as a respected outside authority, to present to their disdainful
Egyptian compatriots who consider them bandits or primitives the truth
about Bedouin social life and values?
         Yet I was excited because I could anticipate their response to this
visit. They consider family important, and part of what had made me
acceptable to them in the first place was that they had met my family.
My background as the daughter of an Arab and a Muslim had also been
significant, compensating for my own apparent cultural incompetence.
Arriving now from America with more family members would confirm
me as, like them, not simply an individual, but part of a family, and one
with which they had already established mutual ties. Over the years, I
had often heard them discuss my father's concern for me and confidence
in them; they would interpret his visit as an acknowledgment of their
generosity and integrity.
         I knew they would also be pleased to see me finally married.
Most of the adolescent girls with whom I had first been associated were
now married, each with one or two children. A bride whom I had helped
welcome into the household was now the mother of five. The women of
the family, and even some of the men, had often expressed concern that I
had not married and begun a family of my own.
         Furthermore, I was certain that they would appreciate our gesture
of honoring them with these gifts. They knew that non-Bedouins do not
offer sheep as gifts; they would realize that I had learned this sign of
respect from them. And only the Awlad 'Ali celebrate the postmarital
visit in this way. The symbolism would be clear. We would be affirming
both a sort of belonging to this community and, more importantly, this
                                     v

particular family's status as ''close kin" of mine. In 1988 I had scribbled
on a sheet of paper a list of things a bride is traditionally expected to
bring on her postmarital visit home. The woman doing the itemizing had
teased me at the time about why I wanted this information: "Lila," she
had joked, "we expect you to bring us these things when you get
married!" She would not be expecting me to follow through, but she
would remember our list.
        This visit was of great personal importance because I hoped
finally to bring together two parts of my life. The Bedouin families with
whom I had lived had just as little knowledge of my social world in the
United States as they had of my academic life, a life to which, in a
peculiarly objectified form, they were so central. Introducing my
husband to them was a way for me to begin to join the worlds. I was
especially anxious that they accept him and condone my marriage to a
foreigner, with its implications for my primary identity. Although my
husband had done research in Egypt and speaks Arabic, he is English.
And I knew they felt strongly that I, in their eyes an Arab Muslim
woman, should marry within the community. I hoped that my father's
very presence would indicate his approval of the match and validate my
husband; but I could not be sure how they would react when confronted
with the finality of my dual identity and divided loyalties.
        I was relieved and touched by what happened. Predictably, the
Haj, my Bedouin host, regaled us with his tales about the British troops
in the Western Desert during the Second World War. He also politely
inquired whether my husband knew his British friends: Wilfred Thesiger,
the explorer, who had indeed once passed through, and Mark Allen, a
British diplomat in Egypt in the early 1980s who had enjoyed falcon
hunting with the Haj. The unexpected thing the Haj did, however, was to
tell some stories I had never heard before: stories about the origins of the
British, suggesting that the ancestors of many English people, including
some of the royal family, had been Arabs. We did not quite realize what
he was doing until, several hours later as we rose to leave after lunch, he
looked closely at my husband and then turned to his brother for
confirmation. "Just look at his face," he said. "You can see his Arab
blood!"
        In his own way, the Haj had sought to bring my two worlds
together, enfolding the foreign world into his to draw me back in. The
distance between these cultural and geographic worlds had been
decreasing over the last decade anyway. The Haj's own daughter had
                                    vi

recently married a young man whose older brother was studying
medicine in England.
         Electricity had been tapped from the new power lines joining the
coastal towns; the new cinder-block houses cropping up on what had
been open land all had television sets in their front rooms. The Awlad
'Ali Bedouins, as former pastoralists moving herds of sheep, goats, and
sometimes camels and involved in trade between Libya, the oases of the
Western Desert, and the Nile Valley from Alexandria to Upper Egypt,
had never been isolated. Yet they were now more closely integrated into
Egyptian state institutions and the national economy than even ten years
earlier.
         Many ethnographies open with the trope of arrival. My first book,
Veiled Sentiments, began with a description of the road one took to the
Bedouin hamlet that housed the families whose social world I would
describe and analyze. Second books on the same community often begin
with the image of return and the radical changes the author encounters
after a long absence. I could not, however, follow this formula because
less than a year had passed since my last visit and I had just spent five
months in the community only two years earlier. Unlike my father, I had
seen the desert highway go from two to four lanes and was not surprised
to see the toll booths. I knew how the Haj detested this new road with its
radar speed traps. I had seen the gradual extension of irrigation canals
and the conversion of much of the barren land around the community
into orchards. As the region became more crowded, fewer families
pitched tents near their houses. I had also seen the sudden growth of the
nearby market town where my host's brothers now owned a building that
housed a café and several stores. They had come to find property
investment more lucrative than the sheep herds that had earlier sustained
them. Now only one brother still kept herds, and when one day he was
kicked by one of his camels, even his old mother begged him to get rid
of them. Their time had passed, she said.
         I had written earlier about the Awlad 'Ali tribes of the Western
Desert as culturally and linguistically distinct both from the Bedouin
groups of Sinai and the Eastern Desert and from the Egyptians living in
the villages and towns of the Nile Valley. The Awlad 'Ali trace their
origins to Libya, and many would insistently point out their difference
from the people who ran the country in which they found themselves
uneasy citizens, resentful of increasing restrictions. Their children,
however, who are in contact with non-Bedouins in government schools,
                                     vii

seemed sometimes ambivalent about the features that set the Bedouins
apart: the strength of the bonds of kinship, the control of elder kin over
younger, the independence that marks men's honor, and the voluntary
veiling and separation from men that indexes women's respectability.
        The younger generation was becoming aware, as readers of this
book should be too, of how marginal their way of life is, whether to the
rest of Egypt or to the Arab world as a whole. If pastoralists in the mid-
twentieth century represented no more than one percent of the population
of the Middle East, their values and their ways of organizing
sociopolitical and economic life are now those of an even smaller
minority. This is clearest in the situation of women. In most of Egypt
working women in the 1980s were struggling with the competing
demands of employment and family: running household farms while
their men worked as migrant laborers in Saudi Arabia, sewing clothes,
peddling on the street, battling the crowds in public transportation to get
to their jobs in offices and wealthy people's homes, or finding
professional careers as politicians, businesswomen, teachers, and
medical doctors, some of whom might also be feminist leaders or Islamic
activists. For the women in the families I know, however, these kinds of
lives are only distant possibilities. Given their differences from the
majority of Middle Eastern women, what purpose might be served by
recounting, as I do in Writing Women's Worlds, their stories?
        This book is intended to present, in the form of a narrative
ethnography made up of these women's stories and conversations, a
general critique of ethnographic typification. I was searching, like other
anthropologists working today, for a new ethnographic style; I was also
intrigued by the insights on method and voice emerging from feminist
theorizing and sympathetic to concerns in Middle East studies about the
way Arab societies tend to be portrayed. I decided to explore how the
wonderfully complex stories of the individuals I had come to know in
this community in Egypt might challenge the capacity of anthropological
generalizations to render lives, theirs or others', adequately. The resulting
series of narratives is organized around five anthropological themes
associated with the study of women in the Arab world: patrilineality,
polygyny, reproduction, patrilateral parallel-cousin marriage, and honor
and shame. Yet rather than the chapter titles explaining the stories, the
stories are meant to undo the titles.
        The narrative chapters are preceded by an introduction written in
the more conventional form of an academic essay that locates the work
                                     viii

in its appropriate theoretical and political contexts. My intention in this is
to alert readers to the possibility of reading the book in a particular way.
The narrative chapters are not meant to be just entertaining or
illuminating stories about Bedouin life in the 1980s; they are also critical
commentaries on anthropological modes of understanding human
existence. As representations of Bedouin life, these narratives are
organized deliberately in terms of a set of goals determined by the
context in which they will be read, not the context in which they
occurred. That is, I expect the audience which I assume will be mostly
Western or Western-educated, coming to the text informed by
anthropology (and its current critics), feminism (and its internal
dissenters, including Third World feminists), and Middle East studies
(with its awareness of the problems of orientalism) to approach the book
critically, keeping in mind questions about the politics of ethnographic
representation and sociological description, problems of feminist
aspiration and method, and assumptions about the Muslim Middle East.
         Although it opens with an introduction, the book has no formal
conclusion. We plunge into the stories in chapter one, and remain with
them through the end of the book. A discursive conclusion would have
given closure; it would have provided the reader with "the meaning" of
all these stories about parents, children, husbands, wives, conflicts, joys,
and hopes. Busy readers could then have skipped from the introduction
to the conclusion, assuming that they had an adequate gloss for what was
sandwiched between. Such a concluding commentary, pronouncing the
lessons of all these rich and complex stories, would have restored the
superiority of the interpretive/analytical mode being questioned by the
very construction of narratives, would have reestablished the familiar
authority of the expert's voice, and, most troubling, would inevitably
have contained the stories. That I selected and organized them according
to the themes designated by the chapter headings seemed limiting
enough to their meanings.
         To have tried to sum up their significance would have reduced
them further. It would, in the end, have diminished their power and their
potential to overflow our analytical categories. In life, in their tellings in
Egypt, these stories and conversations did not occur in themes, at least
not these themes. And although I wanted the tales to be able to speak to a
set of intellectual debates in various fields in the United States and
Europe in the 1990s, I also wanted to let them be more.
(this page intentionally left blank)
(this page intentionally left blank)
                                    xi

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

        Perhaps more than most, this book has depended on the
extraordinary talents and rich lives of those who are its subjects. To
protect these generous families from strangers, I have chosen to use
pseudonyms. Sadly, that prevents me from being able to thank them by
name, although I owe them such a debt of gratitude. As a mediator
between worlds, I have taken their words into another context and fixed
them in a form they would find surprising. Yet I hope the women and
men whose stories I retell here will someday understand why I did it.
Until then, I hope they will give me the benefit of the doubt by having
faith that, though it seems a strange way to do it, I have meant through
this book to honor the kindness they have shown me over the years.
        The list of other individuals and institutions who have supported
this project is embarrassingly long. I have a debt to the reviewers at
various foundations and institutions who recommended that my project,
even in its inchoate stages, be supported; I hope this book will not
disappoint them. An award from the National Endowment for the
Humanities (College Teachers Award) in 1986 made possible an initial
trip to Egypt to record material. More important, it gave me precious
months for reading that helped me to formulate the project and lay its
theoretical foundations. I am grateful to the Department of Anthropology
and the Kevorkian Center for Near Eastern Studies at New York
University for the use of their facilities and the stimulation of their
company during that period. Bambi Schieffelin deserves special thanks
for explaining to me how to begin transcribing my piles of cassette tapes.
While in New York I was fortunate to find a group with whom to read
the French feminists; my thanks to Carol Ockman for bringing us
together.
        The bulk of the fieldwork I undertook for this book was made
possible by a Fulbright Award through the Islamic Civilization Program.
The American Research Center in Egypt kindly gave me an affiliation
and arranged for my permissions through the Egyptian Ministry of
Higher Education. Amira Khattab was wonderfully helpful. Ann Radwan
and the staff of the Fulbright Commission in Cairo saw to it that I could
get on with my research; they offered assistance with transportation and
occasional lodging, for which I was grateful during those long hot
months of 1987. Friends in Cairo gave me good advice, good
conversation, and comfortable places to stay; special thanks go to Soraya
                                    xii

Altorki, Marilyn Booth, Ken Cuno, Nick Hopkins, Soheir Morsy, and
Cynthia Nelson.
        I transcribed and transcribed and transcribed (to use a favorite
convention of Bedouin storytelling) and finally began writing while a
member of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. I am deeply
grateful to Clifford Geertz and Joan Scott for affording me the privilege
of that extraordinary year. The other regular participants in the "Gender
Seminar," especially Judith Butler, Yasmine Ergas, Evelyn Fox Keller,
Donna Haraway, Dorinne Kondo, Rayna Rapp, Carroll Smith-
Rosenberg, and Louise Tilly, were helpful in forcing me to rethink much
about feminist scholarship before it was too late. My gratitude to the
National Endowment for the Humanities increased for their contribution,
along with the Rockefeller Foundation, to my support at the Institute.
        I managed to complete much of the rest of the writing while a
Mellon Fellow at the University of Pennsylvania. I benefited enormously
from colleagues and seminars there, but Arjun Appadurai, Carol
Breckenridge, Margaret Mills, and the enlightening (if not always
civilized) seminar on "Orientalism and Beyond" sponsored by the South
Asia Program deserve particular mention. The anthropology department
made me welcome, and Diana Long gave me an enjoyable home in
Philadelphia.
        Although the project seemed radical when I first conceived of it,
the many talented anthropologists who have published narrative
ethnographies since then have given it something of a school to swim
with. The final form and intent of the book owe much to them and to the
responses of many audiences and readers. If I can no longer remember
what came from where, I am no less appreciative of all the comments
and questions I have received. I will single out only a few individuals for
thanks. The participants in the lively seminar "Representing
Anthropology," organized by Richard Fox at the School of American
Research in Santa Fe, helped me think through some of the issues raised
in the introduction and showed me how much fun intellectual exchange
could be. Susan Slyomovics and Ruth Behar were supportive critics.
Wendy Brown gently but insistently asked me, in the final hour, what I
had repressed. Catherine Lutz was a careful critic and good friend
throughout. At the University of California Press I was glad to work
again with Sheila Levine and Anne Canright and impressed, as before,
with the attention my book received. The two anonymous reviewers
suggested areas worth reworking; they delayed an already long overdue
                                  xiii

project but helped make it better. Without Mary and Ted Cross's
generous offer of an exquisite place to work, I would not have enjoyed
the process of doing these final revisions so much.
        In the acknowledgments to my first book, I buried my thanks to
Tim Mitchell in a long list of friends because he had come at its end.
This book, which has shared our life together, owes much to him in
details large and small (though none of its weaknesses can be blamed on
him). He cheerfully read more of it and my other writings than anyone
should have to; I am ever grateful for his optimism and the gift of his
shared thoughts.
(this page intentionally left blank)
                                   xv

KEEPING THE NAMES STRAIGHT

First Generation:

          MIGDIM     the old mother
          JAWWAD     Migdim's husband, deceased

Second Generation:

            HAMID    Migdim's eldest son
             SAGR    (or Haj Sagr) Migdim's second son
          DHAHAB     Migdim's eldest daughter
           NGAWA     Migdim's second daughter
             LAWZ    Migdim's youngest daughter
          GATEEFA    Sagr's senior wife and first cousin
          SAFIYYA    Sagr's second wife
              AZZA   Sagr's third wife
            FAYGA    wife of one of Migdim's other sons

Third Generation:

            SABRA    eldest daughter of Gateefa and Sagr
           KAMLA     second daughter of Gateefa and Sagr
           SELIMA    Hamid's daughter
             AISHA   family friend and Kamla's future sister-in-law
        KHWAYYIR     Migdim's grandson
             SALIH   Migdim's grandson
Fourth Generation:

              KAFY   Migdim's great-grandson, grandson of Sagr
                     and Safiyya
                                          1

INTRODUCTION

        Every book tells tales, some intended, some not. This is a book of
stories by and about some women in a small Bedouin community in
Egypt. It is made up of conversations, narratives, arguments, songs,
reminiscences, even an essay, that these women shared with each other
or with me. I recall them here in a certain order with a very different
audience in mind. In the way I have retold these tales and the very fact
that I have chosen to keep them as ''just stories" lies a tale meant for my
professional colleagues – the anthropologists, feminist scholars, and
students of the Muslim Middle East to whom this introduction is largely
addressed.
        In one sense, of course, the unusual form of this ethnography
owes much to the remarkable women in the Awlad 'Ali Bedouin
community with whom I lived. During my first stay in this small hamlet
on the northwest coast of Egypt, a stay of nearly two years in the late
1970s, I rarely felt comfortable tape-recording. After I returned to the
United States, I wrote a book based on eighteen tattered notebooks in
which I had scribbled notes. In it I tried to present a general analysis of
social life, morality, and poetry in this community, with a special focus
on gender relations (Abu-Lughod 1986).
        I felt, however, that there was so much more richness in people's
conversations and complexity to their lives than I had managed to
convey in that book that I had to try again. I shared with many a sense of
the limitations of the standard anthropological monograph, however
sophisticated, sensitive, or well written, and wondered if there could be a
style of ethnographic writing that would better capture the qualities of
"life as lived" in this community. 1 A crucial aspect of this way of living
was the way it was caught up in stories. The vividness and style with
which women recounted stories of everyday life impressed me.
        The rhythms of their conversations, the voices dropping to a
whisper then rising to dramatic pitches in enactments of reported speech,
the expressions, the exaggerations, the detail all lent intensity, even
urgency, to the tellings. Those of us for whom newspapers and television
define what is news and books and films constitute our imaginative

1 The phrase "life as lived" comes from Riesman (1977). For recent and interesting
  expressions of dissatisfaction with the gap between the written monograph and life
  as lived in the field, see, among others, Jackson 1989, on the body; R. Rosaldo
  1989, on emotion; and Stoller 1989, on the senses.
                                          2

spaces may find it hard to grasp what stories about life and people mean
in such a social world – a world in which everyone is known (or is
related to someone one knows) and the only events that matter are ones
that happen to them.
         I returned to Egypt several times between 1986 and 1989 with the
hope that if I could manage to tape-record these expressive narratives,
the qualities of life that I had sensed when with these women would not
so easily elude me or those for whom I wanted to write. 2 I did not expect
that just because I would work from recorded speech, some directed at
me, some uttered with scarce awareness of my presence, that I would be
able to represent more faithfully the realities of life in this community.
We have learned to be suspicious of claims about the transparency of
texts and the capacity of representations to mirror reality. No less than
any other sort of ethnography, this book of stories involves analysis and
is shaped by the questions asked and the point of view taken. It presents,
as Clifford (1986a) argues all ethnographies do, a "partial truth." But I
like to think that this book, with its fuller use of narrative and its greater
reliance on recorded speech, conveys something that my first book could
not.


                                 INTERSECTIONS

       My vague longing for some way to write differently about the
experience of living in that particular community in Egypt initially
seemed to find legitimation in the debates about women's writing and
feminist method. Sympathetic to feminist critiques of scholarship in
various fields (including my own), I began to wonder if what I was
seeking to do was write an ethnography "in a different voice" (to borrow
Gilligan's [1982] phrase). In my early formulations of the project, I
argued that this book would be written in the voice of Bedouin women
(not men); more important, it would be in the voice of a woman
ethnographer.3 This framing of the problem seemed especially apt given
the ferment in anthropological circles about ethnographic writing. In his
introduction to Writing Culture, Clifford (1986a, 19) made the

2 By then, needless to say, I knew people well; more important, they knew me. I
  began to tape-record in the presence of those who did not mind, thus gathering most
  of the material out of which this book has been constructed.
3 For a summary of this position, see Abu-Lughod 1988a.
                                           3

controversial claim that feminist anthropologists had not been involved
in textual innovation, a statement that only later gave me pause.4 At the
time, I simply proposed that my project would fill this gap.
        Over the years I became increasingly skeptical of my initial
conceptions. First came a discomfort with the notion of a specifically
female voice in writing. Any attempt to isolate what was specific to
women writers eventually foundered on false essentialism and culture
blindness.5 Feminist anthropologists had done too much excellent work
on the variety of women's experiences and the variability of gender
systems for anyone to imagine that there might be some universal
"woman's experience or woman's style," even if in many societies men
and women did live in somewhat different worlds.6 Feminist scholarship
in the 1980s itself was shaken by self-critiques brought about by the
realization of how many groups of women (lesbians, African-Americans,
"women of color," Third World women, and others) had been excluded
from consideration or participation in the development of theory.
However attractive the prospect of associating certain positive qualities
such as sensitivity, care, attention, embodiment, or egalitarianism with
women and their projects, one finally had to confront the fact that these
"feminine virtues" belonged strictly to a contemporary Euro-American
subculture.7
        If there was not "a different voice" for women, how should I
define what I was aiming for? The next formulation for the book I
wanted to write was as feminist ethnography. This raised a second set of
problems, the most basic and tendentious of which was what it meant to
be "feminist." A minimal definition might include a concern with
women's conditions and with the political, economic, social, and cultural
implications of systems of gender for them. But if feminism also implied
4 My critique of this position can be found in Abu-Lughod 1990a. Other feminist
  anthropologists were working on compelling critiques at the same time; see Gordon
  1988; Mascia-Lees, Sharpe, and Cohen 1989; and Visweswaran 1988.
5 See Echols 1984 for a good critique of cultural feminism. Haraway's (1985)
  cautions about a false organicist association with women are important, and Butler's
  (1990) critique of essentialism is especially lucid. The literature on women's writing
  is vast. I discuss some of it in Abu-Lughod 1990a.
6 Feminist anthropology or the anthropology of women, as it is variously known (with
  different implications), is now a major field. For recent guides to the field and the
  issues, see Collier and Yanagisako 1987; di Leonardo 1991; Moore 1988; Morgen
  1989; and Sanday and Goodenough 1990.
7 Lutz's (1988, 1990) explorations of the associations between gender and emotion in
  Western ideology are especially interesting.
                                          4

some sort of emancipatory project applied to the subjects of the
ethnography, it would not fit. Ong (1988, 90) was correct to insist that
feminists should "recognize other forms of gender- and culture-based
subjectivities, and accept that others often choose to conduct their lives
separate from our particular vision of the future."8
        The ethnographic project could, however, be feminist vis-à-vis
the world of scholarship in which it was embedded; it could direct itself
meaningfully to assumptions of anthropology in general and the
anthropology of the Arab world in particular using feminist insights. In
an important article, Strathern (1987) characterized as awkward the
relationship between anthropology and feminism. As I have argued
elsewhere (Abu-Lughod 1991), she was right in her assessment but
wrong in her analysis of the source of the tension. She located the
tension in the differing relations of self and other of the feminist and the
anthropologist, recognizing the power dynamic in the first relation but
not in the second. By underplaying the inequality inherent in the
anthropological self's position as (usually) a Westerner studying non-
Western others, she disregarded the first lesson of feminist analyses from
Simone de Beauvoir on: relations or, more accurately, constructions of
self and other are rarely innocent of power.9 To be feminist entails being
sensitive to domination; for the ethnographer that means being aware of
domination in the society being described and in the relationship
between the writer (and readers) and the people being written about.
        Also relevant to my project was the lively concern of feminist
scholars in the social sciences, the history of science, and philosophy
with questions of method. Building on the apprehension of how much
knowledge had been generated with no attention to women and scant
attention to gender, these writers had reexamined the implications of the
claims to objectivity that accompanied this knowledge. Some sought to
undermine these claims by showing the partiality of various kinds of
knowledge; others exposed the gender-related associations in the West of
the binary distinction between objective and subjective (Keller 1985) and
analyzed the power effects of assertions of objectivity (MacKinnon
1982; D. Smith 1987). Many proposed alternative ways of knowing or

8 Further sophisticated discussions of the relationships among Western feminism,
  Third World or "Eastern" feminists, and other non-Western women can be found in
  Lazreg 1988; Mohanty 1984; and Spivak 1987.
9 The alternative and increasingly popular tradition of studying one's own society or
  European societies requires separate treatment.
                                           5

seeking knowledge based on "women's experiences" (variously
described as the experience of being subalterns, mothers, sexual beings
or objects, daughters, and so forth), proposals sensibly criticized as
unworkable (Harding 1987; Stacey 1988). These efforts have made one
important contribution: they have sharpened our awareness of the
charged nature of claims to objectivity and the situatedness of all
knowledge (Haraway 1988). Positionality, feminist theorizing teaches,
not only is not a handicap but must be made explicit and explored.
        Feminist work thus encouraged a heightened consciousness of
two issues – standpoint and the power dynamics of self and other that
dovetailed with anthropologists' increasingly sophisticated attention to
reflexivity in fieldwork and writing. Critiques of anthropology were
emerging from various quarters prodding us to question what we worked
on, how we wrote, and for whom we wrote. Relations of self and other
were central to the dilemma of cultural difference; the question of
method and its connection to stance were critical to the politics of
representation (in ethnographic texts), if not the politics of anthropology
as a discipline. In this convergence between feminist and anthropological
theorizing during what Marcus and Fischer (1986) called an
"experimental moment," I began to see more clearly what issues I
wanted to engage with in my second ethnography of this small
community in Egypt's Western Desert.


                          WRITING AGAINST CULTURE

        Why would an anthropologist trained in the professional analytic
language of social science choose to compose an ethnography of
narratives and conversations? There are, after all, only certain things
such a book can do. Speaking of modes of writing about societies,
Jackson (1989, 186) has noted that "the value and place of different
discursive styles have to be decided by the situation we find ourselves in
and the problems we address."10 A book of stories cannot present in a
systematic fashion or in the theoretical terms in which anthropologists
usually work the logic of social life in the community I studied. 11 For

10 Taussig (1987) has argued that the very horrors of colonial terror in Latin America
   forced him to write in a different style. Pandolfo (1991) has worked to mimic in her
   writing the concepts, Moroccan and other, she was trying to explore.
11 See Herzfeld 1987 for a very interesting discussion of what he calls the "theory-
                                           6

that, the reader should turn to other discussions of the Awlad 'Ali (e.g.,
Abou-Zeid 1966; Abu-Lughod 1986; Mohsen 1975).
        This book of tales can, however, speak to a set of theoretical
concerns about the politics of representation. What became for me the
most troubling aspect of ethnographic description was that it, like other
social scientific discourses, trafficked in generalizations. Whether
"seeking" laws of human sociality or simply characterizing and
interpreting ways of life, our goal as anthropologists is usually to use
details and the particulars of individual lives to produce typifications.
The drawback, as I will argue, for those working with people living in
other societies is that generalization can make these "others" seem
simultaneously more coherent, self-contained, and different from
ourselves than they might be. Generalization, however useful for other
projects, helps make concepts like "culture" and "cultures'' seem
sensible. This in turn allows for the fixing of boundaries between self
and other.
        My concern about the generalizing mode of social scientific
discourse is thus not that it abstracts and reifies, although I am
responsive to critiques like D. Smith's (1987) that make this point.12 Nor
am I arguing for particularity versus generality as a way of privileging
micro- over macro-processes. Analysts of everyday life who examine
micro-interactions are just as fond of generalization as social scientists
analyzing social movements or global interactions. In any event,
attending to the particulars of individuals' lives need not imply disregard
for forces and dynamics that are not locally based; the effects of
extralocal or long-term processes are always manifested locally and
specifically.
        Anthropologists do, however, have two reasons to be especially
wary of generalization. The first is that as part of a professional
discourse of objectivity and expertise, it is inevitably a language of
power. It is the language of those who seem to stand apart from and
outside of what they are describing. Again, D. Smith's critique of
   practice conundrum" in which he argues that the opposition between ethnography
   and theory is symbolic.
12 Speaking of sociological discourse, D. Smith (1987, 130) notes, for example, that
   "the complex organization of activities of actual individuals and their actual
   relations is entered into the discourse through concepts such as class, modernization,
   formal organization. A realm of theoretically constituted objects is created, freeing
   the discursive realm from its ground in the lives and work of actual individuals and
   liberating sociological inquiry to graze on a field of conceptual entities."
                                          7

sociological discourse is relevant. She has argued (1987, 62) that this
seemingly detached mode of reflecting on social life is actually located:
it represents the perspective of those involved in professional,
managerial, and administrative structures, and its origins lie in the
management of internal social groups like workers, women, blacks, the
poor, or prisoners. It is thus part of what she calls "the ruling apparatus
of this society." This critique might apply as easily to anthropology, with
its inter- rather than intrasocietal perspective and its origins not in
domestic political problems but in the exploration and colonization of the
non-European world.13 Furthermore, the very gap between the
professional and authoritative discourses of generalization and the
languages of everyday life (our own and those of others) establishes a
fundamental separation between the anthropologist and his or her
readers, on the one hand, and the people being written about, on the
other, that in turn facilitates the construction of these others as
simultaneously different and inferior.
        For the anthropologist, the second and more serious problem with
generalization is that by producing the effects of homogeneity,
coherence, and timelessness, it contributes to the creation of "cultures."
In the process of generalizing from experiences and conversations with a
number of specific people in a community, the anthropologist may
flatten out their differences and homogenize them. The effort to produce
general ethnographic descriptions of people's beliefs or actions risks
smoothing over contradictions, conflicts of interest, doubts, and
arguments, not to mention changing motivations and historical
circumstances. Besides being theoretically unsound, this erasure of time
and conflict is misleading because it makes what is inside the external
boundary set up by homogenization seem essential and fixed.
        The appearance of a lack of internal differentiation makes it
easier to conceive of groups of people as discrete, bounded entities, like
the "cultures" of ''the Nuer," "the Balinese," or "the Awlad 'Ali Bedouin,"
populated by generic cultural beings who do this or that and believe
such-and-such. Although we have come to take this notion of separate
cultures for granted, there are good reasons to consider such entities
dangerous fictions and to argue for what I have called writing against
culture (Abu-Lughod 1991).
        This stance might seem surprising. As the replacement for the
13 These ideas about the relationship between academic disciplines and social
   management are explored more fully in Foucault 1978, 1980.
                                           8

scientific concept of race, popular in the nineteenth century but now
discredited as a means of establishing essential differences between
groups of people, culture was a positive concept. It seemed at first to
solve the moral and analytical difficulties inherent in "race" by removing
difference from the realm of the natural or innate. Whether conceived of
as a set of behaviors, customs, traditions, rules, plans, recipes,
instructions, or programs (to list the range of definitions Geertz [1973a,
44] furnishes), culture was something that was learned and therefore
could change. More important, unlike race, and unlike even the earlier
concept of "culture" as a synonym for civilization (contrasted to
barbarism), the modern idea allowed for multiple rather than binary
differences. The shift to "culture" ("lower case c with the possibility of a
final s, " as Clifford [1988a, 234] puts it) thus immediately checked an
easy move to hierarchizing and, indeed, had a relativizing effect. The
hallmark of twentieth-century anthropology, then, has been its promotion
of cultural relativism over evaluation and judgment. In many cases, as
Marcus and Fischer (1986) have argued, anthropology has even used its
knowledge of others as a form of self-critique.14
         Despite its anti-essentialist intent, however, the culture concept
retains the tendency to make difference seem self-evident and people
seem "other."15 Many anthropologists have expressed concern about how
14 See Stocking 1989 for an interesting analysis of the meanings of "culture" in the
   1920s.
15 Said (1978) has shown how the scholarly discourse of Orientalism, in mapping
   geography, race, and culture onto one another, fixes differences between people of
   "the West" and people of "the East" in ways so rigid that they might as well be
   considered innate. Some anticolonial movements and present-day struggles have
   worked by what could be labeled reverse Orientalism, where attempts to reverse the
   power relationship proceed by seeking to valorize for the self what in the former
   system had been devalued as other. A Gandhian appeal to the greater spirituality of
   a Hindu India, compared with the materialism and violence of the West, and an
   Islamist appeal to a greater faith in God, compared with the immorality and
   corruption of the West, both accept the essentialist terms of Orientalist
   constructions. While turning those constructs on their heads, the appeals preserve
   the rigid sense of difference based on culture. A parallel can be drawn with
   feminism. It is a basic tenet of feminism that "women are not born, they are made."
   It has been important for most feminists to locate sex differences in culture, not
   biology or nature. While this approach has inspired some feminist theorists to attend
   to the social and personal effects of gender as a system of difference, for many
   others it has led to explorations of and strategies built on the notion of a women's
   culture. Cultural feminism (see Echols 1984) takes many forms, but it has many of
   the qualities of reverse Orientalism just discussed. For French feminists like
                                          9

the notion of culture tends to make difference into something solid and
timeless. Appadurai (1988b), in his radical argument that "natives" are a
figment of the anthropological imagination, shows the complicity of the
anthropological concept of culture in a continuing "incarceration" of
non-Western peoples in time and place. He argues that by not looking to
their histories, we have denied these people the same capacity for
movement, travel, and geographical interaction that Westerners take for
granted. The fluidity of group boundaries, languages, and practices, in
other words, has been masked by the concept of culture. E. Wolf's (1982)
work on "the people without history" has similarly uncovered massive
movements of people and transformations in local life under the impact
of Western expansion and the ensuing interactions with European
economies – all this in communities that anthropologists often treat as
representing untouched or enduring cultures. R. Rosaldo (1989) has
argued not only that the ''myth of the Lone Ethnographer" and his
product, the classic ethnography, produce the myth of separate and
timeless cultures, but also that we would do better to focus on the border
zones.16
        Others have suggested as well that cultural theories tend to
overemphasize coherence within these self-contained entities (Abu-
Lughod 1990c). Clifford notes that "the discipline of fieldwork-based
   Irigaray (1985a, 1985b), Cixous (1983), and Kristeva (1981), masculine and
   feminine, if not actually male and female, represent essentially different modes of
   being. Anglo-American feminists follow a different tack. Some attempt to
   "describe" the cultural differences between men and women – Gilligan (1982) and
   her followers (e.g., Belenky et al. 1986), who elaborate the notion of "a different
   voice," are popular examples. Others try to "explain" the differences, whether
   through a socially informed psychoanalytic theory (e.g., Chodorow 1978), a
   Marxist-derived theory of the effects of the division of labor and women's role in
   social reproduction (Hartsock 1985), an analysis of maternal practice (Ruddick
   1989), or even a theory of sexual exploitation (MacKinnon 1982). Much feminist
   theorizing and practice seeks to build or reform social life along the lines of this
   "women's culture." There have been proposals for a woman-centered university
   (Rich 1979), a feminist science (H. Rose 1983, 1986), a feminist methodology in the
   sciences and social sciences (Meis 1983; Reinharz 1983; D. Smith 1987; Stanley
   and Wise 1983), even a feminist spirituality (e.g., Christ and Plaskow 1979) and
   ecology. These proposals nearly always build on values traditionally associated in
   the West with women: a sense of care and connectedness, maternal nurturing,
   immediacy of experience, involvement in the bodily (versus the abstract), and so
   forth.
16 For an earlier and more celebratory view of the way ethnographic writing
   exaggerates cultural differences, see Boon 1982, 26.
                                           10

anthropology, in constituting its authority, constructs and reconstructs
coherent cultural others and interpreting selves" (Clifford 1988b, 112).
Ethnography, he says, is a form of culture collecting (like art collecting)
in which "diverse experiences and facts are selected, gathered, detached
from their original temporal occasions, and given enduring value in a
new arrangement" (Clifford 1988a, 231). Organic metaphors of
wholeness and the methodology of holism that characterizes
anthropology both favor coherence, which in turn contributes to the
perception of communities as bounded and discrete at some fundamental
level cut off from one another and different.
        The problem with the concept of culture, therefore, is that despite
its positive intent, it seems to work as an essential tool for making
"other." As a professional discourse that elaborates on the meaning of
culture in order to account for, explain, and understand cultural
difference, anthropology ends up also constructing, producing, and
maintaining difference. Anthropological discourse helps give cultural
difference (and the separation between groups of people that it implies)
the air of the self-evident.
        Does difference always smuggle in hierarchy, as the feminist
theorists have suggested? Anthropology seems to have high stakes in
sustaining and perpetuating a belief in the existence of cultures that are
identifiable as discrete, different, and separate from our own.17 It has
been argued that otherness and difference may have assumed for
anthropologists "talismanic qualities."18 Whether its goal is to engage in
cultural self-critique or to assert enlightened tolerance through
relativism, anthropology needs others that are different from the self. Yet
a difference between self and other will always be hierarchical because
the self is sensed as primary, self-formed, active, and complex, if not
positive. At the very least, the self is always the interpreter and the other
the interpreted.
        Anyone interested in working against this hierarchizing must
seek ways to undermine the essentialized notion of "cultures" different
from ours and peoples separate from us. There are surely many ways to

17 Arens (1979), for example, has asked the provocative question of why
   anthropologists cling so tenaciously to the belief that in some cultures cannibalism
   is an accepted ritual practice when the evidence (in the form of eyewitness
   accounts) is so meager (if not, as he argues, absent).
18 Said (1989, 213) used this term in his discussion of the current state of
   anthropology.
                                           11

do this, but in this book I have sought to "write against culture" by
working against generalization. Telling stories, it has seemed to me,
could be a powerful tool for unsettling the culture concept and
subverting the process of ''othering" it entails.19 Anthropologists
commonly generalize about communities by saying that they are
characterized by certain institutions, rules, or ways of doing things. For
example, we can and often do say things like "The Bongo-Bongo are
polygynous." What if one refused to typify in this way and instead asked
how a particular set of individuals – three women and their husband in
one community, for example – in fact live the "institution" that we call
polygyny? Societies of the circum-Mediterranean have often been
characterized as "honor and shame" societies. What if one asked how an
Egyptian schoolgirl waiting for her marriage to be arranged by an
important family in the 1980s lived this "cultural" complex?
        By stressing the particularity of that girl's experiences or of that
single marriage and by building a picture of polygyny or honor from
individuals' discussions, recollections, disagreements, and actions, one
could make tangible several larger theoretical points. First, the refusal to
generalize would highlight the constructed quality of that "typicality" so
regularly produced in conventional social scientific accounts. Second,
description of the actual circumstances and histories of individuals and
their relationships would suggest that such particulars, which are always
present (as we know from our own lives), are also always crucial to the
constitution of experience. Third, reconstruction of people's arguments
about, justifications for, and interpretations of what they and others are
doing would allow clearer understanding of how social life proceeds. It
would show that, within limited discourses (that may be contradictory
and certainly are historically changing), people strategize, feel pain,
contest interpretations of what is happening in short, live their lives. In
one sense this is not new. Bourdieu (1977), for example, theorizes about
social practice in a similar way. The difference here is that one would
represent through textual means how this happens rather than simply
assert that it does so.
        By focusing closely on particular individuals and their changing
relationships, one could also subvert the most problematic connotations

19 I have referred elsewhere (1991) to some of the powerful alternative strategies
   scholars have adopted for writing against culture, in particular the study of global
   interconnections, historical transformation, and theoretical explorations of notions
   like "practice" and "discourse."
                                            12

of "culture": homogeneity, coherence, and timelessness. In the face of
the complexity of individual lives even in a single family, a term like
"Bedouin culture" comes to seem meaningless, whether in the sense of
rules that people follow or of a community that shares such rules.
Individuals are confronted with choices; they struggle with others, make
conflicting statements, argue about points of view on the same events,
undergo ups and downs in various relationships and changes in their
circumstances and desires, face new pressures, and fail to predict what
will happen to them or those around them. Particular events always
happen in time, becoming part of the history of the family, of the
individuals involved, and of their relationships. In the events described in
the women's stories I retell, one can even read the "larger forces" that
made them possible.20
                                     STORYTELLING

        If one merit of the textual technique of storytelling is that it draws
attention to, even as it refuses, the power of social scientific
generalization to produce "cultures" (with their differentiation of selves
and others), the other merit has to do with feminism's second lesson: the
inevitability of positionality. A story is always situated; it has both a
teller and an audience. Its perspective is partial (in both senses of the
word), and its telling is motivated. The Bedouin women's tales presented
here are no exception. While these stories may seem to reveal to us a
great deal about the social and emotional dynamics in this Bedouin
community in the 1980s, it must be remembered that in the original
context each was told with a purpose. I have not tried to reproduce those
contexts, nor have I undertaken an analysis of the role of these stories in
the life of the community, although both would have been interesting
projects.21

20 Even ritual, that communal practice for which time seems to have such a different
   (perhaps cyclical) meaning and which in anthropological discourse so perfectly
   marks the (exotic, primitive) cultural other as different, turns out to be particular and
   anything but timeless. A glance at Bedouin weddings (chapter 4), when one does
   not filter out the participants and sequences of events, reveals unpredictability to be
   a central feature.
21 The rich possibilities of the analysis of storytelling itself are apparent in the many
   excellent studies by folklorists (see Bauman 1986 for a discussion and Mills 1991
   for an example) and in recent work by anthropologists such as Gilsenan's
   forthcoming Lords of the Lebanese Marches, which explores the complex role of
   telling tales in the construction of men of honor (and dishonor) in a Lebanese
                                           13

        Instead, recognizing that with the inclusion of these stories in this
book the tellers and audiences, as well as their purposes, have
fundamentally shifted, I have tried to use these tales to construct what
could be called a critical ethnography. I selected the stories and wove
them into a pattern on the basis of a conjunction between Bedouin
women's interest in and attention to certain issues and the salience of
these issues for specific audiences in the West. Initially, I was guided in
my selection by the subjects that excited, moved, and concerned the
women I knew, the subjects most often discussed. In that sense, the
stories represent women's voices in Awlad 'Ali society and their
perspective on many matters that have generally entered the
anthropological literature through men's voices.22 But I have excluded
neither men's stories nor stories about issues that concerned men and
women equally (like land disputes, fights between families, or the past)
because despite day-to-day sexual segregation, women define themselves
in terms of their families, speak often with their husbands, brothers,
fathers, uncles, nephews, and cousins, and are interested in all matters
that concern those to whom they are close.
        Most important, I do not pretend that these stories "lift" or get
"behind" the veil, as reviewers of books on Middle Eastern women
frequently say. As Bruner (1986) reminds us, ethnographies are
themselves narratives. I have therefore sought, by crafting,
reconfiguring, and juxtaposing these women's and men's stories, to make
them speak particularly to my concerns and those of my audience. As the
new teller of these tales, I wanted to draw out the ways they challenged
simultaneously three sorts of constructions: standard anthropological
generalizations about social structure and culture; common feminist
interpretations of gender relations in non-Western societies; and widely
shared understandings of Muslim Arab society. That is the sense in
which this ethnography is critical.
        If this use of women's stories makes me something of a
ventriloquist, as Appadurai (1988a, 16) has suggested all anthropologists
   village; Narayan 1989, analyzing the role of stories in a Hindu swami's religious
   teachings; and K. Stewart 1988 and 1991, which do wonders with the narratives of
   men and women in the Appalachian coal mining camps of West Virginia. Natalie
   Davis's Fiction in the Archives (1988) is a wonderful example of the use to which
   tales can be put for historical understanding of another time and place in her case,
   sixteenth-century France.
22 I have discussed elsewhere the way the anthropological literature has treated
   tribalism primarily from a male perspective (Abu-Lughod 1989).
                                            14

are, it does not thereby undermine the worth of these retold tales. Only a
false belief in the possibility of a nonsituated story (or "objectivity")
could make one ask that stories reflect the way things, over there,
"really" are.23
         Scholars like Kapferer (1988) and Mascia-Lees, Sharpe, and
Cohen (1989), who worry about the hidden power to orchestrate "native"
voices, merely articulate unsympathetically what many anthropologists
have already become highly conscious of and troubled by: our role in
shaping the words of people living in societies other than our own.24
There is clearly no way to avoid doing this if we want to continue
writing. What may alleviate some of the difficulties of the process of
constructing a narrative is to make explicit, as I will try to do, how one
has worked.
         The arrangement of the stories into chapters follows an
anthropological logic. Anthropologists often characterize societies in
terms of social "institutions" like patrilineality (a mode of social
organization based on kinship), patrilateral parallel-cousin marriage (a
regular pattern of prescribed or preferred marriage), or polygyny. These
constructs allow one to compare different groups and to grasp, in a
nutshell, some basic facts about the way things work in a particular
place.
         Although intended as analytical categories, these terms can,
however, have the unfortunate effect of creating a mechanistic vision of

23 I have discussed positionality at greater length in the context of the boundaries of
   self and other that feminists and "halfies" (people of mixed background or between
   two worlds) must deal with (Abu-Lughod 1991). R. Rosaldo (1989) presents an
   important argument regarding the relationship of personal experience to research.
   Haraway's (1988) consideration of the issues about situated knowledge is among the
   best. Other perceptive discussions of the implications of positionality in scholarship
   about the non-West and the whole problem of "location" can be found in Mani 1989
   and John 1989.
24 A particularly heated debate has gone on in Middle East women's studies regarding
   Margot Badran's translated edition of the memoirs of the early Egyptian feminist
   Huda Sha'rawi (1986). Among the questions raised by reviewers (e.g., Ahmed 1987;
   Hatem 1988) were those about the hidden editorial hand used in selecting passages
   from the original manuscript, the choice to focus on the early years, and the decision
   to title the book in terms of Orientalist stereotypes. Lazreg (1988, 106) has criticized
   Mernissi (1988) for attempting "to speak for other women while rising above them."
   However appealing, books like Atiya's Khul Khaal are problematic because no
   information is provided on how the material was collected and what the relationship
   of the author was to the Egyptian women interviewed.
                                     15

society in which members play designated roles. No matter how much
sophisticated theoretical discussion of strategies, dialectics, and
articulations we engage in, thereby refining our understanding of the
processes involved in producing such patterns, we are still left with little
sense of individuals' experiences of such forms of organization and the
individual acts that constitute them.
        Whereas British social anthropology has focused on social
organization, both French and American anthropological traditions have
shown greater concern for "cultural" phenomena such as belief systems,
modes of thought, or worldview. In this discourse, societies like those of
the Middle East have come to be characterized as obsessed with honor
and shame, marked by Islamic fatalism, or rife with agonistic jockeying
between fragmenting tribal segments or calculating individuals.
        I wanted the stories in this book to allow subtler thinking about
such sociological and cultural characterizations by revealing how the
various elements of such depictions, although often present, do not
necessarily take the form one would expect or fall neatly into simple
patterns. The stark contrast between the simple analytic frame indicated
by the abstract chapter titles and the complex contents of the chapters,
which consist of detailed and often highly personal arguments,
experiences, and stories, is meant to be jarring.
        In all cases, it seems to me, the moral of the stories is that things
are and are not what they seem. The Awlad 'Ali are patrilineal, but
reckoning descent, tribal affiliation, and inheritance through the male
line does not foreclose women's opportunities or desires to shape their
own lives or those of their sons and daughters, or to oppose the decisions
of their fathers. Marriages are arranged by families in terms of a set of
ideals, including a preference for marriage between first cousins, but the
circumstances of each family and relations between families at any given
moment make certain possibilities desirable, realizable, or not. Polygyny
is an institution oppressive to women in that it causes them pain, but it is
not necessarily the pleasure for husbands that Western fantasies about
harems suggest. Given their expectations about marriage in general, the
tensions that this sort of marriage generates for Alwlad 'Ali women differ
from those we might ourselves imagine; still, there are tensions, in
relations both between husband and wife and between co-wives.
        Furthermore, although polygynous marriages may share some
characteristics, no two are the same. As chapter two, on Gateefa,
Safiyya, Azza, and their husband, Sagr, makes clear, the experiences of
                                           16

those involved depend in part on their personalities and circumstances.
They also change over time, since no relationship is ever static. Even at
the level of social function, polygyny seems not always to increase
reproduction and strengthen lineages or to forge political alliances:
sometimes it backfires; sometimes such aims are simply beyond reach.
Finally, although some turn to the Qur'an to justify polygyny as Islamic,
others use the same passage to condemn the practice as not favored by
God.
        Like polygyny, the other issues to which these stories speak are
ones that carry multiple charges across the Western discourses of
anthropology, feminism, Middle East studies, and popular orientalism.
Patrilineality and reproduction, the "topics" of chapters one and three,
respectively, are loaded terms for Western audiences. In Middle East
anthropology, patrilineality and tribalism blend imperceptibly. Feminists,
however, easily conflate patrilineality with "patriarchy," and focus on it
in debates about male domination, gender hierarchy, and sexual
difference. Feminist anthropologists thus interpret patrilineality as either
a form of male domination or a system within which women develop
numerous strategies and cause endless problems. In discussions of Arab
society, the form of social organization and system of inheritance based
on patrilineality is sometimes justified as Islamic; other times Islam is
portrayed as trying to move beyond patrilineality by legislating
inheritance for women and promoting wider associations based on
religion rather than kinship. In chapter one, the stories of the old
matriarch Migdim reveal some of the implications over time of
patrilineality. Covering subjects ranging from resistance to a father's
authority to the meaning of giving birth to sons versus daughters, the
struggles with grown sons over decisions affecting future generations,
and the conflicts of loyalty between family and the women's community,
Migdim's stories make vivid the conflicts and emotional ambivalence
generated in her circumstances.25
        Reproduction occupies an even more complex field than
polygyny or patrilineality. In social scientific jargon it refers to the
process of keeping society going; in Marxist scholarship, to the form
women's work takes in the political economy.
        Feminist debates grant reproduction a different but still key role,
analyzing it variously as the root of women's vulnerability to male
25 For a discussion of stories of resistance and an argument for using resistance as a
   diagnostic of power, see Abu-Lughod 1990b.
                                         17

oppression, the reason for the sexual division of labor, the symbolic basis
for their social inferiority, the source of their alternative modes of
thought and social interaction, the basis for a different experience of
sexuality, the determinant of the firmness of their ego boundaries, and
the genesis of their special relationship to language.26 In the popular
discourses about the Third World, and especially about Egypt,
reproduction plays into other debates as well about family planning and
so-called overpopulation, on the one hand, and about high rates of child
mortality and whether Egyptians value life as we do, on the other.
Chapter three, built around stories about giving birth, wanting children,
having too many children, loving children, resenting children, raising
children, scolding children, and telling them tales, tries to open up the
field defined by these other discourses. Motherhood, these stories
suggest, means many things.
        The final two chapters, both about the younger generation, deal
with two important dimensions of marriage, although the overlap in
issues is so strong that the titles "Patrilateral Parallel-Cousin Marriage"
and "Honor and Shame" are virtually interchangeable. What the
anthropologist dispassionately calls arranged marriage is considered in
many feminist circles (Middle Eastern as well as Western) a form of
male control over women's sexuality and lives. In popular thinking about
the Middle East, the practice is self-righteously made emblematic of
Arab backwardness and lack of freedom. For sympathetic interpreters of
Middle Eastern societies, however, much as for the participants, such
marriages are seen as positive evidence of the high value people place on
family ties. Nevertheless, a system in which it is accepted that marriages
are arranged for young women by their families makes for complex
experiences.
        The preferential union known as patrilateral parallel-cousin
marriage (marrying one's father's brother's daughter or son) has been a
staple of Middle East anthropology. 27 Evoking in the popular mind the
26 References to the feminist literature on reproduction would take up pages. A
   sampling of key texts, however, would have to include the following: de Beauvoir
   [1953] 1974; Chodorow 1978; Hartsock 1985; Kristeva 1980; J. Mitchell 1974;
   O'Brien 1981; Ortner 1974; Rich 1986; M. Rosaldo 1974; and Ruddick 1989.
   These do not include other feminist and antifeminist debates such as those in
   sociobiology or in American popular culture, especially in the controversy over
   abortion. For a comprehensive review, see Ginsburg and Rapp 1991.
27 The best guide to the literature on this subject, among many others of Middle East
   anthropology, is Eickelman 1989.
                                    18

horrors of inbreeding, it is the perfect instance of an "institution" that
should neither be seen as mechanical nor treated out of context. Praised
in the songs of women and girls at weddings between cousins, this form
of marriage so warmly spoken about can also be resisted when relations
between families are tense. As chapter four on the still-unmarried Sabra
shows, circumstances of age and personality can always come into play,
and with just a word life will take a different path. Although in all
marriages, the bride's virginity at her wedding is linked to family pride in
surprisingly positive ways, when groom and bride are cousins the taking
of the girl's virginity becomes the business of all the women of the
family. The blunt way older women speak of their participation in the
wedding-day defloration of their nieces by their nephews suggests how
profoundly marriage and even sexuality are public family matters.
        The last chapter speaks to a "cultural" complex rather than a
social "institution." Honor and shame, the values widely thought to
regulate interactions in circum-Mediterranean societies, have been seen
as a mechanism for the sexual control of women. Associating honor with
men and shame with women, discussions of this complex have generally
treated women's role as negative or, at best, passive. Yet Kamla, the
young woman who has been to school, proudly asserts the honor
(through modesty) of girls like herself and struggles to maintain this
modesty as part of her cultural identity. Moreover, although she talks in
terms of these seemingly timeless values, she rejects some of their
entailments using arguments derived paradoxically from both her
religious education and the romantic mass-media soap operas that
enthrall her. Honor and shame in Egypt in the 1980s for a young
Bedouin woman with some education, influenced by the ideas of urban
Egyptians and sensitive to the moral pressures of increasingly persuasive
Islamic groups, take on specific meanings. Indeed, the very possibility of
an abstract moral code like "honor and shame" or a principle of
preferential marriage involving arranged marriage backed by parental
authority is thrown into question by the relentless specificity of Kamla's
case.
        One final issue frames all of the women's stories in this book,
whether about children, parents, siblings, sex, marriage, death, drinking,
schooling, or the Second World War, and that is religious identity. Given
the place of Islam in the Western imagination – at times menacing,
sometimes merely ''other" – and its attributed power to determine the
lives and thoughts of all Muslims, the stories in a critical ethnography
                                          19

must speak to this image. Yet the frame of faith in God or Muslim
identity, represented here by the quotations from the Qur'an or the
sayings (ahadith*) of the Prophet Muhammad at the head of each
chapter, functions in a more complex way than do the short chapter
titles.28 Not only is a contrast being drawn between foreign general
concepts and local terms and complexity, but also an "internal" contrast
is being set up between simple religious prescription and complex
practices and circumstances.
         Intriguingly, the religious framework is significant, in somewhat
different ways, to both the Western reader and the women in the Awlad
'Ali Bedouin community whose stories I relate. In popular and much
scholarly thinking in the West, Islam is perceived as all-determining.
This view corresponds to that of many Muslims who believe that they
should indeed be guided by the ideals of Islamic faith and practice. As
someone who stands in between, however, I want to show both groups,
through this critical ethnography, that not all events or utterances can be
explained by reference to Islam.
         Women often affirm their acceptance of what happens with the
phrase "What God brings," which suggests to the Western reader Islam's
notorious fatalism. Yet from the stories one can see that asserting this
sentiment does not make women submissive. Women are not prevented
from struggling with and resisting decisions they do not like; trying
every healing technique they know to cure pain, relieve suffering, or
conceive and raise healthy children; or calling out oaths and curses when
their disobedient children exasperate them.
         Piety and religious observance have positive meanings for all the
women in this Bedouin community, whereas to many secular people they
suggest a certain sobriety, if not humorlessness. For old Migdim,
however, piety expressed through such practices as organizing her daily
schedule around prayer and praising God even as she moans about her
arthritic hands does not seem to preclude chuckling over a risqué
folktale, enjoying a sexually explicit song, or energetically bad-mouthing
a neighbor.29
28 Only one of the two hadiths* I quote did I hear anyone in the Awlad 'Ali
   community repeat. My source for the hadith that opens chapter 1 is Schleifer 1986,
   8. I have reworked her translation. After comparing the major translations into
   English of the Qur'an, I decided to follow that found in The Holy Qur'an* printed by
   the King Fahd Holy Qur'an Printing Complex in Saudi Arabia. The translator is not
   listed.
29 For a discussion of the tension between the Islamic discourse and other discourses
                                         20

         In addition to these qualities, both believers and outside scholars
grant Islam a sort of timeless and supralocal existence. Yet whether we
take the view of those in the Bedouin community, who see truth in the
Qur'an and the model of the Prophet and strive to follow them, or of the
outsider, who reifies a set of complex practices and statements in a
notion like "the religion of Islam," we fail to grasp the real dilemmas
people face because of Islam's grounding in social and historic specifics.
The Awlad 'Ali women whose stories fill this book have been shaken up
in the last decade by their indirect contact with members of the new
Islamic movements in Egypt and their association with Egyptian state
institutions like schools and media where new moral claims about the
"good Muslim" are made. Educated daughters argue with their mothers
about traditional practices, backing their positions by referring to
Egyptian orderliness and employing knowledge of religion. The older
women now wonder whether they are wrong to visit the tombs of saints
or to seek out holymen to write amulets, as some people in the towns tell
them, people who go to the mosque and can read the Qur'an and have
beards, the women sometimes joke irreverently, that resemble pubic hair.
         I chose not to devote a separate chapter to stories that spoke
specifically to the issue of "Islam," for faith in God and the importance
of Muslim identity were constant elements in women's discourse,
invoked in myriad contexts to justify, implore, reprimand, explain, and
comfort. The stories in this book bring out numerous tensions that relate
to this identity: between practices and their justifications, between ideals
and behavior, between simple prescriptions and multiple interpretations,
between a sense of the universal and the complexity of local and
individual experience. It is hoped that these stories will help draw out the
distinction between reference to and determination by Muslim traditions.


                             TACTICAL HUMANISM

        My argument for writing this book of stories is that cultural
difference, which is both the ground and product of anthropological
discourse, is a problematic construction. The strategy I use to write
against culture involves playing, as many anthropologists are doing, with
writing. Does writing make a difference?
   in this Bedouin community and a sense of how to analyze these tensions, see my
   "Islam and the Gendered Discourses of Death" (forthcoming).
                                         21

        Geertz's (1973b, 1988) insight that anthropologists are writers has
been the starting point of a good deal of serious thinking about textuality,
the practice of ethnographic writing, and the fieldwork encounter.
Suspicions that those with literary leanings have too readily collapsed the
politics of ethnography into its poetics have also been voiced in
response. Fox (1991) puts it best when he wonders if what he calls the
postmodern critique does not reinforce among anthropologists a "false
consciousness about their scholarly labor processes" by underwriting
their self-image as artisans. Noting that anthropology is produced not
only in "the field" but also in the factory conditions of university
departments, professional meetings, granting agencies, and the politically
and historically determined context of previously authorized texts, he
questions how much control we have over the context for our work and
how much liberty we have in altering it. Others have raised challenging
questions about why, at this moment in history, and in the United States
in particular, there should have developed among anthropologists such
attention to textuality and rejection of old forms.30
        One of the most important conditions for anthropological
production has been the global structure of political and economic
power. Despite a long history of self-conscious opposition to racism and
a growing self-critical literature on anthropology's links to colonialism
and imperialism (e. g., Asad 1973; Clifford 1983; Fabian 1983; Hymes
1969; Kuper 1988), anthropologists have not rushed to confront the
implications for their work of their own location in this structure.
        Working in support of political movements to change that
structure has been one response, but it is not particularly anthropological.
Experimentation with techniques of ethnographic writing to relieve
anthropologists' discomforts about their power over their subjects has
been another response. Yet refiguring informants as consultants or
"letting the other speak" in dialogic (Tedlock 1987) or polyvocal texts –
decolonizations on the level of the text – leaves intact the basic
configuration of global power on which anthropology is based. Other
intriguing suggestions, such as "indigenizing"anthropology (Fahim 1982;
Altorki and El-Solh 1988) or encouraging Third World anthropologists

30 Lutz (forthcoming) suggests that one consider carefully the social contexts of
   postmodernism, noting three relevant features: late capitalism (building on
   Jameson's views [1984]), North-South relations, and the state of the academy.
   Sangren's (1988) broadside focuses on the academy; Said's (1989) address to the
   American Anthropological Association focuses on imperialism.
                                     22

to bypass the West and travel to each others' countries (Scott 1989),
confront other limits. As Mudimbe (1988, 19) writes in The Invention of
Africa, "It seems impossible to imagine any anthropology without a
Western epistemological link."
         Until we decide or are forced to move anthropology to new "shop
floors" (in Fox's phrase), or to abandon it altogether, we should perhaps
be more modest in our claims to radicalism. At best we are talking about
reform undertaken with as good a sense as we can develop of the world
context in which we work. As long as anthropologists are in the business
of representing others, the ethnographies through which they do so will
likely remain a primary mode of anthropological production. Without
pretending to master the determinations of our ethnographies (Clifford
[1986a, 6] gives a nice list of these) or their reception, we can
nevertheless be aware that the degree to which people in the
communities anthropologists study appear "other" is in part a function of
how we write about them.
         By insistently focusing on individuals and the particularities of
their lives, we may be better able to perceive similarities in all our lives.
Of course, to say that we all live in the particular is not to say that for
any of us the particulars are the same. Indeed, even in looking at the
everyday we might well discover fundamental differences, such as those
between everyday experience in a world set up to produce the effect of
structures, institutions, or other abstractions (as T. Mitchell [1988]
argues the modern West has been) versus worlds that have not. Yet the
dailiness, by breaking coherence and introducing time, trains our gaze on
flux and contradiction; and the particulars suggest that others live as we
perceive ourselves living not as automatons programmed according to
"cultural" rules or acting out social roles, but as people going through life
wondering what they should do, making mistakes, being opinionated,
vacillating, trying to make themselves look good, enduring tragic
personal losses, enjoying others, and finding moments of laughter.
         It is hard for the language of generalization to convey these sorts
of experiences and activities. In our own lives, we balance the accounts
of ourselves purveyed by social science with the ordinary language we
use in personal conversations to discuss our lives, our friends and family,
and our world. For those who live "outside" our world, however, we
have no immediate discourse of familiarity to counteract the distancing
discourses of anthropology and other social sciences, discourses that also
serve development experts, governments, journalists, and others who
                                           23

deal with the Third World. Ethnographies of the particular made up of
everyday stories that is, use of humanist conventions of writing, the same
conventions favored by popular writers and a whole alternative (though
devalued because largely nonprofessional) tradition of women's
ethnographic writing31 go far toward providing this discourse of
familiarity.
         Why invoke humanism when it has been so discredited in post-
structural and postmodernist circles?32 There are certainly good reasons
to be wary of this philosophy that has masked the persistence of
systematic social differences by appealing to an allegedly universal
individual as hero and autonomous subject; that has allowed us to
assume that the domination and exploitation of nature by man was
justified by his place at the center of the universe; that has failed to see
that its "essential human" has culturally and socially specific
characteristics and in fact excludes most humans; and that refuses to
understand how we as subjects are constructed in discourses attached to
power. Yet because humanism continues to be in the West the language
of human equality with the greatest moral force, I do not think we can
abandon it. In advocating new forms of writing (pastiche, dialogue,
collage, and so forth) that break up narrative and subject identities and
interfere with identification, posthumanists ask their readers to adopt
sophisticated reading strategies along with social critique. Does this
make sense for anthropologists writing in a world still full of prejudice
against those about whom they write? If experimental ethnographies are
criticized for being solipsistic or hard to read, how can their theoretical,
political, or human messages get through? What may be required is a
tactical humanism, made politically useful but also limited in its effects
by anthropology's location on the side of power in a world organized
unequally along lines of "cultural" difference.
         I therefore have adopted many of the techniques of humanistic
writing. First, I have not shied away from leaving traces of myself
31 I have written elsewhere (1990a, 1991) on why this alternative tradition of
   ethnographic writing, often by the "untrained" wives of professional anthropologists
   (best exemplified by the superb and informative ethnographies of Fernea 1969;
   Wolf 1968; and Turner 1987) but also by professional anthropologists writing under
   pseudonyms (e.g., Bowen [1954] 1964; Cesara 1982), was not recognized by
   Clifford (1986a) as a form of textual innovation.
32 So damning is an association with humanism that Said's lapse into it is the crux of
   Clifford's (1980) critique of Orientalism. For an analysis of Said's work that follows
   similar lines, see Young 1990.
                                           24

throughout. I assume, however, that readers are less interested in me than
in the stories I tell, and so I have tried not to be intrusive. Thus, while I
did not make the encounter between myself and these "others" central, I
also did not remove questions I asked or pretend that certain discussions
were not directed specifically at me.33 I also comment sometimes on
what is happening. In short, I have sought a presence somewhere
between the extremes of total erasure of the ethnographer's self (e.g.,
Atiya 1982; Friedl 1989; and Munson 1984) and imposition of his or her
presence as an equal participant (e.g., Dwyer 1982, Lavie 1990, or even
Jackson 1986, dialogic accounts in which the authors present themselves
in the third person).
        Second, I have constructed each chapter loosely around an
individual woman or two. As I noted above, focusing on individuals
encourages familiarity rather than distance and helps to break down
"otherness," for it not only corresponds to the way we ordinarily think
about those close to us in our everyday world, but also actively facilitates
identification with and sympathy toward others.34
        I have not, however, followed the life history genre, perhaps the
most popular humanistic form, for several reasons. This genre,
represented by such engaging works on women as Atiya's Khul Khaal:
Five Egyptian Women Tell Their Stories (1982), Brettel's We Have
Already Cried Many Tears: Portuguese Women and Migration (1982),
Kendall's The Life and Hard Times of a Korean Shaman (1988),
Shostak's Nisa: The Life and Words of a ! Kung Woman (1981), and M.
Smith's classic Baba of Karo, a Woman of the Muslim Hausa ([1954]

33 Works like Briggs 1970; Brown 1991; Crapanzano 1980; Dumont 1978; Favret-
   Saada 1980; Friedrich 1986; Rabinow 1977; Riesman 1977; D. Rose 1987; Stoller
   and Olkes 1987; and Trawick 1990 that have focused more specifically on the
   fieldwork encounter and have been more self-revealing have been extremely useful
   in bringing out the ways in which our knowledge about others is constructed out of
   particular experiences. B. Tedlock's (1991) comprehensive assessment of what she
   calls a major shift "from participant observation to the observation of participation"
   provides a much more detailed account of this literature. It came to my attention as
   Writing Women's Worlds was going to press.
34 A collection of life stories like Burke's (in press) can indeed serve as a
   counterweight to the dehumanization of Middle Easterners that is so prevalent in the
   West, but the dangers of the genre are also worth examining. Shostak (1981) has
   been criticized by Clifford (1986b) for using Nisa to project her Western feminist
   message, and Critchfield (1978) has been shown by T. Mitchell (1990) to have
   abused the genre by plagiarizing from another work in his alleged portrait of an
   Upper Egyptian villager.
                                           25

1981), has long been important for anthropology, but its limitations have
recently begun to receive attention. Crapanzano (1984), for example, has
argued persuasively that the whole notion of "a life" may not be
meaningful for everyone and that conventions for talking about oneself
may differ radically. 35 In a perceptive reflection on the genre, Behar
(1990), drawing on Frank (1979) and Benjamin (1968), has argued that
we need to recognize that life histories are actually stories that people tell
about themselves, texts requiring attention to the conventions of
storytelling and the context of the elicitation.36 Her own reading of the
life story of a Mexican marketing woman makes her case compelling.
         What finally made me reluctant to adopt the form was the fact
that the life story may contribute to a sense of the person at its center as
an isolated individual. The women whose stories are told here neither
live that way nor think of themselves as such. Representing three
generations in one extended family, these women live in a close
community made up of relatives and in-laws most of whom they see
almost daily. Each chapter therefore centers on certain types of
relationships between the key individual and others, and it is my hope
that these women's continued reappearance in different chapters will
bring the reader a sense of the networks and the closeness of family
relations that are at work.
         In writing this book I made use of a third humanistic convention:
the narrative form. I did not construct plots or think of the women as
characters, of course; rather, I tried to make the stories flow smoothly,
convinced that, while literary theorists may have sensitized us to the
bewitching effects of narrative, it remains the most familiar and
satisfying of genres for readers. I could have distinguished between the
women's words and my own commentaries, or interjected reminders of
the ways I was using their narratives to produce certain effects. The latter
technique might have made for more honesty but would have drawn
attention away from the stories. The former would have set up the usual
hierarchy between "informants' words" and expert's explanations, a
construct that, even when unintended, is hard to resist because of habits

35 Weintraub (1978), for example, has traced the links between the concept of life as
   trajectory and the fairly recent historical development in the West of the associated
   genre of autobiography.
36 See also Langness and Frank 1981 and Watson and Watson-Franke 1985. The new
   work on personal narratives (Personal Narratives Group 1989 and Stahl 1989) also
   seems to move in a helpful direction.
                                            26

of reading and the structures of authority. As Behar (1990, 226-27)
remarked of life stories, while the women's words may not "speak for
themselves," the kinds of commentaries that accompany them often
speak past them or, as in the case of Oscar Lewis's works, do violence to
them.
        Committed to a rough (and, if you look too hard, indefensible)
notion of fidelity to what I heard and saw, and perhaps lacking the
requisite literary talents, I have been unwilling to wander into the realm
of ethnographic fiction with these stories. There, license to play with
dialogue and story allows for evocative, sometimes powerful, works that
may convey different sorts of "truths," but ones harder to evaluate in the
customary terms of anthropology as an empirical venture.37 J. Stewart's
(1989, 8-12) argument that ethnographic fiction is ideal for plumbing the
subjective or for "dealing with the inner lives of people" begs the
question of how one can know such things. I preferred a more
conservative approach, recognizing that any piece of writing by a scholar
at an academic institution and published by a university press would be
granted the status of authoritative account. Even though, as I will
describe below, I have made the words of those I quote speak to issues
they could not anticipate and have edited their conversations, I have
reserved the use of quotation marks for that which I tape-recorded or
wrote verbatim in my notes. And although we may always be inventing
culture (Wagner 1981) and every interpretation itself is a fiction of sorts
(Geertz 1973b), I have not deliberately fabricated any incidents.
        I have, however, played with narrative to explore some of its
possibilities. I have taken a variety of Bedouin women's talk stories of
everyday life, arguments, reminiscences, folktales, poems, songs, and
even a written letter and an essay with oral commentary and made them

37 This problem of fictions, "factions," and other serious questioning of what
   constitutes "truth" about other cultures is deeply vexing and cannot be dismissed
   lightly. It is the subject of a good deal of critical reflection in anthropology today
   and is related closely to the insight that the realist ethnography is itself a literary
   genre (Marcus and Cushman 1982; Clifford and Marcus 1986). A number of recent
   and successful works self-consciously embrace the values of this other form of
   writing (Jackson 1986; J. Stewart 1989), joining classics like Bowen's ethnographic
   novel Return to Laughter ([1954] 1964). Many anthropologists whose work is not
   yet in print – Barbara Tedlock, for example – have been trying their hands at this
   form. The popularity and new legitimacy of this sort of literary enterprise is
   reflected and reinforced by initiatives like the annual competition the Anthropology
   and Humanism Quarterly now sponsors for the best ethnographic short story.
                                          27

into five different sorts of narratives. Chapter one comes closest to being
the story of a life with key memories and incidents woven together to
give a sense of time passing and the changing struggles of a woman and
her family. The second narrative portrays a set of relationships that
constitute a marriage, mostly from the point of view of a senior wife.
Chapter three shifts like a kaleidoscope from mother to mother, revealing
different views of children and parenting; no one mother or family could
begin to represent this relationship. At the center of chapter four is the
single event of a wedding. The final chapter takes its shape from a young
woman's essay, which, like this introductory essay, was written and
formal. Unlike this introduction, however, her essay was also
commented on orally, and I include this commentary in parentheses. The
life stages of the central figures of the five chapters suggest a movement
from the past to the future.
         The major editorial work I did was to compose the women's
stories into narratives about patrilineality, polygyny, reproduction,
patrilateral parallel-cousin marriage, and honor and shame. No less
important was the minor work required to make these stories readable,
even after I had translated them. On occasion I felt I had to cut
uninteresting, repetitive, or excessively complicating sections. I hesitated
most over the repetitions, since they seemed to be such a feature of
storytelling style. But in translating repeated words and phrases, one
risks giving the impression in written and much spoken English of a
childishness not evoked for participants.38 I also was forced sometimes to
simplify stories to make them intelligible to outsiders. When women
talked to each other and even when they told me tales after our shared
years, they could assume a common knowledge of hundreds of
individuals, tribal affiliations, and places. In cases where the person
mentioned would not appear again in any stories, I have substituted the
(understood) kinship term for example, ''her uncle," "her daughter-in-
law" for real names, something women might do themselves if telling the
story to a person outside the immediate community. I also have deleted
references to little-known places that are not significant for the story,
even though for the usual listeners they have dense associations.
         These editorial decisions are related to a much larger problem.

38 Although Tannen (1989) shows that repetition is a part of everyday conversation,
   the preservation of this stylistic convention in the translation of a San woman's
   words in Marjorie Shostak's Nisa (1981) had, I believe, the effect of suggesting such
   a childlike simplicity.
                                     28

There seems to be no way to convey to outsiders the significance of
many of the details contained in the stories. Indeed, the specification of
detail is always abundant: not just the people present on a certain
occasion, but the color of the dress, the food eaten, the time of day, and
the exact amount of money paid find their way into these stories. Even
when the events are fifty years old and such details might be thought
surely to have vanished, they remain fixed in the narratives, which are
told time and again. Every detail carries meaning in a world that is so
largely shared. When a woman curious to know about another asks,
"What does she have?" she means "How many children?" From the
answer she can grasp immediately an enormous amount about the
contours of the woman's life and her prospects. There is all the world of
difference between the answers "Two daughters" and "Five sons and two
daughters." To the outside reader, however, they are just facts.
         However much one might want to preserve the actual words and
narrative structures of the Bedouin stories to give a more vivid sense of
the way these women live, one is confronted with the most basic
problems of translatability. No story can move between such different
contexts without some loss in meaning. Many details not at all trivial to
life as lived in this Bedouin community are hard to convey in a written
text in English. It is not just a matter of what is lost in the transformation
from oral to written language, although this is a serious issue that others
(e.g., Tedlock 1983; Tyler 1986, 1987) have explored with insight. Nor
is the problem simply that inevitable shifts of meaning occur when one
moves between languages in which expressions have no precise
equivalents and words have varying connotations. Rather, it seemed that
a number of essential qualities of everyday conversation and narrative
just could not gracefully be carried over into English.
         Two habits of speech are illustrative. First, women's language,
especially in storytelling, is rich in little affections so routine as to be
hardly noticed: "So then, my little sister/my little mother/my dear one, he
said ... ," the listener is addressed. In stories about the community, most
people are referred to by nicknames, diminutive forms of their names if
nothing else. Diminutives are always affectionate, their proper
application to children giving their use for adults a special sweetness.
Because they sound a bit silly in English, where instead of the inflection
of the name itself one must say, for example, "Little Ali," I have left only
a few such cases in the texts. The sense of affection within the
community that these references carry is therefore, unfortunately, largely
                                    29

absent.
        Second, religious references saturate women's language as well.
Some women use oaths almost unthinkingly to strengthen the effect of
their stories, swearing by God and by local saints whose tombs are well
known. Most women use standard religious phrases at appropriate
moments. Common expressions are "Blessings on the Prophet" for
admiration, "How Great God is!" for surprise, and "In the Name of God"
at hearing something strange or beginning any act. Women cannot
mention deaths, illnesses, or misfortunes without prefacing their remarks
with phrases like "[May God come] between you and me [and evil],''
"[May it be] far from you," and "[May it happen to] your enemy." The
power of speech is evident in this habit, but so is the constancy of God's
presence in the everyday. I have left most of these religious phrases in
place, but not without some discomfort; they are so little a part of
everyday language in my own circles that I fear they will be more
noticeable than they actually are in the Bedouin context.
        Through all these compromises of translation and humanistic
conventions of writing I have struggled to make these women and their
stories accessible to the educated, mostly Western, readers of this book. I
have no illusions that my choice of a tactical humanism through
ethnographic writing might contribute to some universal good. I
recognize humanism as a local and historically specific language of the
post-Enlightenment West. Yet it is a useful language because from our
positions as anthropologists we work as Westerners (however tenuous
our identification) and we contribute to a Western discourse.
Positionality cannot be escaped. Nor can we escape the fact, as Riesman
(1982) bluntly put it in his critical response to proposals for dialogic
anthropology, "that we are using other people for our own purposes all
the time" and "using the knowledge they give us for goals they would
never imagine themselves." That does not mean that the goals are not
provisionally worth pursuing or that working within Western discourse is
not crucial. As Said (1989, 224) notes, "Anthropological representations
bear as much on the representer's world as on who or what is
represented." The world from which I write still has tremendous
discursive, military, and economic power. My writing can either sustain
it or work against its grain.
                                   30

                              FOR WHOM?

        In an age when the boundaries of "culture" have become difficult
to keep in place, when books travel, and when global politics appear
increasingly uncertain, we have to anticipate the uncomfortable irony
that our most enlightened endeavors might not be received as such by the
subjects of our writings. Even when they can read what we write, they do
not necessarily share our conventions. From where they stand, the power
issues may look very different.
        In a sad way the women whose stories I retell here are not the
audience of this book. For the most part, the words I have fixed here are
not the kinds of words they consider worthy of being written down. Men
sometimes told me not to waste my time with women because "their talk
is closed-minded"; some women agreed. One man said folktales were not
worth recording; they were just "little somethings" told to children to
keep them quiet. Poetry preserving events that really happened, old
words carrying the wisdom of predecessors, the history of the tribes of
the Awlad 'Ali, the songs that no one knows how to compose anymore –
these are what should be preserved. I ignored these men and do not
apologize for that. I worry about something else. I have made public the
narratives that women told only to specific others and have made
permanent what was meant to be fleeting. Occasionally I have censored
myself, knowing, for example, that certain women would be offended if I
published sexually crude wedding songs; sometimes they censored me,
as when some girls told me to cross out a wedding rhyme disrespectful
of the Egyptian president. In general, however, I have proceeded with
my own vision of what I wanted.
        Curiously, I now realize that a more conventional and less
personal ethnography might have been more innocuous. At best, people
of the community would think it a general description of what everyone
already knew; at worst, they would judge it an offensive
misrepresentation of themselves as a group. But how can they respond to
the specific and personal tales that make up this book? They might
appreciate reading now, many years later, the stories they told and the
conversations they had then. Like a snapshot, the book might stir
memory and a nostalgic remembrance of people and times now gone.
They might feel, as they do about those who have camped with them in
past years, the same wistful affection apparent in the formula with which
they often end stories about those acquaintances: "May God have mercy
                                   31

on them."
        Yet the photographs people in this community really prefer are
those in which they or those they love pose stiffly, unsmiling, in their
best clothes; they always told me to keep the candid shots for myself.
Like nomads, these formal portraits migrated over great distances,
passing quickly from hand to hand. Certain words travel in the same way
the words of poems and songs worth fixing through memory and
repetition. Women were always delighted when I read back to them
poems and songs I had recorded in previous years. Yet it is not clear that
they would appreciate the words of the personal and everyday stories I
have written down here any more than the candid photographs they
reject.
        This makes me uneasy. My excuse for fixing and making public
these stories is the "higher good" of critical ethnography working in the
service of "writing against culture." But critical ethnography, as I have
described, is a project for the West. What good does it do my subjects?
Do the ends of undermining anthropological generalizations, questioning
feminist interpretations, and shaking up assumptions about the Middle
East justify the means? Oblivious to the anti-Arab sentiment that prevails
where this book will be read, my friends would hardly be fazed by it
anyway, since they are so confident of their moral and religious
superiority. I can try to explain to them the context of my work, but is
this sufficient?
        People told me stories, talked in front of me, and even let me
record, because over the years we had developed personal relationships
of varying degrees of closeness. I had come to know some women quite
well, our feelings of friendship having been forged as all bonds are in
that community: through shared memories. When I returned in 1985, for
example, the woman who had been a bride wanting to escape her
husband was now the mother of several children, comfortably settled in
the household. All it took was a word, however, to remind ourselves and
her what trouble she had given us at first. When I came back in 1986, the
sickly young man who had had open heart surgery while I was first
living in the household was now a healthy married man, the proud father
of a baby boy. I remembered beloved old aunts now passed away and
neighbors who had moved. I recalled with affection, as they did too, cute
things little children had said and done, children now serious in their
school uniforms or, by 1989, tall young men with deep voices. I also
remembered, with embarrassment, incidents in which my behavior was
                                         32

less than exemplary.
         The closeness, defined always by them in terms of 'ishra (living
together), was tempered with the recognition that I was an outsider,
related by neither kinship nor marriage, and that I was there for a
purpose, however ambiguous. Over a decade, as we came to know one
another better and even to change as we grew older, our senses of one
another became more precise. We had never confronted one another as
Western self and non-Western other, or vice versa. I have reflected
elsewhere (Abu-Lughod 1988b) on how my relationships to people in the
community were affected by aspects of who I was when I first came to
stay: young, unmarried, female, and, most important, of Arab
background and Muslim. Being a "halfie," participating in both
American and Arab identities, was both important in determining what I
sought to do in my writing and crucial to them in their acceptance of
me.39
         As time went on, however, their sense of just what kind of
"halfie" I was became more precise. They began to focus on the fact that
I was part Palestinian. The women with whom I spent most of my time
were more concerned with my marital and family situation than my
Palestinian identity. They were glad when I married so they could share
with me more easily the jokes about what goes on between husbands and
wives. Yet they also pitied me for the unaccountable delay in having
children. They, like the Bedouin men I knew well, could not understand
what satisfaction writing books and articles or teaching might have. They
knew it was good to get degrees and a job, but was the point not simply
to make a good salary? The real part of life was family, and I seemed to
them to be living in a strangely lonesome world, just myself and my
husband. They prayed for me and implored God to grant me children.
         The men, though, talked more and more about Palestine. Once or
twice when I came back after being away, they would proudly tell me
they had heard my father interviewed on the radio. One time they
brought a poet to recite before me a poem he had composed about the
Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the tragedy of Palestine. I was intrigued
when, in a conversation between two tribal leaders about the loss of their
coastal land through confiscation and sales and the influx of urban
Egyptians and peasants to traditional Awlad 'Ali territory, the men
39 I have discussed in Abu-Lughod 1991 the issue of "halfies" (a term I picked up from
   Kirin Narayan) and the work of others like Kondo (1986) who have written
   eloquently on the experience of doing fieldwork as insider-outsiders.
                                     33

agreed that they were being "Palestinianized." Most recently, with the
publicity about the Palestinian intifada, people impressed with the
courage of the young boys throwing rocks at soldiers began to ask me
more about the Palestinians. Why did they not use guns? Why does the
United States help Israel? As this latter question showed, my North
American identity was not ignored either. After the U.S. bombing in
1986 of Libya, the country from which Awlad 'Ali say they originate and
to which they still have strong ties, they challenged me about the
American position. I can only imagine what they will ask when I next
return, after the war in the Gulf.
        Like other scholars critical of the notion of "objectivity" in social
science, I have argued (1989, 1991) that we need to take greater account
of the specific relations of the researcher to the object of study. Being a
Palestinian American woman who chooses to live with a group of people
who define themselves as a minority of Muslim Arabs living in Egypt
(because tribal Bedouin) and then writes books for a scholarly Western
audience seems a very particular kind of situation. Yet in the end, every
situation is particular. I have criticized Bourdieu (1977, 1 2), who
otherwise perceptively analyzed the effects of the outsider stance on the
anthropologist's (mis)understanding of social life, for failing to break
with the doxa that the anthropologist is an outsider. The obvious point he
ignores is that the outsider self never simply stands outside; he or she
always stands in a definite relation with the "other" of the study, not just
as a Westerner or even halfie, but as a Frenchman in Algeria during the
war of independence, an American in Morocco during the 1967 Arab-
Israeli war, or an Englishwoman in postcolonial India. What we call the
outside, or even the partial outside, is always a position within a larger
political-historical complex.
        The question that remains, however, is the one I began with:
Does using my knowledge of individuals for purposes beyond friendship
and shared memories by fixing their words and lives for disclosure to a
world beyond the one they live in constitute some sort of betrayal? As
someone who moves between worlds, I feel that confronting the negative
images I know to exist in the United States toward Arabs is one way to
honor the kindness they have shown me. So is challenging stereotypical
generalizations that ultimately make them seem more "other." Yet how
will my critical ethnography be received? This is the dilemma all those
of us who move back and forth between worlds must face as we juggle
speaking for, speaking to, and, when we are "halfies," speaking from.
                                    34

        I can only surmise from the reception of my first book how
complex the local readings will be. My revelation, in Veiled Sentiments,
of Bedouin individuals' attachments and vulnerabilities through their
poetry was intended to inspire among Westerners a recognition of these
people's everyday humanity; it met with another response in Egypt.
When one woman heard someone read from the book a few of the poems
she had recited years earlier, she exclaimed, half joking, "You've
scandalized us!" For her, a book about particular people and everyday
life in her community might seem little more than a public display of
family secrets.
        My presentation of the way ideals of personal autonomy and
independence were manifested in men's lives took on complex and
different meanings in Egypt as well. A copy of a long review (in Arabic)
of my book came to the attention of a local Awlad 'Ali man who was a
civil servant and aspiring official in the Egyptian government. He
confronted my host with the article, angry that I had reported that they
liked to carry guns, evade taxes, and guard their rights to settle their own
disputes rather than let the government interfere. "This is your girl who
wrote this!" the man accused. What happened then I will never know,
since I was not there and heard only my host's version. He was, as usual,
defiant, retorting that he had taught me everything I knew. And in any
case, wasn't it true? Didn't the official have unlicensed guns? Did he
report all his sheep for tax purposes? The man admitted these facts but
still wondered if it was right to publicize the situation.
        My host told me he wanted my book translated into Arabic so
that Egyptians would come to understand and appreciate the superior
moral standards of his community (of which many Egyptians are
contemptuous). He thought to use my prestige to challenge Egyptian
condescension and ignorance. Yet as the incident about the report of
guns and taxes showed, he was only one voice in the Bedouin
community. His ideas about what would gain his people respect were
different from those of someone loyal to the government, even though
both were sensitive to their position and identity as marginals in the
nation-state. My work, though intended for a different audience, had
entered a local political field where the relationship between Awlad 'Ali
Bedouins and the Egyptian state was a contested issue.
        The only aspect of these stories that I know will not seem
inappropriate to those who told them to me is the larger way they are
                                         35

framed: by reference to Muslim discursive traditions.40 Whether or not
people actually live up to the Muslim ideals they set for themselves, they
have no doubts that being Muslim draws for them the boundaries of the
moral universe and shapes its features. Even if they recognize the
tensions between some of their practices and those prescribed for them,
they will be proud to see reproduced in these tales the constant
invocations of God and the Prophet that are critical to their self-
definition in the community. Although I intended this religious frame,
like the social scientific chapter titles with which they are paired, to
suggest disjunctions, my Bedouin friends would not be wrong to
understand it as also conveying a deep truth about their lives lives indeed
imbued with faith in God, rich in practices that reinforce their sense of
God's constant presence, and colored by a confident sense of belonging
to a community of Muslims.




40 This is a phrase Asad (1986) advocates as central to developing an anthropology of
   Islam.
                                        37

CHAPTER 1: PATRILINEALITY



        A man came to God's Messenger and said, "O Messenger of God,
       who is most entitled to the best of my friendship?" The Prophet said,
       "Your mother." The man said, "Then who?" The Prophet said, "Your
       mother.'' The man further said, "Then who?" The Prophet said, "Your
       mother." The man said again, "Then who?" The Prophet said, "Then
       your father."

               - Tradition of the Prophet Muhammad


        On a quiet day toward the end of 1979, the second year I had
been living in the community, I asked Migdim whether she would tell
me her life story. She said, "When you get old you think only of God, of
prayer, and of the oneness of God. What happened has passed, you don't
think about it. You don't think about anything but God." And she refused
to say any more. Then, as now, the only decoration on the walls of her
one-room house was a faded black-and-white photograph behind finger-
printed glass. It showed her as a younger, upright woman standing
proudly next to her eldest son, now called Haj Sagr to recognize his
status as someone who has made the pilgrimage, both wearing the
distinctive white clothing of Meccan pilgrims. Although she was now
bent nearly double and walked only with the help of a stick, she still had
the many social duties of a world where the mutual visits of relatives and
friends are the stuff of social relations. As the matriarch of one large
family and the oldest sister in another, she was expected at weddings,
sickbeds, and funerals, as well as at feasts to welcome home those who
had been released from prison or had returned from the pilgrimage to
Mecca. Even when she was at home she was always busy with
something – spinning, winding yarn, sewing burlap sacks together to
patch the old summer tent, seeing to the goats, giving advice, or
bouncing a grandchild on her lap.
        By the time I returned in 1986, seven years later, she could hardly
stand and walked only to go outside to the bathroom or to do her
ablutions for prayer. An eye operation had been unsuccessful, and she
squinted to see people. She rubbed her red eyes and often kept them
closed. Sitting hunched over all day, a blanket over her lap, she had more
time for me.
                                     38

         When I asked her to tell me her life story she said, "I've forgotten
all of that. I've got no mind to remember with any more." But then she
went on, "We used to milk the sheep. We used to pack up and leave here
and set up camp out west.
         And there we would milk the goats and milk the sheep and churn
butter, and we'd melt it and we'd put the clarified butter in the goatskin
bag and we'd cook wheat until it was done and we'd make dried barley
cheese."
         She laughed, knowing how formulaic this "story of her life" was.
That was all I got, though, from my direct questions.
         For her, like the other women I knew in this community, the
conventional form of "a life" as a self-centered passage through time was
not familiar. Instead there were memorable events, fixed into dramatic
stories with fine details. One of the most vivid I heard from Migdim was
the tale of how she had resisted marriages her father had tried to arrange
for her. I even heard more than once, nearly word for word, the same tale
of how she had ended up marrying Jawwad, the father of all her children.
I heard it for the first time one evening that winter; she told it for the
benefit of her sons' wives, Gateefa and Fayga, and some of her
granddaughters.
         She explained that the first person whom she was to have married
was a paternal first cousin. His relatives came to her household and
conducted the negotiations and even went as far as to slaughter some
sheep, the practice that seals the marriage agreement. But things did not
work out. The time was over fifty years ago, just after the death of her
mother.
         "He was a first cousin, and I didn't want him. He was old and he
lived with us. We ate out of one bowl. His relatives came and
slaughtered a sheep and I started screaming, I started crying. My father
had bought a new gun, a cartridge gun. He said, 'If you don't shut up I'll
send you flying with this gun.'
         "Well, there was a ravine and I would go over and sit there all
day. I sat next to it saying, 'Possess me, spirits, possess me.' I wanted the
spirits to possess me, I wanted to go crazy. Half the night would pass,
and I'd be sitting there. I'd be sitting there, until my cousin Brayka came.
And she'd cry with me and then drag me home by force and I'd go sleep
in her tent. After twelve days of this, my cousin's female relatives were
dyeing the black strip for the top of the tent they were about to finish
sewing the tent I'd live in. And they had brought my trousseau. 'I'll go get
                                      39

the dye for you,' I said. I went and found they had ground the black
powder and it was soaking in the pot, the last of the dye, and I flipped it
over POW! on my face, on my hair, on my hands, until I was completely
black.
         "My father came back and said, 'What's happened here? What's
the matter with this girl? Hey you, what's the matter?'
         The women explained. He went and got a pot of water and a
piece of soap and said, 'If you don't wash your hands and your face I'll ...'
So I wash my hands, but only the palms, and I wipe my face, but I only
get a little off from here and there. And I'm crying the whole time. All I
did was cry. Then they went and put some supper in front of me. He said,
'Come here and eat dinner.' I'd eat and my tears were salting each
mouthful. For twelve days nothing had entered my mouth.
         "The next afternoon my brother came by and said to me, 'I'm
hungry, can you make me a snack?' I went to make it for him, some fresh
flatbread, and I was hungry. I had taken a loaf and I put a bit of honey
and a bit of winter oil in a bowl.
         I wanted to eat, I who hadn't eaten a thing in twelve days. But
then he said, 'What do you think of this? On Friday they're doing the
wedding and today is Thursday and there aren't even two days between
now and then.' I found that the loaf I was going to eat I'd dropped. 'Well,'
he asked, 'do you want to go to So-and-so's or do you want to go to your
mother's brother's?' I said, 'I'll ...' There was an eclipse; the sun went out,
and nothing was visible. I said, 'I'll go to my maternal uncle's.' I put on
my old shoes and my shawl on my head and started running. I ran on
foot until I got to my uncle's ... I was in bad shape, a mess."
         Migdim praised her uncle's wife for giving her refuge and
explaining to her uncle what the problem was. "May God have mercy on
her, she was a good woman." But her uncle sent her back the next
morning, with instructions to his son to accompany her and to deliver
greetings to her father and to ask him to oblige him since he had
comforted his niece. If he were to delay a bit, perhaps she would come
around.
         "So I went home. After that I didn't hear another word. The
trousseau just sat there in the chest, and the tent they sewed it and got it
all ready and then put it away in their tent. And autumn came and we
migrated west, and we came back again. When we came back, they said,
'We want to have the wedding.' I began screaming. They stopped. No
one spoke about it again."
                                    40

        Grandma Migdim's story had two more episodes of failed
attempts to arrange marriage for her, episodes in which she did more of
the same. She cried, protested, threw bowls of fresh food, and went to
bed without eating. In the first instance her father's new wife intervened,
so her father refused the proposal claiming that Migdim's little sister was
too attached to her and their mother's death was too recent.
        Then came a group of men who arrived in the morning and
waited all day for her father to come home. He refused them, calling
them stingy. Migdim explained what happened then. "Jawwad's aunt,
married to my uncle, ran over to her brother's camp and told him, 'Come
on, come on. The others have given up their claim to the woman. They
came to ask for her and he refused them.' Her brother, the old man, came
right away and asked for me for his son. My father agreed.
        Then the women came singing with the men who brought the
sheep for the engagement. They had paid bridewealth of fifty Egyptian
pounds for Jawwad's aunt Mastura, so my father said, 'We don't want to
do anything different. What we gave you give us.' But one of their
relatives said 'No, we should increase it by twenty Egyptian pounds.' But
by God they never did give those extra twenty pounds. My father never
did see them. Whenever I used to come home for visits riding on a
donkey my father would say, 'Hey, why don't you give me that donkey?
They promised it to me but never gave it.' "
        Remembering the previous engagements, one of her
granddaughters interrupted her to ask, "Grandma Migdim, did you eat
and drink at that engagement?"
        She answered, "Yes, I ate and drank." But then, as if to assure us
of her virtue, she added, "Although I swear by my soul that it wasn't in
my thoughts nor was it in his. Not at all. It was his father who'd seen me
when I was young. I was energetic, really smart. He'd say, 'That girl, if
only my son could have her.' "
        Fayga, her youngest son's new wife, commented, "Bread and
salt." God wills certain people to share meals and life.
        Migdim agreed. "Yes, it was bread and salt."
        With a smile, Migdim's son's wife (and cousin) Gateefa asked,
perhaps for my benefit, "And what did they give you for your trousseau,
my grandfather's family?"
        Migdim itemized: "They gave me, my dear, a shawl, and a red
belt, and a silk belt, and a white blanket, and a black headscarf, and large
rice platters."
                                         41

         I interrupted to ask whether she had been brought in a bridal litter
on the back of a camel, and she answered, "Yes, it wasn't far. I rode in
the litter. It had a woven blanket over it with an entrance at the front. I
was young and I was scared I'd fall off."
         Gateefa returned to her teasing about the trousseau. "And didn't
they bring you a washtub?" Everyone laughed about the new utilitarian
objects brides now bring with them.
         "No washtub, no cooking pot, nothing. There weren't such things.
The old ones were poor. Nowadays women's brideprices aren't what
brideprices were, and trousseaus aren't what trousseaus were. Now they
bring teapots and kettles and kerosene burners and cakes and cookies and
candy."
         "And washtubs and pots and wooden chests and towels and. ..."
continued Gateefa.
         They laughed at themselves and then went quiet. Suddenly
Grandma Migdim referred to my tape recorder with its red light glowing
in the kerosene-lit room. "Your friend there, doesn't he talk?"
         The girls laughed and said knowledgeably, "No, this one just
listens to the talk, grandmother. It doesn't speak." Then they begged her
to sing.

        "Far away, no news of you comes
        even if you come to mind, O beloved ...*

        Dear one, who in sleep comes near
        is distant on the earth ..."

       Were these songs about her husband, long dead? Or about the
past? Or was she perhaps thinking of me, whose loved ones were far
away?


                      HAVING SONS AND DAUGHTERS

        By Jawwad, Migdim had seven children who lived, four boys and
three girls. Her four sons and their families now make up "the camp."
One daughter lives nearby. The other two are married to men from
distant areas and only come for visits on the major religious holidays,
* (Transcriptions of the Arabic poems can be found starting on p. 243.)
                                    42

when they hear someone is ill, or to attend weddings and funerals.
Migdim's daily life revolves around her sons, their wives, their children,
and their grandchildren.
         I asked Migdim where her children had been born. Most had been
born in this camp or further west, near Alamein, at their spring pastures.
A single daughter had been born east of the camp, and it was through her
story that I later began to hear about the family's experiences during the
Second World War. Some births were memorable for Migdim. She had
never had a doctor attend her deliveries; she even maintained that she
never had other women hold her.
         "I always gave birth by myself," she said, illustrating with the
story of her second-to-last son. "I gave birth to him alone. I had no one
with me but God. We were out west, inland from Alamein. That day I
did the wash. I washed up everything. In the morning I had washed my
hair and braided it with henna and cloves. I cooked too a pot of rice with
yoghurt sprinkled with some butter from the goatskin bag. ... My sister-
in-law and my husband's aunt were visiting, and they asked for lentils.
So the other women started making some flatbread and cooking the
lentils. It got to be sunset the days were short at that time of year.
         "My husband had gone to sleep in the tent, taking the two older
children ... I went to sit with the old women for a while as the girl
cooked the lentils. My little boy fell asleep in my lap, so I said, 'I'll go
put my son to bed.' They said, 'Stay until we eat supper, then we'll all go
to bed.' I said, 'I'll come back soon. But if I don't come it means I don't
feel like eating.' We'd had something to eat in the afternoon, and in those
days people didn't used to eat much.
         "I went off to put the boy to bed. I had three cramps while I was
putting him down. I never came back for the supper. I circled around the
tent, tightening the guy ropes. They called to me, 'Come have dinner,
come have dinner.' The sun had gone down and they called out, 'Come
have dinner.' But I didn't want any. I scooped out a hole in the sand and
went to sit by it. I brought out a straw mat and a donkey's burlap pack-
saddle and I put them down and sat on them, outside by the corner of the
tent. When the labor pains hit, I'd hold on to the guy rope's tension bar.
One hand between my legs, and one holding on to the rope above. The
sheep came home after sunset, close to the time of the evening prayers,
just as the child was coming out … When the child broke through I lifted
myself up by the pole, lifted my clothes up until the child dropped.
         "When my sister-in-law came out to pee she heard. She ran into
                                   43

the tent and told the women, 'Migdim has given birth!' They came
running. 'Where? Where?' they asked, and I told them, 'The child has a
forelock [a boy]. The child with its forelock dropped.' So they lit a fire
and wrapped the boy and they moved me inside. They cooked a pot of
special food that night, and made tea. And the man was sleeping near us,
in the corner, and didn't wake up. The women set up a compartment for
me in the middle of the tent. He was sleeping with the children in the
corner and didn't wake up.
         "In the morning my mother-in-law killed a chicken for me and
was cooking it when a woman neighbor of ours came over. 'Poor dear!
Poor dear! When did she deliver? Why, just yesterday she was doing her
wash and there was nothing wrong. Poor thing!' I tell you, from the
minute the old woman said, 'Poor thing' God protect me, God protect me
I was seized by cramps. Something (may it be far away from you),
something rang in my ears. And something covered my eyes so I couldn't
see. I prayed, 'There is no god but God, there is no god but God,' until
my mouth went dry. That was all the woman had said when they had to
come running. Something blinded me, blinded me and knocked me out.
My mother-in-law came and started moving my head, she made me sniff
a burning rag. Well, I tell you, I didn't taste that chicken she was
cooking. I never even saw it. I always have bad cramps after I give birth.
My cramps are bad then.
         "I delivered my other children alone," she added. "I had no one
with me but God." When I asked Migdim why, she answered, "The
women laugh and they talk and they bother you. You'll be as sick as can
be and they'll be making a lot of noise around you. I don't like them
around." When I asked if she would also cut the umbilical cord herself
she said, ''No, after the baby has dropped they come. They come and
they cut the cord." Then I asked why it was said that the woman who has
just delivered is close to God. She laughed at my piece of knowledge.
"Yes, people say that. By God, it's difficult. Ask the woman who has
given birth, ask her about death. She has seen it."
         Four more times Migdim "saw death." One child died. Of the last
three, two were born in Alamein. The third, a daughter, was born
southeast of where they now lived permanently. I wondered what they
were doing there. "We had set up camp there," she explained. "The
Germans had come. Airplanes came and started bombing. They moved
us there, south of the railroad tracks, and told us to set up very small
tents. 'Don't make the tents big, keep them small!' " she remembers them
                                    44

saying.
         "They moved the whole camp; everyone had to move south of the
railroad tracks. The English had come to Alamein. The Germans and
English started fighting ... A plane started flying over the army camp,
and they hit it with their artillery. It headed south and went to bits and
caught fire. It was on fire until it landed way over there, in the desert
south, and burned up."
         A niece of hers elaborated on these events, their experiences of
the battles of the European war fought on their soil. "I'll tell you about
the war. One day, it was mid-afternoon, and we were in our camp south
of Alamein. Grandma Migdim saw it first – the smoke. Smoke high in
the sky. I don't know if they had set fire to something or what. And the
airplanes – Duw! Duw! Duw! the planes would strike. It seems there
were tents or something, a military camp. We listened for a while, and
then we packed up and moved. At dawn we moved. And when the planes
came we would go into the caves. We'd sleep there and leave the camp.
The airplanes would attack and make noise. And the English would
shoot at them with big guns and hit them. It was the Italians' planes that
circled.
         "When there was an attack there would be something that made a
horrible sound: 'Waaa! Waaaa! Waaaaa!' it would wail. They called it an
attack. An attack, an attack. Two or three hours before, they knew the
airplanes were planning to come. It would go on for two hours like that,
'Waaaaa!' Then they would raise the danger flag. A red flag. And the
planes would come, circling around and then hitting them. Then they
would strike. The airplane would swoop down and they would fire at it.
It would go off and then come back and fire. And then parachutes would
come out."
         A younger woman listening interjected with excitement, "The
parachutes were like the material of our new headscarves."
         "No," Migdim's niece corrected, "they are like the nylon we make
slips out of. ... The women used to make them into dresses, red and
yellow and white. ... Dresses and slips and bloomers. And they used it
for the patchwork of the tent walls."
         She continued the story of their first encounter with the war. "So,
the smoke was everywhere. This was in the afternoon. Early the next
morning – we didn't sleep that night – at dawn we prayed and packed up
the camels and migrated back. We traveled three or four days and set up
camp near here, a place they call Jazeera. And we stayed there until the
                                    45

planes started coming there. We began sleeping in the caves and
spending our days in the tents.
        "And then, one afternoon when we were at the well, we saw an
airplane circling, circling. Around the camp of the Snaagra tribe, east of
the town. They had pitched their white tents, and the plane must have
thought it was a military camp. They wouldn't have touched them if they
thought they were Bedouins. It circled and hit them, hit them. It killed
many. They still talk about it, 'the year the Snaagra were wiped out.' Men
and children and women, in one afternoon.
        "A day or two later the army came to our camp. They came
carrying whole camps. And they made us leave. They made us ride in
their trucks. They moved us, even our cooking stones. 'Pick them up,
pick them up!' They moved us and set us down on a hill near Sidi
Dmayn. What a great place! There was nothing good we didn't have.
There were guavas and dates, tomatoes and cucumbers, watermelons and
oranges ... everything. We were in the gardens. They would come around
on donkeys selling. And we would buy. We were happy. We didn't hear
any more planes droning. After hearing them droning and circling,
droning and circling."
        It was at that camp, during the days of the war, that Migdim gave
birth to her daughter Ngawa. She was a sickly child. Migdim says she
wouldn't even nurse. She used to feed her drops of olive oil, dribbled into
her mouth. A woman neighbor yelled at Migdim, told her she had to
nurse the baby and that she should milk her own breasts to feed her. She
did. And then she forced the girl to drink. Then one day, as the baby lay
on the ground, her eyelids fluttered and she began shaking. It was her
father who noticed. Migdim says Jawwad told her, "Your daughter's
about to die." But then instead she vomited – it was bright green,
Migdim swears. After that she started getting better, although she never
got plump. She was skinny and often sick and her relatives were sad for
her, even though she was energetic.
        In the end Ngawa was married to a poor relation who lived
nearby. Because of her health her mother thought this arrangement a
good idea. In general, though, and using this example, Migdim defends
marriage to close relatives – marriage within the camp, as they say. "If
they are close by, daughters can eat with you and come visit you often. If
they give birth, their mothers are near them. If they get sick, they're near
their mothers. If you get sick they come … If you marry far away
someone can die and you won't hear about it. You don't hear about
                                     46

weddings, you don't hear about deaths. You're not there when anything
happens."
         We often talked about the differences between having sons and
having daughters. Once when I was talking to Migdim about what
Bedouin women, in the days before doctors, did for women in labor, she
described only the foods and soothing drinks that were prepared. "We
would make 'asiida* [a cooked dough] for her and we'd cook eggs for
her and we'd boil fenugreek. After she had delivered she would drink
two or three cups of it so she wouldn't have cramps."
         Migdim's daughter-in-law Azza, who was from a town, not the
desert, interrupted, "And they bring the new mother meat."
         "Yes, meat," continued Grandma Migdim. "And they slaughter
chickens for her, to make her strong."
         I added, "But only if it is a boy, right?"
         She laughed. "No, they bring meat if it's a girl. If it's a boy they
slaughter a sheep for him. The boy, you see, his name is exalted. He has
a little pisser that dangles."
         Her daughter-in-law again broke in, "And the girl well, her father
will be sad and her relatives will be sad and they won't cook at all for
her."
         Migdim was agitated. "No, the girl ..."
         But her daughter-in-law charged on, "The girl, poor thing, her
mother is sad. That's how it is."
         Migdim firmly finished, "No, the girl makes your heart happy.
She's the one who should have a sheep slaughtered to celebrate her. It's
just that people don't understand."
         Another time, though, she made clear why people preferred sons.
Looking out at a group of her little granddaughters playing, she sighed.
"Little girls are nice. This one goes to get water, that one helps you. But
in a week they can leave you and their place will be empty. ... Daughters
aren't yours. When they marry, that's it. They stay with their families and
that's that. They leave you with nothing. But boys, they stay."


                                LOSING MEN

      That sons do stay becomes especially important when a woman's
husband dies. Migdim lost her husband, Jawwad, quite young. She
blamed his death on the death of his younger brother, killed by an
                                    47

exploding mine about seven years after what she knew as "the war
between the Germans and the English." This kind of death was not
uncommon after the battles of the Second World War had ended and the
armies departed. In their desperate poverty the Bedouins had survived by
scavenging scrap metal, an activity they called "rabbasha" – a verb made
from the English word rubbish.
        Migdim did not like telling the story of her brother-in-law's
death. When I asked about it one day, she was terse. "We had migrated
out west that spring. He went rubbishing, riding on a donkey with a
friend. I didn't believe he was dead because when he left the camp he had
been heading east. And he had money; he had no need to scavenge. But
he ran into friends who persuaded him to go. They came across a mound
and found a bomb. The other man started taking it apart. My brother-in-
law said, 'I won't work on it.' But instead of moving far away, he sat near
him. The man kept trying to take it apart, but it exploded.
        "The bomb exploded and killed the man. He flew, who knows
where he landed. Who knows where it threw him. But my brother-in-
law, all that came his way was a small bit that landed (May it be far from
you), landed in his chest. That year part of the family was camped near
the train station at Alamein. They hadn't come with us. People brought
him to them at night, in a car, and he died that night. They brought him
in a car from the desert, from the camp of the man who had been
rubbishing.
        "We had all migrated from here and had set up camp way up in
the desert south of Alamein. Someone soon came – the one who brought
us the news came in the morning. He ran into the camp shouting his
name, told us that he had died and was at the camp in Alamein. When he
told us we jumped up and began running northward. My sons were
young then, and they started running on foot, so I put on my belt and
started running with them, wailing. We found everything in chaos.
People came from everywhere. I found him wrapped in a blanket and
wailed his name.
        "When Jawwad went in to see him, he shuddered. He told me, 'I
trembled and something pounded me from head to foot.' ... He got sick,
Jawwad, and he remained ill after the death. Ill for a year. And then a
year after his brother had died, he died. And the old man, their father,
died between them in the month of 'Ashura.
        "My younger son wasn't very old then he was still small. But he
sang about his kinsmen who had died:
                                    48



       He took away those around you,
       oh eyes, despair hasn't been easy on you ..."

         As her son, the Haj Sagr, now describes it, this dangerous
business of "rubbishing" occupied many people after their return from
the Nile Valley camps to which the British had evacuated them. "After
they drove the Germans out, the English left. Then the Arabs could
return to their territory. They went back as soon as they could. But they
found that the armies had left the area covered with mines and bombs
and big guns that had not gone off. We found hand grenades, some that
had been tossed but had not exploded, some that were untouched. They
had left everything: mines, broken tanks, cars, even whole garages with
their dead in them. For six or seven years they were collecting their dead.
..."
         Migdim's niece tells a similar story of those early days after the
war. Their wells had been destroyed, they had lost much of what they
had. And they had not been able to plant barley for their bread. They had
nothing. "When the Germans came to Alamein the English stopped them.
They pushed them back. So we came back to our land. We found the
world in chaos. There were broken airplanes, ruined cars, and broken big
guns. And big tins of biscuits. We used to find spoons and forks, rope,
nice shoes, and burlap sacks from the sandbags. And nice bottles, great
little glass bottles. We used to collect them. White and green and red.
Just lying around. ... The boys would collect them and sell them. And
there were tires, you wouldn't believe the new tires! They used to carry
them off on camels and go to sell them.
         "Later there was the work in iron. The flints of big guns. They
started gathering that. Iron. And the copper, it was everywhere. They
began collecting that. ... But the bombs, they got aluminum from those.
At the time it was worth a lot, so they started digging in the ground to get
out the mines. They would collect four or five detonators, five or six
detonators, and they'd take them far into the desert. Then they would
light a fire and set them off. They would explode. When they'd cooled,
they'd come and collect the stuff and sell it. Many of them got hurt.
There are poems about that."
         The Haj Sagr elaborated. "Dealers from Alexandria and Cairo
came to buy the copper, one kind yellow and another red, and the
gunpowder. ... People would go into the desert in cars and on foot, any
                                    49

way they could. One time someone would pick up a mine and it would
explode in his hands. Another time someone would touch a bomb and it
would explode. Another time someone would try to undo a detonator, to
get out its cartridges or gunpowder, and it would blow up. Then five or
six people would die together. It became like a war explosions all the
time. ... A car would stray from the track and a mine would go off and
blow it up with whoever was in it. It was like a war."
         Migdim tells of her son's close call with these mines, before the
tragedies of her brother-in-law's death and then her husband's. As she
told it, Sagr had gone off scavenging with his older brother. They took a
long time getting back, and she became quite worried. When she finally
saw them returning she ran out to greet them. Her older son arrived,
walking with his arms folded. "Show me your hands!" she demanded.
"Are you all right?" He showed her his hands and there was nothing
wrong. She was relieved but then they said, "Get Sagr down from the
donkey." She cried out, "What's wrong, what's wrong?" They lifted his
robe and it was all bloody. It was bandaged.
         He had stepped on a mine. "Watch out, watch out, they are in
front of you!" – that is what Sagr had shouted to his older brother. On the
way home they had run across an Englishman whose plane had crashed.
The man had bandaged Sagr so the blood would stop flowing. The boy
had been hit in three places. In two of these – the thigh and the calf –
what had gone in had come out the other side. The third place he had
been struck was his heel. That bit was still in. All night long she stayed
up with him while he cried out in pain. She massaged his foot until
morning, when finally the thing, black and the size of a fly, fell out,
"Tack!" – she heard the metal fall to the ground. Then they brought a
doctor, who scraped and cut and stuffed the wounds to his screams of
pain.
         Haj Sagr himself told me the story in much more detail and with
a different emphasis. Migdim, who remembers staying up all night to
nurse him and massage his foot, barely figures in this account; his story
has become fixed instead as an illustration of the mutual generosity of
the English and the Arabs. His father, Jawwad, not his mother, is the
central character. The date he puts at 1944 or 1945, when he was no
more than fifteen years old, and about two years after the Awlad 'Ali had
returned to their territory.
         "We used to go out and collect copper," he began. "I went out
with my older brother, Hamid, and two others. ... We had some donkeys
                                    50

and bags to carry the stuff out with, to the cars that came into the desert.
The four of us went on foot into the desert. We walked separately
because we were afraid of the mines. Each person had to be paying
attention. I was walking and my thoughts were on the big mines. I was
afraid of the big mines. But there is a mine called 'One with the Little
Mustache,' which has three prongs, even finer than needles, that go into
the detonator. ...
         "I was walking along when I found that my shoe wouldn't go
down. Of course, these prongs are very thin, and if you don't go right up
to the mine you don't see them. And so my shoe ... I tried to put my foot
down but it wouldn't go – something stopped my foot, but I couldn't see
anything. So I pulled my foot back. I lifted my foot and looked and then,
Duvv! It moved before it exploded. It blasted me twenty-two meters. I
had been walking westward, and I was hurled away and found myself
facing east. I had been carrying a knapsack with copper in it, and I was
wearing a woolen vest under that. It scattered all of this. And my clothes,
there was nothing left. All I had left on me was my shredded undershirt.
It had blown them up until they ripped. And my shoes gone. They flew
off and I couldn't find them at all. It was that powerful.
         "It was hissing and there was smoke and after that it went 'Tub
Tub Tub Tub.' I looked and saw my brother shouting and wailing. They
couldn't see me because I was in a low spot. I tried to stand up, but my
legs couldn't. I shouted, 'Watch out for the mines! Watch out for the
mines! The mines!' They started running, but by then you could see
them: every four meters was a mine. I could see them at intervals. One
here and one there. 'Be careful!'
         "I told them at the time, 'I'm safe.' After I'd felt around my
stomach, my chest, my head, and found nothing I told them it wasn't
serious. 'It's only something in my legs and it's not bad. But I can't stand
up.' So I said to them, 'Just wrap up what's here.' It was really
bleeding. ... They had to carry me.
         "I saw that they were frightened, afraid that I would die. So I
said, 'There's nothing wrong with me. Let's just make some tea.' We had
tea, but I only drank a cup. Then I told them to make me a saddle – a
donkey's saddle is not like a horse's – and rope the saddle on and make
me some stirrups in the middle so I could put my legs in. The blood, the
blood was flowing and I was getting dizzy. It was a long way, about
thirty-five kilometers to Alamein, and I was worried about the blood.
         "We got on the donkeys, and when we reached the rise to the
                                   51

north of us we saw someone. He was not an Arab; we could tell from his
clothes. There was an asphalt road that the army, the English, had made.
And there was a pipeline that brought water, dug in the sand. He had left
the road and was walking along the pipeline because the sand there was
soft. He couldn't walk on the hard surface. When we got near him,
Hamid whistled at him. He stopped. He stopped and started mumbling.
He tried to talk, but he was really tired, completely wiped out. 'Hey, hey
bomb.' He'd seen the bomb and had heard it. He'd been close by, but we
hadn't noticed him.
          "Then he looked at me and saw the blood. He took off his
backpack and took out a box with three pills – one small pill, one grey
one, and a third capsule with each half a different color. He opened my
mouth and put the medicine in it. Then he got his water flask – there was
only a tiny amount in it – and he held me like this and made me swallow
the pill with the water. He had hung on to this one last sip, the one I
drank. Then he opened his bag and got out some dyed bandages with two
ties. ... He took off all the headcloths and rags they had used to bandage
me. The wounds were bleeding, and he rubbed the yellow ointment on
and wiped it. It was as if he'd put fire on them, and I let out some
screams. He wrapped them with the bandages.
          "We looked at this Englishman. He had headphones and was
wearing only trousers. He had a sack with an aerial, like a walkie-talkie.
And that's all. His body was burnt. His skin was peeling, exactly like a
snakeskin. His shoes had fallen apart, and he had tied the torn tops on
with what must have been a strip of his shirt so he could walk on them.
His legs looked as if he'd put them over a fire: they were burnt and
bleeding. His lips were cracked. And when he looked down you'd see
that his eyelids were very white, just as if they had been painted white.
He was young, about twenty-eight or twenty-seven years old. He said,
'Wadiwaant, waadiwij wij blayn. Duvv! Cairo, Cairo.' His plane had
crashed. I don't know what he said, but we understood that his plane had
crashed three hundred kilometers from Cairo. There had been maneuvers
where the armies had been and something had gone wrong with his
plane. It went down and he had left it. ...
          "He had been walking for seven days. He had with him a little
water, which he drank bit by bit. And he had a pill to keep going,
something to make him strong. He had gone on like this, walking a lot at
night. In the daytime during the heat he sat in the shade maybe he'd find
a tree or he'd find a mountain with rocks to go between. But he was near
                                   52

the end. If he hadn't come upon us he would have died. He could barely
talk he just kept saying, 'Blayn.'
         "When we got home my father came out and met us. When he
first saw me he asked where I had been hit. When he found out where the
wounds were, he said it wasn't serous. But if it had not been for that
medicine and the bandaging of this Englishman, I would have bled to
death. So he didn't attend to me but went and got water for the
Englishman. He warmed the water and put the man's legs in the water,
water and salt. And he massaged his legs and brought him two spoonfuls
of butter and put them in his mouth and made him swallow them.
         Then he made him a pot of tea, and he drank the tea, and then he
brought him a loaf of bread and some boiled milk and broke up the bread
in the milk. My father took care of the Englishman. He fed him, cooked
a little milk for him, and then boiled him some eggs and fed him, bit by
bit. He made him drink a light cup of tea, sip by sip. From sunset to ten
o'clock at night he fed him, first a bite, and then a sip of tea. He put a
little butter on the tea and told him to drink this.
         And the man would look at my father and the tears would flow.
He couldn't talk from the thirst and the sun and the wind. But he had
courage, and a compass.
         ''When he fell asleep my father covered him. I swear to God he
even slept next to him. My father really was kind and compassionate. All
he'd said to me was, 'It's nothing serious.' "
         "Did this bother you?" I pressed.
         "Of course not." Sagr was quick. He mentioned his mother
Migdim then, but only briefly. "My mother and the whole camp were
feeding me and around me. ... But my father was a doctor, he knew how
to set bones and do everything. He was courageous and strong in
everything. He said there was no big injury when I was able to stand up
when he asked. 'The bones are fine, and the muscles are fine. The cuts
don't worry me. Blood spilled, and that's all.'
         "So, in the morning my father attended to the Englishman, made
him a glass of tea with milk. The man started trying to say something,
something about Alamein. He wanted to go to their headquarters. At the
time there were British intelligence people in Alamein, with their radios,
still there. So Hamid and two others took him. It was a long way. When
they arrived, they were met by an armed guard outside. After the
Englishman talked with him for six or seven minutes the guard put his
gun on his shoulder, saluted, and ran inside. He came out with two
                                    53

officers. ... They had an Egyptian with them who translated. He told
them, 'These people here saved my life. If not for them I wouldn't have
come back. They had someone with them who was hit by a mine. Before
anything I want the English doctor to go and take a look at him. If it is
serious he should bring him back to the hospital. If he can treat him
there, he should. This is the first thing I request.'
         " 'Right away,' they said. My brother said they took them inside
to the mess hall and brought them breakfast. Then they got the car ready
and loaded some jerrycans of water. The doctor got his bag. And then a
major came and greeted the man. They talked a long while and the
Englishman said to him, 'Those people saved my life. They must have a
certificate.' So the officer wrote something saying that the British
government should grant their requests because they helped the pilot So-
and-so. He sealed it and then gave each of them ten pounds.
         "They all rode in the car bringing the doctor. 'Hey howaayi,' he
said to me. And he took some twisted gauze over cotton on the end of a
scissors and put this inside the wounds. He'd open the wounds slowly
and then push this through with one shove. I'd scream. I'd howl. He's
stick it in and pull it out the other end. Every morning, after the sun had
come up, he was there at the tent. He'd change my bandages, and he'd put
this red medicine in some water and wash the wounds. Then he put
medicine on them. For twenty-one days I couldn't stand up. On the
twenty-first day I finally stood up. The Englishman came himself to see
how I was getting along."
         Unlike Migdim, who cared only about her son's injury, Sagr
ended his story with praise for the British: "Those were real men. They
are the real men among the Europeans. The English know about
friendship. Like us, they have courage, stamina, and generosity." Yet he
also estimates that twelve thousand Bedouins have been killed through
accidents like his with unexploded mines left by the British and Germans
during the war. To this day people and camels are being killed by mines,
even though no one works in scrap metal anymore. Reflecting on the
earlier period of "rubbishing," Haj Sagr concludes, "Some people got
rich. People got rich, but it destroyed families."


                         WORDS THAT SCATTER

       After Migdim nearly lost her son through this dangerous
                                    54

business, she lost her brother-in-law and then her husband. That left
responsibility for the family in the hands of her sons. To get the family
back on its feet after the devastations of the war they worked in
smuggling (between Libya and Egypt), began to acquire land, and
increased their sheep and camel herds. Many decisions had to be made,
and they usually consulted with their mother. When they were in the
camp, they spent their evenings with Migdim, talking in her room by the
light of a kerosene lantern. During the day, if they found themselves free,
they would stop by. Even when they had gotten older, her sons were
relaxed in her company. As she aged, they became more solicitous. They
had learned to trust her to run things in the household, among the
women. She organized the work that needed doing and she divided up
the goods, from food to dress fabric, that they brought home for the
family.
        But Migdim complained about her sons. They sometimes made
her angry when they would not take her advice, when they put
themselves in danger by getting involved in arguments with other
families, when they made bad decisions about women. She remembers,
for example, refusing to sing or ululate at the wedding of her youngest
daughter, Lawz. The girl's brothers had agreed to give her in marriage to
their first cousin, on the same day as her brother Sagr's wedding to
Gateefa, his cousin of twelve or thirteen, who was the same age as
Migdim's daughter. Still, Migdim felt that Lawz was too young. "I was
opposed to it," she asserted. "It was against my will.
        "We had their weddings on the same day and we put them in our
old house, together. But it didn't work out. I said they wouldn't manage,
but the boys didn't follow my wishes. ... The girls used to escape. We
had a goatpen a little east of the house. My daughter would go and sleep
among the goats, wrapping herself up in a straw mat. I'd find her
sleeping there but wouldn't say a word. They'd look everywhere, but they
couldn't find her.
        "In the end they just didn't have bread to share, by God. Her
mother-in-law didn't like her. She set up a tiny tent for her, put a bit of
tattered mat down. She made her life miserable. ... So Lawz came back
and stayed with us.
        "Then someone else came to ask for her. He had a wife and
wanted her as a second wife. I said, 'I won't ever put her somewhere as a
second wife.' Even her present husband – I didn't want her to marry into
his family. I said, 'I swear to God I won't give her to them.' He was
                                    55

young, a kid. And his father was away in Libya. I thought the boy would
just be in the camp alone. Well, it happened anyway. Her brother Sagr
agreed to it, and we took her to them and they held the wedding. As you
see, though, it worked out well between them."
         That time she had been upset with her sons for what they had
done to their sister. More often she was angry with her sons because of
their behavior toward their wives. Her daughters-in-law often came to
her with their grievances. If she thought her sons were treating them
unfairly or poorly, she would speak to the men. On the other hand, her
daughters-in-law praised her for being discreet about conflicts that arose
strictly between women of the community and not involving the men.
Most of her daughters-in-law appreciated how often she took their side
and looked out for them in situations where they had little say.
         As her sons grew older and became wealthier through their hard
work in business and their good investments in land, orchards, and
sheep, they began to take second and even third wives. Migdim insists
that in her day it had been rare for men to have more than one wife. Later
it was still unusual, except for those who were rich and important. She
yelled at her sons each time they decided to marry again, even as she
recognized that men wanted to marry women so they could have more
sons, men to make the family strong. One evening Sagr tried to provoke
her. If death didn't beat him to it, he said, he would build a new house
and get another wife. She had a fit. "You fool! It's not good to bring
together several women. Look at your household. Everything is left
spilled, everything is a mess. That's because you have too many women.
Each one says, 'It's not my responsibility. I won't pick it up. Let someone
else do it.' " She had objected to his decision to take a third wife and had
done her best to discourage the woman from marrying her son. She did
not succeed that time, although she had managed earlier to frighten off
the parents of another girl her son had wished to marry.
         Her youngest son took a second wife after his first wife suffered a
serious illness and several miscarriages and was forbidden by the doctor
to have more children. When he started spending time at the household
he had set up for his new wife, away from his mother, Migdim
complained. She moaned that it was terrible to be alone, not to have a
man in the house anymore; no one to say good morning to, no one to say
good night to, no light in the men's guest room. The women would not
let her get away with this. How often, they demanded, had Migdim's
husband, Jawwad, slept at his mother's home instead of with her?
                                    56

        It was not just because her sons neglected her when they married
new wives that she objected. She was protective of the mothers of their
children, the women who had been there for years, and of the children
themselves. This complex mixture of jealousy and protectiveness toward
her daughters-in-law and grandchildren figured clearly in a conflict
Migdim had with her sons in the summer of 1987, a conflict over a piece
of family land that they gave to a long-time neighbor who wanted to
build a new house.
        She told her side of the story. "My sons came here and I told
them I wouldn't give them a piece. But as soon as they left they went
right over and signed it over to her. I had told them, 'My sons, don't sign
it over to her. Let her keep what she's built and let her stay. No one will
bother her. But as for a new house, no, she shouldn't build. If you sign it
over, you won't have my blessings.' But they left here and went and
signed it over to her. This made me sick. What kind of behavior is this?
They do this for that other woman, when I'm their mother?"
        I asked Migdim whether her sons had informed her that they
were signing over the land. "No, they didn't come back here. Other
people told me they had signed it over. ... Sagr and Hamid drove the
boys away saying, 'I swear to God if one of them opens his mouth I'll
drink his blood.' That's what the old one said. They're pimps, the two of
them. Ugh!"
        I thought she must be joking. "How can you say that about your
sons?"
        Her response was sharp. "They're not my sons. I'm not their
mother, nor are they my sons. Sons who crumble what I say and go along
with what that woman says? They're not my sons at all."
        Then furiously, almost incoherently, she began to explain what
had happened. The problem started with goats. The old man next door
had gone to the fathers of the young men of the camp to complain that
they had tried to beat up his sons and drive them out. "The old man said
they had done this and that and this and that, until Hamid began to act
possessed. He started hitting his own sons, shouting at them. He almost
killed them. What's this? You beat your own sons for the sake of that
woman next door? Our boys had neither hit nor spoken to her boys. All
they said was 'You shouldn't let the goats pass through here after
grazing.'
        "Nowadays there's an orchard on either side. And when three
hundred goats pass through the fig orchards and graze ... they'll eat the
                                     57

figs. ... There's no open land anymore. But then if we ever want to get
some milk from our goats, they [the neighbors] won't let us. We have
goats in their herd, you know, but they won't bring them by here so we
can milk them. And then the billy goats get loose. I swear I spend the
whole day going 'kh, kh, kh, kh' to keep them away. If we put fodder out
for the cow, they eat it. If we put fodder out for the donkey, they eat it. If
we put water out for the chickens, they drink it. I told my sons to tell
them to tie up the goats. Hamid said he would, but he's a liar. I doubt he
did."
         I tried to reason with Migdim, suggesting that maybe her sons
figured there was plenty of land. She was not convinced.
         "Is there lots of land? Where is all that land? When their sons get
older they'll start fighting. I told them that. I'm really mad at them, my
sons, because I love them. They're my sons and I love them, but they
shouldn't thwart me. Why does he ignore what I've said and go sign it
over to that woman? No! He's not my son at all. He's not my son, nor
will I bless him."
         What had disturbed her most was an incident a couple of
evenings earlier when her oldest son, Hamid, had chased after his sons
and nephews, believing, despite their denials, that the boys had tried to
beat up the shepherd's son. "I said to my son, 'They didn't want to kill
him! They just wanted to say to him, "Listen, if your family wants to
build you shouldn't. You've already built a house and you're living in it."
' But the old guy starts screaming, 'They wanted to kill the boy. They
tried to beat the boy! May I be forced to divorce my wife if I don't kill
them. God damn their father, their father who gave birth to them!
Gypsies! Bastards! Good-for-nothings!' " Her voice was shrill as she
imitated him.
         I tried to calm Migdim down, but she insisted, "Those grown
men, they're imbeciles!"
         I told her that her son Sagr had planned to come by to see her that
day but had gotten caught up in a dispute elsewhere. She knew about it
already, about the land and the groups fighting over it. She had her
opinion, too, about who was in the right. Like all the women in the
community, she was worried about her sons who had gone off to the
fight. She prayed for their safe return. But that did not stop her from
going on about her own feelings. "My son, may he be safe, I don't want
him to come by anyway. Let him stay away. I'm upset. I'm upset that he
ignored what I said. He threw my words into the air. It is our land, and
                                    58

all of our boys are going to want some. Even the little ones said, 'It's our
land. Tomorrow we're going to grow up and marry and we won't find
anywhere to build.' They are shameless. If they had sense and understood
anything, they would have said, 'Our mother says that maybe later this
will create problems that get worse.' "
        She then muttered, "Those people aren't kin, you know. They're
not from our tribe."
        I interjected, "But everyone says they've lived with you for so
long."
        "So what if we've been together for a long time? Does that mean
they should let their goats destroy our crops? Let them move west, to
Alamein. There's lots of land there and no orchards. Or why doesn't he
go live with his brothers out west, west of Matruh? There's lots of land
out there. The other day I went out to pee, near the barrel over there and I
heard them laughing at me because I had to pull up my dress. I'm afraid
to wet myself and I can't squat now. I heard them laughing at me, I swear
to God. I can't even go out to pee now. No, I don't want them around.
They're weighing on me.
        "My son should respect my wishes. ... He's my son. He came out
of me. Who could be closer to me? Yet he goes and signs it over to that
family when I said not to. By the Prophet, isn't that wrong? Given that I
said not to?"
        Suddenly a new element was interjected into the story. "And the
old woman had the nerve to tell my granddaughter that the boys smoke
and get high. She told her they spend all night in the men's guest room,
playing. 'You'd better not sleep at your grandmother's anymore. Watch
out, maybe the boys will come in,' she told her. But I don't sleep at night.
I swear sleep doesn't enter my eyes. Does she think I'll fall asleep and
one of the boys will come in and rape them? I don't sleep. She told the
old men that the boys get drunk and smoke hashish. What rotten lies. Do
they have a café to smoke at? They don't have a café, and they don't have
hashish. She's just causing trouble.
        "Well, now Hamid won't let his daughter come sleep with me
anymore. For three nights she hasn't come. I don't want them. God bless
those who are with me. I have my water and my things here. As long as
her father thinks his daughter is too good for me I don't need them."
        It was becoming clear to me that Migdim's worries about the land
had something to do with her feelings about her neighbor, feelings that
seemed tinged with jealousy. She continued, "And yesterday, he was
                                     59

over there until midnight. He goes over there and he laughs over there
and he talks. He never laughs with his sons. He never talks with his sons.
He never says, 'My sons, what should we do about this and what should
we do about that?' And when he comes over here he's like a stranger,
weighing on me. Over there it's laughter and talk. May he lick their
asses. I don't want them as long as he cares about what the other women
want and ignores my concerns. He has no sense. No, sister, I don't want
him to come talk over here, I don't want him or anyone. Anyone who
throws away his mother's words and cares about those of outsiders he's
no good."
        When I first had asked her why the men listened to the shepherd's
wife, she had shrugged. The second time I asked, when she was talking
about how much her son enjoyed visiting with the old woman, she
laughed and asked, "Who knows what she did to him? Maybe she had a
charm written. May God protect me from her sins. I swear to God she
has sucked the sense of the old ones, Sagr and Hamid. Sucked both of
their minds."
        She ended our conversation with a poem:

         "The heart is a fool
         it sowed words the wind scattered ...

         God damn them. They ignore my words and make hers come
true?"


                             SON'S MARRIAGES

        This was not just an argument about a piece of land. For Migdim,
the matter concerned the entire women's community.
        The problem was that about eight years earlier, her neighbor's
youngest daughter had become Hamid's third wife. And just a few weeks
before the incident over the land, this young woman had decided to go
against the usual arrangements for the sharing of domestic work among
the wives, daughters, and daughters-in-law of the household. Her
husband had agreed that she could separate from the others and begin to
cook and bake just enough for herself and her five small children. She
claimed her work load was too heavy and that labor was unfairly split
among the twenty-five household members. Her withdrawal had been
                                    60

much discussed in the women's community, defensively by the other two
wives, who feared being blamed for having been unfair, and angrily by
Migdim and the mother and sisters of the senior wife (who was also
Hamid's first cousin), not to mention the other women in the community,
who took sides with the older wives.
        Migdim had opposed the marriage. Her son had arranged this
third match while she was staying with her sick brother. Upon her return
she blew up, insulting Hamid and calling him names. His first wife was a
close cousin who had not wanted to marry him; she had stayed, however,
and produced a line of sons. The two, now like brother and sister, had
long since stopped sleeping together. Hamid's second wife was the
daughter of a shepherd's family that had lived near them for a while,
herding their sheep. He had fallen in love with her and married her. As
Migdim reminded him one day when he complained about the lousy
bread this poor woman had baked, he had raved, in the days before he
married her, about how delicious her bread was and that was when they
used only coarse brown barley, not fine white flour. Migdim
sympathized with both these wives, but especially with this good simple
woman.
        Haj Sagr certainly believed this new marriage was a factor in
Migdim's rage. A few days after my visit with his mother he asked me if
she was seriously angry with him. Should he go make peace with her?
He knew she was angry that they had beaten their own sons for the sake
of an outside family. He also knew she feared that the split in his
brother's household meant the young wife had her husband under her
control. The Haj explained, though, that it was not his brother's land they
were signing over but his own. In his presence, Sagr's senior wife
supported their decision. The two concurred that Migdim was acting
badly. What was the transaction costing her? Both her husband, Jawwad,
and his father before him had always generously given people things
they asked for.
        One other woman, a visiting aunt, took their side and tried to
calm Migdim. She counseled Migdim to keep quiet, arguing that silence
was the best policy. After all, the world would go on a long time. Later,
later when the men were dead, their signatures and their papers would
carry no weight; it would be another generation. She also offered some
pious phrases. She complimented the men, saying there were so few
generous people anymore. They were merely following the model of the
Prophet. The Prophet (God bless him and save him), she reminded
                                   61

Migdim, said that we must care for our neighbors, up to the seventh
neighbor. The Prophet almost left an inheritance to a neighbor.
         At this Sagr's wife retorted, ''But we have actually given an
inheritance to a neighbor. Are we supposed to be better than the
Prophet?" Quickly, though, she added, "May God forgive me."
         Most others in the community, however, found fault with the old
shepherd's wife. They were worried about Migdim, who had been crying
her eyes out, hurt by the accusations that her grandsons smoked hashish
at her house and miserable because her granddaughter was forbidden
from spending the night with her. This was the granddaughter, Migdim
claimed, who woke up before dawn to heat the water for her so she could
wash for the early prayers. (The girl herself complained that she was
very attached to her grandmother and was used to sleeping at her house.
She argued with her father and swore that she would not abandon her
grandmother. Although she could no longer sleep there, she said she still
went to her grandmother's every day to shake out her mat, sweep her
room, and groom her.) Many shared Migdim's conviction that this was
the work of bad magic. After all, remarked one woman, the shepherd's
wife is an old woman and gets around to markets and things. Another
whispered, "They say she gives the charms to them to drink. All of the
men eat and drink at her house. Yes, the old woman gives the magic to
them to drink, and they sign all the papers."
         Each offered evidence of strange behavior. One described how
Hamid had mercilessly hit the little daughter of his senior wife because
she had been fighting with her new half-sister. The man's second wife
had also complained of being beaten one day and accused of stealing a
ten-pound note from the pocket of his robe hanging in her room. She
defended herself by saying she had never even asked him for a ten-
piaster coin to take as a gift to a new mother. The cloves and henna and
money she needed she always got from her own family. She had wanted
to go home to her relatives, angry at being accused of stealing his
money; but she dared not, she said, because she knew everyone would
say she was just angry because he was taking another wife.
         Migdim had tried to intervene, but Hamid just brushed her off, as
he always did when she interfered. I remember a day, a couple of months
after his marriage to this new, eighteen-year-old bride, when he stopped
by his mother's house, trailed by several of his little children. Migdim
began to complain about the number of children in the camp. She
criticized her son because his children had just accidentally smothered a
                                     62

small goat with which they were playing, and she had only barely
rescued a lamb that four of them were trying to ride.
         Then she told him she disapproved of the amount of gold he had
bought for his new wife. "Her mother just buys and buys, and you pay."
The least he could do, she argued, was to buy his senior wife a little ring
or something. "Shame on you," she said.
         "Gold isn't everything" was Hamid's mumbled response.
         She warned him, "A holyman said the man with many wives will
go to hell if he doesn't treat them exactly alike, if he brings something to
one and not the other, even if he looks at one and not the other. It's a sin,
sin, sin."
         Her son rejected this view. He joked, "No, it's the man with only
one wife who will go to hell."
         Migdim returned to the problem of children. Who is going to feed
them? Where will they all live?
         Hamid came back with the standard line. "He who created them
will provide for them. Every being on this earth is born with his God-
given livelihood. God will provide for them."
         She grumbled, but he just smiled.


                             PITY THE WOMEN

        If the conflict was over loyalty to kin versus generosity to
longtime friends, over new wives against old, and exacerbated by the
jealousy of an aging and grumpy matriarch, it also had to do with land
itself. Land was becoming scarcer and more valuable now that the
Egyptian government had begun to reclaim the desert through irrigation
projects. What had once been good only for growing barley or grazing
sheep could now be planted with other crops, especially fruit orchards.
These brought in money. The government had therefore decreed that
anyone who wanted title to land they had held traditionally had to
purchase it formally. Disputes over land and goats eating fig saplings had
thus become common.
        These changes in the area had affected women's lives, and
Migdim bemoaned their loss of freedom. She reminisced about the
conditions that prevailed for most of her life. The whole area, she said,
was sown with barley and wheat. In the spring, if there was rain, it
turned so green there was no place to set up the tents, so they left with
                                     63

the herds to find pastures. Out west they would milk the sheep and store
up butter to last the year. It was a good life. "The old ones," she
commented, speaking of the last generation, "were blessed, really
fortunate. They were happy. They had camels and sheep. They lacked
nothing. ... My sons, though, they say the old ones did the wrong thing
by sticking with herding. But all that we have now is due to them. Then
the government came and took their land, and so these young men had to
buy it back from the government. This business of agriculture they're
now in, may God release them from its troubles."
         They had planted their land slowly. Migdim had brought a few
cuttings from her father's olive trees. He'd been one of the first to follow
the advice of the local British administrator they called "Brumly," who
recommended planting. With watering, the cuttings grew. Yet the olive
orchards that now take up much of the land were planted only in 1960.
That year, an Egyptian man who worked for the government came and
told them he wanted their acreage: it was a good site for a house. They
did not want to give up their land, of course; moreover, they had heard
that if the land were planted, no one could seize it. Day and night they
worked, digging holes in the daytime and planting trees from Migdim's
father's olive grove by night. In fifteen days they had planted the whole
orchard, with the help of many neighbors, relatives, and friends, and had
surrounded it with high posts strung with barbed wire. When the
government people came to inspect the land they found it all planted, and
so said the man could not have it. Migdim remembers that day well. The
man left in his car, followed all the way back to town by Migdim's sons
on horseback, firing their guns into the air in celebration. It was the first
time a Bedouin had won a land claim against the Egyptian government.
         Like most of the rest of the camp, Migdim's one-room house sits
on a ridge that affords a wide view of these olive groves, their new fig
and guava orchards, and the scattered clumps of houses that extend to the
horizon. There are many people and houses now, but she remembers
when the land was empty: nothing between hers and her relatives'
houses.
         This crowding means that the girls no longer go off to gather
firewood because there isn't any; and their trips to get water are short
because their kinsmen worry about them passing by the houses of so
many nonrelatives.
         When she gets together with other women, Migdim rails against
the younger men of the community for being so strict about the
                                      64

movements of their young sisters, cousins, and wives. "The boys are
terrible now," she said once.
        Her daughter Ngawa agreed. "The boys are terrible. I swear by
my father we have one son who's black in word and deed. And he's so
young. You know the shiny material the girls like for dresses? Once my
daughter's maternal uncle bought her a dress. I swear by Saint 'Abd ar-
Rahman, her brother spilled kerosene on it and tried to set it on fire. He
said, 'What's this? She wants to wear a dress that sparkles? And she's
wearing bobby pins and gold fringe? She's got complete freedom!' "
        "Hey Migdim, I heard that your other grandson yells at the girls
and won't let them go to get water," interjected a visitor.
        "The boys are terrible."
        A neighbor added, "Why, when we were young, remember, we
used to go off to herd the goats on our own. Not anymore!"
        Migdim's daughter continued: "Yes, that's how things were, may
God have mercy on past generations. They weren't like this new
generation. ... The men now are awful."
        Migdim talked about a young man who was working for them.
"He's a good boy who took care of the herds and never argued with the
women or bothered them. My youngest son came and found him sitting
in the tent with my two daughters-in-law. He was keeping them
company, he and my grandsons. ... My son came in and said, 'What are
you sitting here for? Why are you sitting here?' "
        "I tell you, girls, we were just sitting there, that night, and the boy
had just finished eating supper," confirmed Migdim's daughter-in-law.
        Migdim continued: "My son came in and slapped him [the
herdsman], shouting, 'God damn your father! Get out! Why are you
sitting with the women?' I started yelling from my room, and he came
over here. I said to him, 'My son, why were you hitting the man? You
fool! When we were young, when we were young women, we always
had three or four young men working with us, living with us. The old
ones never said anything."
        "Dark disgrace! Damn him." Her daughter-in-law was indignant.
        Migdim produced a fragment of an old song:

        "You who guards the female, you're fatigued
        You who guards the female, you're fatigued
        One time she'll go to milk the herd and rendezvous
        One time she'll get up at night to tie up the goats."
                                    65



        The women explained to me, since I had not understood the
words: "A woman can't be governed – anyone who tries to guard her will
just get tired." "Whatever a woman wants to she can do. She's smart and
she can think."
        As if to show, however, that women are capable and eager to
protect their virtue, Migdim launched into an anecdote. To much
laughter, she recounted a trip she had taken to accompany a daughter-in-
law on a visit home. As they sat in a crowded taxi, a man leaned against
her legs. She warned, "Don't ride on my legs! Pull yourself over." She
gave him a good pinch in the ass, as she said, and he flew forward. " 'Get
back to your place,' I said to him. And I pinched him right on his ass,"
she repeated.
        I'm confused by Migdim. She defends her granddaughters and
grandnieces and even her daughters-in-law when the young men, and
sometimes the older ones, criticize them or accuse them of talking to
men or going places. But then she complains that the young women of
today have no modesty. When she was young, she claims, they used to
veil with heavy black shawls, not today's flimsy pieces of cloth that don't
even hide women's faces. When a great-granddaughter of hers came in
crying because she had lost her hairclip, Migdim scolded her. "It's
shameful for girls to wear hairclips. Why do you want a hairclip? Are
you looking for a husband?" Yet the world she remembers is one in
which certain things that would today be considered scandalous were
perfectly acceptable.
        Wedding celebrations, she complains, have lost their appeal. She
tells Fayga, her newest daughter-in-law, that they celebrated her sons'
circumcision with twenty nights of singing and dancing. At weddings in
the past, young women, including her husband's sisters and nieces, had
danced, veiled, in front of semicircles of young men who serenaded
them. It was all "stuff that couldn't happen now!" they agreed, thinking
of the sex-segregated affairs that weddings have become since the
group's settlement into houses.
        Young men and women at weddings used to exchange love
songs, songs that Migdim often recites. Even more intriguing are the
songs she remembers now with wonderment at how things have
changed: the young men's shearing songs. In the days when they lived
mostly by herding, groups of young men would travel from camp to
camp shearing the patriarchs' herds. Shearings were like weddings,
                                    66

everyone was fond of explaining. People enjoyed themselves and had
complete license to sing what they wanted.
        Migdim found it comical to remember who had sung particular
songs because these men had grown old and were now either
distinguished or dead. The words of a shearing song are about sheep, but
their meaning is about love. Young men sang as young women listened,
occasionally coming out among the exhausted young men to bring them
meals. The butt of many of these crude songs was the old herd owner,
the "ram" who took offense only on pain of losing the services of these
shearers.
        The songs were so explicit and immodest that I had a hard task
finding anyone willing to explain them to me. The women simply
giggled when I looked at them questioningly. Even when the bemused
Haj Sagr agreed to explain a few to me, his eyes twinkling as I wrote in
embarrassment, he fell silent if anyone approached.
        Some songs were transparent twists on ordinary love songs.
Words like "the beloved" were replaced with ones like "goats" that
rhymed with them. So a song like the following, which depends on
knowing that sheep and goats must be herded together because sheep
frighten easily and won't move at night without goats, is suggestive:

       Praise be to He who made you
       without goats patient, O sheep ...

        Other songs were more outrageous and testify to a time when, at
least on these restricted occasions, talking about sexual relations under
the patriarchs' very noses was possible. A song addressed to the head of
the family warns him that his daughter has already had a rendezvous
with her lover:

       He's lifted the back of your tent
       the wolf has already come, O shepherd ...

       Another song addresses an old man who has married a young
woman against her will, making fun of him for losing his young wife to a
young lover with whom she has eloped:

       The sheep drank at the well and took off
       and the ram he's the one who died of thirst ...
                                    67



       Since young men were usually responsible for the herding, the
singers usually identified themselves as shepherds. A young man who
knows of a rendezvous his friend has had with a sweetheart might sing:

       In a late night sheep-milking
       the shepherd drank her milk ...

        Not all the songs Migdim remembered were so scandalous. Some
might be sung by, or on behalf of, a young man who had either lost or
gained a loved one. A young man angry that the family he worked for
had given their daughter away in marriage to someone else might play
with the fact that a shepherd is given, as his right, five sheep in the herd
to use for milking for his own needs:

       He struck his tent in anger
       They'd taken away from the shepherd
       what they owed him ...

         Migdim was one of the few who remembered these poems. She
also chanted long lullabies that none of the young mothers knew.
Whenever her great-grandson wandered into her room she would greet
him as she did all her little grandchildren and great grandchildren, with a
warm "Welcome, welcome, welcome!" A chubby blond boy, he had
become steady on his feet and would wander around her room getting
into things.
         To distract him she would sing to him, holding his little hands in
her own wrinkled and tattooed ones to teach him to clap. She sang about
little boys who will grow up to ride horses, carry guns, and become tribal
leaders. Sometimes she bounced him up and down and sang the kinds of
songs sung at circumcisions. He was happy to hear his name.

       Little Kafy, after the circumcision
       he'll ride on a horse with a gold saddle ...

        She teased the little boy too, in ways that suggest either the
license of old age or, judging by her granddaughters' reactions, a
different standard of prudishness in the past. Her favorite game was to
call out to him, "Come here, my little Kafy. Come gimme some snuff. I
                                    68

want to sniff some snuff. Where's the wild parsnip?" He would toddle
over to her, lifting up his robe, whereupon she would pretend to sniff and
then sneeze, the way she and the other old women do when they have
taken snuff.
        When I asked what a wild parsnip was, some girls ran up the hill
to dig one up for me. But when a granddaughter of Migdim's came by to
visit, she was horrified. "What a black scandal!" she exclaimed. She
scolded the boy, "Go put on your underpants!" Migdim just smiled and
did it again.


                           HYENAS AND SONS

         Migdim is getting old. She is diabetic but does not know what to
do about it except to avoid rice and fried foods. When she has a fever,
cries because her head hurts or her eyes burn, loses her appetite, or can't
sit up, everyone rushes to visit.
         Sometimes her nearby daughter moves in with her to bathe and
feed her and to wash her clothes for her. As she begins to feel better, the
mood lightens. All day her room will be packed with women and
children, who, however, disappear or grow quiet when one of her sons
comes in. Otherwise, even if her grandsons or great-nephews stop by,
things are lively.
         The women may entertain Migdim and one another with old
folktales about the sexual desires of old women. They laugh at the
shamelessness of such women, and perhaps at themselves, these women,
some widowed, some divorced, with grown sons. On one occasion
Migdim's daughter-in-law told a disturbing tale whose beginning I
missed. "A man asked his elderly mother, 'Mom, do you want me to get
you a husband?' She said, 'No, no, my son. That would be shameful. No,
that's shameful.' But he said, 'No it's not. He'll keep you company.' So
she said, 'May God grant you success if you do. If you do it, may God
bless you.' " The storyteller found this funny and went on. "He went off
and killed a hyena. He killed the poor thing and wrapped it in a white
shroud. And he brought the hyena to her she was blind and he put it
down next to her saying, 'Mother, be careful. His name is Hassan. He's
sleeping now, don't waken him. He was up late last night. Let him wake
up on his own first. And don't move him. Let him sleep until he's slept
enough.' And he put the bundle down next to her and left.
                                    69

         "She started shaking him, trying to wake him up – her son was
nearby, even though it was evening and she assumed he had gone she
tried to wake him up. She said to him, 'Hey handsome! Hey handsome!
Sit up handsome. Look, here's a jar and here's another jar. There are
some more as well that are hidden.' She was talking about jars she had
filled with gold and buried. She had buried them all over, and she was
showing him, the hyena, as her son watched!''
         This reminded Migdim of another story; she called up a few lines
from it, and her daughter-in-law picked up the tale.
         "She would always say, 'May God grant you success, if only.'
Any time her son talked to her she said, 'May God grant you success, if
only.' The young man went and asked someone, 'Why does my mother
only say, "May God grant you success, if only." What is this "if only"?'
He was told she wanted a man. 'If only' just means if only you'd bring me
a man.
         "So he went to her and said, 'Mother, I've gotten you a man and
he wants you to come to him. I'll take you to his house.' 'His house?' she
says, 'May God grant you success my son. Let's go.' So he brings her to a
hyena's lair and leaves her there. It was rainy and cold and when she
heard the wind in the night whistling and going 'OOOH!' and 'RRRRR!'
she thought this was the noise of the celebration of her wedding night.
She thought she was going to get married and that soon her groom would
come to her.
         "Well," the storyteller continued, "he came to her. The hyena
came and wanted to eat her."
         Migdim interrupted, "Yes, he started eating her."
         Imitating the old woman's high voice, but laughing as she tried to
finish, the storyteller trilled," 'Ooh! Ooh! O God, O God, the groom is
licking and stroking, licking and caressing me.' "
         A younger woman burst out, "Damn these Bedouin stories!"
         Migdim repeated, again imitating the old woman, " 'The groom,
he's licking and caressing!' He gnawed on her until he ate her up! (May it
be far from you!) She assumed he was really her bridegroom, curse her!
He came in the morning, her son, and found her dead."
         "Shame on him," commented a visitor.
         Migdim chuckled as she gave the basic plot: "Her son had gone
everywhere with her and done everything for her but still she would
never say to him, 'May God grant you success.' All she'd say was 'If
only.' So he put her in with the hyena. 'I'll get you an old man,' her son
                                   70

said. 'And here's his house.' 'His house?' the old woman said. 'God grant
you success my son.' "
        She saw my tape recorder, resting discreetly near her. "Lila's
machine is working now," she announced, "taping our words." She
chanted a rhyme to it:

       "A pity, you who this cap belongs to
       A pity, you who this cap belongs to
       A pity, you who this cap belongs to
       They said you were a man among men
       He died without me laying eyes on him
       A pity, you who this cap belongs to."

         From the commotion I gathered that the other women had never
heard this rhyme before. Migdim told us the story:
         "The old woman is lamenting the old man. Her son is a joker! He
was teasing her. He said to his mother, 'I found' what he found was a cap,
a cap in a room on the floor, and he brought it to her and said 'I found
you a husband, but as we were leaving the market he dropped dead.
Here's his cap!' "
         "What a bastard!"
         "What a joker!" The women laughed.
         Migdim laughed too. "So she started lamenting: 'Woe is me, such
a pity ...' "
         My tape went on recording the laughter and repetitions of the
rhyme, the comments on the son, and one woman's comment, "Hey, if
he'd said the old man was alive she would have gone off to look for
him!"
         One by one, the women sighed, chuckled, and got up to leave.
They had things to do cooking, baking, weaving, washing, children
needing care.
         Like the women in the stories, Migdim is almost blind now. She
has to ask whether it is time for prayers. When I am there I tell her by
looking at my watch. "Yes, it's after three o'clock, time for afternoon
prayers," I say now. She positions herself to face southeast, unrolls her
prayer rug in front of her, and, without standing, because she can't, she
begins her prayers. When she finishes she feels around under her blanket
until she finds her prayer beads. She starts counting off on them the
names of God. As she folds up her prayer mat she ends, as she often
                                    71

does, with "Praise be to God. Praise be to God. May God keep evil away
from us. May God keep weddings going forever among Muslims. May
God always bless Muslims with celebrations."
        She is happiest at the weddings of her many grandsons. Whatever
disappointment or anger she may sometimes feel toward her sons, it
seems to disappear as she sings songs praising them as fathers of these
boys. At the last wedding I attended in the community she sang a song
that placed her where she wanted to be: at the center of her family.

       May they always be blessed with happiness
       the sons of my sons with me in their midst ...
                                         73

CHAPTER 2: POLYGYNY



       If you fear that you shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans,
       marry women of your choice, two or three or four; but if you fear that
       you shall not be able to deal justly (with them), then only one ...

                - Qur'an 4:3


                                     CO-WIVES

        Migdim's son Sagr sat with two of his best friends in an office in
Alexandria. They were waiting for a phone call about some business
venture, and I was waiting to be driven to Cairo. I would leave for the
United States the next day, after a stay of four months with Haj Sagr's
family.
        Sagr's two friends, one dressed in "Western" or city clothes –
trousers and a shirt – the other, like Sagr, in the long white robes
distinctive of the Awlad 'Ali, began teasing him, perhaps for my benefit.
They criticized him for having more than one wife. He wanted to know
what was wrong with that. One said, "How would you feel if it were
reversed and your wife had another husband?" The other pulled from his
wallet a photograph of his wife to show me, proudly saying they had
been together for forty years. Sagr laughed when he saw the photo. "But
she's old!" The man replied, "So am I." Back and forth they went, the old
man saying he wouldn't be able to face his wife if he married again. He
wouldn't even be able to face his young bride. Finally Sagr said
conspiratorially to me, "They're not Muslims. This is Christian stuff, to
stay with just one woman." Expecting me to back him he charged, "Lila,
you've seen my wives. Are there any problems?"
        I had just left his co-wives Gateefa and Azza sitting together in a
room at the back of the house where Gateefa had given birth. Azza had
washed her co-wife's bloody clothes for her and hung them on the line to
dry. She had helped her get dressed, brought her food and the things she
needed for her new baby. When she was done, she had come to sit with
her and the women who had come to visit. She had teased Gateefa about
her reaction to the labor pains, imitating her moans and prayers. The
visitors, who included their third co-wife, Safiyya, a woman who lived in
a separate household with her grown son, swore they would not want
                                     74

Azza to help when they delivered she always mimicked the poor mother.
        I had been glad Azza was there because she knew what to do.
The other time I had been with Gateefa when she gave birth I was
frightened. There had been no other women in the household at the time,
Azza being away at her brothers' house. Gateefa had begged for some
sand from the nearby saint's tomb. I had run with her ten-year-old
daughter to get it and had cried, as the girl did, when she kissed the tomb
and implored the saint to keep her mother safe. When Sagr's brother
finally passed by the house I demanded he fetch the doctor from town. It
had seemed to take forever.
        This time, I had not felt so responsible. Just as the sun was setting
and we sat in the courtyard having tea we had wondered where Gateefa
had gone. She had been uncomfortable that day, even though she had
managed to make it to a neighbor's wedding. In fact, I had joked with her
for days that she'd better hurry: I wanted to see the new baby before I
left. She just kept asking God to relieve her of this burden. It was her
eleventh pregnancy, and for months she had worried about the swelling
in her legs and the ache in her back. Whenever she sighed, her husband
would comment, "This will be the last."
        I now waited with Azza, her sister-in-law Fayga, and Gateefa's
older daughters as the younger girls went into the house to look for their
mother. When she did not come, Azza, without a word, followed them.
Gateefa was wandering from room to room, distracted, her waters broken
and her green silk dress stained. She put her arm in Azza's and walked
slowly back to the west room; this was where she liked to give birth
because it was away from the men and their guests. It was also sheltered
from the wind. Azza had been comforting. "Just walk slowly. Hold on to
me."
        By then the sun had gone down. We ran around in the dark
looking for pillows, old blankets, and burlap sacks to place under her.
Where is the kerosene lantern? Where are the matches? The boys were
instructed to go into the house and keep the little ones with them.
Gateefa's three teenage daughters and I set off into the night to bring a
neighbor who was a healer and midwife. There was no moon and I
stumbled on the rocks in our path, but we were guided by electric lights
and jumping television shadows in a few of the still-unfinished houses
that had been built nearby in the last couple of years. The girls picked up
some rocks, as did I, in case we encountered dogs.
        We arrived home to find the baby born. I caught a glimpse of it
                                    75

by the kerosene lantern, lying quiet on the ground waiting for its
umbilical cord to be cut. Gateefa was leaning back against the wall
thanking God. The midwife entered the room whispering, "In the Name
of God the Merciful, the Compassionate." There was incense burning.
        Meanwhile the men had come home, and Gateefa's brother-in-
law shouted for a bowl of buttermilk. His wife went to get it from the
goatskin bag and I, annoyed, told him the women were busy right now.
He asked what was going on. I wouldn't say because I presumed he
knew. Then I was called to the men's guest room, where I found seated
on cushions around the edge of the room a big group of visitors. The
men's voices were loud, the smoke from their cigarettes filled the air.
Sagr introduced me to the men, one of whom was a well-known poet
whose poetry he wanted to tape-record with my machine. Gateefa's
husband could not let his guests know that anything was going on, so all
he did was ask me, in a low voice and with a knowing smile, "What's
their news? Is the business finished?"
        It was not until the next morning that anyone was willing to
announce that the baby was a girl, Gateefa's ninth. She had told our
neighbor, the first woman in her network to visit her, that her eight-year-
old son had come in to see her and said, "Why didn't you give us a
brother? There are only two of us and we wanted a boy." The neighbor
had responded, "God keep her relatives and her brothers safe." Gateefa's
husband, too, had stopped by to greet her in the morning, saying, as one
of his daughters reported, "Thank God you're safe."
        For the other women who came to visit, including the third co-
wife, Safiyya, Azza answered questions about what had happened. I
wanted to know exactly what she had done for Gateefa. She
demonstrated the squatting position a mother should take while giving
birth and told how she had held Gateefa from behind while her sister-in-
law had held her from the front. Suddenly wiping away some tears, she
described to us how Gateefa had cried and prayed to God to protect her
daughters, sure that she was dying. The two co-wives, sitting cross-
legged on the freshly laid bedding, their knees almost touching, and the
tiny swaddled infant lying between them, looked long at each other. In
that moment I saw something about these two women that I had not
grasped before, although I had known them for many years. Despite their
difficulties with each other – and they had many – there was between
them a closeness and dependency, perhaps as women who give birth
(indeed, other women remarked that day, "Men experience nothing
                                    76

compared to women – do they think giving birth is easy? It is as hard as
war"), perhaps as women bound together by sharing a household, daily
life, and a history. Fourteen years of shared history made for a bond,
even if life together was often tense.


                                 COUSINS

        Their most recent argument had been bad. It had begun during
Ramadan, the month of fasting, just before I had arrived more than four
months earlier. I had heard occasional references to it, in passing and
always in humor, but did not ask Gateefa about it until her husband
mentioned the argument at the end of a long conversation about the early
days of their marriage.
        We had been sitting in Gateefa's room on a quiet afternoon. I was
trying to sound disinterested as I asked Sagr about his plans for the
marriages of his daughters. This started him talking about a favorite
subject: the benefits of marrying relatives. Gateefa had come in and sat
down, with a groan about her aching shoulders. He had imitated her, "Oh
my shoulders, Oh my knees, Oh my ... ," rhyming this with a line of
poetry. But then he said, "That's the reason you should marry relatives,
Lila."
        "What is?" asked Gateefa.
        Looking at her, this beautiful plump woman with smooth olive
skin, refined tattoos on her forehead and chin, and dark smiling eyes, he
explained: "This one, of course, she was young when I married her. She
has spent all her adult years, ever since she began fasting, with me. I was
already fifteen when she was born; there are fifteen years between us.
She was born the first year I fasted Ramadan. I never gave her a thought,
though. Not at all. Even though her father – he was my father's brother –
the day she was born we had planned to go with him to spend the
evening in town. It was Ramadan and we used to go spend the evenings
in the market because at the time we were camped in Alamein. Her
father said, 'Come on, let's go.' They were waiting for me to come with
them, but her mother was giving birth to this one. And when I came from
the tent they asked, 'What kept you?' I came and told them, 'She has
given birth.'
        "My uncle, he was young then he still used to sing with us young
guys at weddings. They asked, 'What did she have?' There was a group
                                    77

of men there, and it wasn't him who asked me but the others. 'She had a
girl,' I said. Then he said to me, 'She's your chance. This one I'll give to
you. That's done.' The others said to him, 'Tomorrow she'll grow up and
they'll come to you offering who knows how many she-camels and you'll
give her away. You won't even give your nephew the time of day.' He
said, 'No, I swear to God, I won't ask for any brideprice from him.'
          "Five years later, when she was only five years old, he died when
that mine exploded. You know that story about rubbishing. She was too
young to remember. And she left. Her mother didn't have any other
children. She had given birth to two other kids, boys, but they didn't live.
In that period – he died in 1950, in the eleventh month of 1950, and my
grandfather died in the sixth month of 1951, and then my father died in
the eleventh month of 1951 – within a year I had to take over the family.
A year after Gateefa's father's death, exactly a year, her mother left to go
back to her relatives."
          "And she took Gateefa with her," I added, knowing this part of
the story well.
          "Yes, she took Gateefa with her. We took them and all her stuff
there, but I would go to visit every two or three months. I'd give them
money, for her and her mother." Sagr smiled as he remembered. "At the
time she was young. I was the only one who would come to visit. She
was so young that when I arrived she'd come running up to me and I'd
pick her up and hug her. I'd bring her gifts. When she got a bit older I'd
take her back with me to stay with her grandmother. But her maternal
grandmother really loved Gateefa, so when she'd come to stay with us
here only a week would go by before one of her maternal aunts would
come to take her back."
          I wondered aloud how old she was then. He thought twelve. It
was about then that Sagr began trying to make arrangements to marry.
Three of the arrangements fell through because the girls' male cousins
claimed the would-be brides away from him. The fourth arrangement
was for Safiyya, the woman he eventually married as his second wife.
          But initially, after he had asked for her hand and paid the
brideprice to her father, once again a cousin had asserted his prior claim
and Sagr had been forced to look elsewhere.
          Haj Sagr complained, ''Really! I swear to God, I tried to marry
more than seven women. But no matter what, it didn't work out. So then
one day my father's cousin came to me – at the time I used to make
money by going back and forth to Benghazi to buy goods and to sell
                                     78

camels and sheep and cows; all my brothers except the youngest had
married – he came to see us at the household I shared with my older
brother.
        "He said, 'You don't see or understand anything.' He started
scolding us loudly, 'Look, you've asked for five or six women now, and
then people have withheld them from you. Don't you see the tribes won't
give you their girls? But you've got a cousin who's not so little anymore.
Are you going to leave her to others?' He swore, 'May I be forced to
divorce my wife if I don't bring some sheep to offer them. I'm going right
now to take them the brideprice. She's our girl and no one can take her.'
He was a tough man; he had his gun. And he swore, 'May I be divorced
if I don't go there today.'
        "We protested that she was too young. He threatened, 'Oh really!
Well, if that's what you think, then here, here's some money for the
brideprice. You go look for a woman!'
        "So they went, taking some sheep. And they agreed on the
marriage and paid the brideprice. He paid them. And we also arranged to
marry my sister Lawz to my cousin on the same day. On the wedding
day, though, the men from the other tribe came – Safiyya's brothers.
They didn't know any of this and came and found the wedding in
progress. 'What do you want?' we asked. 'Well,' they answered, 'we had
agreed to give our sister to our kinsmen but now they've released her.' So
I said to them, 'Okay, I'll come for her in a few weeks.' I'd already paid
the brideprice for Safiyya and everything. A bit later, I told the family
what had happened. To celebrate we brought candy and cookies for the
children. Gateefa at the time used to like cookies."
        At this Gateefa laughed.
        "It's true," he went on, laughing, "she'd stand there with the little
kids and I'd bring them all cookies. We didn't sleep together. We had
held the wedding, but she just ran around the camp as she wished. At
least no one else could marry her. She was young, not really a woman,
and for two years she lived in the camp not knowing a thing. She'd just
play and hang about. I had brought the other woman about three months
after the first wedding. After two years or so, Gateefa started thinking
about things. She saw what the other woman did and started dressing
nicely, pulling herself together. Bit by bit."
        He looked at Gateefa, and she laughed with him, mumbling
something I couldn't understand. Then he teased, "And then she agreed
to me. And the older she got the more beautiful she got."
                                     79

         "Oh, and wasn't she beautiful when she was young?" I asked.
         "No," she laughed, "I was ugly."
         Sagr began to tease. "She got better and better the more I hugged
her. I wouldn't ever scold her. She was important to me. Until then there
had been nothing sexual between us. Then she began to know a little bit.
And then she had the girls. Finally I said I'll bring another wife. So I
brought the other [third] one."
         Gateefa pitched in, "He wanted to get a woman who would have
sons."
         He defended himself. "I wanted sons, do you hear me? No, that's
not exactly it."
         His senior wife repeated to him what I had once said: that even
his third wife, Azza, had not just produced sons. She, too, gave him
daughters.
         He was impatient. "But I'm telling you the truth, Lila. Everything
is hers [Gateefa's]. To this day she's the mistress of my house, she's the
one with the last word, her requests are the ones honored. And it will be
this way until she dies, until she dies."
         Gateefa looked embarrassed.
         "No one dares upset her," he added.
         I protested. In her defense, I argued that it was just that she bore
patiently what came her way.
         "I don't mean the kids making her angry. What can I do about
that? I mean something else," he said. "Why, just a little while ago Azza
came to me, complaining about her. And what did I say? I said, 'You go
ask her forgiveness. You must go kiss the top of her head.' She went and
kissed her on her head. Isn't that true? See? Gateefa had hit her."
         Gateefa smiled defiantly. "I hit her with a wooden spoon."
         When I asked why, she said, "Because she insulted me."
         "Listen, Lila," Sagr said, "when Azza came to complain about her
I said, 'You go to her room and make up and kiss her on her head.' I said,
'Either you go or I'll divorce you. I'll write your divorce papers and take
you home to your relatives.' She went, then and there, although she
dragged her heels. Azza went to her and kissed her on her head. What
more does she want from me?"
         Again Gateefa said something to him that I didn't catch. Then she
accused, "But aren't you the one that brought her here?"
         "So what? She can't do anything to you, can she?"
         But Gateefa wouldn't let him off.
                                   80

       "All of my brothers are married," he protested. "What am I
supposed to do? It's not just me – everyone has two or three wives."
       Gateefa snorted, "But they're not like this one." When I asked
how, she explained, "The other women are decent, they're respectful."
Sagr had to agree.


                       AREN'T WE ALL THE SAME?

        That evening, when we were alone, Gateefa reflected on her co-
wife Azza. When the Haj had first married Azza, she said, his mother
had criticized him for spending so much time with her and putting her in
such luxury, setting her up in a separate apartment in Alexandria. He had
quipped back that his two other wives were just old donkeys – they'd eat
anything, and their clothing was full of fleas. Why worry about them?
        Upon hearing about his plan to marry again, Migdim had
admonished her son not to. But he had already made the arrangements
and paid the brideprice without telling anyone. He reassured his mother,
"She's sweet and pious." I had heard from one of Gateefa's daughters that
Migdim had also gone to Azza to warn her against marrying Haj Sagr.
"Grandma told her the man was tough, his wives were difficult, and he
had lots of children. But my father's wife assured her she'd cherish his
children."
        But as Gateefa commented, "She was as you see her now."
        I knew what she meant. Azza was loud, often swore, and never
prayed. She was not unkind, but she was also not always easy to get
along with. Stubborn and overworked, she sometimes lost her temper
and sometimes withdrew to her room, forcing her children to come with
her.
        "From the moment she arrived," explained Gateefa, "she couldn't
stand it. The first time she came here she only stayed four days. This was
twenty days after she married him. Even when she was a bride she had
no modesty. She'd wander around the camp talking to people. When she
saw him coming home she'd run back excited, 'Sagr has come! Sagr has
come!' Why, in those days we women in the camp were so respectful of
him that we couldn't even say his name."
        That Azza had been treated differently from Gateefa and Safiyya,
the other wives, was a strong theme in descriptions of the tensions
among them. On my first day in Sagr's household, in October 1978, I'd
                                     81

been told that Azza was different. She was estranged from her husband
at the time and living with her brothers, but her co-wives spoke about
her. They said she was from Tunisia meaning, it turned out, that her
ancestors came from there. Unlike them, they each told me, she did not
veil or wear a red belt, something every married woman in the camp did.
Over the years I would hear Gateefa complain that town women (which
Azza was) were not like Bedouin women.
        Telling a story, in 1980, about the early days of her husband's
marriage to Azza, Gateefa commented that he had mellowed after
marrying Azza. "She did things," Gateefa explained, "that were unheard
of. After that he left us alone. When he first married, he was away a lot,
spending time in Alexandria. Every day or two he'd come home and take
one or two hundred pounds to spend on her. There she was, just one
woman alone in a house, and yet he would bring three kilos of meat
every time he went. Your grandmother Migdim went crazy. She was
furious. She yelled that it was not fair, that his children didn't get to see
him. 'You spend lots of money on her and your children don't get to taste
a thing.'
        "She scolded and scolded until he finally brought Azza to the
camp. Azza stayed with us for thirteen months, and then he said he was
taking her home to her family to have her baby. But instead he went and
put her in a new house he bought in town. We didn't know about it.
When we found out we were angry. All those sheep people bring as gifts
for slaughter, and all that money, and your children don't get any?
        "Well, Azza had her baby about a week later, and Migdim and I
agreed that we had to go pay a visit. We took the children and went in
the car. We found Aunt Fatma there. She had heard the news of the baby
and figured we would be there, but all she found were Azza's relatives. A
house full of them! Her sister, that gypsy, 'giggle giggle,' flirting and
laughing all night, playing cards with him [Sagr] in the men's guest
room, just the two of them. She'd sit right next to him and 'giggle giggle.'
This was something we'd never seen. Even Azza used to talk with him all
the time and laugh with him. All that stuff, nightgowns and slips we
didn't know any of it.
        "Migdim spent one night there. It was clear that Azza didn't want
us there. She insulted us. I had always treated her well, like a person. I
had cooked rabbits for her and everything. She treated us badly, and I
was furious. The Haj had asked me for my rugs to put in the guest room.
When I got there and saw the guest room, I couldn't believe it: pillows
                                      82

and cushions and pads, two couches. Stuff worth six hundred Egyptian
pounds. He hadn't told us about any of this. At that time we didn't even
own pillows: we used to stuff straw into old burlap sacks those were our
pillows! We had nothing. And the number of sheep they had cooked! We
went into the kitchen and found cartons and cartons of dried fat and the
sheepskins piled high. A woman alone and all that stuff?
        "The next morning when Aunt Fatma and Migdim were leaving,
we snuck into the kitchen and gave Fatma a bag full of dried fat to take
home with her. Migdim too, she wanted some skins. Later when Azza
came in she screamed at me, 'This is mine, he brought it for me!' I yelled
back, 'If it wasn't for her you wouldn't have him. You want to deny his
mother a few sheepskins?' Even her sister came in and told her to be
ashamed of herself, to be quiet. Other things happened, worse and worse
things. She was nasty, and my blood was boiling. I felt I was going to
explode. My heart got this big!"
        As she made a gesture to suggest something enormous, I asked an
obvious question. "Were you jealous?"
        "No, I wasn't jealous," she insisted. "I was angry that we were
being treated unfairly. Aren't we all the same? She had all of this. And
food – halva and cheese and bread from the market, when we had hardly
ever seen a tin of halva and had to go out and collect every stick of wood
for the oven so we could bake a loaf of bread! And she was terrible,
insulting. 'This is mine, this is mine,' she'd say.
        "In the end I fought with her about the rugs. I had lent him my
woven rugs to put down for the guests, but I was angry that they hadn't
put ashtrays down. The men had spilled things all over them and the rugs
were filthy. Azza fought with me then: 'Take your rugs back. Who needs
them? I don't want them in my guest room!' The lady with her bed and
her nightgowns and her nice soft blankets.
        "I was so furious I wanted to leave that night. If I'd had anywhere
else to sleep I would have left that night. ... I didn't eat at all. First thing
in the morning, I demanded that the Haj take me home. He tried to get
out of it. He had important business in the market, he argued. 'No, I must
go right now. You can take me home first and then go to the market. And
I'm taking my rugs,' I said. He agreed to take me home but begged me to
leave the rugs for two weeks until the guests stopped coming.
        "In the car ride home I really let him have it: for the money spent
on her while the rest of his family didn't have anything, a woman who
isn't worth even a shoe, and on and on. 'I'm not a real woman if I don't
                                    83

get a house like that myself,' I swore. 'You will see,' I warned him."
        "What did he say?" I asked.
        "He didn't say a word all the way home. When we got back
everyone asked me what was the matter. 'You haven't eaten,' they said. It
was true, I had eaten neither dinner nor breakfast, and my face was pale.
But I didn't tell them what had happened."


                                   RIVALS

         This was only the beginning of Gateefa's troubles with her co-
wife. Even Sagr found it difficult to live peacefully with his third wife.
Of the fourteen years of their marriage, Azza has spent at least four
living back with her own relatives. Three of her children were born
during these times away, yet the children were also the reason Sagr
always decided to take her back.
         Gateefa once mused about why Sagr had married Azza: "He saw
that she was fat and strong, and that's all. He didn't know what kind of
person she was." The problem was her behavior. She did things everyone
associated with peasants or townspeople. Once, for instance, some
neighbors had scolded her son for something, and Azza set off with
barely her hair covered to swear at them. When she got back to the house
Sagr came out after her, furious that she had disgraced him by showing
herself in such an unseemly way in public and by using such foul
language. As she escaped into her room he called out after her, "Shame
on you," and spat in her trail.
         Azza admits she is stubborn. When she tells the stories of the last
two times she fought with Sagr and almost divorced, it is clear how
impossible both of them are. It is also clear how far she has fallen from
the grace of those first years of special treatment, extra food,
nightgowns, and a separate house. Of the second-to-last time she stayed
away she says: "I went home the second day of the religious feast. I
didn't find my mother at home because she was in Matruh: my sister had
just given birth there. The Haj came to pick me up the next day. He said,
'Come home.' I said, 'I won't go.' He said, 'Come.' I said, 'I won't go.' He
yelled at my son to get into the car, and I yelled back. Then he said,
'You'll find yourself divorced.' He gave me a slap, but I didn't budge.
And he left. He went to find my brother and talked to him about what
had happened. My brother came home but didn't say anything. He came
                                    84

bringing chickens. We slaughtered them and I made rice with tomato
sauce. My brother came in and asked, 'Are you going to have lunch with
us?' I said, 'I'll eat lunch.' He said, 'Don't be upset. Just forget him.' "
         Azza gave birth to a daughter at her brother's. After three months
her husband sent word that either she should return with the children or
he would divorce her and take the children. She agreed to go back, but
only for the sake of her children. Because she and Sagr were not sleeping
together, she says she was not obligated to cook for her husband or share
in any of the household work. Yet she pulled her weight anyway. This
changed when a religious authority told Sagr, who wanted to go on the
pilgrimage, that he was wrong to eat food cooked by a woman he was no
longer married to. His pilgrimage would not be accepted unless he took
her back as a wife. So he did, and she got pregnant again, although the
boy died.
         Another religious feast came around and Azza wanted to go
home to see her mother. Everyone in the camp tells a version of the
story. Her sister-in-law Fayga tells it this way: "Azza said to him, 'My
mother's sick and I want to go see her.' He said no. 'All the women want
to go home and see their mothers for the feast you can't all go at once.'
But then he changed his mind. He said, 'I'll take you. The three of you –
Gateefa, Azza, and Fayga.' I went and got my bag ready and got dressed,
and your Aunt Azza here went and got her bag ready and got dressed.
Gateefa said, 'I'll skip this trip.' She knew he was angry. Then he said to
Azza, 'If you go, you can consider yourself divorced. If you go now,
you'll just be hurting yourself.' But she said, 'I want to go to my mother.
I'll just go and come back tomorrow.' He grabbed her and hit her and
divorced her. Well, your Aunt Fayga here returned to her room. I didn't
go. And your Aunt Azza they took to her relatives, and she didn't come
back for nearly a year."
         Azza added, "I stayed with my mother for nine months."
         Her sister-in-law picked up her sadness. "But now the mother she
used to go to has passed away."
         Azza never tired of contrasting her husband's home with that of
her father. At her family's home they had fruit and meat every day. They
had a washing machine and refrigerator. Her brothers bought clothes and
nice things for the children. They took them to doctors when they were
sick. "Here," she once said, "they let the children run around in rags.
They don't pay any attention to them. If they live, they live; if not, so
what?"
                                    85

        Sagr's view of her family was quite different, and he was not shy
about insulting them, as I discovered one day while sitting with him.
        Azza's son came and stood bashfully in the doorway. His father
said, "Come sit down with Lila. What did I tell you the other night?"
Acting pleased with himself, he said to me, "It was great – you'd like to
hear this old poetry."
        Azza, it seems, had come to Sagr the other day and told him that
her brother had suggested she take her son out of school, since he wasn't
doing well. Her brother was willing to offer the boy a chance to work by
his side until he learned his uncle's trade; Azza's brother would teach his
nephew the skills of a butcher. Sagr had answered angrily: "That's not
the work of his father." Whereupon the boy had asked, "What is your
work, Dad?"
        In answer Sagr had told a long tale about the days when the
Awlad 'Ali tribes were at war with the tribes of Libya. The fighting was
serious at the time around 1929 or 1930, when Sagr was born. The
Sanussi family – good pious people and reciters of the Qur'an who were
never involved in fighting – had finally agreed to arrange a peace. The
tribes assembled, tribe by tribe, each with its "colonel" and twenty
horsemen, at a huge tent (actually four tents sewn together) pitched at the
border of their territories.
        The Libyan tribes wanted to start the proceedings, but the Awlad
'Ali tribesmen objected: Said Hafyaan had not yet arrived. Finally he
rode up. So far, as each of the other men had arrived, some had stood up
to greet them and some had remained seated. But when this man arrived,
even before he had dismounted, all had risen in respect. He left his horse,
came in, and shook hands with the men one by one. One man, however,
did not rise. This was 'Abd as-Salaam Bu-l-Kizza, a Libyan pasha
dressed in decorated robes of the highest-quality baize. Said went around
the circle greeting everyone in turn but passed by the seated one. When
he got all the way around they said to him, "You didn't greet 'Abd as-
Salaam."
        "I greeted those who troubled themselves to stand up. He's
comfortably seated, so I thought I'd greet him once I got comfortable
too." Once he had sat down, he shouted across the tent, "Hey, how are
you, 'Abd as-Salaam, you Tightwad" (mispronouncing and thus changing
the meaning of his surname). The man, who did not know him,
answered, "Hey you, what do you do where you come from?" Said
Hafyaan's answer surprised him:
                                    86



       "My work is a strong steed
       that rides alone at the head of an army.
       When he approaches the gathered tents
       he bursts apart his harness.
       The noble invite and are generous;
       they are accustomed to giving,
       while the lowly begin to fret
       even over the smallest biteful."

         Sagr eagerly explained. The Libyan had expected to hear what
kind of leader he was; instead, through poetry, Said Hafyaan showed
what the work of great men was: generosity and respect. He was
insulting the pasha. After this answer, 'Abd as-Salaam stood up and
walked all the way across the tent, just to shake his hand. He knew Said
Hafyaan to be a real man.
         ''So," Sagr finished with a smile, his green eyes flashing, "I said
to my son here, 'Your mother's relatives may do that kind of work, but
that's not the work of your father.' "
         Despite his feelings toward Azza and her family, Sagr kept
agreeing to take Azza back because he wanted all his children together
with him. Yet he found it hard to live with her, and he knew that Gateefa
did not sympathize. Once, after an argument with Azza, he sat fuming in
Gateefa's room. He turned to me and complained that Gateefa made his
life difficult for him. She was like a press, he said: she turned the screw
just when he had managed to forget how rotten his home life was. Yes,
he admitted, he knew well enough that he had two wives who hadn't
worked out. That was bad enough. But she never let him forget. "She's
angry," he went on, "because I married other wives after her."
         Although she said it with humor, her retort was quick. "No one
told you to do it. It's your own doing. You brought it on yourself."
         The Haj conceded this. He had been fortunate to get a wife who
was really special, he said. And he wasn't one of those ignorant men who
don't understand things. But he lamely offered as his final excuse the
religious saying "In the moment of God's power a man is blinded." He
added, "One must bear patiently one's fate."
         Gateefa was reluctant to absolve him of responsibility for his bad
judgment. She had her own views on men's choices, modeled perhaps on
two folktales she liked to tell. Both showed the difference between a
                                    87

good husband and a bad. In one story, the husband rewards the good and
clever first wife and punishes the beautiful but idiotic second wife. In the
other story, the good co-wife, who is also, perhaps significantly for
Gateefa, a senior wife, does not fare so well. But this time it is because
the man is of bad stock.
        The first tale goes something like this:
        There was a man who had two wives. One was beautiful, ample,
and fair-skinned; she was also stupid. The other was small, clever, and
energetic. After he sheared some sheep he said to them, "I'm going to
Siwa to get dates. When I come back I'll bring the pack camels to the one
who has woven a new tent. I'll unload only the small calf in front of
anyone still in an old tent." And he left.
        The clever one started spinning at night and during the day
worked inside her tent. The other one, the beautiful one, did nothing. She
was pleased with herself and didn't do a thing. And the small one was
busy, busy, busy, every night. She set up a loom and wove the new tent.
        When she saw this, the fat one came to the busy one and asked,
"When did you do your spinning? What am I going to do?" The clever
wife answered, "I'd take my wool to the sea and say, 'Spin it.' "
        The woman went off. She gathered together her wool and took it
to the sea. She left it there by the sea. Fifteen days later she went back
for it.
        The clever one asked her, "Did you finish your spinning?"
        "No," she said.
        "Did you go to the sea?" the busy one then asked.
        "Yes, but I found my wool just as I had left it. Except for some
seaweed on it, nothing."
        "What did you put with it?" asked the clever one. She suggested,
"Put some rice and dates and flour and stuff and put the wool close to the
water and say, 'O sea, spin,' and leave it. What if you tried putting it in
the water?"
        So the woman went off and put her wool in the sea. She stayed
away, stayed away, stayed away, and then went back.
        "Sister, did he take it?" her co-wife asked.
        "Yes."
        "And what did he say?"
        The woman responded, "He said to me, 'Duvv, duvv, duvv,' "
imitating the sound of waves.
        "That's the way he spins and twines. Just be patient," said the
                                    88

clever one.
        But the other one thought, "She's spun and woven her tent and
twisted the ends and pitched it, and he's about to come back and I haven't
made a tent." She asked her co-wife, "What should I do?"
        The clever one suggested that she take a sackful of flour and
make dough out of it and then cover the top of her old tent with the
dough so it would be white and look new.
        So the woman made some dough and slapped it on the tent. She
plastered the whole top of the tent. But when the dough dried it started to
crack and fall apart. Birds came and picked holes in it, and the chickens
jumped on top of the tent and pecked at it.
        One night after the two women had gone to sleep their husband
came back. He circled around the tents. He saw the black stripes on the
new tent of the quick wife. And he saw that the tent of the big beautiful
wife had dough stuck on it. So he unloaded the pack camels in front of
the clever one's tent and tied only the young calf in front of the other's.
        A few days later he said to them, "Your relatives have sent for
you. There's a wedding. What will you take with you as gifts?"
        The clever one wanted to go. She thought, "What shall I take
with me on the visit?" She got her load of dates and kneaded them with
butter and made little date balls.
        The other wife had only a small amount of dates. So she said, "I'll
save up some shit and fill my sack." She began to shit each day and put
the shit in the sack.
        The clever one kneaded the dates with butter and made little balls
and put them into her sack and then went to her husband. He asked,
"Have you gathered everything together? What are you going to take
with you when you go to visit your relatives?"
        She said, "I'm ready and packed, but I don't know about her."
        He went over and opened the other wife's sack and found it full
of shit. He loaded it onto one camel. Then he put the clever wife's two
sacks, one with dates and the other with date balls, on the other camel
and they set off.
        Then he asked them, "What will you ride on?" He told the
beautiful one to take a palm stalk and ride on it until she reached her
relatives. She got on her stick and rode off. The other one rode on the
camel with him. The one ran and ran, and they rode and rode. The man
and his clever wife arrived first, and the people asked, "Where's your
other wife?"
                                   89

        The man said, "She's on her way. She's riding on her stick. Here
are the sweets she's been saving for you."
        Her mother opened the sack and found it full of shit. "Here's your
daughter," the man said, "take her back. I won't stay married to her."
        The second tale Gateefa told about co-wives ended differently. It
began as the story of a young man who, with his brothers, had kicked out
their mother. They were poor, and so he began to wander around looking
for work. A rich family took him in, gave him animals to raise, found a
wife for him, built him a house, and gave him a slave to herd for him. He
became rich and proud and suddenly announced that he wanted to leave
that household to live on his own. They were disturbed and didn't
understand why, but he insisted and took his wife and slave away. Not
satisfied with the wife they had arranged for him, he then married a
second wife he chose himself.
        One day he announced that he wanted to go on the pilgrimage to
Mecca. He told his wives and slave to stay camped in the same place
until he returned. He had the two women [their genitals] sewn up as a
precaution to preserve their chastity.
        Gateefa, for whom this detail was as unusual as it is for us,
proceeded dramatically with the telling. "Every day, the slave went off to
herd the camels and then came home to the camp where the two wives
were. Now, the older wife, well, I guess she was pathetic, modest. And
the wife that he took second, she was one of those who ... Well, shortly
after he left, the young wife said to the slave, 'Let's move camp.' The
older wife said, 'No, we shouldn't move. He told us to stay here until he
returned.' The young wife said, 'No, I want to set up my tent in a new
place. Let's go to another area.' So they moved.
        "The young wife had undone the stitches. Right away this woman
said, 'Come here,' to the slave. The other one remained sewn up, the old
one. So they moved and set up camp in an empty area. There was
nothing to eat or drink there, and the camels and the sheep started going
hungry and dying. The carcasses of the dead beasts lay there, and crows
came to eat them. Then each day the crows would circle around the
camp. As the slave was putting medicine on the camels he'd say:

       'Crows make people happy but I'm afraid of crows
       they bring us the shadow of the one who's longing
       and blinded from missing us.'
                                    90

        The slave was afraid, and the old wife knew what the crows
meant: they herald the arrival of people who have been away. The young
one didn't know.
        "Then one day, the man arrived home. He said to them, 'You
moved camp. I wouldn't have found you if the crows hadn't brought me.
I started walking in their trail, every night in a place, every night in a
different place. I moved with the crows until I found you.'
        "That one had met him, the young one. She had come running out
to greet him saying,

       'In my joy for you
       I undid it just for you
       but Ahmad's mother is still all sealed up.' "

        At this Gateefa commented, "See what women are like!" Then
she continued, "So he went to the old one and found her disgusting,
bound and putrid." She laughed again. "He said to her, go away. I
divorce you. And he returned and took back the young wife, and they
moved camp."
        I wonder if Gateefa sometimes feels there is some of the same
injustice in her own world. Her husband, too, had found her grand co-
wife Azza attractive and, blind to her faults, married her secretly, against
the wishes of his mother. Unlike the good husband in the first story, he
had seemed to judge his wives not by their virtues and their actions but
by their looks and the lifestyle they represented.
        Gateefa presents herself as stoically putting up with what her
husband has imposed on her. Take, for example, her version of what
happened when Sagr married Safiyya as his second wife, which differs
from his. He presents himself as a victim of circumstances, a man with a
child bride interested only in cookies. Gateefa gives the same basic facts
about the marriage: Sagr had planned to marry Safiyya, but her cousins
claimed her; he went around looking for a wife, but everywhere he went
the girls were claimed away from him; finally he ended up with her; after
a while he ran into Safiyya's brother in the market; her brother said, "If
you still want her, her cousin has released her."
        But then she told her side of the story: "Right before the wedding
to Safiyya he took me home to visit my mother, just for a visit. My
mother had bought me a silk dress and a fancy slip, and I came back with
them. On the night before the wedding my aunts dressed me up – they
                                     91

were furious with him – and they did my hair. My hair was long and
thick and my braided topknot this big" she gestured with her hands "in
those days. They hennaed my feet and hands just like a bride. You
should have seen me. I wasn't upset. I didn't care about the man. They
brought the bride, and everyone was shocked. He had told everyone,
'She's like the moon, wait till you see her!' But she was thin and yellow.
She had been sick before she came and was sick for fifteen days after she
came. And I was beautiful healthy and plump and fair-skinned. Everyone
said I wouldn't stay 'She'll never put up with it,' they said.
         "I really didn't want the man. From the first night I used to escape
and go wherever there were other women I could sleep behind. I'd climb
into their midst to sleep. Especially our neighbor. She'd threaten him, 'I'll
beat you if you come nearer.' "
         Having heard a friend tease her with the same tale her husband
had told about how she had come around to the idea of being married, I
asked: "And so after Safiyya came you changed?"
         Her answer was short. "I got a little more sensible."
         By the time I came into their lives the Haj had separated from
Safiyya, although he still supported her. He said it was by mutual
consent, but I knew the situation was more complicated. The point was,
she had eight children and was not about to go anywhere because it
would mean leaving them. Bitter and sad though she was, she
nevertheless did not question the justice of men marrying more than one
wife. For her the problem felt like one of a preference for cousins over
outsiders.
         Still, she and Gateefa appeared to get along well. Gateefa says
that Sagr had treated the two of them fairly in the days before he married
Azza. Gateefa's daughters remember that their mother and Safiyya used
to argue when they lived together but that the troubles lasted only a few
days and the women never told their husband. Azza, of course, always
tried to involve Sagr, even though her pleas to him had begun to
backfire.


                                 THE FIGHT

       Azza could be hurtful, as Gateefa had discovered. She told me,
on a hot day in June, about their fight during Ramadan – a story I might
not have heard if Gateefa had not been angry with her husband. When an
                                    92

unexpected respite from the stream of visitors left him alone he had
gone, as usual, to rest in her room, and I went to sit with him. He
apologized for being so busy that we hardly got a chance to talk. He
wanted to recite some poetry for me. Poetry, in his view, was important
because it was about events that really happened. Then he began a story
about two paternal cousins, a tale that Gateefa would interrupt.
        A young man from a poor family wanted to marry his cousin,
whose family was rich. He went to her father, his uncle, to ask for her
hand, but the man said, "Go ask her." When he did, she refused him
saying:

       "I'm not your prey and you aren't my falcon
       nor will your [gun]barrel fit my riflebutt
       God will be kind to you and you'll find someone else."

         Rebuffed, the young man decided to leave the camp to find work.
He warned his relatives that if anyone tried to marry this girl he would
kill him. He left, and God opened the way for him and he found work.
After five, six, or seven years he returned. He came back riding a
beautiful horse. He had camels and money, but no wife.
         He threw a big party and everyone came, and they found him
much changed. He had servants and offered a great feast. He had paid a
call on everyone in the camp except his cousin. Everyone came bringing
sheep to honor him. But they were surprised "It's odd that he has servants
but no wife," they said.
         People went to tell his cousin all about him. They told her he was
a real man now and they spoke highly of him. No one had dared to marry
her because they had heard about his warning. She waited and waited but
he never came to greet her, so she said, "I'll go say hello to my cousin."
She dressed up and went over to where he was. He greeted her and then
asked who she was. She told him and he said, "Welcome." He
slaughtered a sheep for her and hosted her generously, and then he had
his servant give her a gift, a pearl necklace. But he wanted her to know
that it was not he but his servant who had given it.
         She started thinking about the situation and got worked up. She
said, "He's the one who prevented me from marrying and he won't say a
word about it." So she sent an emissary who conveyed the message that
it was his fault she was still unmarried.
         He answered, "I treated her well when she came as a guest and I
                                   93

didn't get angry at what she once said. Get out of here – after what she
said to me, what can I say?"
        "I'll apologize," she said, and told the messenger to let the man
know that she would be willing to marry him. "Fine, if she's willing, I'm
willing," he said. He was lying. "What does she demand for a brideprice?
What about the trousseau?" He brought everything she demanded and
held a wedding feast the likes of which no one had ever seen.
        When the guests left he told her, "I swear by God, you must tell
me again what it was you said to me then." She pleaded, "I was young. I
was wrong. I'll be like your servant now." He repeated his question,
"What did you say? Say it again."
        "I've forgotten it."
        So he recited her verse, and she hung her head. "I have something
to say too," he then announced.

       "I forbid myself to touch you
       and forbid myself your bed and beddings
       bring the camel and gather your stuff on it
       and wander where you want to fly
       for I'm not your prey nor am I your falcon."

        Haj Sagr explained this to me. The man forbade himself this
woman and would not touch her because she had hurt him. He wanted to
make her blood boil. He threw her out and proudly refused to accept any
of the brideprice back, even the wedding gifts he had given her. And the
next morning he held another wedding and married someone else.
        Just as Sagr was reaching the end, Gateefa came in to tell us that
lunch was ready. He ignored her, intent on finishing the story. He
admired the young man for his response, commenting, "He really burned
her!"
        At this Gateefa said sharply, "He only felt the ways that she hurt
him. He didn't feel what he did to her."
        Sagr fell silent at this surprisingly pointed remark. She left the
room. When I joined her later, I asked why she had said that. She
repeated her remark, and this time there was no doubt that she had, as the
Haj and I had both sensed at the time, meant that comment for him. She
had accused him of insensitivity to the pain he caused others (herself?)
and shown sympathy for women mistreated by men.
        She may have been smarting from a remark Sagr had made a
                                   94

couple of days earlier as we drove back from their nephew's wedding.
Both Gateefa and Azza were in the car, so he made a point of
commenting on how many beautiful women he had seen when he went
in to shake hands with his aunts. He didn't understand, he said, why all
those men who were nobodies should have more beautiful wives than he
had. Neither of his wives smiled. Nor did I. I saw tears welling in their
eyes, but they said nothing. I protested, trying to look disapproving. I
didn't want him (or them) to think he had an ally.
        In our conversation Gateefa referred to this remark, saying that
the point her husband seemed to have missed was that all those other
women looked beautiful because they were comfortable. Unlike hers,
their husbands didn't impose troubles and worries on them, troubles like
Azza. To illustrate, she described the fight she had had with Azza during
Ramadan, the one her husband had mentioned to demonstrate how well
he treated her.
        They had argued because of the children. She had been cooking
dinner when Azza's son came and helped himself to a bowl of vegetable
stew, even though it was barely cooked yet. His little brother and
Gateefa's young daughter started crying because they wanted to share it
with him. He wouldn't let them and then hit her daughter with a sandal,
twice. She had yelled at him either to put the food back until it was
cooked or to share it with them. He refused. She threw a plastic sandal at
him.
        Azza had shouted out, "Are you beating my son?" Gateefa had
answered, "What, it's hard on you when I hit your son but not hard on
you when he hits my daughter?"
        Azza threatened to go home to her family. Her brothers were
alive, she added defiantly, implying that they would defend her. Gateefa
told her to go ahead. ''Go home," she had said; "you're the one who came
to me!"
        Azza insulted her back, "You who don't have any kin."
        Gateefa slapped her on the cheek. "These are my kin, and this is
my house."
        After Azza's son had eaten dinner and then eaten again with his
father, he went to bang on his mother's door. But she was not there: she
had gone across the road to the rest of the camp. When Gateefa reported
to her husband what had happened he said, "Good riddance."
        Azza returned the next day, brought back by the Haj's sister
Lawz, visiting her mother Migdim at the time, who pleaded her case.
                                     95

Azza accused Gateefa of, among other things, hitting her and saying that
she had chased after the Haj to marry him – half of it lies, according to
Gateefa.
        I interrupted here. "And is it true, as Haj Sagr said, that he forced
Azza to go kiss you on the head and apologize?"
        "Yes, it happened," Gateefa replied.
        What had incensed Gateefa was the charge that she had no kin.
To have no kin is to be vulnerable and isolated, since the family is such a
crucial source of identity and of support. For a woman, having brothers
behind you allows you to stand tall in the world, and especially in your
husband's community. Gateefa kept saying, "God Bless my kin. These
are my kin, and this is my house."


                                 ISOLATION

        Azza's insult had stung, though, because it held a half-truth.
Although she was Haj Sagr's first cousin and a member of his kin group,
Gateefa had no father and no brothers; and she was isolated in the
women's community. The problem was not that she wasn't central to all
family functions, including representing the family group to outsiders.
Indeed, she was perhaps the most distinguished woman of her generation
in this family, having always been a clever storyteller, a talented singer,
and a moral woman with good judgment who had grown into her role as
a senior wife and mother with grace and dignity. Her aunts were
affectionate with this only child of a favorite brother killed so young in
the rubbishing accident, and several cousins also obviously enjoyed her
company. All of them liked to stay with her, spending happy hours
talking, when they came home to the camp for visits.
        The family was not the problem; rather, the women of the camp
had isolated her. I had seen the split widen since first coming to live in
the community and assumed that it was because Gateefa had moved with
the Haj (about the time of my arrival) into his new house across the road.
Absorbed in her own busy household, she saw less and less of the
women with whom she had spent all her married life. So alienated was
she that she refused to give her eldest daughter, Sabra, in marriage to one
of the boys in the camp. Among the other families, though, ties
multiplied as sisters agreed to let their children marry each other. Even
some of the women from outside the community who had married in
                                     96

were related to each other and tried to have their children marry. With
each intermarriage between households, Gateefa and her children
became more cut off.
        Yet she claimed that these women had always ganged up against
her, an opinion that her maternal aunt confirmed. As we sat alone, this
older woman lowered her voice to tell me that the others had never been
good to Gateefa. She had recited some poems about this eight years
earlier when she came to help her niece sew a huge new ceremonial tent.
A woman starting such a large project expects other women in the
community to help out when they can, but hardly anyone came to help.
These poems, then, were about Gateefa's loneliness.

       Friends in times of ease
       I found out in need were enemies ...

       Your worries increased, my love
       watch you don't pick up terrible illnesses ...

       They watered the loved one with a waterwheel
       of bitterness until she was drenched ...

       Despair over them, oh loved one
       made you a stranger even to those your father begot ...

         What lay behind Gateefa's isolation in the women's community I
can never know fully, not least because my attachment to her is well
known by the other women. The makeup of the community and the
strength of some of the alliances and kinship ties among its core women
are partial explanations. Gateefa herself, often in justifying why she did
not feel it unfair to receive gifts from the Haj's wealthy friends, alluded
to this fact when she pointed out that she, unlike those women, had no
sisters.
         There was also the problem of the matriarch Migdim. According
to Gateefa, her mother-in-law had always sided with Safiyya. I knew
from experience that Migdim in fact often did defend this co-wife and
criticize her son for treating her unfairly; she also tried to make sure that
Safiyya got attention and goods even though she was now separated
from her husband. This favoritism was not a new thing, Gateefa confided
as we walked home after a visit to her mother-in-law.
                                    97

         She recalled how Safiyya's mother used to come to visit, staying
for as long as a week or ten days; when it was time for her to go home,
the two matriarchs (the Haj's mother, Migdim, and her niece, married to
Migdim's husband's younger brother) would run around like mad
gathering up good things with which to fill the visiting woman's bag –
butter, henna, whatever they could find. When Gateefa's mother came to
visit, in contrast, making a special point of complimenting them by
announcing that she had come to pay a call on her relatives, she would
arrive with her bag full of things to give away, but when she left the old
women wouldn't budge. She had come with a full sack and they let her
go home with it empty.
         "Isn't this something that hurts?" Gateefa wanted to know. Her
mother, though, would tell her not to worry, not to do anything. One
should not respond to people with wrongs, she would say. Gateefa
admires her mother. "That's the way she is. She even tells me not to hit
the children. When I ask why, she says, 'God is with you. Don't be like
the others.' She's never said an angry word."
         I was surprised to hear about this rudeness to her mother and
asked why it happened. Gateefa was bitter. "You've only seen my mother
now that she's grown old. But if you'd seen her before. ... Her brothers-
in-law, my uncles, really liked her. They always went to see her, and
she'd honor them, be respectful of them. They liked her a lot. The two
women, their wives, used to say that she must have done magic because
the men would always come and sit with her. And they were afraid that
my uncle would marry her as a second wife."
         Was it common for men to marry their brothers' widows?
         "If the woman is willing," Gateefa answered. "They had sent
someone to ask her if she'd be willing to marry him. She'd said, 'No, no,
no!' But there is a hatred from way back. My mother-in-law is difficult."
         To complicate matters, the Haj's eldest sister, Dhahab, had
married a man whose badly treated senior wife was the sister of Gateefa's
mother. Migdim would certainly have sided with her own daughter. I do
not know if this situation affected relations because I never heard those
stories. All I could gather was that Gateefa may have been made to suffer
for having a beautiful and good mother who was a threat to her sisters-
in-law. These rivalries were part of the past, but the present was also tied
up in unspoken ways with jealousy over my special closeness to this
woman with no sister of her own.
                                   98

                               OUTSIDERS

         Gateefa's maternal aunt, to explain why things were so hard for
her niece, once remarked that there was too much work to do and her co-
wives would not relieve Gateefa of it. Further, she whispered, the women
in the community were jealous because they felt Gateefa got things they
didn't get. Outsiders always asked about Gateefa and liked her, she
added. This made the others envious.
         There was little doubt that I was part of this world of outsiders
who liked Gateefa and brought her gifts. But I hardly felt that my small
gifts even began to make up for what she gave me. She was indeed
gentle and gracious to strangers. I still remember the kindness she
showed me on my first visit alone to the community. She had looked at
me warmly, concerned about my comfort. She spoke slowly and looked
for words I would understand, asking me if I needed to go to the
bathroom, if I wanted to rest. I was tired from the strain of sitting with
people I did not know or much understand.
         She took me to her room, spread out a small mattress and pillow,
and lay down on the floor next to me as I rested. I remember being so
grateful to her as we lay in the cool semidarkness away from the sun and
the crowd of women and children that had gathered around me asking
questions, obviously talking about me, and wanting to look at everything
in my bag.
         On many other occasions I watched Gateefa graciously host
guests, not just visiting Bedouin women (everyone knew the conventions
for that encounter), but the families of Egyptian men who came to see
her husband as well. She made special efforts to put them at ease,
bringing them special food and sitting with them, suspending her own
moral judgments to converse with them. An Egyptian friend of the Haj's
once brought along his wife and college-age daughter. Gateefa politely
ignored the shortness of the girl's dress and asked the mother and
daughter all about the young woman's fiancé. The visitors
enthusiastically talked about him and about the country clubs the couple
went to and the things they did together. Gateefa smiled kindly and
listened. She did not even hint at what her eavesdropping daughters were
later to howl about: the sheer scandalousness of talking about a fiancé as
if a girl were anxious to marry, not to mention admitting that she spent
time with him.
         Gateefa's dignity as a hostess, a role thrust upon her as senior
                                   99

wife, was often appreciated, and she and her children were sometimes
sent gifts by the Haj's friends. One man who had built an extravagant
villa on some land owned by Haj Sagr was particularly generous. In that
case, however, Gateefa's sense of self-respect, and ultimately her pride,
made her disinclined to be hospitable.
        I had heard about these new neighbors when I came for a visit
one winter. The man was reputed to be rich, originally from the Sudan
but working in Saudi Arabia. His Egyptian wife, they said, had been an
airline stewardess. I soon saw this woman for myself. One day, a
Mercedes drove up to the house. Out stepped a woman with makeup,
frosted hair, and large dangling earrings; she wore high-heeled black
patent leather shoes and a long fashionable red sweater over black pants.
When her husband was taken into the men's guest room she came with us
into the house, where we put cushions down for her in Gateefa's room.
Gateefa sat with her politely; the other women in the household came in
to greet her. When they went off to prepare the food, I ended up alone
with her.
        She was curious about me and horrified that I was speaking the
Bedouin dialect. She told me it was not proper Arabic and that I should
not learn from these people. She let it drop that she had numerous
American and English friends from her stewardess days and that she
used to go to parties at an English language institute I knew about in
Cairo. I was uncomfortable, resenting her assumption that I would share
her sense of superiority or that we had any bond.
        Haj Sagr came in after we had eaten. He sat close to her – too
close – and teased her in a way I had never seen him treat any Bedouin
woman. He joked with her about a land deal she wanted to make with
him. Then quickly, and in dialect, he said something to me and Gateefa
about her. He then made fun of the woman for not having understood
what we said.
        Politely (and pointedly), he offered her cigarettes, which she
willingly took and smoked in front of him, something no Bedouin
woman her age would have done.
        The couple had come to invite us to dinner in their villa, to eat
the lamb the Haj had given them as the traditional welcome for new
neighbors. That evening we prepared to go. Gateefa put on one of her
good dresses, her best colorful gold-threaded socks, and doused herself
with cologne. She dressed her youngest daughter, the two-year-old, in
her only Western-style dress, torn though it was in the seams. The Haj,
                                    100

whose robes were always clean and pressed, put on a stunning white
robe and draped his rich wool cloak around his shoulders. His sons
begged to go too, and when he agreed they ran off to wash their faces
and find their shoes. The little girls were crying as we piled into the car;
they did not want to be left behind. So we grabbed them too and headed
off.
        The villa was large and indescribably lavish. Gateefa and the
children stared. The boys touched the wall, papered with a life-size
portrait of a horse. In the cavernous living room, draped with silky
curtains that divided it into quadrants and covered the ceilings, one wall
was decorated with a giant poster of a Caribbean beach scene. The
elaborate moldings had been painted green, their shadows caught by the
red lamps that lit the entire space. Leaving our shoes at the door, we
padded in across yards of fake Oriental carpets and perched gingerly on
the yellow satin banquettes that lined the walls.
        The mixed-sex situation was unusual for Gateefa, who sat in
silence. The children, too, were wide-eyed and quiet. Our host offered to
bring a kerosene heater in and then the television. This they turned on
and began to watch, the Haj and our host and hostess meanwhile making
conversation. After about twenty minutes the Haj's brother arrived with a
friend to join us for dinner. They were hurried into another quadrant and
a curtain drawn on them, since as a non-kinsman Bedouin the friend
could not politely mix with the Haj's wife. This was too much for
Gateefa. After a few minutes she whispered to me that it wasn't right to
draw the curtains on those men; she didn't feel comfortable watching
television while they sat over there by themselves. She persuaded me to
get up with her and, taking the girls with us, to move to the main
bedroom down the hall.
        Our hostess joined us there, still chain-smoking as she had done
in front of her husband. She was relaxed with him, bantering with him in
a public way that was unimaginable for Gateefa. The woman took us on
a tour to show off the house. It was uncanny the way this family I felt so
close to and who usually seemed so ordinary suddenly appeared, as I saw
them through our hostess's eyes, like ragamuffins or Gypsies. They
ranged through the house touching everything, looking wildly from one
new object to the next. When our hostess left us alone again in the
bedroom the children jumped up to touch the velvety blankets piled high
on the bed, sprayed themselves from the five bottles of cologne arranged
on the dressing table, ran into the bathroom to wash their faces and hands
                                   101

and arms with the brand-new bar of soap that lay on the sink. Their
splashing resulted in a trail of mud on the ceramic floor tiles.
         Everything in the house was new. To me the Italian lacquered
bedroom set, the shiny mirrors, and the gleaming red porcelain bathroom
fixtures looked grotesque. Was it because our mirrors back at the camp
were plastic framed, hand held, and usually chipped in the corners? Was
it because our bathroom had paint splattered all over it, fixtures that did
not work, and no running water? Was it because the two beds in the Haj's
house, a grand and foreign house compared to other families', were held
together with rope and painted crudely with a simulated wood design?
Was it because we kept our precious bars of soap hidden so people
would not walk off with them, and our bottles of cologne locked in
wooden chests, to be used only before going visiting or, for the boys,
before going to the mosque on Friday? I felt caught in between: I knew
how to live in such a house and they did not, but I also knew how to read
such a house as the tasteless display of people who have suddenly
acquired too much money. Gateefa and her children only saw clean,
luxurious goods in quantities that awed them.
         I was caught in between in an even more direct way later that
evening when our hostess began to discuss veiling with me. She had
pulled out a sequined cocktail dress to show me what she was going to
wear to a party in Alexandria the following evening. This led to a
discussion of what her life in Saudi Arabia was like and what she wore
there. When Gateefa stepped out of the room she commented to me,
"Their ways are certainly different."
         I recommended, half-joking, that she read my book to find out
more; in it I had explained why Bedouin women veiled and avoided
men. She cut me off, "Oh, I know them well. They veil their faces but do
all sorts of things."
         I disagreed. She insisted that in Saudi Arabia she knew it to be
true, thereby implying that the same was true of Gateefa and the other
Awlad 'Ali. I protested angrily that perhaps some were like that but
certainly not most.
         Weeks later, I reported this conversation to Gateefa. She was
indignant. She countered with stories about the Egyptian stewardess.
Gateefa had been embarrassed the first time the woman had visited their
house because she had sat with the men in the guest room, leaning back
in her short dress with her legs stretched out in front of her. Gateefa
whispered that the woman drank liquor. She commented on what the
                                    102

woman had been wearing the day I met her. Making a suggestive hand
gesture, she showed how the outlines of the woman's genitals pressed
through her stretch pants.
       Later, Gateefa would tell me that ever since I had passed on to
her what the woman had said about them and their veils, she had felt sick
even looking at her. There were, indeed, limits to her graciousness to
outsiders.


                                 INTIMACY

         Gateefa was somewhat more dependent on her husband than
other women were. From the early days when her mother-in-law
criticized her and defended her co-wife Safiyya, Haj Sagr had learned to
guess where the truth lay. He never fought with her, she said, which
made the others suspect her of having done magic. With a laugh she
tossed aside that idea; it was just that unlike the others she never talked
back, she was too afraid of his temper. When I came to live with them
just after their move to the new house, set apart from the rest of the
camp, she began to know her husband in a new way. "You know, Lila,"
she confided several years later, "before you came to live with us I'd
never spent an evening with him. He always spent his evenings with his
brothers in their mother's room." I had, in fact, noticed how quiet she
was at first when we sat all together in the evenings.
         She is still reserved with Sagr. "She won't talk to me," he
complained once when I found them sitting silently, side by side,
enjoying the breeze at sunset. For all his proud talk of honoring her as a
sister, knowing her since she was a child, and trusting her, sometimes he
seems to know her not at all. I saw them as well matched: both
intelligent, articulate, insightful about people and knowledgeable about
life, good at telling stories, fond of poetry, generous, and self-respecting.
Yet he seemed to have no idea that she was a good poet and singer. She
had shared with me hundreds of poems and had begun to teach me to
appreciate them. But he was surprised once when, sitting in the back of
the car he drove to pick up the bride, she sang the requisite wedding
songs. "Hey, she's not half bad!" This was the first time he had ever
heard her sing.
         Another time, flipping through an article in Natural History I had
written about them, Sagr had peered at the photographs. He didn't have
                                   103

his glasses on and asked, "Who's this?" about a photograph of Gateefa.
She and I laughed.
        He looked closely and said, "She was a gazelle then." I
sometimes sensed that he regretted not appreciating what he had, caught
up as he had been for so long in making his family wealthy, building his
reputation, and striving for sons.
        When Gateefa gave birth to her ninth daughter, just before I left,
he seemed to take it in stride. Although he spent the evening on which
she had her baby listening to poetry with his male guests, this was not
unusual: men always stay away from women's affairs like giving birth.
But he went the next morning to see Gateefa, breaking the convention of
a forty-day avoidance. Even though she had some women visitors from
the community, he came in with his cassette player to share with her a
tape he had just received from an old friend of theirs who had gone to
Libya twenty years earlier. The young women with Gateefa all jumped
up to leave, too modest to sit with, much less listen to a tape in the
presence of, a man of his stature. Only one older cousin of theirs stayed
to witness Haj Sagr affectionately offer his wife the cigarette he knew
she desperately wanted. Later this woman would tell everyone how
much this familiarity had impressed her.
        Every day Haj Sagr spent time with his senior wife in her
confinement. Their eldest daughter had once remarked how impossible
her father was when Gateefa was away: it was bad enough when she left
the house for a few hours; when she went away for days at a time to visit
her mother or to attend a wedding or funeral the Haj just wandered
around and didn't know what to do with himself. He would start picking
on his children. That was why he always fetched her back from these
visits sooner than most other women were brought back, and sooner than
he would bring back his other wives. Indeed, it seemed to me that he did
not feel truly comfortable anywhere but in her company.
        The same could not be said of her, but perhaps I had this
impression because she was so aware of the social impropriety of public
affection. Also, she made no secret of her resentment of the burdens he
placed on her everyday life. One day a friend who was grooming her
commented on how grey her hair was getting. ''It's the women who've
made you go grey," she suggested in a loud voice. Looking over at Azza,
Gateefa said, "It's Azza. She's the one who's made me go grey. She does
things that hurt one's insides."
        She took little consolation from being her husband's current
                                   104

favorite, expressed most openly in his favoritism toward her children. He
was especially affectionate with the younger ones, even though most
were girls. When he took his turn with Azza, spending the night in her
section of the house, Gateefa's youngest daughter would go in to play
with him first thing in the morning. She would pick up his plastic bag of
medicines to bring back to her mother's section. He encouraged her in
this and delighted in telling people about it. He would also play a game
with her. Because she followed him everywhere and crawled on him
looking for hugs and kisses, he would instruct her: "Hey Little Nura, go
smell your mother's veil. Is it sweet?"
        "Sweet," she'd whisper, and he would laugh.
        "And what about Azza's veil?" Coaching her, he would turn up
his nose and make a noise, "Peeuw!" Nura would imitate him and they
would giggle.
        Gateefa may resent what he has imposed on her, but she remains
loyal to her husband, who is also, after all, her close relative. She takes
responsibility for running his household, she protects his property, and
she tries to uphold his reputation. She fears for him when he goes off to
mediate disputes, knowing the dangers of angry men. She is proud of his
standing in the world and his generosity to guests as well as to the
women and children of the whole community, for whom he brings gifts
when he goes on the pilgrimage or holds a celebration. She cares for all
his children, sometimes protecting them from the wrath of their own
mothers. She once took care of Azza's children for weeks when their
mother left in anger. She would never disgrace him.
        She worked hard at the wedding of her husband's oldest son, his
son by Safiyya. She wanted it to be a success. Her women friends and
relatives congratulated her and gave her as many gifts as they gave her
co-wife, the boy's mother. As always at weddings, she sang many songs.
To show her joy, she also danced. The family had much to celebrate. The
boy had recovered from a heart condition that had troubled him for
years, thanks to an expensive operation paid for by the Haj. He could
now marry. Moreover, the family had just avenged after ten long and
painful years the murder of a dear cousin. The anger and humiliation
were over. Sagr's brothers and cousin had been detained for forty days,
but the authorities had released them: no one was willing to testify
against them. The wedding came at the end of these troubles.
        Gateefa sang at this wedding two songs to encourage her
husband's son as he went to his bride – a tense moment requiring, among
                                     105

other things, sheer courage.

       Son, be like your kin!
       strong willed and steady eyed ...
       Even facing the government of Egypt
       their eyes were steady, they didn't falter ...

        Her songs were also songs of praise for her husband and his
brothers. The most touching of her songs was one her mother-in-law
recited to me later; it expressed an intimacy not of direct affection but of
understanding. On the night before the wedding she sang about how her
husband must have felt:

       All of his desires achieved
       on now calm seas he unfurled his sail ...
                                    107

CHAPTER 3: REPRODUCTION



                 Paradise lies under the feet of mothers.
                        - Tradition of the Prophet Muhammad



        It was a long walk, past fields of green barley shoots edged with
daisies, poppies, and wildflowers purple, orange, and pink. Ahead, the
unplanted fields were a strangely soft blue, covered, as we would soon
see, with a haze of tiny white flowers that extended even to the roots of
the dusty olive trees. From the distant houses, their windows like black
eyes in wide yellow faces, children came running to greet us.
        We stepped over the door ledge into the darkened room, with the
proper greeting, "Thank God you're safe!" In the corner we could make
out Ngawa's form buried in blankets. The glint of a silver bracelet on her
right wrist struck us when we leaned over to shake her hand and to place
by her side a couple of bars of face soap, a little dress stitched together
from bits of leftover fabric, and six eggs wrapped in tattered plastic.
        Her last pregnancy had ended in a miscarriage. I had heard her
melodramatic tales of the hemorrhaging and the three blobs she had
expelled, one bloody, one white, and one pronged "like a rabbit's ears."
When she had collapsed, "dizzy and up to my waist in blood," her
brother had rushed her in his pickup truck to the clinic in town. First, she
said, she went deaf. Then suddenly everything went blue, bright blue.
"I've gone blind, my brother. I've gone blind! I can't see you!" she had
screamed. They gave her an injection, and later she found herself hooked
up to an intravenous feeder. She knew that many people thought she had
lost her baby because she'd carried heavy loads. But what could she do?
Stop working? Others had just said, "It was from God."
        Ngawa tucked the soap and little dress under her pillow. The eggs
went into an old tin can. She felt around and pulled out a small bottle of
kohl. Then she signaled to her young daughter to look under the
handwoven rugs folded neatly against the wall. "May God give you
success, darling, if you find me the hair oil."
        The girl produced a stained yellow plastic bottle of scented olive
oil. Ngawa insisted we put some on. The women we had just then sat
down with – Ngawa's mother, Migdim, her sister Lawz, and several of
her brothers' wives – handed us a small mirror and the smoothed twig
                                     108

used for applying kohl to the eye.
         Giving birth was expensive. Not only the kohl and hair oil had to
be readied for the women who would visit, but also the fenugreek and
maghaath (root of Glossostemon brugieri) for cramps; sulfur for
fainting; mahalab* (Prunus mahaleb), musk, and cloves for a perfumed
necklace; and incense for burning. A new mother does not bathe until
seven days after the birth. In the old days, I had been told, when there
was not much money around, each neighbor would come carrying on her
head a small sack of milled barley flour, tea, and sugar in honor of the
birth. The older women of the household would insist as she left that the
visitor take back a share: three big handfuls of flour at the birth of a girl,
five for a boy.
         "In the name of God, in the name of God. Let me hold her,"
Gateefa murmured as Ngawa cautiously pulled out from under the
blankets her swaddled newborn. The baby's cheeks were pink. Her eyes
were shut tight but black-rimmed with kohl. Wisps of dark hair peeked
out from under the handkerchief knotted around her head. "God keep her
parents and her brothers safe," Gateefa blessed. "Girls are nice. I swear
to God, daughters are caring. If I were alone, without my girls, I don't
know what I'd do."
         Ngawa's sister Lawz began teasing her, though. "I don't know
what happened. Ngawa, didn't you have some camel fat for breakfast
seven mornings in a row after your last baby?"
         Migdim argued, "Daughter, if you wanted a boy you should have
wrapped the bit of the umbilical cord that falls off and buried it. You
bury it with barley, salt, and lentils, but you have to make sure that the
umbilical cord is on the bottom."
         Turning to me, Lawz explained, "You know, Arabs prefer boys."
         Gateefa disagreed. "They are equal with God. And He even
prefers girls. It is only the ignorant who prefer boys. Some daughters are
worth a hundred sons."
         Suddenly the children in the doorway scattered. "Move, move out
the way," yelled Ngawa's sister-in-law as she came in carrying a large
wooden bowl. She put down the special birth meal in front of us –
cooked dough doused with butter and molasses – and greeted the new
arrivals. "Greetings. How are you? How are your daughters? How is
your family?"
         "May God keep you. How are you? How's your father in his
illness? How's your family?"
                                   109

         "Go ahead and eat," urged Ngawa's mother-in-law.
         "Go play outside, outside!" Ngawa's sister-in-law shooed the
children out. Only the visitors' youngest children ate by their mothers'
sides. A child cried outside and was told to go over to the oven where his
sisters were baking bread.
         Migdim laughed at this and began to tell an old tale about a
woman living alone with her children. They were so poor they had
nothing to eat. Her little boy woke up in the middle of the night crying,
"Mom, I'm hungry."
         She said to him, "My son, go to sleep, go to sleep."
         "Mom, I want a piece of bread. Mom, I want a piece of bread."
         "Go to sleep my son," was all she could say. There was nothing
in the house, nothing at all.
         Then suddenly she looked up and saw a man rummaging through
their stuff in the corner of the tent. "Even he wanted some bread, the
thief!" interrupted Ngawa's mother-in-law.
         Migdim. continued, "Yes, he was looking around for some bread.
I don't know what the woman was afraid of. She had absolutely nothing
in the house. So when the boy cried again, she said to him in a loud
voice, 'Son, go to sleep, go to sleep. I swear on my life, your uncle over
there is looking for some food for you and if he finds some bread he'll
give you a scrap!' "
         A man's cough outside the door interrupted our laughter, alerting
the younger women to pull their veils over their faces.
         Ngawa's husband poked his head in the door. "Welcome,
welcome! How are you ladies?"
         "Greetings," we responded.
         One of the older visitors called out affectionately,
"Congratulations on what you got!"
         "May God bless you as well," he smiled as he left.
         A woman teased Ngawa. How was it that she was the only one
whose husband hadn't taken a second wife?
         She laughed weakly. Women don't end up alone with their
husbands unless the men are poor, "like my old man," she said. As soon
as they get any wealth, men take second wives. Some women were
clever, she added. They bathed and got perfumed each night. But not her.
Making fun of herself, she said, "I'm filthy, as you see me. He has to take
me as I am."
         Unlike her wealthier sisters, Ngawa was always unkempt, her
                                  110

dresses caked with dirt or flour, her headcloth slipping off to expose
thinning hair she had not had time to braid. She worked hard, but when
she sat with you, her long thin legs stretched out before her, she talked
fast, gesturing, smiling, frowning, poking, rushing from one topic to the
next.
         Lawz was fond of her sister. "Hey, did you hear what Ngawa's
daughter told her father the other day? She said, 'When my mother stays
over with her relatives, I have a happy night.' "
         Ngawa protested that it was because the girl got to use her
mother's warm blanket. The women were surprised. "She sleeps in your
room with her father?" Ngawa explained that she had to take care of the
little ones, who usually slept there.
         Lawz went on with the story. "Do you know what the man said to
the girl? He said, 'But my night isn't a happy one!' "
         The women laughed, especially when Ngawa reported that her
daughter had then quipped, "Yuck! What do you want with her
anyways?"
         Her sister Lawz agreed. "Indeed! What would he want with you
in this cold anyway? It's hard on the knees!"
         We knew Ngawa's daughter had filled two snail shells with blood
from the umbilical cord of this new baby and then crushed them. She had
also rubbed seven date pits in blood from the umbilical cord and buried
them wrapped in a rag. This was to prevent pregnancy. She thought her
mother had enough children. Three boys and four girls are enough if
you're struggling.


                      GOD REWARDS THE MIDWIFE

        A small bowl with chicken and macaroni was brought in for
Ngawa. A new mother must eat good food: chicken, eggs, but no fried
vegetables or milk products. She should not drink anything cold. She
should never be left alone, nor should anyone give her trouble. She is
vulnerable.
        I had once asked Ngawa's mother-in-law about birthing because
she had acted as midwife for all her sons' children. Would she mind
telling me how she did it? The women present had giggled and refused
when she asked for a volunteer to demonstrate. So instead she made me
squat facing her.
                                     111

         She began, "I sit in front of her and I look, like this. When the
contractions come, I look. I put my finger against the opening and feel.
When the child's head pushes my finger I know it is close to time. And I
start widening the opening. If it is close and the child's head is stuck or is
pressing but off-center, then I reach with my finger as far inside as I can
and turn it, turn it, turn it until I straighten it out."
         How had she learned?
         "I've given birth before and I know."
         The women asked for details. She continued, telling them how
she pressed against the woman's anus to push the child forward. When
she feels the time is near, she instructs the woman, "Push, push. Push,
push!"
         "Does the woman cry?" I had asked. "Does she scream?"
         "If she has sense she doesn't cry. If she has a strong will, she
doesn't scream. But if she's like these women," she had said, turning to
her daughters-in-law, "she makes noise like this."
         They had all laughed, these women who had given birth so often,
as one of them mimicked for me the moans and screams of childbirth.
         The old woman went on. "Then I say, 'Listen. Hold your breath.'
This is so the kid comes out right away. When he comes out, I hold him
face up. I hold the umbilical cord, like this" she made the gesture of
milking an udder and added, "If the afterbirth doesn't come out I gently
massage the cord, with my hand. This is birth as we do it. The Egyptians
are different."
         When I asked if any of the other old women in the camp, Migdim
for example, knew how to deliver babies, she snorted.
         "Once I came and found Migdim and the other old woman just
sitting there with one of the twins lying on the floor next to its mother. I
told them, 'Why don't you lend a hand? You've all given birth before.
What's the matter with you? What are you being bashful about? Why
don't you get close?' ... Midwifing has great recompense, I mean God
rewards it. I swear to God, these hands – it is righteous before God –
these hands here and these legs strain. And I won't even talk about what
sometimes comes down on my hands. My arms will be swimming in
blood. Only after the woman finishes and is fine, only then do they get
me soap and hot water. I wash my hands and my body and my hair. I
take off everything I was wearing."
         "There's lots of blood? You don't get disgusted?" I can't help
asking.
                                   112

        "No. Because it is a righteous act, you don't get disgusted."
        I had heard something similar from Ngawa's older sister, Dhahab.
In the area where she lives, she helps women in labor because, as she
explained, ''God made me one of those who doesn't feel disgusted
delivering babies. Some people can't stand it." She figures she has
delivered a thousand infants. Although people offer, she never takes
money for her services. "God rewards this," she says. "There is no
reward like God's reward for those who midwife." But she doesn't say no
to small gifts of soap or incense.


                       SEARCHING FOR CHILDREN

        A neighbor once remarked, "A woman gets anxious if she doesn't
have many children. People talk. They say, 'Poor thing, she doesn't have
any sons,' and so she goes searching for children. Even if a woman has
four or even five kids she still says that's not enough. Don't you know the
louse's lament?

       'Every day you give birth to a hundred
       Alas, what a pathetic brood.' "

        "Hey, that's not the louse but the bedbug," someone corrected.
        The woman was serious. "There are people who've had children
and people who are looking for children. People aren't the same. Some
people have many children and still say, 'I don't have any.' That's the way
the world is."
        I had heard that she took a long time getting pregnant and asked
her about it.
        "By God," she swore, "I don't do anything about it. I wait for
God's help. If it comes it comes, if not it doesn't. Some go to doctors or
to the religious healers. The healers write them amulets. They have quill
pens and write, and you soak the papers in water and bathe with them."
        A woman listening to us laughed, noticing my questions. "If you
are having trouble getting pregnant, Lila," she said to me, "you go to a
woman healer who massages you, lays on hands, and ties little strings on
your back. I'll take you. Or you go to a healer from the saintly lineages.
He'll tell you to bring a goat to sacrifice – either red or blue. You
slaughter it there and he and his family get themselves a good meal. You
                                    113

bring him rice, oil, sugar, and tea. And if you're really an idiot you bring
flour too. They just take you for a ride. They walk the goat around you
seven times and then kill it. And after he's nice and full of rice and meat,
the man begins to drum and trance. It's all just a waste of money.
Children are from God."
          On one of my visits to the community, people were worried about
a new bride who had not gotten pregnant yet. "May God grant him
children," mumbled one of the aunts of the young husband. Another
whispered, "We heard people say her family is thinking of taking her
back. Have you heard that?"
          Migdim, the man's grandmother, confirmed this rumor. The
bride's family had discovered only at the wedding that he was twice
divorced, with no children. She also reported that at the wedding, her
daughter Lawz had made sure the bride stepped back and forth seven
times over an iron peg. And she was careful to make sure that the bride
spoke first in the morning no one came in on her and said anything.
Others approved of these measures meant to ward off "blocking."
          I asked if he had gone to any doctors to see what the problem
might be. Migdim answered, "He's been to every doctor and every
religious healer. And the doctor said go to the healer. The healer said go
to the doctor. The healer said he should divorce that last wife and get a
new one. Don't you remember? The last healer said to go to a certain
area to get this one. 'She's got the crown of a baby already at the top of
her womb,' he said."
          "So we went to get her," an aunt added. "The doctor said go to
the healer, and the healer, the last one, told him to divorce his wife and
bring this new one. But he's still looking for the boy, still looking."
          "May God grant him a son from this woman," wished Migdim.
          "Even a girl, if God wills. Just so he has children," her daughter
said.
          The women began exchanging stories of people who had children
after many years. "It is God the Glorious on High who grants it to them.
Some people say a person who's thin and sickly doesn't have kids. Forget
it. It's a matter of fortune. Some big strong men don't have kids."
          "And there are some who sit ten years without having kids. Some
wait eight years ..."
          Another woman in the community was encouraging. "You
know," she said, "the other day my little girl hugged him and followed
him around calling him Daddy."
                                   114

         "Maybe because she has called him 'father' that means ..."
         "Yes, maybe that means he'll conceive. So I said, 'Why don't they
take this little one as a laying egg?' Maybe if the woman sleeps with the
baby in her bed for a few nights she'll get pregnant."
         The women laughed, but I was excited. I told them about how our
newspapers at home reported often that people who adopted a child
would suddenly have one of their own. Or sometimes even when they
got a pet, a cat or dog. The women thought this amusing, though the idea
of adoption parents giving up their own children horrified them.
         "Protect us from evil and the flames! No, this baby, may God
protect her, her mother and father are still alive. They'd borrow her only
as a nesting egg. There's nothing shameful in that. They could take her
for a little while and feed her good food and get her nice clothes."
         They also argued about the wedding. Circumcisions are
sometimes celebrated with weddings so that guests need attend only one
festivity and give one gift. This had happened at the unfortunate couple's
wedding. A neighbor said to Lawz, "Hey woman, I heard that someone
entered the bride's room with some blood from the boy's circumcision on
her dress. She's sure to have loused it up."
         Lawz wouldn't accept this. "No, no, his mother said they had
already put some of the blood inside the room before she arrived."
         Migdim disagreed with her daughter. "They did not. They hadn't
put any blood in the room."
         "They said they had."
         "We told her again and again not to do the circumcision at the
same time."
         They explained to me that you must put some of the blood from
the circumcision in the bride's room before she arrives, otherwise it may
block her. And she should be the first to go out in the morning: no one
should enter her room before she comes out. But rumor had it that the
bride's new sister-in-law had gone into her room in the morning. "Bad
luck," someone said.
         Advice was offered on what the young bride should do to undo
the blockage. "She should wash with the virginity cloth of someone who
has already gotten pregnant. Before a woman gets pregnant she must not
wash the cloth; she should save it. But once she's gotten pregnant she
doesn't have to keep it. The new bride should soak it in a pot of water
and step back and forth over it seven times. Then she should wash
herself with the water."
                                   115

         Another woman pitched in. "My daughter did that. When she
didn't get pregnant at first, while her sister got pregnant right away, we
thought, why not do the blood thing? She took her sister's virginity cloth
and soaked it in water and bathed with it. She didn't see her menstrual
blood again until she had the baby." I had heard long ago that this girl
had been blocked by her own virginity cloth because she had refused to
leave her room on the wedding day. What she should have done was go
out and then follow the women back into her room when they brought in
the bloodstained cloth at sunset after it had been taken out for public
display.
         Women often talk about how to undo blockages. One visitor from
a town nearby told her daughter's story. After six years of marriage she
still had no children. They took her to doctors and everywhere, and all of
them told her, "You have lots of children in you." They went to a local
woman healer. She said, "She's blocked. Go get some milk from a
woman whose child has just died. Wash with it." A woman they knew
sent over some milk. The daughter soaked a bit of wool in the milk and
placed it inside, in her vagina. Three mornings in a row. She did not even
get her period that month. And now she has three children. When the old
mother had thanked the kind woman for giving the milk, she had prayed
to God to be good to her and to reward her by making it possible for her
to go on the pilgrimage to God's House. Shortly after, the woman
received a small inheritance. Her brother said, "Here's your share. You
can live on it or you can use it to make the pilgrimage to Mecca." She
said, "I'll go on pilgrimage," and thanked her neighbor for the answered
prayer.
         It is said that if a woman who has just weaned a child, or a
woman whose baby has just died, or even a woman who has just given
birth enters the room, she may cause a blockage in the flow of a new
mother's breast milk, if not conception altogether. Even animals dogs,
cats, and donkeys who have just given birth can do this to a woman.
Women returning from funerals are careful never to enter the room
where a new mother sits; she must come out to greet them.
         If the blockage is caused by a woman wearing a gold medallion
necklace who enters the room of a new mother or bride who is not
wearing her own gold, the necklace should be dunked seven times in a
pot of water with which the blocked woman would then bathe on three
successive Fridays. A certain black-and-white stone bead blocks nursing
mothers. Yet this stone is good for fertility too if dipped in the bathing
                                   116

water seven times on three successive Fridays.
         Haj Sagr's wife Azza had not had a child in many years. She had
already tried undoing the blockage by stepping back and forth seven
times over the afterbirth of a friend. And when a neighbor's donkey
foaled, she had stepped seven times over its afterbirth. At first they had
thought she was blocked because just after her youngest son had died a
donkey that had just foaled had entered the courtyard where she was
sitting. Now, though, there was another theory.
         "She wants to go turn over her boy," her sister-in-law confided.
"Her son must have turned over on his face. When a child dies, they put
some stones under his head so he won't turn over. If he turns over on his
face, the mother doesn't get pregnant. Until she sets him right, she won't
be able to conceive."
         "On a Friday," clarified a visitor. She should go to the cemetery
and pick up a stone from someone's grave. At home she should bathe,
three Fridays in a row, in water in which she has soaked the stone. Then
she should return the stone to the cemetery, being careful to replace it
upside down. She should wear her dress inside out and be sure not to
leave the cemetery on the same path she used to enter.
         These remedies do not always work. Sometimes matters are more
serious, as a commotion one day in the camp showed. Two women were
spotted heading for a neighbor's house. They turned out to be the former
wife of our favorite neighbor and her mother. Ten years earlier, after a
few years of marriage, the woman had sworn by the local saint that her
husband was not a man and would never have children. She wanted a
divorce and got it. She had remarried, and so had he. But she was never
able to have children. She had gone everywhere for help. Now she had
come to him. Perhaps if he forgave her for swearing falsely against him,
God would grant her children. When she and her mother got to the door,
they were met by the man's current wife who later whispered, "You
should have seen her face when she saw me with my children there. She
said, 'Blessings on the Prophet!' I said, 'And these are just some of them.
The others are at school.' She came in and wept."


                     CHILDREN KEEP YOU COMPANY

       Living near us was an intelligent and hard-working man from a
poor branch of Haj Sagr's family. His two wives were both from the
                                    117

farming areas to the east – loud, amusing, and inseparable. The second
wife, no younger than the first, had just had her third child. The first was
childless and sometimes came by for consolation. "People always want
what they don't have," others remarked. "There's no profit in having
kids."
        The haggard young mother argued that all children did was tire
you out and give you headaches. She pointed out that her co-wife was
comfortable; she could sleep through the night. With a baby you're up
and down, up and down, your eyelids dropping as you try to manage.
"Listen," she said to me, "I don't know why everyone tries so hard to
have children. They suck your blood and sap your strength, and what do
they do for you? Nothing. In the end you die and what good are they?"
        Other tired mothers wonder if God could possibly call them to
account on the Day of Judgment. After all this bitterness – children and
work and exhaustion – could there be any more in the afterlife? There
just couldn't be, argued one of them; women couldn't possibly have any
sins counted against them. Some women took me aside to ask if I could
get them "something" to stop them having children. "You're better off,"
they sometimes said to me. "Better to stay light."
        Yet when someone like Ngawa would pick up her crying
newborn, women watching always said, "Blessings on the Prophet!"
They were careful to say this to protect the baby. Gateefa had told me
once about her eldest son, now skinny and prone to colds. "You should
have seen him when he was small. He was huge and fair. Then one day a
neighbor came by and said, 'I never thought you could have a boy like
this!' Well, the next day he woke up with a huge boil behind his ear. I
sent someone to the Sudanese religious healer who used to live nearby to
find out what had happened. The woman had entered on the boy and not
asked for the Prophet's blessings. She'd given him the eye. The healer
gave me an amulet, sewed something in a pouch, and said I should keep
it and put it on each child I had. For forty days."
        When I had asked what "the eye" was, Gateefa had answered,
"Whatever pleases the eye." Then she told a story about the Prophet's
daughter. The Prophet told his doubting daughter, "You don't believe in
envy? Do this: hide your baby and instead wrap a rock in its blanket
when the women come to visit." After the women left visitors who all
had said admiringly, "What a big healthy baby!" he told her to look at the
stone. She found it smashed to bits. That's envy.
        A newborn faces other dangers that were apparent when we sat
                                    118

with Ngawa and her new baby. Ngawa's youngest son, almost three and
curious about his new sister, leaned over his mother and tried to kiss the
baby, but he squeezed her a little roughly. And was he pulling her hair?
The women nearby challenged him, "Hey, little Ramadan, where did
your new sister come from?" "Hey, Ramadan, shall I take her home with
me?" "Hey, Ramadan, shall we take the little girl and throw her in the
irrigation ditch? What do you think?" He grew suddenly protective and
began to cry as he shook his head. When his mother asked gently, "Then,
shall we keep her?" he nodded. He watched intently when Ngawa pulled
out her breast to try to nurse the infant. This had been his until eight
months ago. Now the lap that had been his contained someone else. He
pushed the baby. At this his grandmother hollered for his older sister.
"Come here, Sultana.'' Silence. "Hey, you good-for-nothing. Get over
here to take your little brother." Ngawa murmured, "May God keep you
for me," as her daughter dragged him out.
         Ngawa laughed and asked if we'd heard what her other son had
said. He had challenged her: why was she still having children? "You're
an old woman, Mom," he'd said. "There are women younger than you
who've stopped having children."
         "Who?" she had demanded. "Name me someone." When she tried
to appease him with the offer to "do family planning," he'd been
condescending. "It's too late to do family planning, Mom! If you wanted
a planned family, you would have had to stop three kids ago."
         Older women seem reluctant to do anything for birth control
besides stepping on snail shells, burying date pits, or wearing on a string
amulets made of salted goat's penis. As one woman put it: "Childbearing
both its good and its bad is God-given. The other is the work of God's
servants – that's different. If something goes wrong it is better to have it
be between just you and God. That's better than if the servant had
interfered." She followed this with the story of a woman who underwent
four operations for a dislodged intrauterine device.
         I was holding a visitor's child in my lap. Her mother said, "You'll
like having babies. Having children is nice. They keep you company."


                   GOD CREATES THEM GOOD OR BAD

      "Welcome, welcome, welcome!" Several children dressed in their
rumpled beige school uniforms tumbled in, smiling shyly. They shook
                                   119

hands with the women, tossed their schoolbags on top of the rug pile,
and sat down next to their grandmother.
         The mothers complained about the costs of school. Every day the
children came wanting money one day for books, one day for pencils,
one day for food. And the teachers demanded fresh eggs to take back to
their city homes.
         One woman argued that the children hadn't learned a thing. It was
just a waste of money sending them to school. A woman from the next
village had all her daughters in school. She said school ruined them.
They got lazy and did nothing around the house. They stopped listening
to their mothers.
         Migdim contrasted the old Bedouin teachers who educated her
sons with today's Egyptian schools. "The Bedouin teacher," she said,
"wrote on a wood slate. He made ink out of burnt sheep's wool. The
children began by learning to read the letters. He would write in really
big letters, b, t, h, k, n. When they had recited these, he would erase the
board and write more letters for them. It was amazing how quickly one
came to understand with him."
         I asked if they didn't learn from the government schools.
         "Not like with the Bedouin," she said. "The religious teacher
would sort out the letters until they learned. Quickly they learned what
he wrote. But in the schools, they give them a book to write from. They
copy it, but they don't read it. They don't know what they're writing
because they just copy what is written. They don't know what it is. They
don't understand."
         The schoolchildren did not protest. They were used to the
women's blunt talk. They were used to being talked about: "Little
Sayyid's ears are too big" (to which his mother retorts, "When he grows
up the headdress will cover them"); "None of the girls in the camp are
appealing except Fawzia''; "Little Ali is just like his father, always
hanging his head"; "Hey, slave boy, how did you turn out so black?" (to
which his mother answers, "When he grows up to be a man and goes to
put his arm around you, I'll tell him what his aunt said about him!").
         As the women talked, the room filled with more and more
children. Their noise began to interfere with the women's conversation.
When two who were chasing each other fell against me, Migdim cursed,
"May pain take you! You beasts!" To her nine-year-old daughter,
Safiyya shouted, "You're not little anymore. Go get your sister some
clean clothes. Go feed your rabbits." To her little son and daughter she
                                    120

said gently, "Go, Mama's sweethearts, go with your sister." Then "Oh,
my head," she complained.
         "There didn't used to be so many children in the old days,"
commented Migdim. "They were always outside, playing or herding the
goats or sheep. Not like now. Then the kids didn't bother you; they didn't
get into everything."
         Gateefa was harsh. "Some people know how to raise their
children. Ours, they're not afraid of anyone, not even their father."
         Once I had asked, "What makes children turn out bad?"
         She had answered, "It's from God. God creates some good and
some bad."
         "Not from their parents?"
         "No, not from their parents."
         I had tried to keep the topic going. "Do you know that in America
parents blame themselves when their children turn out bad?"
         "Yes, even here some do," Gateefa's sister-in-law nodded. "If a
man does wrong – cheats in a hearing, lies, steals, kills people or wrongs
them – his children will be bad. This is from God. But if a man is good,
God rewards him with good sons. Look at Muftah Bu-Sultan. His uncles
are all thieves and murderers and their sons are worthless. But his father
was a good man. He never wronged anyone. And now look at his son
good, strong, healthy, and tall, and everyone respects him."
         Someone brought up a contrary example. "But what about
Hussein? He's a good man but all of his sons are lousy. Only one of them
is worth anything – the son of the older wife."
         "So is it thanks to the mother that a kid turns out well?" I asked.
         Gateefa said, "No, they say it is the mother's brother. A person
gets two-thirds from the mother's brother. If the mother's brother is good,
the boy will be."
         "But you know what else they say? If a mother is beautiful, her
children will be awful. There is a proverb: The mother with snot in her
nose, her children will be lovely."
         "Why would that be?" I wondered.
         "People would envy the beautiful one," was the answer.
         No one mentioned training or molding children, although they
sometimes pointed out that children imitated adults around them. I was
confused by the way women disciplined children in my household. If
two siblings began to quarrel and their exasperated mother, sitting on a
mat trying to cook with an infant in her lap, warned them to stop and
                                     121

they didn't, she would grab whatever was handy, usually a plastic sandal,
and hurl it. They'd duck and run off laughing. She would threaten to tell
their father when he got home. She'd shout for their older brother, "Come
here with a rod and hit these kids." But he wouldn't come, and the next
thing you'd know she was finished cooking and listening adoringly to the
children's excited stories as they lay with their heads in her lap.
         When daughters reached eight or nine, discipline was imposed
and they became mother's helpers. They would eventually grow up to be
their mothers' closest friends, but now, accustomed to earlier freedoms,
they often stubbornly refused to do what they were told. Then invectives
would fly. "You slut! You willful girl! You're not a little girl anymore!"
Later a mother would confide, "Girls are such a responsibility. You
worry about them all your life."


                                    SHOCK

        Out of breath, children came running in to announce some
visitors. The floor mat was swept quickly. It was the wives of old
Migdim's brothers, and we stood up to greet them warmly. Come to ask
after the health of their husbands' sister, the women sat awkwardly,
asking after everyone they could think of. Migdim sat close to them and
asked about her relatives. News was exchanged. After food was brought
and tea poured, the women's stories got longer. One asked Migdim about
a daughter-in-law: had she had any more children since the little girl she
had seen on her last visit there?
        "Yes," Migdim began, "She had another girl, but she died. And
then her mother died. She'd given birth eight days earlier when her
mother came east. Her family had set up camp on that southern ridge
over there because they wanted to wean their lambs.
        "The old woman's grandson, her daughter's boy, came along and
reversed the car into her and killed her. They'd told him, 'Over there, stay
far away, boy! Boy, don't come near, keep away. Son, the car doesn't
have any brakes!' But he started rolling in it, rolling in it until he ran over
his grandmother. She died instantly.
        "At the time, my daughter-in-law had just given birth to this girl.
Her husband was the one who told me. 'Her family just set up camp near
here and her mother has been killed – her grandson ran her over. Go tell
her, go tell.' I said, 'Oh my God, what can I say to her? What should I say
                                      122

to her? I can't ...' Should we tell her this, or tell her that? Finally her older
brother-in-law went in and told her: 'Your family had set up camp here
and now a car has knocked over your mother. She's got a broken leg.'
        "Well, the woman let out some wails. She said, 'God, she's
probably dead! God, it's none other than death!'
        "He told her, 'Get into the car. I'll take you there.'
        "They took her in her husband's car to where her family lives.
They had taken the old woman back immediately. She'd come in the
morning alive and went home dead. I rode with my son and his wife, and
we took the baby girl. I put her in my lap, and I took care of her little son
too. Until we got to Alamein. There they washed the body and buried the
old woman. There was nothing wrong with her at all except that the car
had run over her stomach. Killed her right away.
        "I stayed there eight days. But the children got sick; they got
measles, and I was taking care of the little baby and the boy. In the end, I
decided to take the boy and come home. We stopped at the clinic on the
way, and they gave the boy an injection. Then we came home.
        "She stayed there about fifteen days. When she came home, the
baby was sick. She brought the baby back, and four days later the little
girl died. After that she never got pregnant again."
        "From shock," offered Ngawa.
        "Shock is tough," she concurred.
        They asked about our new bride. We quietly said she was still
"washing," or getting her period. Had a religious healer been consulted?
Had the young husband perhaps been frightened or shocked? There were
many stories about shocks, the most devastating of which always
involved the loss of those one loved – especially one's own children.
        Dhahab, the older sister of Lawz and Ngawa, had a husband who
was legendary. He had married thirty-one wives. As Dhahab told it,
"Every day he brought us a new bride. He'd leave us feeding the animals
and tending the orchards, harvesting the figs, and working. He would
come back with a bride. Every year he married once."
        I was confused. "You mean they would actually hold a wedding
each year?"
        "Yes," Dhahab laughed, "we'd hold a wedding and ululate. Some
brides stayed a week, some stayed six months. There were those who
stayed fifteen months, two months, a month, and sometimes only a week.
My son asked me why, but I said I would not say anything. I told him, 'If
only God had given him. Your father hasn't had children.'
                                   123

         "This is what happened. When my son was only one month in my
womb, my co-wife's daughter was with me. One minute she was talking
with me – she was so young and beautiful – and the next thing she had
fallen in the well. Her father got shocked and went crazy. For a month he
could not sit up without hauling himself up with a rope. After that he
didn't have any more children. A healer came and wrote him some
amulets, but he took a long time getting better. He was sick for three or
four months after the girl died. He didn't have any more children, at all,
after that. And me, I had my only son in my womb, and that was that. I'd
had four daughters and then this son and then it ended. From shock.
         "And my co-wife didn't get pregnant either. He had been
shocked. And so, my dear, he'd bring a woman and she'd stay a year, stay
a year and a half, she'd stay a month or two or three. She wouldn't get
pregnant, and she'd leave. Until he got old. When he got old, his relatives
told him he shouldn't keep marrying. His sister said, 'Go have yourself
examined if you want to have children. Go find a doctor for yourself, or
a religious healer. Go to someone. You're the one with the problem, it
seems.' "
         In a whisper she gave details of what happened. "His aunt, his
father's sister, was an old woman, and she knew about men. She said to
us, 'If a man doesn't have children, it is because of a shock. He must have
been shocked. If a man doesn't have children, we must look at the cloth
that he and his wife wipe themselves with.' She told us to hide it under
the bed and bring it to her in the morning. We brought it to her in the
morning, and when she looked at it she said, 'No, that one can't conceive.
There's nothing there. Because of shock he's only producing water.'
         "So she told him, 'You can't have children anymore.' 'How's that?
But I've had all these children.' She said, 'You had the kids before. But
after the girl fell in the well she gave you a shock and you haven't had
any since then. Go find yourself a religious healer.'
         "So finally a Sudanese healer started writing amulets for him.
He'd gotten older and older, so when he went to try to arrange marriages
people would turn him away. What young woman would want him when
he was an old man? But finally he married the mother of the girls. She
was very young. And then he married another wife. And both of them
had children with him – one had two girls, and the other two boys."
         Gateefa, who had heard the story from her maternal aunt, the
girl's mother, told it with a different emphasis. She spoke of the beauty
of the girl who had died, a young woman who had fasted only five
                                    124

Ramadans. She had just had a marriage request, and they were getting
things ready. The day she died she was wearing a red dress. Her
grandmother had just cut the fabric for the red-bordered white slip she
would use on her wedding day. She was heading off somewhere, but her
grandmother asked her first to fetch water from the well. Before she left,
her father looked at her and said of his future in-laws, "By God, she's
being wasted on them!"
         She went off, carrying a water jar. She was wearing embroidered
boots, and her legs were strong. Her hair came down to her waist, and
her eyes ... never mind her eyes. At the well she filled her jar, and then a
neighbor of theirs, an old woman, came to fill hers. The girl offered to
fill her containers for her and then sat on the edge to wash her feet. She
put her boots back on, but as she rose to pick up her water jar her foot
slipped on the side and she fell in. Straight in. She had nothing to grab on
to. They sent for divers from Alexandria, but they could not get her out
until late the next day. They dragged her up by her belt.
         Shocks are said to make even stranger things happen than
infertility. One woman said she'd had a fetus in her womb for thirteen
years. When she had been four months pregnant she saw a train hit
something. She feared it was her two sons because she knew they were
out herding the sheep. As it turned out, the train had only hit a few ewes.
But from that moment, she swore, what was in her womb stopped
moving. She didn't want to do anything about it because she was
embarrassed to be pregnant at all. She was already the mother of grown
sons. Just as well, she thought. A local woman healer felt around and
said the baby was parked in her side. For twelve years the baby girl
remained parked there. Then, one day, in a sandstorm, the woman
witnessed a train collision. When the trains crashed she felt something in
her side, as if a stone had just been flipped over. This released it and the
baby got better and she gave birth to a girl.
         I asked how long she had carried the fetus after it had come to
life again. Nine months was the answer. When a young woman disputed
the story – "How can a baby be dead and then come to life? It would
become putrid" – the woman swore it was true.
         Since countershocks seem the best way to undo the damage of a
first shock, whenever a large snake was found and killed in the area,
women would insist that it be used to frighten someone who was having
trouble conceiving. In our community, this was said to have worked with
two people, one man and one woman. Cars turning over, mines
                                    125

exploding, or even loud noises can have the same effect.
        Not all shocks that bring illness are bad. A former neighbor
("Many blessings upon her") had just celebrated the first annual festival
in honor of the saint who had possessed her after the death of a son. She
was now a healer. I had visited her once when she still lived nearby, in
the company of Lawz, who was trying to wean a child. We had found the
healer dressed in the white robe of the men; instead of the typical black
headcloth, she wore a white headscarf over a green kerchief. About eight
months pregnant, she sat cross-legged at a low table, her belly pressing
tightly against the robe.
        Her voice was hoarse as she indicated we should sit and wait in
the adjoining room. When we were invited in, she spoke in a deep voice.
"What do you want?"
        She asked Lawz's name and her mother's name (which she knew
perfectly well in her ordinary state). She made a few scratches with a Bic
pen in a child's notebook. These looked like numbers. She whispered, "In
the name of God, in the name of God." She looked down at the paper,
then at her upturned palm. She talked but didn't say much. "Are you
dizzy?" she asked. "Tell me if what I'm saying is true or not." Lawz
agreed, "Right, right. Right.''
        Then she scribbled, filling page after page of a notebook. She
whispered as she wrote. After she had covered each page, she spat on it.
Then she tore the pages out and folded some incense into them. Others
she tore into scraps. "For burning with incense. For massaging your
body. Bathe in the water in which you've soaked the papers. Right before
dawn."
        She sprayed Lawz's head and rubbed some of her spit (with its
blessings) onto the suffering woman's chest. "How blessed she is," the
women kept saying.
        The story was that she had been an ordinary woman, just like the
rest of them. Then one day, when she was away visiting maternal
relatives, her ten-year-old son was hit by a car. It was dusk, and the two
of them had been walking along the road. She tells people that when she
wanted to cry out, two apparitions came before her, one with a beard.
The bearded one put his hand over her mouth and sprayed her with water
to stop her from crying or lamenting the boy. After that, all she would
say about the death was, "His life came from God." A year later she fell
ill. They took her to doctors and to local healers. Finally they took her to
a woman healer who told her that she had been possessed by a saint. To
                                   126

cure herself, she would have to begin drumming and trancing to become
a healer.
         As Ngawa put it, after the woman's son was killed, "She fell ill
and started going to doctors and going here and there. But she didn't get
better. Finally she went to a woman healer. And when she went to her –
this after what? After she had gotten worn out from going to all the
doctors she talked about the one who had possessed her. The healer said
he had told her, 'I came to her because I was afraid for her. She would
have gone mad if I had not. I have forbidden her to cry over her son.' He
had also said, 'She should build me a tomb and make me a resting place.'
What he said, the healer told her to do. And she did it. Then when she
started to hold trance sessions, the saint would come to her. Her voice
becomes the voice of an old man." Those who come to her God frees
from illness.
         Women say that it is a sin to cry over one's little children who
die. It is said that for every tear you shed there will be one less drop of
water in the jug your child brings to you in heaven. It is said that your
dead children come running to greet you, carrying a jug of water. A
woman, they say, should not get upset, because it comes from God. But
their stories show the pain of shock.


                     "TELL ME A STORY, GRANDMA"

         The sun was getting low in the sky. Children lying on the floor,
their schoolbooks spread before them, were trying to do their homework.
Other children played nearby, sometimes taking a workbook on their
laps and turning the pages to look at the illustrations. Older daughters
were in and out, preparing for the evening. We thought about going,
since it was a long walk home.
         "Daddy's car! Daddy's car!" Little Mastura had spotted her father
driving slowly over the rutted dirt approach. She ran out to hug him. His
nephews went out to greet him and lead him into the men's guest room.
We knew now that we would stay for supper while he spent a
companionable evening with his brothers and their guests. Nice to catch
a ride home.
         In the stew were a few chunks of fatty meat from the market.
These were placed before the guests. We ate, dipping the freshly baked
bread in the bowls of vegetable stew. The kerosene burner was brought
                                   127

in and tea cooked slowly in an enamel teapot. The youngest children
were already beginning to drop off to sleep, lying on the mat with their
heads resting on a mother's or an aunt's leg. Mothers rubbed their
sleeping children's hair, feeling for lice. One fussy child, crying and
looking around while lying in his mother's lap, was suddenly covered
with a blanket and rocked. "Hush, hush. Quiet! There's a dog trying to
come in. Get out of here dog! You'd better go to sleep quick."
        It was dark, despite the lantern. People drew closer and talked.
Some of the children asked for stories. "Tell us a little story," they
pleaded with their grandmother. I asked for the story of the old man and
the old woman. They laughed.
        "You want to hear this one, Lila?"
        Old Migdim told the story about the old woman and old man who
traveled into the desert and set up camp in a lonely area where there were
wolves. They had brought with them seven goats, a cow, a donkey, and a
puppy. The first night, a wolf came to the tent. He called out:

       “Hey old man, Hey old woman
       O cow who's stopped milking
       O seven black goats
       O little braying donkey
       O little yelping puppy
       Give me someone for dinner tonight
       Or else, Humm, I'll eat you!"

        So the old man and woman gave him a goat.
        He came the next night and called out the same thing, asking,
"Who will you give me to eat for dinner tonight?" They gave him
another goat. This went on night after night until the old couple had
given the wolf all seven goats, their donkey, their cow, and their puppy.
        Then they realized that they had no more animals to give him and
that he would eat them. The old man said to his wife, "Hide me in a
basket and hang it from the tent pole. And you, hide in the big urn." So
she hung up the basket with the old man in it, and she hid inside the
pottery urn.
        When the wolf came that night, no one answered his call. He
came into the tent and sniffed around. Then he looked up.
        Now, the basket had a tear in it, and the old man's genitals were
showing, they were dangling out of the hole in the basket. The wolf
                                   128

started jumping up trying to bite them. The old woman watching this
started laughing so hard she farted. This split open the urn she was
hiding in, and the wolf ate her. Then he nipped at the old man's genitals
until he pulled down the basket and ate the old man too. And then he
went to sleep in their little tent.
         As with all stories, this one ended with "And they went far away
and I came back." This time it was amid much laughter. One of the
women commented, "She was laughing, the old woman was laughing at
the wolf biting her husband's thing."
         Then someone begged, "Grandma, tell us that story Aunt Dhahab
told, the one with Bu-Taroori!" The women laughed again. Dhahab told
good stories, unlike her younger sister Ngawa, who always lost the
thread. Once when their brother Sagr had found us together trying to
record stories, he'd made fun of Ngawa, saying, "My sister, you're not
the right one to do this. Dhahab's the one with a clear mind. You, your
mind's busy with children and how to make ends meet."
         After some moments the various conversations stopped as the old
woman struggled to recall the story her daughter had told them on her
last visit.
         "She said there was Khwayteela and Bu-Taroori, and they had
three daughters. Bu-Taroori said, 'Come on, let's go visit our girls.' But
then he said to his wife, 'Khwayteela, what are we going to take for
them? What are we going to take?' She said to him, 'Don't worry, you
take a sack and I'll take a sack and we'll fill them with shit and we'll go
drop in on them.' "
         A woman listening exclaimed, "What nerve!" The rest of the
women and girls laughed. Then, with a look at my tape recorder, "And
this is going to go all the way to America!"
         "So, my dears," the old woman continued, "they went off to their
daughters. They came to one and gave her the sack of shit. Seems she
figured it was candy or cookies, and so she threw it in the corner and that
was that. And they spent the night with her, they had dinner. In the
morning she said to them, 'Why don't you stay here while I go to get
water from the well.' Her house was full of containers of honey and oil.
They must have been merchants. And who knows what their problem
was, but they started spilling the oil, and spilling the honey. They'd yank
open the tops 'Here Khwayteela, hold this!' 'Grab this, Bu-Taroori ...'
When their daughter came back she yelled, 'What a rotten visit!'
         "So they went off to see the other daughter. This one, they gave
                                    129

her a sack, and she threw it out. This one had a little baby. They spent
the night with her, and in the morning she said to them, 'Here, hold my
son while I get water from the well. I'll be back.' She left. The boy
started crying and crying. The old man, with the help of his wife, killed
the baby and it died. They covered him and put him to bed. The boy's
mother came back and asked, 'How's the baby?' He said, 'The child is
over there sleeping.'
        "She found him dead and shouted, 'Rottenest of visits! Rottenest
of visits! Get out of here, go before your friends [her in-laws] catch you.
The people will kill you. Move, move! Run, run!'
        "They got up and ran. They ran and ran. ... They walked and
walked until they came upon a house that had a dead sheep in it. They
opened it up and cut out its stomach. Bu-Taroori pulled on the stomach
and stretched it out and cut it and then wore it as a cap. And the old
woman wound the intestines around her waist as a belt.
        "He said to her, 'Hey Khwayteela, by the Prophet, aren't I
handsome in this cap?' She said, 'You really are handsome! And me,
aren't I beautiful in this belt?' He said, 'You'd be really beautiful if it
weren't for that fly sitting on your nose!' A fly that was wandering
through the filth had landed on her nose. She said, 'Smack it, Bu-
Taroori.' Bu-Taroori whacked it with a stake. This smashed her nose and
she died.
        "He started jumping up and down and wailing. He started wailing
and began to go fart, fart, fart, fart. 'What's this, you asshole?' he said.
'Farting when my sister's dead? By God, you're asking for fire.' So, my
dears, he went and made a fire and shoved a metal pin in it, like this
pestle we grind with. Then he rammed it in his asshole. He died."
        Ngawa's sister-in-law objected that this wasn't a good story. "Has
Lila heard the story of Ngaarij?" Yes, I had. "How about Rjuu'?" Yes, I'd
heard that one. "Tell her the story of Slaysla," said one of the older girls.
"That one's good." And so we heard the tale which goes something like
this:
        Once there was a boy and girl whose mother died. She left them a
cow. Their father remarried, and the stepmother (their father's wife) had
a girl and a boy. Every day the boy and girl would take the cow out to
pasture. They'd come home and the stepmother wouldn't feed them –
she'd mix a little flour in water and put that out for them to eat. But every
day when they went out with the cow they would call to it, "We're
feeling hungry," and the cow would come close and urinate milk and shit
                                     130

dates. They'd fill a whole bowl, and they would eat dates and milk until
they were full.
         The stepmother began to wonder, "My son and daughter are dark
and ugly and these two are beautiful. Why, if what they eat all day is
grazing plants?" So she called her son to her and pointed this out. She
told him to go out with them the next day to see what they ate.
         So the next day the boy went out with them. They called to him
and said, "We'll show you something, but promise not to tell a soul?" He
promised. They called the cow and said, "O cow of ours, we're hungry.
Shit us some dates and urinate milk." They milked her, and they drank
milk and ate dates until they were full. Then they went home. When his
mother questioned the boy, he said indeed, they ate nothing but grass.
         So the next day she called her daughter to her and pointed out
how lovely the other children were. She told her to go out with them and
see what they ate. The same thing happened, but the girl came home and
told her mother.
         This woman then pretended she was sick. She lay on her bedding,
having put a sack of dry bread under her, complaining that her back hurt.
She would move on her bedding and say the noise made by the dry bread
came from her back. Then a peddler came by. She paid him a lot of
money to pretend that he was a religious healer, and she told him to
prescribe the sacrifice of a cow. He wrote her some amulets to rub
herself with and then, when the husband came home, told him he should
sacrifice a cow. The husband said, "Oh, we have a cow." He called to his
children to bring their cow.
         Their half-brother came to find them and tell them to bring the
cow for sacrifice. They sent him home, saying they would follow. Then
they went to the cow and told her, "If they make you lie down, don't do
it; and if they cut your throat, don't let them; and if they cut you up, don't
let them; and if they cook you, don't let them; and if they eat you, don't
let them."
         With that they took the cow home. When their father tried to
make the cow lie down, he couldn't. Finally he asked the children to
make her. They said, "Lie down," and the cow did. Then, try as he might,
he couldn't slaughter her until he asked the children to make her submit.
They told her to let him sacrifice her. On and on, the same happened
with the butchering, the cooking (the meat cooked for hours and hours
and refused to be done), and the eating. When they came to eat the meat
they couldn't, and so each person threw away his portion.
                                    131

         The girl and boy collected the pieces of meat in a sack and the
next day took them far away. They buried each chunk and watered them
separately. From each piece sprang a fruit tree a date palm, an apple tree,
an orange tree, and so forth. Every day they would go out to that place
and call to the trees, "Lower yourself, our tree, we're hungry." The tree
would bend over and they'd climb on, and then the tree would straighten
up. They'd eat until full, then say, "Bend down, we're full now." And the
tree would let them down.
         Now, the stepmother began to wonder. She thought, I've killed
their cow but here they are, beautiful and healthy, and I don't feed them.
She sent her son out with them. He saw, but he didn't tell his mother. The
next day she sent her daughter, who related what she had seen. So the
mother went to get a woodcutter. But the woodcutter, when he got near
the trees, found a big snake coiled around. He couldn't chop the tree
down. She ordered him to, but he refused.
         Frustrated, the stepmother devised a new scheme. She sent her
stepdaughter, Slaysla, to borrow a sieve from the female ghoul. The girl
set off. She passed a tall tree and said, "Good morning!" The tree greeted
her, "May your length be in your braids, not in your legs." She passed a
horse and said, "Good morning!" He responded, "May my whiteness be
in your cheeks, not in your eyes." She passed a crow and said, "Good
morning!" The crow answered, "May my blackness be in your eyes, not
in your cheeks." Then she passed a peddler and said, "Good morning."
He said, "Here, take these sesame seeds, and when the ghoul asks you to
delouse her, pick out the lice and pop these sesame seeds into your
mouth saying how delicious her lice are."
         Finally she reached the tent of the old ghoul. "Good morning,
Grandmother," she said to the old lady. "Good morning," answered the
ghoul.
         "I came to borrow a sieve."
         The ghoul said, "First knock down the tent." So Slaysla tightened
all the guy ropes, swept the tent, and got it all nice. Then the ghoul said,
"Break my dishes." Slaysla washed all the dirty dishes and stacked them
neatly. The ghoul said, "Go shit outside my tent." So the girl took a
broom and swept all around the tent. Then the ghoul said, "Come groom
me." The girl sat down, and the old ghoul put her head in her lap. Slaysla
began to groom her, picking out the lice and throwing them away and
eating the sesame seeds saying, "Your lice are delicious, Grandma." She
did this until she had completely cleaned her scalp.
                                   132

         Then the ghoul said, "Come help me get water from the well.
Which would you prefer that I lower you with a thin or a thick rope?"
The girl chose the thin rope. The ghoul lowered her into the well saying,
"O well, Slaysla has come; fill her with gold and silk."
         The girl came up glimmering with gold and silver. When her
stepmother saw her come home with all this gold she called her own
daughter to her and said, "Go return the sieve to the old ghoul and come
back with lots of gold like Slaysla."
         So Umm Zabarbar headed off. She passed the peddler, but
instead of saying "Good morning" she said, "Look at the man who's
harvesting in the morning." To the tree she said, "Boy, what a tall tree!"
On and on, insulting everyone. Finally she got to the old ghoul's. She
said, ''Good morning, old lady, I came to return the sieve."
         The ghoul told her to knock down the tent, so she did. Then she
told her to break the dishes, so Umm Zabarbar broke all the dishes. Then
she told her to shit all over the yard, so she went from place to place
defecating. Then she said, "Come delouse me." She put her head in the
girl's lap and the girl started picking lice from her hair and eating them,
saying how awful her lice tasted. Then the ghoul asked her to help get
water. "Do you want a thin or a thick rope?" she asked. The girl said, "I
want a thick rope." (She was afraid she'd fall in the well.) As she lowered
her into the well, the ghoul said, "O well, Umm Zabarbar has come;
cover her with donkey hides and scorpions."
         The girl came up screaming, covered with snakes and scorpions,
donkey hides and dog skins. She ran screaming all the way home. Her
mother was horrified when she saw her so hideous. She picked off all the
scorpions and snakes and yelled at her.
         Then one day some people came to ask for Slaysla in marriage.
When they came to pick her up for the wedding, the stepmother put her
own daughter in the covered litter. Slaysla she put in the oven room to
bake bread. Each of the girls had a pet cat, and Slaysla's cat meowed:
"Slaysla's sitting baking bread and Umm Zabarbar's in the carrier." Umm
Zabarbar's cat meowed the opposite. The men overheard this and asked
what was going on. "It's just the cats fighting," said the stepmother.
         But the men listened. Then they went in and took the cloak off
the bride in the litter. They said, "That's not our bride!" So they went to
the oven and found their girl. They dressed her up, gave her clothes; she
already had her gold from the ghoul. They carried her off on the camel to
her husband's home. They had the wedding, the groom slept with her at
                                    133

night, and they celebrated in the morning.
        Slaysla stayed with her husband's family for a long time without
going to visit her own family. After a while her brother wondered why
she hadn't come. Her stepmother volunteered to go pay a visit. She went.
She told Slaysla her father was sick and that she should come with her.
So Slaysla left with the woman.
        They walked and walked and walked, into an area that had no
one in it. The stepmother suggested they rest a bit and offered to delouse
Slaysla. She groomed her until the girl fell asleep. Gently she lifted her
head off her lap and took off running, abandoning her.
        The sun was shining, and it heated the earring resting on Slaysla's
cheek and woke her up. She looked around north, south, east, west but
saw she was alone. She started crying. Then she started walking. In the
distance she saw several tents, but when she approached she found them
all closed, so she decided to keep going. When she looked back she saw
that they were all tombs. She said God's name and kept walking.
        She came upon another tent. She looked all around but didn't see
anyone. She went in and saw tombs in the tent. Also, there was a pot of
rice on the fire. There was also a big chest in the tent, and she decided to
hide in it. Toward sunset she cooked some vegetable stew, baked some
bread, ate dinner, and left the rest of the food out. She climbed into the
box and shut herself in.
        Shortly thereafter a man arrived. He found dinner ready and was
surprised. Later his two brothers returned. There were three brothers
living there, herding camels. They took turns with the cooking. The other
two were surprised that he had made them dinner so early: usually he
didn't get it ready so fast. But he decided to say nothing. They had dinner
and stayed up talking.
        The next day, the girl cooked rice, ate, and made herself a pot of
tea. Then she got ready another pot of tea, put water, tea, and sugar in the
pot, and left the rice on the fire. She climbed back in the chest. The
second brother came home to make dinner and was shocked to find it all
ready. When the brothers returned he told them what had happened.
They decided that one of them should stay home the next day. He would
hide and find out who was cooking for them. So the next day, one of
them hid.
        When she thought everyone was gone, the girl got out of the box
and set about cleaning. When she went out to tighten the tent ropes, the
brother grabbed her. "Who are you?" She said, "I'm a Muslim." Then she
                                    134

told her story. When the other brothers came home they heard her story
and then asked her what she wanted to do – marry one of them, go back
to her husband, or find her old family. She said she'd stay and marry one
of them. They decided she should marry the eldest brother, so she did
and she stayed with them.
        And that's the end. They went away and I came back.


                                    SONS

        "Lila! Come on." The engine was running and we said our good
nights. The stars, as always, were bright as we made our way back.
Through the shutters we could see lights still on at home, but we had to
bang hard on the door before one of the girls opened. The creases in her
reddened cheek spoke of sleep.
        "Put down a mat. And get a pillow for Lila's back," Sagr ordered
his daughter. A barefoot toddler rounded the corner, followed by
Gateefa. He was affectionate with the little girl. "Welcome, welcome,
welcome. What's this? Haven't you fallen asleep yet?" He cuddled her,
nibbling on her neck as he pretended to be a ghoul and remarking to me
that the youngest child is always the dearest. Winking at his embarrassed
wife he said, "That's why I want to keep having children." He was not
one of those fathers who remained distant from his children, he insisted.
He reminded me that I had seen him with his children crawling over him
and riding him like a horse while he was trying to do business. I had also
seen him clipping his young daughters' fingernails and even sometimes
wiping their runny noses.
        Everyone loves children, he added. All little creatures are cute,
even puppies. You see how God created things! There is an old story,
that they once asked an old man, "Who is your favorite?" He said:

       "The one who's absent, until he returns
       The one who's ill, until he recovers
       And the one who's small, until he gets big."

        But a girl is not like a boy – he will become a man; the girl
doesn't have as much strength of will. As long as her father is alive, a girl
does not feel any pain. But when he dies, it is hard on her. Daughters,
Sagr said, are dearer to him than sons.
                                    135

         A father doesn't want anything from his daughter. He just wants
to make sure she marries well and can take care of herself. But a son
needs testing. He must make sure he has turned out well, has managed to
make a living. If not, his father must yell at him. This is not because he
doesn't love his son. That could never be. No matter what they do, a
father can't stop loving his children. It is possible for a child to abandon
his father or mother, but not the reverse. A proverb says, "The one who
gives birth is not like the one born."
         Sagr asked me what I'd done all day. I told him where I had been
and mentioned that I had tape-recorded stories the women had been
telling.
         He objected. "These stories, Lila, they're not true. An old woman
or old man will tell them to the grandchildren. We call them 'little
somethings.' Children love this sort of talk."
         A sleepy Gateefa added, "If a child is unhappy, he says, 'Please
tell me a story.' We use stories to bribe them. 'If you do this say, go take
the goats out to graze then I'll tell you some stories.' So the kid goes and
does what you ask so he can get a story."
         Sagr went on, "What is worth writing are tales of things that
really happened. That's what should become known, the stories with real
meaning. There was so much good poetry before. Not anymore. I used to
know so much. You need to find someone who's relaxed and carefree
enough to remember. When I'm busy and worried about things, I can't
get it right. Yesterday, when I was alone and had no guests, I
remembered a lot of poems. But now I've lost them again."
         After a short silence, he began, "For example, there was once a
rich important man. His brother had been killed by another tribe. His
brother had been very dear to him, and so he went blind. He stopped
seeing. He did nothing about it. His sons were young, so he waited until
they grew up. When they had become young men, he gathered the three
of them and said, 'Come here. Anyone who wants something should tell
me and I'll get it for him.'

       "The eldest son said to his father:
       'I want a small herd of she-camels
       and a prancing stallion
       and to live with the daughter of a good man.'
       "He turned to his second son. 'And you?'
       'I want some milking camels
                                    136

       and a majestic horse to ride on
       and to live with the daughter of a tribal leader.'

      "The old man said fine. But this wasn't what he wanted to hear.
He wanted something about avenging his brother. He turned to the
youngest son, 'And you?' The young man said:

       'I want to be up on a young mare
       And for times to change
       To pursue someone who owes me and who had hidden
       But like a fool has now forgotten our debt.'

        "The father said to him, 'You shall succeed me. You are going to
be in charge.' And to those others he said, 'Okay, go. You'll get what you
want.' Then he bought the young man his mare, and he bought him a
gun. And his son set off. Day followed day followed day until the young
man found the one who had killed his uncle. He killed him and returned
home.
        "It's a pity," Sagr added, "this was a long tale with lots in it, but
I've forgotten how most of it goes."
        We talked about having sons. It used to be, Sagr explained, that
you needed sons. If you didn't have men, no one would respect you.
They'd push you around. Gateefa protested. These days, she said, having
many sons was a bad idea. You men all want to marry wives so you can
have sons, she accused. But strength isn't in numbers. She gave the
example of their grandfather. He was an only son, yet nothing could
happen in his whole tribe without his being consulted first. And he was
wealthy. The men, she complained, say that their bounty comes from
God. But they forget how much they inherited. Their grandfather was
wealthy, and his sons were only a few. Now if they were to divide the
land, there would hardly be a square meter for each.
        Yet, Sagr pointed out, women want sons as much as men do.
Hadn't I noticed, he asked me, giving his wife a glance, that as women
get older, they use their children to dominate their husband? They pay
less and less attention to their husband. They tell him to go to hell. A
woman raises her sons to displace him. Once she has grown sons, she
doesn't need a husband at all.
        But sons, at least according to folktales Gateefa had told, seemed
only sometimes to be good to their mothers. One tale I had recorded
                                    137

about mothers and sons and sisters was an odd moral tale. This was how
Gateefa told it: There were two sisters. Each one married a man. One of
them had children, and the other was barren. She didn't have children. So
she started trying to have children, she went looking for children. She
went to her sister and said to her, "My sister, I haven't gotten pregnant,
and now the man wants to take a second wife. What do you think?" Her
sister said to her, "My dear, I'm pregnant. Why don't you come back the
month I'm due? When I have the baby, you can take it."
        Time passed, time passed. Finally the woman told her husband,
"My sister is going to have her baby this month. I'll just go and bring
back the baby." She went. She went and stayed with her sister until she
gave birth. She washed her clothes for her, cooked for her, and cared for
her. Eventually she said to her, "My sister, I want to go home now. What
do you think? Will you give me your baby?"
        But her sister said, "Oh! I just can't do that."
        "What? How could you lie to me? I came here and spent a month
with you and I told my husband you were giving me the baby. I told him
to wait until you'd marked your fortieth day and then come for me."
        Her husband came. He had brought her a camel, and he had
brought her a blanket for the baby. So she bundled an extra dress, to
make it look like a baby, and she wrapped this in another dress and
carried it in the blanket. They traveled and traveled until they got close to
the camp.
        Then she said she had to stop. When they got close to the camp
she got down and said she wanted to go over to a shrub. She told her
husband he should go on ahead and she would follow. Her husband
asked why. She said, "For the child. Go ahead, I'll catch up with you."
(She was just lying. There was no child, but she didn't know what to do.)
She began walking and walking. He went ahead on the camel, and she
stayed behind.
        Soon she saw a bird come down from the sky and peck at
something. She went toward it. She walked and walked, and when she
got close she saw that someone had left a baby there. It was still crying.
She got a bit of broken glass and cut the umbilical cord, swaddled the
baby, wiped him clean, and bundled him up. And she went home with
him.
        See? See what God sent down for her? So she walked and
walked. Her neighbors greeted her ululating and announcing, "She had a
baby! She had a baby!" The women came to visit and bring gifts.
                                   138

        After about a year, she got pregnant. She got pregnant and had
another boy. Time passed, and then her sister came to visit. She had sent
for her to attend the circumcision celebration for the boys. Of course, the
last time she had seen her, she had refused to give up her child.
        Her sister was surprised. "What's this, my sister? When did you
have a baby?"
        The woman said, "My dear, God gave me of his bounty. I came
and stayed with you, and when I went home I went blind crying. I got off
the camel, afraid to come home and have the women laugh at us when
the man came saying I was carrying my new baby. I didn't know how I
would lie. I was embarrassed, so I said to myself, I'll stay here until God
opens a way for me. I brought the bundle with me. Then I saw a bird
pecking at something, wanting to eat it. I rescued the baby, wiped it off,
and took it home. I raised him and cared for him, and a year after I
weaned him God granted me my own child. And I had him and now I
want to circumcise him." Then she gave her sister a dress and a scarf and
some gifts for her boys.
        Time passed, and the boys grew tip. One would ask, "Mom, what
can I get you?" The other would ask, "Mom, what can I do for you?"
        But the other woman, the one with seven sons, got thrown out.
The sister who had denied her a child was thrown out by her sons. One
day she arrived carrying her bundle of clothes on her head. "Who's this?
Who's this?" "It's your sister," she said. "My boys threw me out and I
want to stay with you."
        Her sister said, "Come in." And her sons said, "Here is a house
for our mother and for our mother's sister. And here is our house.
Whatever we bring for our mother, we'll bring for our aunt." If they
brought clothing, they'd bring the same thing for both of them. And if
they brought food, they'd bring equally for both of them.
        Time passed and passed, but not a single one of the other
woman's sons came to support her. Not a single one came looking for
her. So she stayed with her sister until finally she died. She got old and
died.
        The boys said, "Should we bury her before even sending for her
sons?" Their mother said, "Go tell them, 'Your mother has died.' " One of
the young men went and told them, "Hey men, come. Your mother has
died. Come attend." They said, "No, we won't attend. Bury her wherever
you want to. We don't want to bury her. We don't want her.''
        So her sister held the funeral for her and buried her. And she told
                                  139

her sons, "This woman is like a holyperson. There's no one in the world
like this dear one who died. Every year I want you to make a pilgrimage
to her tomb."
        When they did, the boys found some gold, a pot full of gold.
They'd circle around the tomb and they'd find a little pot of gold by her
head. They showed their mother. She said, "Don't tell anyone." Every
day that they went to visit her tomb, they found gold. They kept making
pilgrimages to her tomb until they became wealthy.
        Good mothers, bad mothers. Good sons, bad sons. There is pain
for mothers whose sons do not come to ask each day, "Mom, what can I
get for you? Mom, what can I do for you?" In a poor family like
Ngawa's, a son might leave to find work. In fact, Ngawa's husband's
older brother had a son in Libya. After ten years, they had despaired of
his return. His mother's song for him was a song about herself.

       My dear, have you forgotten my love?
       Oh how long I carried you around ...
                                       141

CHAPTER 4: PATRILATERAL PARALLEL-COUSIN MARRIAGE



       Prohibited to you are: your mothers, daughters, sisters, father's
       sisters, mother's sisters, brother's daughters, sister's daughters,
       foster-mothers (who gave you suck), foster-sisters, your wives'
       mothers, your step-daughters under your guardianship, born of your
       wives to whom you have gone in, no prohibition if you have not gone
       in; wives of your sons proceeding from your loins; and two sisters in
       wedlock at one and the same time, except for what is past; for God is
       oft-forgiving, most merciful.

       Also (prohibited are) women already married, except those your
       right hands possess. Thus hath God ordained against you. Except for
       these, all others are lawful, provided you seek them with gifts from
       your property, desiring chastity, not fornication.

               - Qur'an 4:23-24



         Sabra shyly pulled out from under the bed a bulging suitcase. As
she dusted it off and unbuckled the straps, she mumbled that her mother
had been saving up for her. One by one she began showing me the
swaths of dress fabric. This one, a patterned olive-green silk, was a gift
from a Saudi friend of her father's; that one, a pink flowered polyester,
came from her mother's aunt, who had brought it back from the
pilgrimage to Mecca. The solid-yellow satin she had traded with a
neighbor for a red that her mother's maternal uncle had brought for his
niece. In the jumble I spotted something familiar: a beige nylon
nightgown with a maroon ribbon I had brought from Boston many years
earlier as a gift for Sabra's mother, Gateefa. In among the fabric were
cheap perfume, bead necklaces, fringed scarves, and tiny glass bottles of
musk.
         "It's better to have this cloth ready," Sabra commented on the
contents of the suitcase, "so you can put the whole brideprice into gold.
Especially if you marry within the family, because then the brideprice is
so much less."
         Marriage was on her mind, just as it had been when I had first
come to live with her family in 1978, seven years earlier.
         She was fourteen at that time, and, along with her other grown
sisters, she had slept in the same room with me during that first winter.
                                   142

On those long dark evenings after the others had gone to bed we would
chat about many things. The girls' favorite topic had been weddings.
        One evening they drew pictures for me. Concentrating hard,
Sabra, who had never been to school and had rarely held a pen, began to
draw a line of trucks and cars. "A wedding procession," she explained.
She showed me the bride, sitting in a Peugeot, the piles of stuff she was
bringing along with her packed onto the roofs of the cars, and finally, in
the rear, the truck carrying her bed and wooden wardrobe.




        Long before I attended my first wedding in the community, I
knew what to expect. The girls had been anxious to describe the events.
They sang me wedding songs softly, so no one could hear them, and they
went over the whole procedure. Sabra introduced me to the terminology
for the marriage negotiations, the gifts brought for the bride, the wedding
procession, the defloration. She described how families agreed to a
marriage, and what the girl's parents and relatives bought with the
brideprice: blankets, a bed, suitcases, a wardrobe, and the bride's gold
earrings, a necklace, a ring, bracelets. I had already seen this jewelry,
identical except for weight, on all but the poorest of the married women
in the community.
        Sabra and her sisters were particularly animated when they
described the wedding day. In the morning the bride would get dressed
up and wait, surrounded by her women relatives and neighbors. Cars
from the groom's family would come early to fetch her lots of cars with
lots of women. Young men, too. One car would come right up to the
door so she could get in. They'd clap and sing and the drivers would toot
their horns. On the way, the cars would circle around the local saint's
tomb four times for blessings and then go on to the groom's father's
house. The groom, Sabra explained, would not be there but at a
neighbor's, because he was thought to be too embarrassed to be around
his father. The older men and their guests would all be gathered in the
                                   143

men's guest room or a large tent. The bride, her face covered, would be
brought into the room that would be hers and welcomed by women
singing and drumming around her.
         Then the young men would bring the groom. The women and
girls would leave the room and wait outside the door when he entered,
except one or two or three older women who would stay in the room to
hold the bride. Then, Sabra whispered, the groom would wrap his finger
in a white cloth and take her blood. The bride, she explained very matter-
of-factly, would scream and struggle against him and sometimes there
would be a fight – she'd hit the groom or he'd hit her or the women
would hit her. Then the groom would throw to the gathered women the
cloth with the blood on it, which they would carry off and hang on the
guy ropes of a tent. The women and girls would begin to sing and clap
and drum again. The bride would get bathed, changed, and perfumed.
         The same narrative of the wedding included the bride's return
visit to her parents' house a week or fifteen days later. Not her husband
but his uncles or older brothers would accompany her, bringing two or
three sheep for slaughter and lots of food: rice, tea, sugar, macaroni,
candy. They would stay only for a meal and then take her back. The
description ended here.
         When I attended my first wedding a month after this
conversation, I was disappointed. It was a small affair, even if it did
follow the lines she had described. Later I would understand why: the
groom was poor and from an undistinguished family and his wife a poor
stranger; this was his fourth marriage, his previous wives having left him
when they did not get pregnant; and it was bitter cold. I would have to
wait for the summer and fall to begin to appreciate the girls' excitement
and to sense the riot of feelings that weddings generated.


                        ARRANGING MARRIAGES

        I was surprised to find Sabra still unmarried when I came back
again in 1987. She was now around twenty-three, although small and
thin from a childhood illness and, with her long lashes, large brown eyes,
and gentle smile, still quite young looking. I noticed her old suitcase
piled on top of one of the wooden wardrobes, half buried by cases
holding her father's winter clothes, flight bags stuffed with his important
papers, and even a bag carefully packed with all the clothes I had left
                                  144

behind hoping they might find a use for them.
        When I had first come to live with them, I had asked the girls
anthropological questions like "How are marriages decided?" Sabra had
given me the official answer: "It is the father who decides." Someone
comes to ask for her and her father decides. A girl, she had told me,
cannot say anything until after the marriage. If she does not like the
groom, she can come home then; but she cannot say no before the
marriage has taken place. But then Sabra had added, "Some girls do
protest – those who have no modesty."
        Why had Sabra's father not yet arranged a marriage for her?
Various families had come to ask for her. Her father had refused to
consider a request from his older sister's only son because, twenty-five
years earlier, the boy's tribe had withheld from him a woman he had
wanted to marry. Sabra's two sisters, Safiyya's daughters, who were
among those who had spent those giggly evenings with me, were now
married to two brothers, Sabra's first cousins. Why had they bypassed
her?
        Sabra's younger sister told me how it had happened. They had
planned for years the marriage between Safiyya's eldest daughter and one
of the cousins – they were only waiting for him to finish his military
service. I knew that. But just a week before the wedding, Hamid, the
boy's father, had come to ask for Sabra for his younger son, thinking to
save money and trouble with a double wedding. Sabra's mother,
however, had refused. (We all knew that Gateefa's relations with the
family were strained.) Instead, Sagr offered his brother another of his
daughters, from Safiyya. This left Sabra, though she was older,
unmarried.
        Gateefa told me about another family that had come asking for
her daughter Sabra. As she told it, Sagr had run into some friends at the
market. They had asked if he would be willing to let their two sons
marry his daughter and a niece. He had tentatively agreed. When he
came home and informed his wife, she was furious. She told him she
would never make her daughter marry into that family. They lived in
tents in the desert, and her daughter, who had grown up in a house and
had few of the old Bedouin skills such as caring for tents or milking
sheep, would find life too hard.
        Moreover, the family that had asked for her was in trouble. The
reason they were living in a tent camp when everyone else was in houses
was that two of their men had accidentally killed a man in a fight. As
                                   145

was customary, they were forced to seek refuge with another family,
leaving behind their homes and land. They lived in fear, knowing that the
victim's kinsmen would want revenge.
         Sabra's mother did not want her daughter to be a widow. She said
no. Her husband was angry, she told me. "What am I supposed to tell
them? I already agreed," he had said. He then marched off on foot to talk
to his niece's mother, to enlist her support. But she, too, refused to let
Selima, her only daughter, marry into that family. The women suggested
that he inform his friends that the girls' male cousins had asserted their
right to claim them. He would save face, and Sabra and Selima would
not have to go. And that is what happened.
         Another request, from the family of Sabra's father's third wife,
Azza, had been trickier to deal with. The accounts I heard conflicted,
and, knowing Haj Sagr's deteriorating feelings toward his wife and her
relatives, I believed none of them.
         According to one sister's version, Sabra's father had set tough
conditions for Azza's family, but these had been met: a high brideprice of
five thousand Egyptian pounds (then worth about $2,500) and a separate
house for Sabra to live in away from the man's parents. The house was
built in Matruh, and they even, it is said, put in electricity. But then
Sabra's cousin claimed her. He went, according to this version, and
informed the prospective groom that unless he arranged to give his own
cousin to the new claimant in exchange, the man could not have Sabra.
The poor would-be groom protested. Had it been a sister he might have
managed, but in his Egyptianized town family he had no say over his
cousin.
         Sabra's version was different. The man, she insisted, had not
asked specifically for her: rather, he would take any of her father's
daughters. Moreover, it was Azza who had approached Sagr, and he had
told her he had no objections. They settled on a day when the family
would come to make arrangements. In the meantime, though, Sabra's
uncle Hamid had run into Azza's relatives at the market. When he had
asked who the groom was to be, one of the men, joking, had pointed to
an old lame man who was with them.
         Her uncle was furious: no way would his family give one of their
girls to that old cripple. The men had just been joking, but Sabra's uncle
had made up his mind. The next thing they knew, he had sent his son to
demand an exchange. In this version, too, the prospective groom had
said, "We're not like you. We don't have any say over our cousins.
                                    146

Everyone is responsible only for himself." Sabra's cousin had said then
that the man could not have her, so the groom and his family got angry
and did not come on the appointed day.
        Was she hurt when she heard that her cousin had gone to claim
her, knowing it was a bluff?
        "No," she had said. "Why should I be upset? A Bedouin girl has
no say, they don't care what she thinks."
        I persisted. "But inside, even if you don't say anything, do you get
upset?"
        Her answer added a crucial new bit of information. "No, I don't
ever want to have to marry a man who already has one wife. I was glad
my cousin did it. I want to marry someone young, someone who is not
yet married."
        "And what if he hadn't been married?"
        "Then I would have gone to my cousin and said, 'Isn't it wrong,
cousin, to do that?' "
        I tried to probe her feelings about being still unmarried. As we sat
with a neighbor of about Sabra's age I asked, "Do girls like yourselves
get bored sitting at home? I mean, if it takes a long time before you get
married?"
        "Does anyone get tired of her own family?" Sabra's friend had
replied. Then – invoking the special strength of Bedouin family bonds –
she explained, "Among the Arabs, girls don't get bored. It is only among
the peasants that people gossip. They say, 'No one has come for her and
she's gotten old ...' But the Arabs want their daughters to stay with them,
they prefer it. They don't marry them off so young because they think it's
hard if they have children when they're too young. No one says, 'She's
gotten old.' "
        Sabra just listened quietly. Not long after the last rejected
marriage request – the joint request for her and her cousin Selima – it
had been arranged that Selima would marry another first cousin from the
camp. This made it easier for Sabra's father to face his friends in the
market, and everyone was pleased with the match. But everyone also
knew that no more male cousins remained in the camp the right age for
Sabra.
                                   147

                            NIGHT OF HENNA

        There was much running back and forth as Selima's wedding day
drew near. Everywhere clusters of little girls, some no more than three
years old, giggled and sang wedding songs. I asked Sabra and her sisters
why they liked weddings so much.
        "Who doesn't like weddings? Don't you like weddings?" They
were puzzled. When I said I liked other things just as well, they pointed
out that they never got to do anything except run around and work all
day. "It's nice to be able to get away from that. You do other things you
enjoy. We don't."
        The evening before the wedding, Sabra hurried to get supper
ready early so she could put on her new yellow dress and fringed scarf
and take off, in the dark, to her uncle's. Her younger sisters had already
slipped away during the day, escaping their chores. They had wanted to
help prepare their cousin for the wedding. I had seen them earlier in the
day combing and oiling Selima's hair, plucking her eyebrows, and
dressing her, this time in a red-and-gold brocade dress.
        They had sung songs of compliment, clapping to keep the
rhythms. I had dutifully admired the bride's wide gold bracelets, her new
earrings, her dresses, and rummaged through the straw basket piled with
the shawls, scarves, slips, and negligees of her trousseau. It was
whispered that the necklace she wore was really her mother's: the
brideprice had been too low to allow for much gold.
        Because the bride and groom were close cousins, their fathers
being brothers and their mothers sisters, we would be busy that evening:
we had to celebrate at both households, beginning at the groom's, where
the wedding would take place the next day. Guests, male and female, had
been gathering. It was still mostly family, swelled by the happy presence
of Sabra's great-aunts, aunts, and cousins – women who had married men
from other families and visited only a few times each year.
        When Sabra and I approached the camp, we heard drumming and
saw faint lights shining through the threadbare tent where the women sat.
Made of burlap sacks, the tent had been pitched for cooking. Inside, lit
by kerosene lanterns suspended from the two center poles, the flushed
girls were on the ground, crowded together in a circle. Sabra squeezed in
next to the girl drumming on a round aluminum tray. The beat was
strong, and the girls sang song after song. These were short rhyming
two-part songs appropriate to the ''night of henna" the evening before the
                                   148

wedding when women decorate their hands and feet with henna paste.
         The girls took turns shouting out the first lines of new songs,
some of which welcomed the guests, while others referred to the
festivities themselves:

       We're playing at a wedding of ours
       And damn anyone who tries to stop us

       Those who came to our wedding we'll go to
       We won't bother with those who didn't

       Those who come to congratulate you, my dear
       May they be next so I can go to them

       You who've come to keep me company
       Make your night last until morning

       If you'd not been very dear
       Late at night we'd not be here

       My brothers and my uncles' sons
       I'm happy when they come before me

       Go tell her aunt who's far away
       To attend this happy evening

       Uncle, those who've come to congratulate
       That's a favor I'll not forget

       A hundred blessings on our aunt
       Who held a wedding and gathered us all

       You who've come here from out west
       Welcome, welcome, you've honored us

       The older married women ringed the circle of enthusiastic girls.
They sat back to listen and chat quietly. Every so often one of them the
groom's mother, his aunt, his grandmother, his father's wife broke in with
a melodic song of a different sort.
                                    149



       The maternal and paternal aunts
       are happy at your marriage, O beloved ...

       He wore himself out to set you up
       Bravo for your father, son ...

       At the end of each song, other women ululated and the girls
resumed their drumming and rhymes.
       Suddenly, laughing as she protested, a girl would be dragged into
the middle to dance. A shawl would appear and someone would knot it
around her hips. Of the women in the outer ring, only one or two would
take special notice – usually her mother, perhaps an aunt. To get the
older women involved, it was necessary to inspire someone from their
midst. Then, to wild shouts of encouragement and wide smiles, this older
and more robust woman would begin a shimmy of the hips that no
younger girl could imitate. The girls would sing to these serious dancers:

       If you dance, those here will come
       To repay you at the wedding of your son

       Even if her topknot is grey
       [Dancing] on Little Ali's wedding day is no shame

       Even if she's gotten old
       To sing and do it, she knows how

       Out little boy, she's not for you
       This lesson's from an old lady, an old man's thing

        Gateefa was moved to break into a song as her older cousin got
up to dance, playing with a cane as women had in the past.

       Gold dipped in gold
       the beloved is the pure coin of old ...

       I had heard that many years ago, when it was still acceptable and
expected, many of Sabra's aunts had danced at their brothers' or cousins'
weddings not just, as now, among the women and girls, but in front of all
                                  150

the young men. The men had serenaded them with the sort of song one
heard now only on cassettes, mostly smuggled in from Libya.
        When Sabra's aunts and great-aunts had been young, they had
also danced in the wedding parties that accompanied the bride to her new
home. As Migdim had been, these brides were carried inside a litter on
the back of a camel. Dodging celebratory gunfire, the women had danced
completely veiled, their waists girded thickly with the same white men's
cloak that brides come covered in today. This had not stopped men from
singing to them in praise of their beauty.
        In the market today one can buy the cassettes of 'Awadh al-
Maalky, the most popular of the new local singing stars, who still
composes lines that follow the old form. On one tape he welcomes and
then describes minutely the totally veiled dancer.

       Welcome, welcome to the one who's come.
       Welcome, welcome to the one who's come.
       Welcome, you with the trailing bangs,
       Welcome, you with the eyes so black,
       Welcome, you with the eyes rimmed with kohl,
       Welcome, you, the best of your age.
       So now, it will make me very happy
       to describe you exactly right;
       to say in front of all those present,
       to say in front of all those sitting here:
       Your hair is thick
       and your braids swing to the left ...

      After more on the dancer's braids, the poet begins a new conceit –
drunkenness – that marks it as a song of the present.

       Like a man coming out of a bar,
       like a man who's drunk
       who has drunk every variety there is,
       who careens from wall to wall,
       I'm dizzy, caught in the current,
       I'm dizzy, caught in a whirlpool ...

        With the lines "We've talked enough about the drunk, and still
there is more of you to describe," he goes on to describe her glowing
                                    151

cheeks, her eyes, her smile, and the blush in her lips that has set his heart
on fire. No sooner do the words become less innocent than he checks
them with pious expressions, in line with the new seriousness people
show toward religion.

       Praise be to God who created in you
       your neck and shoulders and arms,
       small hennaed hands.
       And under your necklace I saw in you
       now I'll talk about them and show you
       forgive me since I'm a poet
       you'll permit me and oblige
       You, about your breasts, what can I say? Wow!
       He whose heart is patient loses it,
       He who recites the Qur'an loses it.
       May God protect me from the Devil!
       I worship God the Glorious
       and I pray, and the neighbors know it,
       but you made me possessed by spirits;
       the Lord created for you breasts,
       standing firmly like pomegranates,
       that would warm someone shivering in the cold ...

       Like all such songs, this one goes into many verses. Girls of
Sabra's age have never heard men sing them for female dancers, just as
they have never seen a woman dancing in front of young men. They have
heard, as I had, about things that are hard to imagine now: male singers
vying for the attention of dancers who defiantly jump out of their reach
or walk away in anger if the men's songs don't please them.
       For the girls, weddings have always been – as Selima's was –
divided into women's and men's activities. Only girls sing about the
dancer – a recent practice, says Sabra's mother, that began a mere fifteen
years ago. Many of their songs are compliments – the risqué ones they
learned from wedding guests from areas near Alexandria with peasant
influence. To encourage their sisters and cousins as they danced, then,
Sabra and the girls sang:

       Take the sash and tie it around me
       Drum a lively beat, then teach me
                                   152



       Your mom's bloomers are made of satin
       Shake 'em or get out of here

       Hey beautiful, may God protect her
       She's dancing, her hands held up there

         At times like this of great happiness and display, people feel
vulnerable. They dance with their hands held up against the evil eye. A
tale Sabra heard from her uncle's wife shows why. A woman, the story
goes, was heading off to a wedding. Her father stopped her and made her
fill her mouth with water so she wouldn't join in when the other women
said of the bride, "She's ugly," "Her nose is too long," or "Her legs are
too short." At the wedding this woman said nothing, but she did notice
some small flaw in the bride. When she got home, her father told her to
spit out the water in her mouth. They found it had turned to blood just
from this bad thought. Thus the girls sang that evening about warding off
people's envy:

       Our bride is fair and beautiful
       In the envying eye put a burning ember

       Into the eye that envies people
       We'll stick a brass comb

       If you fear the eye
       Wear amulets of a hand and a red pepper

       The girls know special songs for celebrating marriages between
cousins. Although under normal circumstances Sabra's sisters, away
from the camp, as they rode their donkeys to the public water tap, would
sometimes sing rude ditties about the boys living on their hill:

       I don't want the old cap on the hill
       What I want is a new Peugeot

       Mom, get me off this hill
       No firewood and no sweet water
                                      153

       God damn the uncle's son
       Lord don't lead me near no blood relative

tonight they had only praise for marriages within the family:

       O Lord, let them be many
       The weddings between cousins


       The bride belongs to us
       And the groom is our aunt's son

       O Grandma, bless our joy
       She's our little girl and she's at our son's

       As the girls sang, older women like Selima's aunt Ngawa, with
her raspy voice, and Gateefa, her voice strong and clear, interrupted the
drumming to sing their slow songs about the virtues of this kind of
marriage:

       Even on the scales
       her splendor is like his ...

       Silk on silk is beautiful
       better than gathering at strangers' ...

       Some people travel to strangers
       but we take from our own ...

        The muttering began after this song. A neighbor had taken
offense because her daughter, who had recently married Hamid, Selima's
father, was a "stranger," not a relative. Women tried to calm her by
pointing out how many of them were outsiders. Her daughter, they
reminded her, was hardly the only one.
        But as in their parents' generation, in Sabra's and Selima's there
had already been matches between cousins. All these marriages within
the camp appeared happy; all had produced sons. Girls who listen to
traditional romances get mixed messages about marrying cousins. Some
stories expose the tyranny of a young man's right to marry his first
                                    154

cousin; equally as many glorify cousin marriage.
        Even in Sabra's family a story was told about grandparents who
were related. Sabra's great-great-grandfather, it was said, had been an
only son. Because his father had died young, his mother took him home
with her to Fayoum, but early on she had arranged with her husband's
relatives that he would one day marry his cousin Aziza. While he was
away she grew up to be a beautiful woman much desired. Her family
finally agreed to give her in marriage to some people living far to the
west.
        A cousin heard about the match and set off by camel on the five-
day journey to Fayoum to inform the young man. When he arrived at the
tent he found the young man's mother and gave her the news. Her
wailing brought her son, who came running to ask what the matter was.
"Nothing," she said. "It's just that when I asked about your cousin Aziza
he told me she was about to be given to some people out west!" The two
had loved each other when small. So the young man traded his horse for
a camel and rode with his cousin for five days until he got to Aziza's
camp. He found that the wedding had already taken place.
        Without even spending the night the two men set off again, riding
west for several more days. When they reached the camp the young man
insisted on going in alone. He saw a tent set apart in front of the camp
the bridal tent. As he approached, the men of the camp came out. They
had heard of him and knew that their bride was his, but her relatives had
thought he was so far away that he would never hear about it. They came
out to greet him and invite him to rest, but he refused to dismount. Since
he refused to go to the tent, they picked it up whole and brought it to
him. Then Aziza came out to greet him, hugging him and kissing his
cheek. The men admitted they had been wrong to take his bride and
offered her back.
        After accepting their hospitality, he said he would not insist on
taking her. She chased after him, and his companion argued with him:
"After all this, you won't take her? You'd better bring her." The men of
the camp gave the bride a riding camel and loaded up seven more with
provisions, which they said were the young man's to keep. He proudly
refused them and agreed to keep only the one camel for his bride. They
rode back to his father's territory, then married there and planted barley.
That year the rain fell only on his land. Year after year, it rained only on
his land, and soon he became one of the wealthiest men in the region.
        The happy ending of this "true" story of the cousins who founded
                                   155

Sabra's line is like the ending of many romantic tales full of poetry about
cousins who love each other. Trouble begins when the girl's father, for
one reason or another – often because his nephew is poor – violates the
young man's rights by promising his daughter to someone else. These
stories are about longing and cleverness, about cousins who outwit their
parents by feigning illnesses, playing tricks or reversing roles so that
girls pursue their male cousins, or simply eloping. Many of the Bedouin
stories of the past, mythical and true, are about marriage between
cousins. As Sabra's old aunt Dhahab says, "If you don't tell the stories
you forget them. Now that there are radios, we don't tell stories
anymore."


                                THE BRIDE

        The girls' drumming suddenly stopped. The groom's father was
causing a commotion after having made his way in the dark from the
ceremonial white tent where the men were sitting. Although the tent had
been pitched far from the house and the women's cooking tent, he
complained that the sound was carrying in the still night air. There were
men there, outsiders who had come as guests, and the women would
have to stop.
        The old women protested. They often spoke about how weddings
had changed. Migdim had said once, "No, the things they did before you
can't do anymore. Nowadays weddings are small, like a shrunken old
man. People used to really celebrate, staying up all night, for days! But
they have become like the Muslim Brothers now."
        The younger woman she was talking to had explained for me.
"They say it is wrong. Now everything is forbidden. People before didn't
know. They were ignorant. Now they say it is wrong for women to dance
in front of men."
        Migdim held her head and sighed. "Everything passes. Now they
don't sing or ululate. They just bring the bride and that's that."
        "The men say no," her daughter-in-law added. "Like at the last
wedding we had. They sang and clapped only the day before the
wedding. The day of the wedding itself the men said not to sing because
there were people from all over visiting."
        In the name of religious propriety older men had begun to
interfere, like tonight, in the women's celebrations. I had heard a couple
                                       156

of times the favorite story about the last wedding in the camp. The girls
and women had been celebrating for many evenings with drumming and
singing. The older men kept trying to stop them. On the night of henna,
when they had assembled again and begun the fun, the groom's father
came in to welcome his aunts and cousins. He also hoped to quiet the
group of women. When he walked into the women's tent, he saw his own
older sister, a dignified woman in her sixties, dancing.
        "Hey, what's this!" he had said. "Rottenest of days! Even you,
Hajja?" He called her by the respectful title reserved for those who have
performed the pilgrimage to Mecca.
        "That's right," she had answered defiantly, "even me!" Everyone
thought it exceedingly funny.
        The old women contrast this situation with a time when girls
danced veiled in front of the young men and women and men exchanged
love songs. Some songs, like those exchanged as the young woman
danced, were challenges. Migdim remembers one exchange between
Sabra's other grandmother and a shepherd attached to the family at the
time. As her sister danced, the woman had sung:

       A bird in the hot winds glides
       and no rifle scope can capture it ...

The man had responded:

       The heart would be no hunter
       if it didn't play in their feathers ...

        None of this could go on now. The same men who when younger
had sung such songs to women had now become elders. Unlike their
fathers, these men felt they had to keep the women quiet when outsiders
were there. That evening, we had no choice but to give in to the men's
wishes and stop singing.
        Anyhow, the girls decided, it was about time they went to
celebrate at the bride's place – she had been sitting alone all evening,
with only a few girls and a couple of the young married women to keep
her company. Two brave girls led the way with lanterns as we trailed off
across the camp under the starlight. Since all the men were at the groom's
household, we spilled noisily into the girl's courtyard and sat on the
ground. Selima, the bride, was brought out and put on a chair in front of
                                    157

us. She looked happy as another old aluminum tray was brought out for
the drumming. ''Come on girls, liven up!" shouted one old neighbor,
getting up to dance. "Come on, faster!"

       Fair and her bangs hanging down
       A girl you'd say was a lowland gazelle


       Fair, unblemished with not a mark on her
       Like the moon when it first appears

       She takes after her maternal and paternal aunts
       Gold threaded with pearls

       If you want love from a girl of our tribe
       Put down nineteen hundred pounds

       Her father doesn't care about money
       What he wants [in a man] is importance and honor

       Encouraging Selima to feel good about the match, the girls sang
songs that praised their cousin, the groom:

       The one you took is the son of a Bedouin
       Not a good-for-nothing who hangs out in cafés

       The boy you got is from a good family
       So don't cry and don't say "O Mommy"

       One by one, the older women broke into this wildness with their
slow songs, many conveying the same sentiments about marriage to
cousins.

       Pastures where your family put down
       set up your tent there, dear, blessed ...

       The dear one, may her steps be blessed
       she sowed her seeds in her homeland ...
                                    158

       The dear one, may her steps be blessed
       she planted high in her homeland ...

       We had found the sisters of Selima's father's new wife at the
household. They hated dwelling on this insider aspect of the marriage but
wanted to show that they wished Selima well. Only one of them offered
a song about marrying a relative. The others' songs had different themes:

       Apples from the gardens of the pious
       No one eats but the pure ...

       May God's mercies on you, daughter
       be as numerous as the waves of the sea ...

         Many songs for the bride are, like this last one, tinged with
sadness. But Selima was lucky not to be going far, or to an unknown life,
so there were few such sad ones sung that evening.
         Singing for hours on end, the girls are not always able to tie their
rhymes to the specific wedding; they grab for any songs they know. A
girl, though, will know many. One day Sabra's young sisters, aged eleven
and twelve, had recited with barely a pause forty-six songs for my
notebook. Their all-purpose songs might compliment the bride, groom,
or their families:

       God protect the father who raised her
       Then to good people gave her

        Their mothers reproach the girls for songs that are little more
than nonsense syllables. Unlike the songs of older women with their
images of spring pastures, sown barley, princes' steeds, and woven tents,
the girls' songs appropriate whatever is new.

       If he doesn't bring a refrigerator
       I swear he won't have a taste of dinner

       If he doesn't get a television
       I swear I won't make up my eyes
                                    159

       Anyone who tells me my sweetheart's in jail
       May he find himself hooked up to a glucose IV

       Hey you with the silver car
       Turn off the headlights, you're blinding me

       The one who owns the big truck
       Doesn't get drunk and doesn't touch beer

       Swing by, swing by in your Toyota
       To toss me the price of some cookies

       Put the bridal veil on her hair
       And let the photographer take her picture

       The women disapprove because so many songs are indecent. The
girls who helped me write down one sequence suddenly warned, "Don't
ever show these to our father!"

       Hey woman, explain to your daughter
       Or she'll go to bed with her clothes still on

       Him with the patterned red headdress
       If God wills, I'll soon be counting his money

       Let's go, you and me, my sweetheart
       And the money we need will come from God

       You and I are the sweetest candy
       Let's go play up on the hillside

       These are cruder than the older rhymes that get mixed in, though
the old ones are also about love – like one that refers to the drops of
water given to a person who has died:

       My eyes will never forget their sweetheart
       Not until they get the droplets at death
                                    160

and a second about a dancer:

       A girl you'd say was a year-old calf
       When I come near her she jumps back

Other songs from an earlier generation reveal the intensity of love:

       Don't forget the one who's far away
       When the plant shoots come up he'll return

       No one has yet forgotten them
       They're still precious to the eye

       The tears of the eye at losing them
       Filled seven wells around them

        On and on, late into the night, girls sang and women danced. As
the guests drifted home, a dancer brought out the henna paste in a pot
balanced on her head, a song about henna announcing its arrival. Those
who wanted to smeared the paste on their palms; in the morning their
brightly stained orange hands would mark their joy at the celebration.
They sang to the bride one last time:

       Tonight's the night of henna
       And tomorrow at your sweetheart's you'll sleep.


                         THE BLOOD OF HONOR

       Sabra stayed overnight at her grandmother's. Like the young
women her age who could cook, bake, and wash pots and pans, she rose
at dawn and went to the groom's household to help her aunt with the
work. Hundreds of guests had to be cooked for; each would eat two
meals. Men were butchering lambs and goats. Bread needed baking,
vegetables chopping, rice cleaning. The wedding had mobilized the
whole camp.
       Sabra wanted to be there not just to help with the work – after all,
she had plenty of the same at home – but also to be there when the cars
headed off toward the bride's, no matter how early. Everyone was
                                    161

waiting for this moment. As a rule, the older women angled most
actively for places in the cars going to fetch the bride. They liked to see
the houses and relatives of the bride, and they liked to sing songs that the
bride's family would hear and perhaps respond to with their own songs.
Contacts between the two families were usually competitive. Today,
though, because the wedding was within the family, the number of cars
and trucks the groom's family could muster, the number of women who
could go, and the status of the men who would drive mattered little. The
display was only for the guests, who would watch the cars cross the
camp and return the long way around, detouring to circle a local saint's
tomb.
        When the time came, Sabra, like the rest of us, was ready and
watching. Things began to happen quickly, though the morning had been
slow. Tension was high as the convoy returned. We could hear the
honking horns of cars and trucks that raised clouds of dust as they
approached. Young men lined the entry to the courtyard, greeting the
arrivals with volleys of celebratory gunfire. Selima, swathed in her
father's white cloak, was rushed into her new room, followed by women
and girls singing and dancing in welcome.

       The bride is welcomed with song:

       The corners of the tent lit up
       happy that the desert gazelle has arrived ...

      The girls sang the same sorts of songs as the night before, but
now with wishes as well that she would do well in her new family.

       May she be good
       And bless us with children and wealth

       May she be a real Arab
       To enter the community and not make trouble

       During a lull, food was brought for the women who had come
with the bride. Then more car horns, more gunshots. The groom was
coming! Flanked by his friends, he was rushed through the crowd of
women and children into the room where his bride sat. The door, newly
painted blue and red, shut tightly behind him. All eyes were on it. The
                                    162

women and girls outside sang wildly, this time about what was going on
inside. The songs told of how many people had stakes in the appearance
of the "blood of her honor."

       Make her dear mother happy, Lord
       Hanging up her cloth on the tent ropes

       O Saint 'Awwaam on high
       Don't let anyone among us be shamed

The more serious songs of the older women had the same themes.

       When the people have gathered
       O Generous One favor us with a happy ending ...

       Behind us are important men
       who ask about what we are doing ...

Selima's aunt expressed faith in her niece's chastity.

       I'm confident in the loved one
       you'll find it there intact ...

Not just the bride but the groom was on their minds.

       Khwayyir doesn't tremble or fear
       He brings forth her honor in a flash

       It seemed like forever (though later they said two minutes,
stopwatch timed). My heart was beating and my camera trained on the
door when it was finally flung open. I jumped as the guns went off and
the men rushed away. The women streamed in to surround Selima, dazed
and limp in the arms of a relative, singing and dancing with relief. The
cloth with its red spot of blood, a faint mark, was waved above our
heads. Selima's maternal aunt exclaimed, "Praise God! Blessings on the
Prophet! How beautiful! Blessings on the Prophet!"
                                    163

                   THE MOST IMPORTANT MOMENT

        It was over now. People began saying their goodbyes. We were
tired, especially the relatives who had been there for days, worrying
about their girl. I took my bundle of clothes and walked with Selima's
aunt Lawz. She knew her husband would come soon to pick her up and
take her back home, and she wanted to spend her last hours with her
mother. Other women came to join us at Migdim's. They began to go
over what had happened: who had come, what these guests had brought
with them, how well organized the cooking had been, whether there was
enough food, who went in the cars to get the bride, who stayed in the
room with her.
        I had managed this time, juggling camera and tape recorder, to
tape the singing outside the door after the defloration. I played back the
tape for them. Amid the sound of wind and guns were enthusiastic
voices. The women could make out the songs or did they already know
them all by heart? One was sung for the benefit of a nephew nearby:

       Go tell your father, O Sultan
       the banner of her honor is flying high ...

Most of the songs were about our bride and the pride she brought to her
family:

       They lived like falcons
       the hunters of the wild couldn't touch them ...

       Bravo! She was excellent
       she who didn't force down her father's eyelashes ...

       Look at her cloth, girls
       You'd say it was burst pomegranates

       Little Selima, blessings on your marriage
       You're lit up by the faces of your kin

       Little Selima, bless you for hiding it
       Your brother came back proud as a pasha
                                   164

       Go tell her father to be happy
       The girl's blood came down on her hennaed feet

       The cloak I covered you with
       May God shine on your face, you filled it with light

         The voices were hard to hear, and the women began to lose
interest. These were only girls' songs anyway, not women's. Suddenly
one old aunt turned to me. "Hey Lila," she asked, "where you are, do
they do it with the finger or with 'it'?"
         I'd had this question many times, from my earliest days with
them, and I laughed. Unlike the first time, I knew perfectly well what
they meant by "it." Gateefa, who had been with me on these previous
occasions, answered for me. "No, they're like the people out west in
Libya."
         Before I had married, the women had often teased me about my
fiancé. They had warned me not to let him enter with "it" on the wedding
night. It was painful enough with the finger, which was, they pointed out,
much smaller. They had also advised me not to permit my husband to
sleep with me the first few nights after the wedding to give the wound
time to heal. Sabra's mother, Gateefa, always winced and commented
after weddings, "Poor things," even though her own daughters were not
involved.
         But these other women were not like Sabra's mother. They were
blunt and no-nonsense. One asked me a second question, "Hey Lila, did
your man use a piece of cloth or a cloak?"
         "We don't have cloaks," I answered. But to make it seem less
strange, I added, "In the past they used to inspect the sheet the couple
slept on."
         But then they wanted to know, "Does the bride take it home to
her family?"
         Sabra's mother again explained for me. "It's considered shameful.
The man just knows, and that's that."
         "Doesn't her mother hang up the sheet or slip?"
         "No," again I explained. "People would say it was embarrassing.
It's something between the two of them."
         Outraged, an old woman laughed. "Between who and who? They
say it's between the two of them?!"
         I had been through this just a few days earlier in a conversation
                                   165

with another woman. I had found myself feeling embarrassed to be from
the West. She had begun by asking me a simple question. "In your
country, do they marry their paternal cousins?" I'd had to say they didn't
and that it was even forbidden, although I knew this was for them the
best kind of marriage, sanctioned, so they told me, by the Qur'an. Next
she had asked how much a family paid for a wife. Gateefa, sitting with
us then too, had laughed and said, "Without dowry. There's no
brideprice. You like her, she likes you, and you marry her. That's that."
        The woman thought we were kidding. "Do you swear by your
father?"
        Sabra's mother swore it was true. Sabra and her sisters had
laughed at the incredulity of this old woman. Sabra had repeated her
mother's words, "I swear by my father they don't pay." To save face, I
offered, "They'll get a wedding ring, and a diamond ring worth at least
two thousand Egyptian pounds."
        "That's the brideprice?"
        Gateefa would not let me get away with this. "But they don't set
conditions the way we do, or have a feast and slaughter sheep, or pay the
brideprice, or get a trousseau for the girl."
        The next familiar question came quickly. "Hey Lila, do they go in
during the day or at night?"
        "At night."
        "Really? That's like the Egyptians. And do they do it with the
finger or the other?"
        "With the other."
        "And Lila, do they get out the blood, like Arabs, the girl's blood?
Do they get it out and show it, or don't they bother?"
        I had to confess. "They don't show it."
        Sabra's mother explained, "It's just between the two of them."
        As the old woman turned this phrase over I added lamely,
"There's no one there to show it to. It is nighttime and they've gone
somewhere, like to a nice hotel. Or they've traveled far away, on a
honeymoon."
        She repeated, "So there's no one. He'll know and that's all, the
groom."
        Tired, after all these years, of their horror at the immorality of
Europeans, I decided to try to explain a different way of thinking. "They
say," I continued, "that it's just between the two of them that it's
shameful for others to enter into it. What business is it of theirs?"
                                   166

         The old woman repeated the phrase. "Right, what business is it of
theirs?" Then she lowered her voice. "And what if, for example, what if
the blood doesn't come out? What do they do?"
         I said I didn't know.
         "Maybe it doesn't matter to them," she suggested.
         "It doesn't matter to them," confirmed Gateefa.
         Suddenly Sabra's younger sister, quiet until then, had said
something. "They don't care about it, Grandma. You know Ramadan's
wife, the one in England? She said there was no difference in England
between unmarried girls and divorcées.''
         This had set them talking all at once. I broke into their excited
laughter to ask what she meant. Azza had piped in, "She said there were
no virgins at all!"
         The old aunt was puzzled. "What do you mean, there aren't
virgins?"
         "It's total chaos there," was the answer.
         Perhaps sensing my discomfort, the old aunt tried to be
reassuring. She said, "But Lila's not like that. She's proper."
         Of an older generation, this woman had lived all her married life
in an isolated desert area. She had had little contact with Egyptians from
the Nile Valley, and she knew even less about Europeans. Here, closer to
Alexandria, with marriages taking place between desert families and
families from the agricultural province nearby, with schools and
television and radio, people knew more about differences in the ways
things are done. A few men I had talked with might even have been a
little defensive about their wedding practices.
         I had two interesting conversations of this sort during my first
stay in the late 1970s, both with respected men in the Bedouin
community. One, the sophisticated regional representative to Parliament,
lectured me on a few Bedouin practices that were wrong: the first was
that cousins had the right to block marriages and that girls could be
forced to marry against their will; the second was that they "used the
finger" and insisted on daytime deflowerings. Still, he had said, sitting
by his Mercedes and wiping his sunglasses with his handkerchief, this
taught girls to be careful to act with thoughts of that future day.
         The other man, a worldly businessman, had explained to me that
"entering with the finger" was wrong. "We're the only ones who do it this
way. Nothing in our religion says you should." He had added, by way of
excuse, "But the faster the groom does it, the better – the more he is
                                    167

admired because it means he was not shy or afraid." I had heard women
sometimes complain that it was stupid the way wedding guests waited
and waited just to see that drop of blood. No one criticized the daytime
ceremony, though. It allowed all the people to see, "So there would be no
doubts."
        Knowing how they felt, and sensing how badly Western practices
could reflect on me, I was generally evasive on the subject. The
afternoon of Selima's wedding I therefore found myself again trying to
shift the conversation away from myself. Instead I saw a chance to find
out what really happens in the room when the bride's virginity is taken,
because here with me were the women who had been with Selima.
        I took the offensive. "You didn't finish what you were saying.
Did you say that people out west, in Libya, don't use a cloth or a cloak?
Do you use a cloak? Does he wrap his finger in it?"
        "No, no," said one aunt impatiently. "He wraps his finger in a
piece of cloth. The blood comes out on the cloak she's sitting on. The
bride sits on the man's cloak they've laid it on the ground. And then they
hang it up."
        I was confused now. "They hang up the cloak but not the cloth?"
        "They hang up the cloth too. The cloak she takes home to her
family."
        "When she goes for her visit?"
        "Yes, after seven days she visits and they hang it out on the line."
        Gateefa was used to explaining things to me. "They hang it at her
family's so people can see ..."
        "So first they hang it at her husband's family's, then at her
family's?"
        Migdim interrupted to remind them about the first of her
granddaughters to marry outside the community. "When she came home
she brought her slip. Remember, I hung it here on my door. It was a half-
slip."
        This started them talking about recent weddings and comparing
the sizes of blood stains. They discussed Lawz's daughter, a girl they had
not had the strength to hold. I worried it might be a delicate subject, but
was too curious not to jump in: "Do the women have to hold her well?
How do they hold her?"
        They laughed when Lawz grabbed me and held me from behind.
"Like this we hold the bride like this," she mocked.
        I struggled to get free and asked, "Does the bride scream?" I had
                                     168

heard that she did but that the screams were drowned by the singing.
Sabra and the girls had told me a girl struggled "to show that her father
had raised her well." Was there also fear?
        Lawz, it turned out, had been one of the women in the room with
her niece Selima. Hoarsely, she began telling us about the encounter.
"Does the bride scream?" she repeated. "Why, the moment Selima saw
him at the door, inside, she moaned, 'O my father! O my father!' "
        "When she saw him?" I asked.
        The bride's maternal aunt added, "She turned her head like this
and looked." She had been there too. "I guess she saw him they were
face to face, and he was inside the room. She turned her face away and
went 'O father! O father!' I stood blocking her view of the door. I stood
there so she wouldn't see his robe."
        Gateefa wanted to get things clear. "Who was holding her?"
        Lawz interrupted, "I was holding her." Half laughing at the
memory, she described what happened: "I was holding her by the legs.
Her other aunt was there too. She had sat her in her lap and put the cloak
on the pillow under her. She had her arms around her and held her."
        Migdim addressed her daughter, "Hey, woman, that reminds me.
Did I hear that our neighbor went in there with you?"
        Gateefa was surprised. "What? She was in the room with you?
Why?" They discussed this angrily. Why was someone who was not a
relative in the room, especially when relations between the bride's
mother and this neighbor were not particularly good?
        Lawz wanted to continue the story. "The moment she saw him,
she said, 'Woe is me, my father! Woe is me!' She turned her face away
and I told her, 'Stay quiet, don't you dare say a word! Be quiet.' And then,
what happened? The woman met him at the door. I'd given her the cloth
and told her, 'When he comes in, hand him the cloth and tell him to go
ahead.' Well, he took the piece of cloth and put it around his finger. The
boy approached Selima, still putting it on. He came near and what did I
do? I opened her legs. I opened her legs and told him, 'Go ahead, extend
your hand.' He reached out and I said to him, 'Twist your finger. Hard.'
As soon as he pressed he got some blood. On the first twist. He said to
me, 'Here it is.' Just after he said, 'Here it is,' though, that other woman
pounced on the cloth. I told her, 'Give it back to him! Don't bother the
boy. There's still plenty of time. Give the boy the cloth. Don't take it yet!'
We said to my nephew, 'You'd better try one more twist like the one you
just did.' "
                                   169

        Migdim was curious. "And so did he change the cloth?"
        "Yes, he changed the cloth. He wrapped his finger again. He left
the other spot and covered his finger again and did it again. It had been
like a wipe he just wiped it. When he wiped it, we said to him, 'Change
the cloth, change it and put your finger inside.' As he was moving the
cloth that other woman started yelling at him, 'You don't know how, boy.
You didn't do it right!' "
        "Bitch!" Migdim muttered.
        "So we said, 'Give the boy the cloth! Here, son, take the cloth.'
Then he gave one last rub. The last one got the blood."
        The bride's maternal aunt added, "They told the woman to leave
him alone."
        "So why did he give this woman the cloth? What a scandal!"
Migdim was indignant.
        "She'd said, 'You didn't know how!' Didn't know how? How
should he know? What's her problem?"
        "What business is it of hers," asked the grandmother. "What did
she want, that bitch, staying in the room?"
        "How would I know?"
        "Who let her in, anyway? You shouldn't have let her in," Gateefa
insisted. "I'd refused to go in because I saw that Selima already had her
aunt with her and there were three women there."
        Lawz agreed. "Yes, she really was trouble. I told her to leave the
boy alone. 'Don't interfere with the boy. Get away from him,' I said. 'He
knows everything. He knows what to do.' "
        I was trying to figure out why the women were so furious. I
asked, "Did she want to do it for him? Was she afraid there wasn't
blood?"
        Migdim's daughter answered gruffly. "That is really wrong. You
must never come near the bride. It's a great sin for a woman to go in and
take the blood of a woman."
        Another woman added, "Only if people are cheating do they do
that!"
        Lawz insisted, "But this wasn't a time when things weren't clear.
From the first twist, he'd got it."
        "So why was she interfering?"
        Lawz continued, "She's the one who got people worried. She's the
one who slowed us down. You know, if it hadn't been for her, he would
have done it again and gone out right away! Don't you ever let her in
                                    170

again. She tied up the boy. 'Give it to me, give it to me,' she said. 'You
didn't know how. Hand it over, you didn't do it right, boy!' And she took
the cloth and wanted to put it on her finger."
        This caused a furor, everyone talking at once. They wanted to
know what happened next. They turned expectantly to Lawz. "So what
did you say to the woman?"
        She picked up the thread of her story. "I said to her, 'Stay away
from the boy. Leave him alone! Let him be the one to get it.' I said to her,
'He got the blood already. Just let him get a little more. Let him be.' The
woman said to him, 'Take this piece of cloth, take the cloth!' I was
holding it, and holding the girl's arm. I held her this way, and our other
friend was holding her too. We wanted him to do a second twist."
        Migdim leaned closer to her daughter. "Did everyone see the
blood?"
        Lawz was firm. "No. But I saw. I looked and I saw. I've never
been shy. I said to my nephew, 'Go ahead, son you must not be shy about
it. There should be no embarrassment, for you or her!' "
        Her voice dropped to a whisper. "And then when he put his finger
in the cloth, I lifted her up. Gave her a real lift, from below. With two
hands. When he gave his finger a good twist, he brought out blood."
With an expressive gesture, she added, "The spot on the cloth was this
big. But then what did he do? He moved his finger and wiped, this way
and that. He had just got a little. That was when the woman came after
the cloth saying, 'You don't know how, boy. You don't know how.' But
I'd seen the blood, from when he'd first put it in."
        Again the women complained. "That bitch, that whore. What's
the matter with her? God protect us."
        Lawz was animated. "She'd said, 'I'm staying in the room with
you. Are you staying, Lawz?' I'd asked her, 'Are you going to stay?
Maybe you'll be needed out there. Your little girl has only just been
weaned.' That's what I said to her. I wanted her to leave – the truth is, I
didn't want her to stay. I said to Selima's aunt here, 'Stay standing just
inside the door and when the boy comes in, give him the cloth right away
so he can put it around his finger. That way when he comes to squat in
front of her he'll be all ready.' But then the other one wanted to stay. So I
said to her, 'Go hold her from there hold her shoulder.' I didn't want her
near the boy. But she started guiding the boy, guiding his hand."
        The women exclaimed, "What? she started guiding him? She's
the one that made him take so long!"
                                     171

        "And she tried to pull at the cloth, to blotch it. I said, 'Don't touch
the cloth. Keep away from it.' "
        "How shameless. Really shameless," said one listener. "What a
disgrace," said another.
        Lawz reassured them. "But she didn't touch the blood or
anything. We gave the cloths to the boy we gave him one first of all and
then followed with the second right after. And the women came and took
them, both of them. We didn't take off the girl's slip until later. As soon
as I'd seen the blood come, I wiped her with her slip. I pressed it against
her."
        I wondered why. The answer was obvious, "A woman, when
she's wounded like that, her blood flows."
        Lawz went back to the narrative. "He'd come back toward us,
wanting to take the cloth from that woman. We told him, 'That's enough.
It's done! Get going!' I'll tell you, it's no good having too many women in
the room with the bride. You need two to hold her, and then one standing
near the door with the cloth ready for him. Good women. The third, she
can come if she sees that the other two are having a hard time. If they
don't have a hard time, even one's enough."
        I was obtuse. "What do you mean, a hard time?"
        "The bride, of course," Lawz said, "she struggles."
        Gateefa laughed. She didn't have the courage to stay in the room
with a bride. When she saw the groom coming, she told them, she started
trembling and fled. "I don't have the strength for it," she said as the
women teased her. "Some women do."
        Outside Migdim's room the wide plateau was strangely graceful
in the sun's glow, shadows touching the young fig saplings and gnarled
olive trees. We thought we should start for home. Sabra and the girls had
long since gone back. They had work to do: dinner to prepare, little ones
to look after, bread to bake. Their mother only supervised.
        As Gateefa and I made our way home, taking turns carrying her
youngest daughter piggyback, again she sighed, "Poor things." She
started recalling a nightmare she'd had the other day. She had dreamt that
Sabra had gotten married and there was no blood. She had woken up
sweating, her stomach knotted. She repeated what I had often heard her
say: "Daughters are hard. Having daughters is so hard." And we walked.
        The next day, when Sabra was resting, I brought out my tape
recorder to entertain her. What a good wedding it had been, she said, as
she and her sisters listened closely to the new wedding tape. I wanted to
                                  172

get the exact words of those defloration songs because no one had ever
told me about them.
         As we listened and I wrote, Sabra tried to make me understand.
"For us Bedouins," she said, "this is the most important moment in a
girl's life. No matter what anyone says afterward, no one will pay
attention as long as there was blood on the cloth. They are suspicious of
her before. People talk. 'She went here, she went there.' 'She looked at
So-and-so.' 'She said hello to So-and-so.' 'She went to the orchard.' But
when they see this blood the talk is cut off. This is one of the things
wrong with the Arabs – they don't like their girls to go out. But once
they've seen the cloth, she can come and go as she pleases. They love her
and everything is fine."
         I wondered how long she would have to wait for that day when
her aunts would sing about her piece of cloth,

       Like a crescent moon on a cloudless night
       the honor of our loved one appears ...
(this page intentionally left blank)
                                       175

CHAPTER 5: HONOR AND SHAME



       Say to the believing men that they should lower their gaze and guard
       their modesty; that will make for greater purity for them. And God is
       well acquainted with all that they do.

       And say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze
       and guard their modesty; that they should not display their beauty
       and ornaments except what (ordinarily) appear thereof; that they
       should draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their
       beauty except to their husbands, their fathers, their husbands'
       fathers, their sons, their husband's sons, their brothers or their
       brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women, or the slaves
       their right hands possess, or male attendants free of sexual desires,
       or small children who have no carnal knowledge of women.

               - Qur'an 24:30-31



       In a letter dated July 30, 1989, Kamla, another daughter of
Gateefa and Sagr, wrote to tell me her good news.

       In the Name of God the All-Merciful and Compassionate.
       It gives me pleasure to send this letter to my dear sister,
       Dr. Lila, hoping from God on high, the All-Powerful, that
       it reaches you carrying love and greetings to you and
       your family while you are all in the best of health and in
       perfect happiness.

        By name she mentioned my brother and sisters (none of whom
she has met) and asked me to convey her greetings and those of her
family to them and to my parents, as well as to the one American friend
of mine they had met ten years ago – in short, to everyone they knew
about in my life in America. I had confided during my last visit that I
would be getting married soon. She asked if I had; if so, she wrote, she
sent a thousand congratulations and hoped, God willing, that he was a
good man who would understand me. She hoped also that their new in-
law was a noble man, the best in all of America, and that they would
meet him soon. After wishing me many children (six boys and six girls)
and more greetings, she squeezed her piece of news onto the bottom of
                                   176

the page.

       Your sister Kamla has become engaged to Engineer
       Ibrahim Saleem, Aisha's brother.

        I could hardly believe it. We had teased Kamla about him ever
since his name had been floated four years before as a prospect. This was
the match she scarcely dared hope her father would arrange. Not that she
had ever met the young man. What mattered was that he was educated,
came from a family that believed in educating girls, and lived in a town.
She would be able to escape the kind of life her family lived, a life that
annoyed her – the only one in her family, male or female, to have made
it through high school – more and more.
        Because she complained so much, I had asked her in the summer
after she graduated to write me an essay on how young Bedouin women's
lives were changing and what of the past she hoped the Awlad 'Ali
would retain and what she wished they would abandon. She had proudly
told me that her teacher had sent off for publication an essay on Awlad
'Ali weddings she had written in school. You can trace, in the stilted
words of her essay and the candid comments (in parentheses) she made
as she read it aloud to me, the outlines of the new world she hoped to
gain by marrying the likes of Engineer Ibrahim Saleem.


                       THE EDUCATION OF GIRLS

            An Essay on the Young Bedouin Woman of Egypt
               and the Changes in Her Life over 40 Years

       If we are to speak of the Bedouin girl in Egypt we find
       that her life differs from one era to another. The
       circumstances of the home and family relations change
       from one age to another. If we go back to discuss the way
       she was around forty years ago, we find that the Bedouin
       girl was living a life in which she was of no value. When
       she came of age, or maturity (as the Egyptians say I mean
       the years when she is ready for marriage), she had to do
       housework at her family's home for example, cooking,
       washing clothes, and preparing firewood. (Her only value
                                    177

       was in the housework she did – the sweeping and washing
       – and if she didn't do it they'd laugh at her and gossip
       about her laziness. She was forced to do it, even if she
       weren't capable. No matter what her health was like. I'm
       talking about those who were my age, from around the
       age of twelve on.) Also, she used to spin and weave, even
       though it is very difficult, painful, and strenuous. (When
       she was around fifteen, her mother or any woman in the
       household, an aunt for instance, would teach her. It's
       supposed to be the mother, though. Her goal was to teach
       her daughter to spin and to make something, anything.
       The important thing was for her to weave something, if
       only a border for the tent.) She had to learn this skill.
       (This is what is important for the Bedouins, housework,
       weaving, and such things. Forty years ago this was what a
       girl had to put up with.)

         Kamla had been resenting housework. Now that she had finished
school she rarely left the house. With two sisters, she was responsible for
the cooking and cleaning one day out of three. On another of those days
she was in charge of baking bread with them. She was on call much of
the rest of the time, seeing to it that her little brothers and sisters were
bathed, dressed, and staying out of mischief. Piles of laundry collected in
the back room to be done when there was time.
         Where before she had worn clean clothes for school, studied with
her brothers in a quiet room of her own, and been given few household
duties, now she had no privileges. Her clothes were as caked with dough
and soot as her sisters'.
         Kamla's only escape was listening to the radio. She carried my
transistor with her wherever in the house or courtyard she was working.
She kept an eye on the time so as not to miss the radio soap operas.
When she was free, she stared into space as she listened to Egyptian
music, talk shows, and the news. So attached was she to the radio that I
called it her sweetheart. Her mother, irritable from fatigue herself,
scolded her and threatened to lock up the radio. When Gateefa
complained, ''My daughters are becoming lazy sluts," Kamla, like her
sisters, simply ignored her.
         Kamla had scored high enough on her final exams to secure a
place in the agricultural college for which her high school had prepared
                                    178

her. She had no special interest in agriculture and had gone to this
secondary school only because the regular high school was on the far
side of town. Her uncles had given her a choice: quit school or go to the
nearby agriculture school. School was still much on her mind. Her essay
continued:

       Education for the Bedouin girl used not to exist. It was
       impossible for her to study. (Forty years ago she lived a
       life, as I said earlier, that had no value at all.) She was
       governed by the customs and traditions that the Bedouin
       families followed. These customs and traditions forbade a
       girl to leave the house under any circumstances. So going
       to school (this is an example) would be the greatest
       shame. She couldn't say that she wished to study, no
       matter what. Even if, as they say, she was the daughter of
       a tribal leader. (So for example, a girl's father would be a
       tribal leader and she'd want to study, but her relatives
       would say no you can't. She'd say, but I'm the daughter of
       the head of a lineage. I must learn. They'd forbid her.)

        This hypothetical example was, of course, from her own
experience. She had been allowed to continue her schooling against the
wishes of her uncles. They wanted to pull her out when she was no
longer little. Because she was so determined, she and her parents had put
up with the uncles' general suspicion and occasional accusations. She
was a fierce child who had early on decided she wanted to go to school.
She was not allowed to enroll in the public school, though, because, as is
often the case, her father had never registered her birth. Yet still she went
each day, as a visitor, borrowing her brothers' books. After three years of
this her teacher finally required her to register officially. Haj Sagr went
and had her papers drawn up. From then on she came in at the top of her
class, while her brothers and male cousins flunked out. I had recorded in
my notes from 1979 her bashful reaction when her brother told their
father she had been appointed school monitor. Sagr had been hugging his
youngest son, then in his first year of school, proudly predicting that his
son would come out above the rest.
        The primary school had been within sight of the camp, and its
students were mostly relatives and neighbors. The secondary school,
though, was about three kilometers away. Kamla's class had only four
                                    179

Bedouin girls; the rest of the girls were Egyptians from town. To get to
this school she had to walk along the road past houses of people who did
not know her. She said she walked with her head down, looking neither
right nor left, but she still had to endure catcalls from men driving by.
        Her relatives' suspicions were harder to cope with. One aunt had
come twice to Gateefa to accuse Kamla of taking her son's schoolbook to
give to a boy from a neighboring tribe. Kamla's mother had defended
her. True, she had given the boy a schoolbook, but it was in exchange for
a book that he had given her the previous year. And the book was one
that her father had bought her, not one she had taken from her cousin.
Fortunately, when they questioned the aunt's son, he backed Gateefa.
        Kamla and her mother were angrier when Kamla's uncle told Haj
Sagr that he had seen his niece Kamla walking home with a boy. Gateefa
felt she'd been hit in the stomach with a rock. She argued, to me, "If it
were true, why didn't he stop for her and put her in the car? Why didn't
he get out and beat her right there, if he really saw her? If he's so afraid
for her, why doesn't he ever offer to drive her to school?"
        Kamla told the story as she knew it. She believed the problem
began during her second year of high school. Her uncle had not wanted
her to continue, but Sagr had defended his daughter's right to stay in
school. Furious, her uncle did everything he could to prevent her from
studying. If, for example, guests came to the house, he would knock on
her door to ask her to make the tea. She'd try to escape, sneaking off to
study outdoors under the trees. Two days before her final exams (when,
as we all know, she added, nerves are on edge), she was walking home
from school. Across the road a boy she had known since she was small
was going the same direction. Because she always walked with her head
down, she noticed her uncle drive by only after he had passed. He went
straight to her father and told him, "Your daughter was walking hand in
hand with a boy." Her father had questioned him carefully, then called in
Kamla's mother. Gateefa in turn had come to her ("And you know how
upset she gets!" she said to me) to ask her about it. Kamla refused to say
"yes, no, or maybe" unless her uncle came and accused her to her face.
        Her father, she said lovingly, believed in her. He asked her why
she didn't walk home from school with her cousin, and she explained that
she was not about to go out of her way just to walk with him. If he
wished to walk with her along her route before cutting off to his house,
he was welcome to. Kamla's uncle had also told her father that this
cousin had informed him that the boy waited for Kamla at the school
                                   180

gates to walk home with her every day. Fortunately for Kamla, her
cousin happened to pass by the house that afternoon. Sagr called him
over to question him right in front of her uncle. The boy swore that he
had never said such a thing. That ended it.


                         ARRANGED MARRIAGE

       The next paragraph of Kamla's essay took up the matter of
marriage. Commenting on it, Kamla said, "This was a topic the Bedouin
girl would hear nothing about and wasn't supposed to have anything to
do with."

       She had no right to an opinion in any matter, however
       much the matter might concern her personally. She had
       no say even in the choice of a husband. She had
       absolutely no say in this matter. (And to this day, no
       matter how educated she's become, very seldom does she
       have any opinion. The Bedouin girl has no say.) In this
       matter what she had to do was carry out her family's
       orders even if she didn't want to. It was not right for her
       to refuse. (Even if she didn't want him, she had to agree to
       it against her will. Even if he was older than she was, for
       example, or very different from her, she had to agree to
       what the family wanted. For example, if they said I had to
       marry someone and I didn't want him – I hated him – but
       if my kinsmen had agreed to the match and told me I had
       to marry him, what I would have to do, despite my
       wishes, was marry him.)

        I was surprised that Kamla depicted women as powerless in
decisions about marriage. She had heard the same stories I had – stories,
like her grandmother Migdim's, of resistance to marriages arranged for
them by their kinsmen. She knew plenty of young women like one who,
in love with someone else, had married Kamla's cousin but then had
gone home to her father's household at the slightest provocation,
eventually forcing her husband to divorce her. The specter of forced
marriage, especially to paternal cousins, may have loomed large for
Kamla because she, like her sister Sabra, was waiting. As her mother
                                  181

joked with a friend, "Kamla's got her diploma. Now we're going to give
her the other diploma!"
        Her religious training at school had given Kamla moral
ammunition against arranged marriage. The Prophet, she would explain,
says that it is wrong to marry someone you have never seen. Moreover,
the girl must give her consent: the bride's relatives are supposed to ask
her opinion. Kamla is not sure her opinion will be sought. Already she
has made it known throughout the women's community that she does not
want to marry her cousin Salih, the young man closest to her in age who
has been lined up with her, at least according to the calculations of his
father and uncles about marriages between their children.
        Kamla is fond of Salih, but he is "like a brother." She and her
sisters boldly ask him to get them things they want from town; they
reach into his pockets to grab the latest cassettes he has brought for
himself. Kamla sometimes teases him, threatening to make him wash the
dishes and sweep the floor if he marries her. Kamla even jokes with his
mother. I had seen the woman grab Kamla and warn her to be good or
else she'd exercise her prospective rights as a mother-in-law and make
her quit school. Kamla broke free easily, laughing as she shouted
defiantly, "Not until I come to live with you!"
        Women in the camp mutter that Salih is not right for Kamla.
Even her grandmother half supports her. Although Migdim tries to
persuade her granddaughters of the virtues of marrying cousins, she is
angry with her sons for wanting "what nothing good will come of" – this
set of matches within the family between children who have grown up
together and say they feel like siblings. She fumed, "Her father wants
Kamla for Salih, and Kamla says she won't marry him. And Salih says he
won't marry Kamla. She's older than he is!"
        Her unmarried granddaughters enjoy provoking Migdim by
maligning cousin marriage. They say they want out: they want to marry
men who live far away so they can have new lives.
        "They're good for nothing!" insisted one of Kamla's cousins once
about her male cousins.
        Migdim scolded her, "You slut! What is this outrage? You
gypsy!"
        She and her sister laughed wildly, "Damn them, our cousins!
What do you see in them?"
        A cousin agreed, "They're all ugly. Not a handsome one among
them. No, we'll marry outsiders, Grandma, ugly or handsome."
                                   182

        Kamla shook her head. "I'm marrying an Egyptian! Someone
educated."
        Her grandmother retorted, "Your father won't agree to it!"
        Kamla hugged her grandmother. "We're just talking with you to
see what you'll say. Is there anything in our hands, Grandma? Or in my
father's? Only God knows what will happen."


                              GENERATIONS

       In the past, according to Kamla, a girl had no say in the matter of
marriage because, as her essay continued,

       They thought that girls shouldn't be concerned with
       anything but clothing and food and drink. In her
       kinsmen's eyes a girl had no value. (Even now it's true.
       You might think conditions had changed and advanced a
       bit, but it's still true.) They did not know that a girl had
       something she valued more than food and such things and
       that was feelings. (Feelings were forbidden to the girl.)
       But she had feelings and sensitivity and affections just
       like any other person on this earth. (This is true. There is
       no person God has created without feelings or sensitivity.)
       Her kinsmen had feelings and sensitivities and affections.
       (Take my father, for example. My father loved in the days
       of his youth; but then he thinks a girl doesn't have any
       such feelings.) But they did not care if the girl had
       feelings. Her feelings and desires were not important.

Kamla laughed conspiratorially as she read the next section.

       So, for example, if she loved a person, she could not show
       this love, however precious and strong her love was. She
       would be very afraid that her relatives would hear about
       it, because they considered it a big scandal for a girl to
       love, even though they had. They say that only men have
       the right – a young woman does not have the right to
       know or speak with any man except her brothers and
       their relatives. All of this has governed the Bedouin girl
                                    183

       for as long as she has lived on this earth. (This is true.
       For example, if a boy meets a girl and talks with her, they
       say it doesn't matter – "He's a man." But you, the girl, if
       you do this? They don't say anything to him. If my father
       heard that my brother was in love with someone and
       talked with her, he wouldn't say anything. But if it was
       me? That would be dealt with very differently.)

         This talk of love and vocabulary of feelings was new. Ever since
I had known Kamla, from the age of twelve or so, she had been a tough
little girl, the kind who would say to her uncle's new wife, "I don't even
know what this 'love' is. I hear about it in songs and hear about this one
giving her necklace and that one her ring, but I don't know what they are
feeling." She used to amuse her great-aunts when they hugged her and
teased her about which of her young cousins she would grow up to marry
by proudly shouting, "I'm never going to marry."
         Just a year before she wrote this essay she had demanded of her
mother, "Does a woman have to marry? Does she have to have someone
to tell her what to do, to boss her around?"
         "Yes, a woman has to marry," Gateefa had answered. "If she
doesn't, people will say, 'The poor thing!' "
         But things had changed. Kamla now quoted from a book she had
read at school: it was natural as one entered adolescence to begin
thinking about members of the opposite sex. She admitted that such
things had never even crossed her mind before. But then it had happened.
It was at her cousin Selima's wedding that she had first revealed to me
the new experiences she had begun to have at school. During a quiet
period of the day before the wedding we had gone for a stroll on the
hillside. Scattered on the ridge were groups of women in twos and threes,
sisters who rarely saw each other, aunts and their nieces, old friends, also
talking privately.
         Looking into the distance and, as it turned out, toward a certain
house Kamla had asked me, "What do you think, Lila? Is it wrong for
two people to think about each other all the time?" I was puzzled. She
told me about a young man at school – a well-behaved and good person,
she added quickly – who had taken notice of her. He had asked her
friends whether they could persuade her to agree to talk to him. She had
refused at first. Finally she agreed to a brief meeting, with friends
present. He wanted to know if she would be willing to marry him if he
                                   184

got his father to request her from Haj Sagr. She wondered if there was
any hope that her father would accept. Knowing the family, I said I
doubted it.
         Usually she was more realistic. When I would ask whom she
wanted to marry she would give various answers. She was adamant
about her cousins: "If they think I'm going to take any of these, my
cousins, or anyone from the camp, they're wrong." Then she would deny
that she cared whether or not it was the boy she knew from school. The
brother of their family friend Aisha would be just fine. As long as the
man was educated. Backtracking she would say, "It's not even important
that he's well educated. But he must be knowledgeable." The boys in her
camp didn't know anything; they would not know how to get on in the
world. Dependent on their fathers to feed, dress, and marry them off,
they were incapable of taking care of themselves. "They're men in name
only," she scoffed.
         She blamed her elder kinsmen, especially her father, for her
cousins' failures. Despite the double standard in matters of the heart, she
acknowledged that her cousins and her brothers were having almost as
hard a time dealing with their old-fashioned elders as she was. One time
when I returned from a short trip to Cairo, Kamla greeted me with the
news that her grandmother was distraught because her cousin Salih, the
woman's favorite grandson, had run away from home after his father had
hit him. No one knew where he had gone.
         I would hear the story several times from Migdim, once as she
told it to a visiting niece who began by asking, "Who hit Salih?"
         "His father hit him."
         "And why?"
         "He went to a wedding at So-and-so's and they say he drank
liquor."
         "Liquor? What kind of liquor?"
         Migdim didn't know much about it. "The stuff you drink that
makes them drunk. They said he drank. Each of the men came and asked
him. They'd told his father on him."
         "Beer, must have been beer." Migdim's niece knew things. Her
husband, now dead, was rumored to have been a womanizer and an
alcoholic.
         Migdim did not want her story interrupted. "His father came here
and hit him."
         "Beer. Liquor? why a bottle costs twenty-five pounds! There is
                                    185

beer and white water. The beer costs two pounds fifty a bottle."
        Migdim went on. "I said, 'Son, listen, sometimes he hits his
sisters just to get half a pound from them. Another time he'll need a
pound. By God, he doesn't have a piaster.' I said, 'Son, your boy didn't
drink. He doesn't have any money.' Salih told him, 'Father, I didn't buy
any. Dad, I didn't taste it. Dad, I didn't drink.' Every time he said
something, his father would give him a slap. And in the end he looked
for something big to hit him with, but we grabbed it away." Her niece
was shocked.
        "The women stopped him. The boy cried and cried – and I was
crying too – until his eyes were red. And he said, 'Swear to God, I'll go to
Libya. I'm leaving.' I thought maybe he'd go stay with his maternal uncle.
That would have been fine. In the end, though, they said he headed east."
        Migdim went on about her own feelings. The night Salih left, she
says, her head never touched the pillow. She and his sisters sat up crying
all night. "It was hard on me. He really was so generous, he was
generous. I swear to God, that time he got a job with his uncle out west
and had some money, he'd give me five pounds, his sister five pounds,
his aunt five pounds, and his nephews one pound each. So generous. And
in the morning, he never left without coming to say, 'Good morning,
Grandmother. How are you, Grandma?' And he'd kiss me from this side
and that. He was always there around me."
        Although they thought Salih was wrong to run away, the other
women in the community were angrier with his father. One of them had
tried to calm the man, saying, "It's something that's already happened. If
the boy went astray it has passed, and if it didn't really happen, then
people lied. He's your son." The man had refused to be calmed.
        Migdim was upset that her son was now threatening to pursue the
boy. She says she cursed him, "You've gone crazy, my son, and you've
made him go crazy. If you got him angry, may God bring you no
success! May God not grant you success!"
        Her niece commiserated.
        Migdim continued, "I told him, 'If you hit him, may God not
favor you! You should just talk to him. How can you say you're going to
make him go out to herd the camels, living for three or four months on
unleavened bread? You drove him crazy! Why didn't you scold him
gently and say, 'Son, this is wrong, this is shameful?' "
        Migdim's niece gave an alternative. The man should have said to
his son, "Okay, it was the first time. Now say it will be the last time."
                                   186

She added, "After all, someone invited him, rottenest of invitations. The
boys figured it would pass, but they caught it."
        Had Salih really bought the liquor? Who was with him? The
women of the family disagreed. Migdim cursed the family that held the
wedding. "May God ruin their houses, those who had a wedding and
brought – I don't know what dog it was – who brought a box and sold
bottles from it – who was it?" Others knew that beer was often sold at
these kinds of weddings, where professional performers entertained.
They suspected that the drinking had gone on. All the women agreed that
the boys were just kids who didn't know better; his father should have
reprimanded the boy, "My son, this is wrong. This is the Devil's work."
        Kamla, too, criticized her father and her uncles, but not just for
the way they had reacted to this rumor of alcohol. She thought they were
mistaken to be so strict with the boys. They wanted the boys to be
straight, but all they would get from applying this pressure was
stubbornness. The pressure, she warned, would produce the opposite of
what they wanted. She gave examples. The men wouldn't let the boys
play soccer. ''What's wrong with soccer? It's exercise." They wouldn't let
them have a television, go to cafés, or visit the local cafeteria where
videos are shown. Needless to say, they wouldn't permit them to grow
their hair long. The men wouldn't even let the boys get jobs, making
them stay on the land and tend the new fig trees. Noting that her brothers
and cousins had no money, Kamla added, "They treat them like girls. If
only they would give them a bit of freedom."
        The freedom she wants for them, and perhaps for herself, is the
subject of a popular song, an early recording by 'Awadh al-Maalky, that
includes a comical tale of woe. The singer is moved, he begins, by the
suffering that customs of the past have caused a young man. Hundreds of
others have come to him to complain. Assuming the voice of the
aggrieved young man, the poet describes what happened in the three
marriages his kin arranged for him: when he reached out on the wedding
night to touch his first bride, he discovered she was completely bald; the
second bride, though beautiful with long thick braids, could not speak;
the third tried to strangle him in his sleep – she was insane. The young
man declares he won't marry again unless he is allowed to choose his
own bride. Resuming his own voice, the singer comments on the young
man's predicament with some advice to the elders:

       My warnings are to the old man
                                   187

       who imprisons the freedom of the young,
       who has forgotten a thing called love,
       affection, desire, burning flames,
       forgotten the strength of lovers' fire,
       the fire of lovers who long for one another.
       What's exquisite is that they're afraid,
       they say, any minute my prying guard will turn up:
       my father's about to catch us.


                     THE DANGERS OF SCHOOLING

        Kamla thinks her elders are wrong to fear an abuse of freedom.
Her essay described what happened when her generation began to go to
school.

       Life began to change for the Bedouins, a change of
       conditions and location. Those Bedouins who began
       living in town started sending their sons and also their
       daughters to school to learn right from wrong, prayer,
       and writing. (That was my father's single goal in
       educating us. He wanted us to know this. They don't put
       us in school to learn – who cared if I got educated? My
       own reason for being there was to learn right from wrong
       and the Qur'an. That's all.) After that they would pull them
       out of school. (Even if a girl was clever and came out first
       in her class, once she had learned right from wrong and
       had come to understand, they would say to her, "Come
       on, that's enough.") Some might let her stay through
       secondary school. (Like me. After I finished secondary
       school, that was it.) The Bedouin girl could even gain
       such a mastery of learning and knowledge (it would be
       great if every girl could go to high school) that she could
       enter university. (In Alexandria you'll find Bedouin girls
       who've gone to university.)

        Kamla was grateful to have been allowed to continue so long in
school. She had dreamt, when still in primary school, of going to college
to study politics and economics. At the time, she says with amazement,
                                  188

she didn't understand the problem of being a girl. She had hope. Now
they tease her younger sister for similar ambitions. Her father had
proudly congratulated the younger girl for a good report card and said it
was a pity her brothers had given her such a hard time when she
announced that she wanted to be a doctor. Kamla was scornful. "They'll
make her quit long before she becomes a doctor."
        The problem with being a girl, as Kamla explained in her essay,
was what other people would say and think about her family if they let
her go to school.

       What happened was that people began competing over
       the schooling of girls. (For example, my father sees
       Aisha's father, who has educated all his daughters; so my
       father looks at him and says, "Why should he educate his
       daughters and not me? I have to educate my daughters."
       One looked at the next until all of them started educating
       their daughters. … But around here, they see that others'
       daughters aren't in school. No one here has daughters in
       university. In Marsa Matruh they all sent their girls to
       school, each imitating the other. My father looks over at
       Aisha's father and his daughters. If one of them did
       anything wrong may God protect us! anything wrong, my
       father and all of them would decide not to follow. But
       when I look, I see that the Bedouin girl does not give up
       her Bedouin values. The girls went to school and nothing
       bad happened.)
               They put them in school, and the girls repaid their
       precious trust. The Bedouin girl made them see clearly
       that their daughter was as good as any girl from the
       biggest city in intelligence and level of learning. She
       would get the highest grades in all fields of learning.
       (This is true. If, for example, you compare someone from
       Marsa Matruh and someone from Cairo who've both
       graduated from the same school, you'll find them equally
       good. You'll even find that the Bedouin girl is better
       because she is also modest, pious, and respectful of her
       traditions and customs better than the Egyptian girl who
       may have graduated from medical school but does not
       dress properly. Everything in her lifestyle is not right.
                                    189

       Even if she gets educated, the Bedouin girl is better. You
       know, the Bedouins used to think that girls were a
       scandal. They used to think that if a Bedouin girl left the
       house she would have to do something wrong. They were
       sure of it. They'd say she can't go out – she's an idiot, she
       can't think. Like a beast of burden, she wouldn't know
       right from wrong. But when she got educated she showed
       them that what they had thought was wrong.)

         Kamla still struggled against community opinion. Her relatives
opposed sending her to college. An aunt put it bluntly: "What? Let her
study in Alexandria? She's a kid. What does she know? Someone might
take advantage of her. If it were here in our territory, it would be fine.
But it's in Alexandria. She's gotten enough schooling."
         Her father was more honest about their concerns. He had defied
his brothers (with Aisha and perhaps even me in mind) to let her
complete high school. The summer she graduated a school friend of
Kamla's came to visit. She was dressed differently from the girls in our
camp, having adopted the modern Islamic modest dress that included a
severe headcovering. Haj Sagr knew her family; she spoke freely to
Kamla's father, while his own daughter sat silent. The young woman told
him how they wished they could go on to college. At first he tried to
dismiss the idea by asking what use agricultural college (the only kind
they were qualified to enter) would be for a girl. Then he got to the heart
of the problem: "What would people say? 'His daughter's in college. I
wonder if she's really studying or just going out a lot.' "
         Even if she were truly doing nothing wrong, he said, people
would talk. The young woman argued with him, but he ended, as Kamla
had predicted, by saying, "Listen, if your father agrees to it, tell him I'll
agree too."
         He inquired about her family situation, and she told him her
father was refusing to marry any of his daughters to cousins. His excuse
was that blindness ran in the family. Kamla was encouraged,
momentarily, when her father agreed that a girl who is educated should
be married to an educated man so there could be mutual understanding.
But then Haj Sagr suddenly reversed his argument. He told Kamla's
friend that he had been willing to send his daughters to school because
he wanted them to know how to organize their lives, their home, and
their children. An educated mother could help her children with their
                                   190

schoolwork. Therefore, he said, he would prefer to keep these girls in the
family: even if their husbands were not educated, the next generation of
the family would benefit. If you give women to outsiders, he noted, the
benefits go to the other tribe.
        His model was Aisha, the woman whose father had been an old
friend, whose husband was Sagr's business partner, and whose brother he
was eventually to accept as a son-in-law. Aisha was the only college-
educated Bedouin woman they knew. Whenever she and her children
accompanied her husband on a visit, Kamla assumed special charge.
Although all the women were warm, it was Kamla who saw to it that
Aisha got water for ablutions, a prayer mat when she wanted, and who
kept the conversation going.
        Aisha was tall, slender, and elegant. She wore nicely styled full-
length, long-sleeved dresses. Instead of the usual black headcloth, she
wore the fashionable modern headcovering that now marks Muslim
modesty and piety. Unlike the Egyptian women who sometimes visited,
she did not turn up her nose at the food that was offered her, and she was
relaxed with the women of the household. She'd just laugh when old
Migdim teased her about her husband. "After He created your husband's
tribe, God created the donkey." Insults were expected between people
from Aisha's tribe and that of her husband.
        Aisha was and was not part of their world. A distant relative, she
had people and interests in common with Migdim, Gateefa, and the
others, but she was defensive about her family. Although they lived in
the city, she was quick to tell stories that showed her brothers to be
proper Bedouins. Describing her own wedding, she recalled how her
husband whose family were real desert Bedouins came to her house the
evening before the ceremony. He had brought along a Western-style suit,
intending to have his photograph taken with her. Her brothers, she
reported, had said, "If you're coming to have dinner with us, that's fine,
you are very welcome. But if you're coming for anything else, don't
bother."
        Later she would try to cover for her sister, who made an
unconventional marriage. We had met this young woman once, a student
of pharmacology at Alexandria University who came to visit dressed in a
long woolen suit, her hair covered with a turban and scarf, an alternative
"Islamic" style. We heard later that her brothers had agreed to a marriage
offer from an Egyptian doctor living in Marsa Matruh. Aisha insisted
that even though the groom was Egyptian, her brothers had required a
                                   191

Bedouin engagement ceremony, where sheep are brought and eaten, first,
before the Egyptian-style engagement party the groom's family wanted.
She also claimed that they held a traditional henna party on the eve of the
wedding before the Egyptian-style wedding in a club. She denied that
anyone except one brother had attended the wedding itself, but I didn't
believe her: I knew she knew how scandalous it would be to admit that
the bride's relatives had attended such a wedding.
         Aisha switched easily between the Bedouin and Egyptian
dialects. When she and her husband entertained Bedouins in their home,
she served the men the customary lamb and rice but otherwise remained
in a separate room from them. When they were with Egyptian friends,
she served different foods and they all ate together. They even got
different videos to entertain their guests. For Bedouins they always
rented the same film about the Libyans' struggle against the Italian
colonists. Their guests, Aisha explained, loved the early scenes showing
a traditional Libyan Bedouin wedding and the scenes of men fighting on
horseback. Egyptian films, she said, contained risqué scenes, so these
were never shown to Bedouin guests. Aisha also owned two photo
albums: one she showed to their more traditional Bedouin friends and
family; the other one she kept hidden because it contained photographs,
taken with a self-timer, of herself holding hands with her husband. Yet
Aisha worried about trying to raise her two small children in an
apartment on the outskirts of Alexandria. She did not want them to play
with the neighbors. She feared they were learning bad language, and she
apologized for their having picked up the Egyptian dialect. Her five-
year-old daughter had just begun school and had started to deny that she
was an Arab. "She says she's Egyptian," her mother reported. "You
know," Aisha said earnestly to Kamla, "Egyptians aren't like us."


                                EGYPTIANS

        Could Bedouin identity be maintained after schooling? Kamla's
essay took up this question.

       The Bedouin girl preserves the traditions and customs she
       was raised by. (People stay with what they have grown up
       with because they came of age with it. Me, for example, I
       grew up knowing this was shameful and that was not
                                   192

       right, there are customs, there's respect and modesty.
       Even when I'm old and my hair is grey, I'll have to follow
       these.) She has sense and preserves her family's
       reputation. (Of course, she'd be afraid that if she did
       something wrong they'd pull her out of school.) The
       Bedouin girl tries to overcome the special obstacles she
       must confront. (For example, she doesn't let her customs
       and traditions, or people's talk – saying this is wrong and
       that is shameful – make her fall behind other girls. The
       Bedouin girl follows her customs but in a way that doesn't
       tie her up or block the path before her.) She attempts to
       live a life enlightened by learning, happiness, and
       contributions to her country and family. (She gives to her
       country. The Bedouin girl feels for her country and
       understands the meaning of Egypt as much as any girl
       from Cairo. The girl living in the Western Desert has
       feelings for Egypt that may be even stronger than the
       Egyptian girl's. The educated Bedouin girl knows the
       meaning of her country. ... Boy, if my father heard this!)

        Kamla's comment about her father gives a clue as to the obstacles
she faces as she moves between home and her state school run by
Egyptian teachers. While Haj Sagr bemoans the Awlad 'Ali's lack of
foresight in failing to request an independent state from the British and
chafes against every government restriction on his activities, Kamla
patriotically defends Egypt and speaks proudly of President Mubarak.
Once, when her father confronted her for being a few hours late from a
school trip, she argued back. He then scolded her for raising her voice
and waving her hands as she spoke.
        "This is the work of Egyptians!" he yelled. Anger fighting fear,
she answered, "I am an Egyptian. And they are the best people, and this
is the best country!"
        Kamla listened closely to the detailed reports of city life that
Safiyya, her father's second wife, gave each time she returned from visits
to her brothers' homes. These were brothers whose sons were becoming
lawyers. Kamla was also riveted to broadcasts of Egyptian radio
melodramas, with plots like that of "Bride by Computer," about a young
man whose life is nearly ruined by computer matchmaking. Kamla can
envision this world better than her sisters can, although she was as
                                    193

puzzled as they were about what a computer might be, and just as
disapproving of the female characters in this conservative moral tale.
         The plot of this serial, as the girls explained, followed the usual
formula: A man loves someone but cannot marry her; in the end, though,
he succeeds in getting her. The main character was a young Egyptian
who worked in a company. When his mother objected to him marrying a
co-worker whom he loved, a friend suggested he "talk to the computer to
find a bride." The results, predictably, were disastrous. The first bride
was a doctor. "She worked day and night," Kamla recalled. "Even the
night of the wedding she was busy."
         "You know what she was doing?" Kamla's neighbor intervened.
"She was doing experiments with mosquitoes and rats."
         "So he divorced her," Kamla went on. "He got engaged to
another girl but didn't marry her. After he got engaged to her, she wanted
him to go swimming with her and to dance with her, to act like
foreigners."
         The neighbor was excited. "The day he wanted to marry her she
told him she wanted him to come over. He went there and found it wild.
There was loud music."
         Sabra explained. "She was at a nightclub. When he got there she
said, 'Play that music,' and people started dancing. She asked him if he
knew how to dance. He said no. She said, 'Look, see that man who's
moving wildly on the floor?' The girl moved wildly as well, asking them
to play a foreign tape."
         The young women laughed as they described her. "She said to
him, 'Get up, get up.' But he wouldn't go with her. He wouldn't dance
with her."
         When they paused I asked, "What was the problem with the third
bride?"
         The girls were confused. Sabra ventured, "I don't know, she had
put ... she had made a workshop in the house. They had a guest room,
and she put her workshop in that room."
         "No, she turned the bedroom into a factory."
         "And she started fighting with her in-laws. She experimented on
the old woman. She gave her something to try that made her almost die.
When the man came home from work he asked his wife, 'Where is my
mother?' She told him, 'I took her to the hospital.' He asked, 'Why, what's
the matter?' He couldn't bear that any harm would come to his mother.
When he went to see her she talked to him. She said, 'She was doing an
                                   194

experiment and I'm the one who drank the medicine.' "
         They giggled as Kamla repeated, "The old woman almost died.
He said, 'No, if she wants to kill my mother, I don't want her.' "
         "He loved his mother," Sabra noted.
         "And the fourth one, he brought her and then couldn't get any
peace. She gave him a headache. She'd bring the onions and potatoes to
peel. The man would be resting on the bed and she'd climb up next to
him at night to peel potatoes. She'd say, 'Put down that newspaper and
let's talk, me and you.' "
         The girls found it hilarious to think of the woman peeling
potatoes in bed. One of them explained, "She was a real peasant."
         Kamla argued, "It's just lies. A peasant woman wouldn't do that."
         Her neighbor was emphatic. "She was a peasant from Upper
Egypt. They are like that."
         Kamla will only go so far in her defense of Egyptians. She often
criticized their neighbors, a poor family who had lived among Egyptians
and had picked up different ways. As evidence of their immorality she
disclosed that the men and women ate together. Another nearby
household fared little better. They knew no modesty, she said: the son
listened to cassettes in front of his father, and the young daughter-in-law
neither covered her hair with a black headcloth nor avoided her father-in-
law.
         In her essay, and even more clearly in her commentary, Kamla
underlined this distinction between Bedouin morality and Egyptian
immorality. Still writing about the young Bedouin woman who had
become educated, she said:

       She doesn't forget her origins or her customs and
       traditions. She raises her children as well as the people of
       the city do. (Now we're talking about what the Bedouin
       woman does after she gets educated. Does she forget her
       duties as a mother? The difference between the Bedouins
       and the Egyptians is that when the Egyptian woman has a
       baby, she gives it to her mother to raise for her, and she
       takes it to day care. She doesn't do her duty to the child
       nor give it the required care. For example, she nurses only
       up to the fortieth day or at most for two months. And then
       she leaves it with her mother, her sister, or day care and
       goes out to work. But the Bedouin woman gives the child
                                   195

       its due, even if she's educated and has an advanced
       degree. Not her mother, not anyone else – she herself does
       the work. And she raises her child according to her
       customs. Let's say she's a Bedouin who marries an
       Egyptian or an educated Bedouin. She doesn't raise her
       child by the customs or traditions of the Egyptians. She
       raises her child with the customs and traditions of the
       Bedouin, except that she is slightly more informed. I
       mean, she tells her daughter, "This is shameful" and "That
       is right." Take an educated Bedouin girl like me, for
       example. If I were to marry an educated man and live the
       city life, I wouldn't let my daughter follow the ways of the
       Egyptians where a girl wears short dresses or goes out to
       clubs. No, of course that is wrong. We must be modest. It
       is wrong for us Bedouins, and we must respect our
       traditions. This is necessary. You wouldn't find an
       educated Bedouin woman allowing her daughter to do
       things that she could not do when she was with her
       family. Or maybe even if her parents permitted it, the girl
       herself would not do it. ''No," she'd know, "that's wrong."
       Bedouin women are the ones who really know how to
       raise their daughters. They are better than Egyptians
       because the Egyptian woman won't hit her daughter. Very
       rarely do you find an Egyptian who can hit her daughter.
       But the Bedouin woman, if her daughter does something
       wrong, she must hit her. Even if she's not that young. She
       must hit her to teach her right and wrong. You don't learn
       right from wrong if you're not beaten. The Egyptians don't
       do it and their girls well, you know ...)

        Poets have long reflected on the differences between Bedouins
and their peasant neighbors. Only fragments are remembered, however,
like the lines of a love story about a wealthy peasant and a beautiful
Bedouin girl named Khawd. Drought had driven her family into his
fields in search of pasture for their herds. He allowed them to stay and
graze their animals – when he saw Khawd. One day, though, his beloved
announced that her family had decided to return to the desert; she asked
him to migrate with them. In despair the young man answered:
                                     196

       O Khawd, I have no camels that I might travel your distances
       I have nothing but buffalo and cows, who will find
       no pastures near you

        Kamla's aunt Dhahab had once recited a short poem on a similar
theme – it was her comment when I declined her polite suggestion that I
marry her son so that I come could live with her. The song came, she
said, from a story about a bull who fell in love with a camel and tried to
follow her into the desert. She warned him that he would exhaust himself
if he tried, since he had to eat and drink every day and she drank only
every five days. He said that for her sake he'd drink only every other day,
but she knew he couldn't keep up with her. She told him:

       You'll kill yourself bellowing
       O bull, if you try to follow ...

        Some women were tolerant of moral differences between
themselves and Egyptians. I talked once about television with two poor
women who had recently moved to the area from near the Libyan border.
They said they found television entertaining to watch when they had no
work to do. Their favorite shows, of course, were the Egyptian serialized
dramas.
        I was curious. "But the Egyptians on these programs are not like
you, are they?"
        One of them laughed. "The Egyptians are citified, not like the
Bedouins, the poor things."
        They explained that it didn't matter because they would never
watch television with people they should respect and be modest in front
of. Girls would never watch if their fathers were there; women would
leave the room if their husbands had visitors.
        "So you don't you feel embarrassed by what you see on
television?"
        "No, if you're by yourself it doesn't matter," replied the older of
the two.
        "What if you see people in love?"
        The younger of the two women laughed. "They're free to do that.
We don't worry about them. The Egyptians have no modesty. They have
no religion. They just do everything. It's their way."
        The older one agreed. "Yes, let them do what they want. We just
                                  197

laugh at them."
        Kamla and Sabra had a younger sister who loved television. She
thought her father was wrong not to let them have a TV set. Although
she conceded that foreign films were immoral, she argued that Egyptian
films were different. Haj Sagr had taken away the television set when he
heard that the girls were watching films in which people hugged and
kissed each other. "He didn't want us watching. He said it was
shameful." But these films and stories, she persisted, always showed the
correct path in the end, even though they had people doing such things in
early scenes. Egyptian films show how the girl who went off with a man
later realized that he had tricked and used her. The importance of proper
moral behavior always became clear ultimately.
        Kamla's sister wondered anyway what her father could be
thinking when he worried about his daughters' exposure to these things.
Realistically she asked, "Where do we ever go? Nowhere but this house
or the rest of the camp, where it's all family. Where does he think these
things could happen?"
        Kamla's father did fear the influence of Egyptians on the Bedouin
community. In his opinion, the most serious problem the Bedouins faced
was that of intermarriage between Bedouins and Egyptians. In the past,
he maintained, no Arab, even the simplest shepherd, would give his
daughter in marriage to "a peasant," as they used to call all Egyptians,
even if the man were a company president. Things were more difficult
now. Whereas before the area had been almost completely Bedouin,
now, in regions like theirs that were close to large towns, Egyptians
made up fifty percent of the population.
        The trouble with the Egyptian presence, he went on, was that the
Egyptian girls looked so pretty. They always dressed up, combed out
their hair, and wore short dresses. A group of Bedouin elders had met
recently to discuss what to do about these women who "walk around
naked." Their concern was that the young men would find them
attractive and want to marry them. And their fathers, wanting to make
them happy, might agree. If the young men married Egyptian girls, there
would no longer be any difference between Bedouin and Egyptian in the
next generation. Sagr had warned the elders of this danger at the
meeting. He admitted, though, that the process would be hard to stop
now that the boys see these girls in school. Although he was afraid that
Bedouin girls might pick up attitudes and habits from Egyptians like
having boyfriends, which the Egyptian girls don't think twice about, his
                                   198

real fear was intermarriage. That would bring about the end of tribal
bonds.


                               EUROPEANS

        Sagr sensed the gradual shift in the boundaries of the moral
community. Egyptians and Awlad 'Ali are being brought together by
roads, newspapers, radio, television, schools, agricultural cooperatives,
the army, and Parliament. With foreigners – Europeans – however, the
divide remains absolute. Even Kamla, who sometimes pleaded with me,
exasperated with her rambunctious little brothers and sisters, to take her
away with me ("Put me in your suitcase and get me out of here!") and
who proudly told me about several young Bedouin women with M.A.'s
in veterinary medicine – who had been sent, tattoos and all, to London
for further training – even she did not approve of the Godless Europeans.
        Unlike Egyptian Christians, she argued, Europeans do not
recognize God. "Every Muslim, even the most ignorant and uneducated,
knows that there is a God and that He created all things." Worse,
Europeans do not pray. When I contradicted her to say that many prayed
in church, she challenged me. ''What? What kind of person prays with
his shoes on? May God protect us!"
        The Westerner's lack of faith in God provides powerful imagery
for inhumanity. Kamla's uncle's wife once lamented her lost brother with
a poem that exploited this view:

       The European, with all his lack of faith,
       wept when I told him of my condition ...

       To show the magnitude of their compassion for girls, women
sang a wedding rhyme that also mentioned Europeans:

       God protect every girl
       even the Christian woman's daughter

        Kamla has not seen the new tourists who visit the Western
Desert, but she has heard about them. In 1986 a favorite commercial
cassette was the song called "The Japanese Woman" by the young
Bedouin star Si'daawy al-Git'aany. The singer, identifying himself by
                                    199

tribe, says he lost his heart to a foreigner. (Although he calls her
Japanese, the details of his song suggest a melding of many
nationalities.)
        Spanning many verses, the tale begins with his first sight of the
woman. She had come to Egypt to relax, he sings, and in the gardens of a
summer resort hotel in Marsa Matruh she was swinging on a swing. Her
father, sitting on a chair ("like a boss") was grotesque and frightening: a
European Christian with a long beard eating platefuls of pork and
drinking quantities of beer. "We are Bedouins who like the desert," the
singer goes on, "and they are Europeans. Fate brought us together." In
her company he forgot his cares, and although they were accustomed to
different ways, she made him lose interest in Bedouin women, who only
cared about tying up goats and waiting for the sheep to come home in the
evening.
        She wore a cross and made him sit on chairs. Oh, he knew their
ways were different, but he went astray, unable to stop himself from
falling in love with a Christian. As she sat under an umbrella they talked.
He had been to school and knew her language. She asked him to come
home with her, but he first wanted to show her his home and the desert
snail shells. Then she telephoned the governor and got permission for
him to travel with her. So there he found himself, walking behind her,
carrying her suitcases to board an airplane. Like a bird it took off, and he
was scared. Everything is by God's will that a man from the desert
should end up with a Japanese woman.
        Contrasting her country with his, he finds that the sea is to the
south instead of the north. Her country is famous for its buses and trucks,
he sings, whereas our women know only how to spin and to churn butter
in goatskin bags. The moral contrasts are harsher. There, women's hair is
uncovered and men wear straw baskets on their heads instead of skull
caps. Women go wherever they wish and everyone says hello to them.
Accompanying his lover to a nightclub, he found people dancing like
birds as someone howled while playing the piano. People got drunk and
started fighting and throwing things around. His story would make a
good soap opera, he sings.
        Things were different once they got to her country and she lost
interest in him. The song ends with a refrain about the treachery of
women, an ending that always got a rise out of Kamla and her sisters.
"He got what he deserved," they insisted. "Who told him to go chasing
after the foreigner, carrying her suitcases?"
                                   200

                                   PIETY

        Kamla reflected, in her essay, on what aspects of Bedouin life she
would like to see preserved. Her father would have been proud of the list
of positive features she drew up.

       We all know that everything in life has its good qualities
       and its bad. (Weren't you asking what was good about the
       Bedouins and what wasn't?) The virtues of the Bedouins
       are:

       1. Their piety and their total adherence to the traditions of
       the Prophet, despite their lack of education. (This is the
       thing I hope will continue until Judgment Day. This is the
       best thing – that they are religious. Even though ninety
       percent of them aren't educated, they are pious. Long
       clothing, respect, and modesty. The woman is as pious as
       the man. No woman can talk with a man she doesn't know
       or have him visit her at home. And she doesn't show her
       face or talk with any older man. This is what I hope
       Bedouin women and girls will never abandon.)

       2. Their total respectfulness. The old respect the young,
       and the young respect the old, whether they are strangers
       or kin.

        3. Their generosity. (It's true. You won't find anything on
       this earth like the generosity of the Bedouins. Even
       someone they don't know – they must invite him to the
       house and bring him food. Maybe no one else has this
       quality. I hope the Bedouins will hold on to this.)

       4. Hospitality and respect for the guest.

       5. The ties of kinship that link various parts of the family
       and the cooperation of relatives in all situations. (The other
       thing I want them to hold onto is this mutual assistance –
       they help each other in all circumstances. For example,
       even someone from a family that is related distantly to
                                   201

       another must help a person from that family. Even among
       the women. When a Bedouin woman sets up a loom, for
       instance, her neighbors come to help her. Others always
       come to help. I wish the whole world – never mind just
       families – the whole world would help each other and that
       Muslims would cooperate the way our religion tells us to.
       Ninety-nine percent of Bedouin women haven't been
       educated. But they are pious. They're ignorant and illiterate,
       but they dress the right way, they fear God, and they pray.
       Sometimes they don't even know how to pray properly, but
       they pray anyhow. They are totally respectable, and they
       follow the traditions of the Prophet. They say the Prophet
       used to do this, the Prophet used to do that. They learn it
       from their husbands or their educated sons.)

        Interestingly, Kamla had little to say about any of the traditional
virtues except the first, piety. Although she was vehement in asserting
their importance, perhaps she could not afford to think through their
implications. She was proud of her father's generosity and hospitality, for
instance, but it was also a source of tension, since the burden of feeding
his many guests fell on the overworked women of the household. And if
she were to think about how the extensive bonds between kin are to be
maintained, she would have to admit the virtues of marriages to paternal
cousins, the kind of marriage she wanted desperately to avoid.
        Piety was a different matter. Like many, Kamla was becoming
defensive in the face of new pressure from those sympathetic to Islamic
activists in Egypt. She was correct to point out how tied up with their
faith her kin were. They reckoned the months by the Islamic lunar
calendar, the years by the annual religious feasts, age by the number of
years a person has fasted the month of Ramadan, and the hours of the
day by the five times for prayer. All the older women and many of the
younger ones prayed regularly. Doing without the accoutrements of city
people, women simply prayed where they were, facing southeast and
laying a small kerchief on the ground before them. The men like Kamla's
father tended to know more. They would have learned as children to
recite the Qur'an, and they continued to learn from the lectures at the
mosque every Friday.
        Their reactions to the sanctimonious Egyptians and now to some
Bedouins from the cities, who were becoming, as they put it, "followers
                                   202

of the model," meaning the life of the Prophet have been mixed. The
older women are not cowed. They argue, as Kamla did, that they have
always worn modest clothing and covered their hair with a headcloth.
They resent being told that some of the ways they have demonstrated
their devoutness are wrong.
        Kamla is more unsure. Sometimes she defends these Muslim
Sisters and Brothers and sometimes she goes along with the old Bedouin
women as they make fun of them. One evening, having recited some
poetry and told some traditional tales for my benefit, Kamla's aunt
Dhahab turned to her niece and asked, "Hey Kamla, have you given Lila
any songs?"
        Kamla was coy. "I'm not a song person. I'm just a simple person
minding my own business. I'm with God. I'm pious and know my Lord."
        Her sister hooted, perhaps thinking of Kamla's love of the radio
and scandalous movie magazines. But Kamla went on, only half joking,
"Auntie, I've become pious. I don't have anything to do with songs."
        Her aunt mocked her, "What's this? You've become pious?"
Everyone laughed as the old aunt continued, "God's blessings! God's
blessings! So, you're joining the 'Beard Family'?"
        There was a commotion, with everyone talking at once about the
topic that was so often in the air these days: the Islamists. Kamla spoke
on their behalf. "They say, 'We are religious people, ... following God's
path, the path to heaven.' "
        Her aunt was hardly convinced. "I swear to God, they've never
seen heaven. God is the only judge. God is present."
        Sabra thought they should be more respectful. But she admitted,
"May God protect them, they do some things that aren't necessary. Do
you know what our aunt who lives out west says? She says they say that
the sugar dolls are wrong, even the food we make to celebrate the
Prophet's birthday. Rotten life! The special food for the birthday that the
whole world celebrates they say it is forbidden!"
        Her aunt concurred. "Have you ever heard of such a thing!"
        Some women were even more irreverent. Once when an old
friend from the nearby town was visiting, the evening conversation
turned to the topic of these new religious types. She complained that they
had forbidden celebrations of saints' birthdays, including the candy and
meat eaten at them. They had said it was wrong to call any holyman
"Saint So-and-so." She said, "They have forbidden everything. Why, the
next thing you know they'll forbid the clothes we wear and make us go
                                    203

around naked."
         She then described to the group gathered around her how these
people dressed. She told them about the wife of a Muslim Brother called
Mr. Muhammad who had moved to her town. The woman was offering
lessons on religion every Tuesday afternoon for any woman who wished
to learn. She wore a veil that covered her head and her face, "except for
her eyes"; she wore gloves, a dress down to the ground, and shoes. As
the old woman put it, "She looks like a ghost."
         Kamla showed off her knowledge of religion. "It is wrong for a
woman to veil her face. What is required is that your head be covered; it
is fine to expose your hands, your feet, and your face."
         The old woman then commented on the men. "They all run
around with those beards. Why, Doctor Ahmed's sticks out like this! It
looks like pubic hair."
         Kamla had to raise her voice to be heard over the wild laughter.
"But Auntie, the beard is a tradition of the Prophet."
         Kamla's cousin Salih had tried briefly to grow a beard, but the
teasing had been merciless. No matter how many times Kamla told them
it was the tradition of the Prophet, Gateefa and his other aunts accused
him of looking like a Coptic priest. He finally shaved it off.
         Kamla had confided to me that she would have liked to replace
her kerchief with the new Islamic headcovering but she was afraid her
family would object. A photograph of her with her school friends
revealed that she was the only one among them not wearing the new
modest dress. Yet Kamla criticized some of her classmates who wore
this type of clothing but added flowers and multicolored headbands to
their veils. She said their religion teacher had given them a real talking to
and had confiscated their flowers and headbands saying, "If you want to
take on the veil, do it seriously."
         Kamla said she would adopt this kind of headcovering "if God
opens the way for me and I get to marry someone educated."


                               A NEW ORDER

      The final part of Kamla's essay was to have been about what she
hoped would change in her community. All she had written, though, was
this:
                                     204

        As for the bad things, I will talk about them.

        She read this final sentence and looked at me. "What are the
wrongs I wish the Bedouins would finish with? I've already discussed
these. First, their ideas about girls. They are totally meaningless and
wrong. I wish they would give her the opportunity to get educated. They
see her as a worthless being. You know this, Lila. ... This is what I hope
the Bedouins will leave behind. They should see that a girl is a person, a
noble person created just as God created men. She has feelings,
sensitivities, and desires.
        "Another thing I wish is that they wouldn't let their customs and
traditions rule them to such an extent that they believe that the customs
of the city people are wrong and theirs right. Whenever they see that a
person is educated, they say he's wrong, we're right. I wish they would
respect the educated. I wish they would preserve their customs and
traditions but be a bit more advanced. A girl who goes to school doesn't
forget her customs and traditions, no matter how educated she becomes.
Even if she goes to Europe or America, the Bedouin girl will preserve
her customs and traditions. They should give her more freedom.
        "Another thing I wish is that they would get more organized. I
wish they would put a little order in their lives. Among Bedouins, order
is completely lacking. In every area of their lives – in terms of food, in
having too many children, in the way they raise the children – there's no
order. And in the house anything goes!"
        I was curious about what Kamla meant by "order." She gave
examples from close to home. "Say you've got two brothers living in one
house. If they organized their lives, they'd put each one in his own house.
And the business of marrying more than one wife – I wish they'd change
their views on this. It is the biggest sin. The Prophet – it is not forbidden,
but the Prophet said only if you can treat them fairly. But a man can't, it
can't be done. Even if he has money, he can't. As a person, in his
thoughts and his actions, he can't be fair. He'll like one more than
another.
        "The generation that's coming now, after my father's and
mother's, they wouldn't think of it or do it. Why? So they won't have a
house with thirty or forty people living in it. A household with two
women in it will have thirty or forty people in it. Their lives will be
lousy. They won't have good food, good clothes, or good childrearing.
They won't be clean. A woman alone in her own house can handle her
                                    205

children. When there are two women, one will say, 'Why should I hit my
children when that one doesn't hit hers?' They watch each other. When
one does something, the other is looking. If one cleans and washes and
the other doesn't, she says, 'Why should I do this when she doesn't?' If
she is alone, a woman won't be able to say that. Who's going to do it for
her? She'll do it herself and she'll know what's what. When she's alone
she doesn't have to depend on anyone. And even her daughter will turn
out well, like her mother. The other way they're always getting into
fights over any little thing. Even without my saying this, you know it,
Lila. This is what I wish would change.
         "Bedouins think that as long as they have a house and can eat,
drink, and be clothed, that's enough. That's life. And they marry and have
kids and marry again. But a man should live a more ordered and relaxed
life. Should a man come home at the end of his day tired from working
and find it filthy and the kids and women fighting? He comes wanting to
relax, and finds this? This is what makes someone say, 'No, there should
be order.' "
         For years I had heard Kamla's call for order. Living in a
household of twenty or more, half of whom are under ten years old, can
be chaotic. Fed up, Kamla would sometimes say, "This isn't a house, it's
a breeding station!" She and Sabra often teased their mother, calling her
Shalabiyya, the name of a character they had seen in a family planning
advertisement on television. Shalabiyya was a woman with too many
children: in her lap, on her shoulders, on her head.
         When she tried to draw water or milk the cow, they climbed all
over her and trailed behind her. Gateefa would apologize, "We can't
change the way we are."
         When Kamla was young, she would come home from school
announcing that she was going to marry an Egyptian doctor and have
only one child. Other times she'd say she was going to have only two
children, both daughters. She was going to live alone in a house with her
husband, just them, no relatives. Bedouin men, she would say, make
women work hard and don't pay attention to them. Even if the woman is
ill, the man won't lift a finger to help, not even to pick up a crying baby.
Egyptian men help their wives, respect them, and treat them well. When
Kamla's younger sister, echoing their father, accused Egyptians of being
stingy and not offering food to their guests, Kamla defended them to
support her favorite theme. She argued that they just did things in an
organized manner; they had special meal times, unlike the Bedouins who
                                     206

brought out food whenever anyone stopped by.
         Perhaps because tensions between her father's wives had recently
intensified, Kamla was impassioned in her final commentary. "Even
without becoming educated, the Bedouins could organize their lives. It is
enough to marry just one. Or if a man wants to marry more than one, he
should put each wife in her own house. They won't fight then. But if the
two are together, you'll always find this one saying, 'That one did and
said' and that one saying, 'This one said this and did that.' Even if they
are friends, the people outside the household won't let them be. Someone
will come and say, 'That one said this' and 'This one said that.' Women
are famous for this kind of talk.
         "Yes, Bedouin women are famous for their talk. The Prophet
said, 'Women – if not for their tongues, women would go to heaven.'
They asked him, 'Why should a woman go to heaven?' He said, 'Because
she gives milk.' Praise be to God, milk flows from her. And beyond that,
she works harder than a man. She's weaker – that's right, she's weak
compared to the man, whom nothing bothers – but she has to work more.
She has children and cares for them. They asked the Prophet, 'So what is
it that keeps her from entering heaven?' He said, 'It is because of her
tongue.' In a second she'll turn things around. She'll gossip about
everyone. Women talk about people more than men do."
         Kamla is critical of the older women in her community. She
confessed, too, that she belonged to two worlds. With her sisters and
cousins she talked about the things they knew, not letting on that she was
different. But there were so many things she could talk to her school
friends about that she could not talk about with the girls in her family –
things like politics. Sometimes she seemed to accept her double life with
equanimity. When I saw her spinning with her aunt one day, I asked,
"Hey Kamla, so you know how to spin too?" She had laughed. "Yes, I
can go either way. If it turns out I'm to be citified, I'll do that. And if it
turns out I'll be a Bedouin, I'll know how."
         When I suggested that she might be lonely if she moved into a
house of her own, she was adamant: "No, I won't miss them at all." Yet
this is someone who is fiercely proud of her father for being an important
man who is also generous and pious. Despite occasional confrontations,
she spends, like her sisters, nearly every evening sitting close to her
mother and talking. Even her brood of little siblings only sometimes
drives her really crazy. The youngest she can rarely resist grabbing to
hug. Delighted by this two-year-old's every new accomplishment, she
                                   207

whispers new words in her ear and kisses her when she repeats them.
         Most of the time, though, she says she wants to get out. I worry
about Kamla's blithe confidence that life in the city will be so much
better. I disagree with her assessment of Bedouin women's lives. I argue
with Kamla that she deliberately ignores the richness of their
relationships and the way they have always struggled back (and were
expected to). Her own life is evidence. There was not a single woman in
the camp who had not admired her for being a willful little girl. Even her
father had been amused by her opinions and determination. As she had
grown up, her strength of purpose had enabled her to withstand the social
pressure against her going to school. The independence she displayed
reminded me of her grandmother Migdim, with her stories of resistance
to marriage and her struggles to have her way with her sons. It even
reminded me of her mother, Gateefa, who had earned the respect of her
husband.
         Yet when her letter arrived I was happy for her – happy that it
was her fate not to have to marry her cousin after all and glad that her
father had been willing to take her wishes into consideration. Armed
with romantic visions inspired by Egyptian radio melodramas, cloying
love songs, and her tattered collection of hokey postcards showing
blonde brides and grooms looking deeply into each other's eyes, she will
go off to live with her Egyptianized, educated husband in a small and
ordered household. She will never work outside the home. She will
rarely even leave her apartment. She expects to clean house, cook meals,
and serve her husband. If God brings children, she'll take care of them
and raise them well.
         Because she has none of his sister Aisha's feminine refinement, I
was worried. What would her husband think when he first saw this
sturdy young woman with her wide feet and callused hands? Because she
is the daughter of a wealthy tribal leader, the fabric of her dresses would
be expensive and she would bring many with her; but they would have
been tailored by local seamstresses, whose renditions of city clothes are
always awkward. And would she know how to dress for the wedding
night, this girl who had to fight her mother's horrified accusations of
immodesty when she wore a home-made bra? Would Engineer Ibrahim
Saleem find charming her outspoken ways?
         I wrote back to wish her all happiness and to apologize for not
being able to attend the wedding. An older sister would sing at the henna
party on the eve of the wedding, so I looked through my collection of
                                   208

Bedouin wedding songs to see if any seemed right. I ended my letter
with three that I hoped would mean something to her. The first let her
know how much I thought of her family:

       Her father has a good name
       and those who have come to marry will find happiness ...

The second reminded her that I knew how much she wanted this:

       Her morning is blessed
       she got what she desired and was honored ...

And the third expressed my best wishes for this young woman,
vulnerable and beautiful as are all young brides heading off into the
unknown:

       Neighbors, come say farewell
       a gazelle from our land is about to journey ...
(this page intentionally left blank)
                                   210

TRANSCRIPTIONS OF ARABIC POEMS AND SONGS

Transcriptions of the Arabic poems seek to approximate the Awlad 'Ali
dialect except in distinguishing d * from z* to conform to the system
used by the International Journal of Middle East Studies. A detailed
explanation of the dialect and the transliteration system can be found in
my earlier study (Abu-Lughod 1986, xv xix).

Chapter 1

       1. Far away
               bi 'id* ma* yjibak* 'ilm*
               hagga* lu* tahayet* ya* 'alam* ...

       2. Dear one
              'aziz* fil-manam* girib*
              w fi l-ard* juba* ya 'alam ...

       3. He took away
               showwa* twarfik* ya 'en*
               il-yas* fik* mo* dayir* shway ...

       4. The heart
               il-'agl* hu* illi* mhagug*
               arma* hjayja* rahan* dilul* ...

       5. You who guards
              ya nagir* 'al-antha* shagi*
              ya nagir 'al-antha shagi
              marra tzurr w marra tlagi*
              marra tthur* tdugg sdadi*

       6. Praise be
               subhan * illi* khallak*
               bla* mi'iz* ya* dan* sabra* ...

       7. He's lifted
               'alek* shal* dhel* il-bet*
               idh-dhib* jak* ya ra'i* l-ghanam ...
                                   211



      8. The sheep
              id-dan* waradat* wizrudat
              wil-kabsh hu* illi mat* min il-'atash* ...

      9. In a late night
               zarrarat* 'agab* il-lel*
               shrib halibha* ra'i l-ghanam ...

      10. He struck
             shal kheshtu* mughtaz*
             khadho* minayha* ra'i l-ghanam ...

      11. Little Kafy
              Kfewa* ba'd* it-tuhur*
              yirkab hsan* markabu* dhahab ...

      12. A pity
              haba* ya sahib* ha sh-shanna
              haba ya sahib ha sh-shanna
              haba ya sahib ha sh-shanna
              galu* shayib* min l-ashayib*
              mat w ma* 'uyuni* ra'nnu*
              haba ya sahib ha sh-shanna

      13. May they always
            'alehum* il-'izz* ydum*
            dana* danay* w ana* benhum* ...

Chapter 2

      1. My work is a strong steed
             na* sana'ti* mjammam
             yji* fis-saraya* yzayid*
             lamma * khalat* rumt il-kim
             ykhalli* t-tawarif* gineyid*
             w l-ajwad* tanda* w ti'zim*
             w ilha* fin-nakhawa* 'awayid*
             w il-andhal* min ligumt il-fam
                              212

        minha* t'an* ish-shadayid*

2. Crows
       in-nas* yafraho* bil-ghraben* w na*
          min ghraben* khayif*
       yjibilna* zol* mishtag* mghawnin 'alena* mrayif*

3. In my joy
       min farhi* lak
       fatahtu* lak
       w umm ahmad* mittabaga*

4. I'm not your prey
        lani* sayyidtak* w lanak* teri*
        w la* j'ibtak* tarkab 'ale* sriri*
        yhannin* 'alek* allah* w talga* gheri*

5. I forbid myself
         haram* ftashik*
         w haram 'alayya* margadik w frashik*
         hati* j-jamal limmi* 'aleh* dbashik*
         w duri* wen* tubbi* tiri*
         lani sayyidtak w lanik* terak*

6. Friends
        illi* fir-rukha* sahib*
        fil 'uzz* 'ida* tharitum* ...

7. Your worries
       tuhkminik* kthir ya* 'en*
       ushe* amradh* shenat* tuligdi* ...

8. They watered
       isgo* l-'en* bil-hawwal*
       mrar* nin* 'aleha* rwi* ...

9. Despair of them
       khallak* yashum* ya 'en
       gharibin* ma* jab* waldik* ...
                                   213

      10. Son, be like
             khallik * ya* wlad ke* halak
             shdad* 'azm* w 'uyunhum* gwa* ...

      11. Even facing
             hatta* fi* hukumat* masr*
             'uyunhum gwa ma* rayyabu* ...

      12. All of his desires
              jama'* min shihah* gada*
              bharu* rag* w glu'a* nasab* ...

Chapter 3

      1. Every day you give birth
             kul yom* tjib* miyya
             ya na* ya 'atibt* idh-dhirriyya

      2. Hey old man
             Ya* sheb* ya 'ajuz*
             ya bgerat* ganduz*
             ya sab'a* mi'za* sud*
             ya hmayyir* in-nahag*
             ya jrewa* il-wagwag*
             a'tina* min ta'ashsha* hal-lela*
             walla hamm, nakilkum*

      3. The one who's absent
              illi* ghayib* nin* yji*
              w illi mistaja'* nin yishfi*
              w is-sghayyar* nin yakbar

      4. I want a small herd
              na wuddi* fi git'at* lgih*
              w kota* tfih*
              w mag'id* ma'a* binit rajil* mlih*

      5. I want some milking camels
              na wuddi fi git'at shawayil*
                                  214

             w markub* khayil*
             w mag'ad* ma'a binit shekh* il-gabayil*

      6. I want to be up on a young mare
              na * wuddi* fog* gabbab* gabba
              w l-ayyam* dala* bidalu*
              w nalhag* tliba* taghghabba*
              w insi* denna* min hbalu*

      7. My dear, have you forgotten
             nsit* ya* 'aziz* ghalay*
             ya tul* ma* jazet* bik ...

Chapter 4

      1. We're playing
             nal'abu* fi* farhan* lilna*
             yin'an* buh* illi* kallimna*

      2. Those who came to our wedding
             illi jana* fil-farh* njuh*
             illi ma jana ma nibbuh*

      3. Those who come to congratulate
             illi baraklak* ya ghali*
             l-'ugba* 'indu* nin* njih*

      4. You who've come to keep me company
             ya lli annastu matrahi*
             khalli* lelitkun* sabbahi*

      5. If you'd not been very dear
              lu* manak* ghali bil-hel*
              ma jinak* 'agab* il-lel*

      6. My brothers
             khawati* w 'iyal* 'amami*
             nazha* kef* yju* guddami*
                             215

7. Go tell her aunt
        gulu* lil'-amma* l-bi'ida*
        tihdar* hal-lela* s-si'ida*

8. Uncle, those who've come
       illi baraklak ya sidi*
       jamila* fog 'ale* rasi*

9. A hundred blessings
       mit * mabruk* 'ale* 'ammitna*
       illi* darat* farah* w lammatna

10. You who've come here
       ya* illi min gharba jituna*
       marhabten* w sharraftuna*

11. The maternal and paternal aunts
       il-khalat* w il-'ammat*
       fraha* lgahnwak* ya 'alam* ...

12. He wore himself out
       gada* mnab* shagi* fih*
       brawa* 'ale buk* ya wlad ...

13. If you dance
        kan* ragasti* jak* ij-jud*
        fi* farh* wledik* mardud*

14. Even if her topknot
       hatta* nkan* il-gissa* sheb*
       fi farh 'elewa* ma* 'eb*

15. Even if she's gotten old
       hatta nkan 'ajuz* kbira*
       ta'raf* kef* tsob* wtdiru*

16. Out little boy
       barra wlad ma nakshi* nayib*
       dars 'ajuz bdat'at* shayib*
                            216

17. Gold dipped
       dhahab fi dhahab masbub*
       'aziz* min l-'mala* l-awwili* ...

18. Welcome, welcome
       marhabten ahlan* bij-joda*
       marhabten ahlan bij-joda
       marhab* ya mol* ij-jumma mahruda*
       marhab ya lli* 'enik* soda*
       marhab ya lli kahil* l-anzar*
       marhab ya fayiz* 'an* jilu*
       w tawwa * yis'idni* bil hel*
       njibu* safik* bit-ti'dil*
       w nihki* guddam* il-hudar*
       w nihki guddam il-ga'id*
       fik* (ghathithin*?) ma* lhun had*
       w inti* lik salif* mah* ysara* ...

19. Like a man
        mithil* illi* tali* min bar*
        mithil illi sharib* sakran*
        illi sharib min kul anwa'*
        yji* ysannid 'as-sisan*
        nmawwij rayih* fi* tayyar*
        nmawwij rayih fi daymum*

20. Praise be to God
       subhan* illi khalig* fik
       rgeb* w ktuf* w dhir'ek*
       sghar* w mangushat* idek*
       w taht* 'ugudik* rayna* fik
       tawwa nihki 'anhin* nawrik*
       w nistadhan* rani* sha'ar*
       tsamhini* diri* ma'ruf*
       inti min sadrik* ahu* off*
       ykhuff illi 'aglu* sabbar*
       ykhuff illi gari* l-guran*
       a'uzu* billah* min sh-shaytan*
       ana* 'abid* rabbi* subhan
                              217

        w nsalli* w 'arfin* ij-jiran*
        lakin* rakkabti* fiya* jnan*
        il-mola* khaliglik* tidyan*
        msabi* ke* habb* ir-rumman*
        ydaffun man yirjib bardan*

21. Take the sash
       khudh il-mahzam* w hazzimni*
       'ala* tagra* w nus 'allimni*

22. Your mom's bloomers
       sirwal * ummik satane*
       hizzihum* willa atla'i*

23. Hey beautiful
       ya* 'eni* ma* shalla* 'aleha*
       tal'ab* w t-khammis bideha*

24. Our bride is fair
       'arusitna* beda* w hamra*
       w il-hasid* fi* 'enu* jamra

25. Into the eye
        il-'en* illi* tihsid* fin-nas*
        nhuttu* fiha* misht nhas*

26. If you fear
        kunti* khayfa* mn l-'en*
        huttilik* khamsa w gren*

27. I don't want
        lubt il-'ilwa* na* ma nridu*
        wuddi* fi bajo* jdida*

28. Mom, get me off this hill
      yamma fukkini* min l-'ilwa*
      la* htiba* la mayya hilwa*

29. God damn
                             218

       yikhrib bet* wlad il-'amm*
       rabbi* ma ygarrib la damm

30. O Lord, let them be many
       n'anha* ya molay* tzid*
       il-farha* ben* 'iyyal* is-sid*

31. The bride belongs to us
       il-'arusa* 'arusitna*
       w il-'aris* wlad 'ammitna*

32. O Grandma, bless our joy
       ya hanna* salmi* sa'adna*
       bnayyitna w 'ind* wladna

33. Even on the scales
       hatta* fil-zwan* rda'*
       il-'en kefha* kef* il-'alam* ...

34. Silk on silk
        harir * fi* harir ykhil*
        kher* min talami* 'al-ghrub* ...

35. Some people travel
       in-nas* 'al-gharib* tjul*
       nihna* min 'adana* nakhadho* ...

36. A bird
        ter* fi smum* iryah*
        yhum* ma* minzar* saydu* ...

37. The heart would be no hunter
       yabga* l-'agl* mo* siyyad*
       in ma la'ab* fi rishhun* ...

38. Fair and her bangs
       beda* wij-jumma masfiyya*
       binit tgul* 'anag* hattiyya*
                            219

39. Fair, unblemished
       beda la* shara* la mara*
       ke* l-gamar sa'at* mazhara*

40. She takes after
       jat lil-khala* w il-'ammat*
       dhahab biluli* maldumat*

41. If you want love
        kan* trid* ghala* s-sab'iyya*
        hutt* alfen* w shil* il-miyya

42. Her father doesn't care
       buha* mo mkhasus* flus*
       yrid* l-himma win-namus*

43. The one you took
       illi* khadhti* wlad si'dawi*
       la sayi'* la bta'* gahawi*

44. The boy you got
       hassalti* wlad mtsammi*
       la tibki* la tguli* yummi*

45. Pastures
       rabi'* fi manazil* halik
       bni* fih* ya* 'en* baruki* ...

46. The dear one
       il-'en * darijha* mabruk*
       armat abdharha* fi* wutunha* ...

47. The dear one
       il-'en* darijha mabruk
       zra'at* fi m'ali* wutnha ...

48. Apples from the gardens
       tuffah* fi janan* ikhwan*
       ma* yaklah* gher* in-nigi* ...
                            220

49. May God's mercies
      allah* ysamhik* ya* binit
      'ale* 'idad* mojat* il-bhar* ...

50. God protect
       sallim buha* illi* rabbaha*
       lin-nas* iz-zenin* a'taha*

51. If he doesn't bring a refrigerator
        in kan* ma jab* it-tallaja*
        ma 'ad* ydhug* 'indi* l-ghada*

52. If he doesn't get a television
        kan ma jab it-talfizyun*
        nihlif* ma nkahhil* l-i'yun*

53. Anyone who tells me
       illi gal* il-ghali* mahyuz*
       n'annu* yrakkib kalakuz*

54. Hey you
       ya bu* 'arbiyya* lamuni*
       taffi* n-nur* 'amet* 'uyuni*

55. The one who owns
       bu 'arbiyya* nagl kbira*
       la* yaskar la yashrab bira*

56. Swing by
       mayyil mayyil bit-tayuta*
       w i'zigni* hag* il-baskuta*

57. Put the bridal veil
       hutti* l-kusha* fog* sha'arha*
       khalli * s-sawwar* ysawwirha*

58. Hey woman, explain
       wassi* bintik ya* wliyya
       rah* tirgid fij-jallabiyya*
                            221

59. Him with the patterned red
       bu* smada* hamra* mangusha*
       bizn illah* n'idd* grushu*

60. Let's go, you and me
        yalla* na* wiyyak* habbabbi*
        wil-masruf* yjibha* rabbi*

61. You and I are the sweetest
       na wiyyak halawa* hilwa*
       yalla nal'abu* 'al-'ilwa*

62. My eyes will never forget
       'eni* ma* tansa* ghaliha*
       nin* gtur* il-mot* yjiha*

63. A girl
        bint tgul* gu'ud* fwakhir*
        ke* nagrabha tistakhar*

64. Don't forget
       ma tinse* illi* mitmawwih*
       kef* zarag* iz-zara'* yrawwih*

65. No one has yet forgotten
       lissa* ma nsahum* wali*
       ma zalo* 'al-'en* ghawali*

66. The tears of the eye
       dam'* il-en* 'ale* fargahun*
       malla sab'a* byar* ihdhahun*

67. Tonight's the night
       il-lela* lelat* hinnayat*
       w bukra 'inid* 'aziz* tbat*

68. The corners of the tent
       tdawan* arkan* il-bet*
       farhan* jayta* rimat* khala ...
                              222



69. May she be good
      l'anha * tibga* binit halal*
      tfajina* bi'iyal* w mal*

70. May she be a real Arab
      l'anha tibga binit 'arab*
      tkhushsh ij-jimla ma* tkharribsh

71. Make her dear mother happy
      Ya* rab farrih* maynitha
      'ar-rumma* tinshir khirgitha*

72. O Saint 'Awwaam*
       ya* sidi* il-'awwam* il-'ali*
       fina* ma tshammit la* wali*

73. When the people
      sa'at* hdur* in-nas*
      ya karim* tati* bil-faraj ...

74. Behind us
       warana* tawagi* humur*
       ysalo* 'ale* ma naf'alu* ...

75. I'm confident
        'aziz* 'inid* dumni* fi*
        talgah* ya 'alam* bamantu* ...

76. Khwayyir doesn't tremble
      Khwayyir la yrayyib la ykhaf*
      yjib* sharafha* 'ar-rafraf*

77. Go tell your father
       ya Sultan* gul* l-buk*
       rayat* ish-sharaf fog* rusna* ...

78. They lived like falcons
       'ashan* sguriyyat*
                                  223

             sayyad* il-khala* ma talhun* ...

      79. Bravo!
             brawa* 'aleha* nur*
             illi* hajaj* buha* ma wti* ...

      80. Look at her cloth
             unzur* khirgitha ya banat*
             tgul* mfaggis rummanat*

      81. Little Selima, blessings
              ya * Slema* mabruk* 'arisik*
              daweti* bwjuh* tirisik*

      82. Little Selima, bless you
              ya Slema salmik dassasa*
              rawwah* khayyik kef* il-basha*

      83. Go tell her father
             gulu* lbuha* tahanna
             damm il-bit nzil 'al-hinna*

      84. The cloak
             ij-jard illi* ghattetik* bih*
             nawwar wajhik nawwartih*

      85. Like a crescent moon
              hilal* ma* 'aleh* zbun*
              sharaf il-'en* yoban* ya 'alam* ...

Chapter 5

      1. My warnings
             nsuha* minni* lisj-shayib*
             illi habis* hurrit* ish-shab
             wnasi* haja* ismha* hub*
             w 'atf* w shog* w nar* thib
             ya magwa* nar il-ghawi*
             ya magwa nar il-'ajgin* illi ba'dhun* mishtagin*
                             224

       simahitha* yagbo* khayfin*
       ygul* in-nagir* sa'a* yji*
       ygul in-nagir sa'a ytug*

2. O Khawd
       ya khod* ma 'indina* dhod* nin* narhalo* fi* jibakum*
       ma 'indi* gher* bgar w jamus* ma lhum mrati'*
          ihdhakum*

3. You'll kill yourself
        yirdi* 'alek* n'ir*
        ya thor* tibi'ak* ilhun

4. The European
       nasrani * glil* id-din*
       shketlu* 'ale* hali* bka*

5. God protect
       rabna yustur* kul bnayya
       hatta* bit in-nasraniyya*

6. Her father
        buha* msamma* zen*
        w illi* khalato* sahib* sa'ad* ...

7. Her morning
       il-'en* subuhha* mabruk*
       talat* mnaha* washrafat ...

8. Neighbors, come
       wad'u* ya* jiran*
       ghazal* wutna* nawya* safar ...
(this page intentionally left blank)
                                  226

BIBLIOGRAPHY

        Abou-Zeid, Ahmed M. 1966. ''Honour and Shame Among the
Bedouins of Egypt." In Honour and Shame, ed. J. G. Peristiany, 243-50.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        Abu-Lughod, Lila. 1986. Veiled Sentiments: Honor and Poetry in
a Bedouin Society. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.
        . 1988a. "A Bedouin Community: Ethnography in a Different
Voice." Newsletter of the American Research Center in Egypt 141:1-4.
        . 1988b. "Fieldwork of a Dutiful Daughter." In Arab Women in
the Field: Studying Your Own Society, ed. Soraya Altorki and Camillia
El-Solh, 139-61. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
        . 1989. "Zones of Theory in the Anthropology of the Arab
World." Annual Review of Anthropology 18:276-306.
        . 1990a. "Can There Be a Feminist Ethnography?" Women and
Performance: A Journal of Feminist Theory 5(1):7-27.
        . 1990b. "The Romance of Resistance: Tracing Transformations
of Power Through Bedouin Women." American Ethnologist 17:41-55.
        . 1990c. "Shifting Politics in Bedouin Love Poetry." In Language
and the Politics of Emotion, ed. Catherine Lutz and Lila Abu-Lughod,
24-45. New York: Cambridge University Press.
        . 1991. "Writing Against Culture." In Recapturing Anthropology,
ed. Richard Fox, 137-62. Santa Fe, N.M.: School of American Research
Press.
        . Forthcoming. "Islam and the Gendered Discourses of Death."
International Journal of Middle East Studies.
        Ahmed, Leila. 1987. "Women of Egypt." Women's Review of
Books 5(2):78.
        Altorki, Soraya, and Camillia El-Solh, eds. 1988. Arab Women in
the Field: Studying Your Own Society. Syracuse: Syracuse University
Press.
        Appadurai, Arjun. 1988a. "Introduction: Place and Voice in
Anthropological Theory." Cultural Anthropology 3:16-20.
        . 1988b. "Putting Hierarchy in Its Place." Cultural Anthropology
3:36-49.
        Arens, William. 1979. The Man-eating Myth: Anthropology and
Anthropophagy. New York: Oxford University Press.
        Asad, Talal, ed. 1973. Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter.
                                  227

New York: Ithaca Press.
        Asad, Talal. 1986. The Idea of an Anthropology of Islam.
Occasional Papers Series, Center for Contemporary Arab Studies.
Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
        Atiya, Nayra. 1982. Khul Khaal: Five Egyptian Women Tell
Their Stories. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
        Bauman, Richard. 1986. Story, Performance, and Event.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        Beauvoir, Simone de. [1953] 1974. Second Sex. New York:
Random.
        Behar, Ruth. 1990. "Rage and Redemption: Reading the Life
Story of a Mexican Marketing Woman." Feminist Studies 16:223-58.
        Belenky, Mary, Blithe Clinchy, Nancy Goldberger, and Jill
Tarule. 1986. Women's Ways of Knowing. New York: Basic Books.
        Benjamin, Walter. 1968. "The Storyteller." In Illuminations, 83-
110. New York: Schocken Books.
        Boon, James. 1982. Other Tribes, Other Scribes: Symbolic
Anthropology in the Comparative Study of Cultures, Histories,
Religions, and Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Trans.
Richard Nice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        Bowen, Elenore S. [1954] 1964. Return to Laughter. Garden
City, N.Y.: Anchor Books.
        Brettel, Caroline. 1982. We Have Already Cried Many Tears:
Portuguese Women and Migration. Cambridge, Mass: Schenkman
Publishing.
        Briggs, Jean. 1970. Never in Anger. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
        Brown, Karen McCarthy. 1991. Mama Lola. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
        Bruner, Edward M. 1986. "Ethnography as Narrative." In The
Anthropology of Experience, ed. Victor Turner and Edward Bruner,
139-55. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
        Burke, Edmund III, ed. In press. Struggle and Survival in the
Modern Middle East. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
        Butler, Judith. 1990. Gender Trouble. New York: Routledge.
        Cesara, Manda. 1982. Reflections of a Woman Anthropologist:
No Hiding Place. New York: Academic Press.
                                  228

        Chodorow, Nancy. 1978. The Reproduction of Mothering.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
        Christ, Carol, and Judith Plaskow, eds. 1979. Womanspirit
Rising. San Francisco: Harper & Row.
        Cixous, Hélène. 1983. "The Laugh of the Medusa," trans. K.
Cohen and P. Cohen. In The SIGNS Reader, ed. Elizabeth Abel and
Emily Abel, 279-97. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        Clifford, James. 1980. Review of Orientalism, by Edward Said.
History and Theory 19:204-23.
        . 1983. "Power and Dialogue in Ethnography." In Observers
Observed: Essays on Ethnographic Fieldwork, ed. George Stocking, Jr.,
121-56. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
        . 1986a. "Introduction: Partial Truths." In Writing Culture: The
Poetics and Politics of Ethnography, ed. James Clifford and George
Marcus, 1-26. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
        . 1986b. "On Ethnographic Allegory." In Writing Culture: The
Poetics and Politics of Ethnography, ed. James Clifford and George
Marcus, 98-121. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.
        . 1988a. "On Collecting Art and Culture." In The Predicament of
Culture, 215-51. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
        . 1988b. "On Ethnographic Self-Fashioning." In The Predicament
of Culture, 92-113. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
        Clifford, James, and George Marcus, eds. 1986. Writing Culture:
The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
        Collier, Jane, and Sylvia Yanagisako, eds. 1987. Gender and
Kinship. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
        Crapanzano, Vincent. 1980. Tuhami: Portrait of a Moroccan.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        . 1984. "Life Histories: A Review Essay." American
Anthropologist 86:953-60.
        Critchfield, Richard. 1978. Shahhat: An Egyptian. Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press.
        Davis, Natalie Zemon. 1988. Fiction in the Archives: Pardon
Tales and Their Tellers in Sixteenth-Century France. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
        di Leonardo, Micaela, ed. 1991. Gender at the Crossroads of
Knowledge. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
                                  229

        Dumont, Jean Paul. 1978. The Headman and I. Austin:
University of Texas Press.
        Dwyer, Kevin. 1982. Moroccan Dialogues. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
        Echols, Alice. 1984. "The Taming of the Id: Feminist Sexual
Politics 1968 83." In Pleasure and Danger, ed. Carol Vance, 50-72.
Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
        Eickelman, Dale. 1989. The Middle East: An Anthropological
Approach. 2d ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
        Fabian, Johannes. 1983. Time and the Other: How Anthropology
Makes Its Object. New York: Columbia University Press.
        Fahim, Hussein, ed. 1982. Indigenous Anthropology in Non-
Western Countries. Durham, N.C.: Carolina Academic Press.
        Favret-Saada, Jeanne. 1980. Deadly Words: Witchcraft in the
Bocage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        Fernea, Elizabeth W. 1969. Guests of the Sheik: An Ethnography
of an Iraqi Village. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books.
        Foucault, Michel. 1978. Discipline and Punish. New York:
Pantheon Books.
        . 1980. Power/Knowledge. Ed. Colin Gordon. New York:
Pantheon Books.
        Fox, Richard. 1991. "Introduction: Working in the Present." In
Recapturing Anthropology, ed. Richard Fox, 1-16. Santa Fe, N.M.:
School of American Research Press.
        Frank, Geyla. 1979. "Finding the Common Denominator: A
Phenomenological Critique of Life History Method." Ethos 7:68-94.
        Friedl, Erika. 1989. Women of Deh Koh: Lives in an Iranian
Village. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
        Friedrich, Paul. 1986. The Princes of Naranja. Austin: University
of Texas Press.
        Geertz, Clifford. 1973a. "The Impact of the Concept of Culture
on the Concept of Man." In The Interpretation of Cultures, 33-54. New
York: Basic Books.
        . 1973b. "Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of
Culture." In The Interpretation of Cultures, 3-30. New York: Basic
Books.
        . 1988. Works and Lives. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
        Gilligan, Carol. 1982. In a Different Voice. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
                                  230

        Gilsenan, Michael. Forthcoming. Lords of the Lebanese Marches.
London: I. B. Tauris.
        Ginsburg, Faye, and Rayna Rapp. 1991. "The Politics of
Reproduction." Annual Review of Anthropology 20:311-43.
        Gordon, Deborah. 1988. "Writing Culture, Writing Feminism:
The Poetics and Politics of Experimental Ethnography." Inscriptions
3/4:7-24.
        Haraway, Donna. 1985. "A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science,
Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s." Socialist Review
80:65-107.
        . 1988. "Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in
Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective." Feminist Studies
14:575-99.
        Harding, Sandra. 1987. "The Method Question." Hypatia 2:19-
35.
        Hartsock, Nancy. 1985. Money, Sex, and Power: Toward a
Feminist Historical Materialism. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
        Hatem, Mervat. 1988. "Feminist Analysis and the Subjective
World of Women." Association of Middle East Women's Studies News
2(6):7-9.
        Herzfeld, Michael. 1987. Anthropology Through the Looking
Glass: Critical Ethnography in the Margins of Europe. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
          The Holy Qur'an: English Translation of the Meanings and
Commentary. 1410 A. H. Rev. and ed. Presidency of Islamic Researches,
Ifta, Call, and Guidance. Al-Madinah al-Munawarah, Saudi Arabia: King
Fahd Holy Qur'an Printing Complex.
        Hymes, Dell, ed. 1969. Reinventing Anthropology. New York:
Random House.
        Irigaray, Luce. 1985a. Speculum of the Other Woman. Trans.
Gillian C. Gill. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
        . 1985b. This Sex Which Is Not One. Trans. Catherine Porter, with
Carolyn Burks. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
        Jackson, Michael. 1986. Barawa and the Ways Birds Fly in the
Sky: An Ethnographic Novel. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
        . 1989. Paths Toward a Clearing: Radical Empiricism and
Ethnographic Inquiry. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
        Jameson, Fredric. 1984. "Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic
                                  231

of Late Capitalism." New Left Review 146:59-92.
        John, Mary. 1989. "Postcolonial Feminists in the Western
Intellectual Field: Anthropologists and Native Informants?" Inscriptions
5:49-73.
        Kapferer, Bruce. 1988. "The Anthropologist as Hero: Three
Exponents of Post-modernist Anthropology." Critique of Anthropology
8(2):77-104.
        Keller, Evelyn Fox. 1985. Reflections on Gender and Science.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
        Kendall, Laurel. 1988. The Life and Hard Times of a Korean
Shaman. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
        Kondo, Dorinne. 1986. "Dissolution and Reconstitution of Self:
Implications for Anthropological Epistemology." Cultural Anthropology
1:74-88.
        Kristeva, Julia. 1980. "Motherhood According to Giovanni
Bellini." In Desire in Language, ed. Leon Roudiez, 237-70. New York:
Columbia University Press.
        . 1981. "Women's Time," trans. Alice Jardine and Harry Blake.
Signs 7:13-35.
        Kuper, Adam. 1988. The Invention of Primitive Society:
Transformation of an Illusion. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
        Langness, L. L., and Geyla Frank. 1981. Lives: An
Anthropological Approach to Biography. Novato, Calif.: Chandler &
Sharp.
        Lavie, Smadar. 1990. The Poetics of Military Occupation:
Mzeina Allegories of Bedouin Identity Under Israeli and Egyptian Rule.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
        Lazreg, Marnia. 1988. "Feminism and Difference: The Perils of
Writing as a Woman on Women in Algeria." Feminist Studies 14:81-
107.
        Lutz, Catherine. 1988. Unnatural Emotions. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
        . 1990. "Engendered Emotion: Gender, Power, and the Rhetoric
of Emotional Control in American Discourse." In Language and the
Politics of Emotion, ed. Catherine Lutz and Lila Abu-Lughod, 69-91.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
        . Forthcoming. "Social Contexts of Postmodern Cultural
Analysis." In Modernity and Postmodernity, ed. John Jones, Wolfgang
Natter, and Theodore Schatzki. New York: Guilford Press.
                                  232

        MacKinnon, Catharine. 1982. "Feminism, Marxism, Method, and
the State: An Agenda for Theory." Signs 7:515-44.
        Mani, Lata. 1989. "Multiple Mediations: Feminist Scholarship in
the Age of Multinational Reception." Inscriptions 5:1-23.
        Marcus, George, and Dick Cushman. 1982. "Ethnographies as
Texts." Annual Review of Anthropology 11:25-69.
        Marcus, George, and Michael M. J. Fischer. 1986. Anthropology
as Cultural Critique. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        Mascia-Lees, Frances E., Patricia Sharpe, and Colleen Ballerino
Cohen. 1989. "The Postmodernist Turn in Anthropology: Cautions from
a Feminist Perspective." Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society 15:7-33.
        Meis, Maria. 1983. "Towards a Methodology for Feminist
Research." In Theories of Women's Studies, ed. Gloria Bowles and
Renate Duelli Klein, 117-39. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
        Mernissi, Fatima. 1988. Doing Daily Battle: Interviews with
Moroccan Women. London: Women's Press.
        Mills, Margaret. 1991. Rhetorics and Poetics in Afghan
Traditional Storytelling. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
        Mitchell, Juliet. 1974. Psychoanalysis and Feminism. New York:
Pantheon Books.
        Mitchell, Timothy. 1988. Colonising Egypt. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
        . 1990. "The Invention and Reinvention of the Egyptian Peasant."
International Journal of Middle East Studies 22:129-50.
        Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. 1984. "Under Western Eyes:
Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses." Boundary 2 12:333-58.
        Mohsen, Safia. 1975. Conflict and Law Among Awlad 'Ali of the
Western Desert. Cairo: National Center for Social and Criminological
Research.
        Moore, Henrietta. 1988. Feminism and Anthropology.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
        Morgen, Sandra. 1989. Gender an Anthropology: Critical
Reviews for Research and Teaching. Washington, D.C.: American
Anthropological Association.
        Mudimbe, V. Y. 1988. The Invention of Africa: Gnosis,
Philosophy, and the Order of Knowledge. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
        Munson, Henry, Jr. 1984. The House of Si Abd Allah. New
                                   233

Haven: Yale University Press.
         Narayan, Kirin. 1989. Storytellers, Saints, and Scoundrels: Folk
Narrative in Hindu Religious Teaching. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
         O'Brien, Mary. 1981. The Politics of Reproduction. Boston:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
         Ong, Aihwa. 1988. "Colonialism and Modernity: Feminist Re-
Presentations of Women in Non-Western Societies." Inscriptions 3/4:79-
93.
         Ortner, Sherry. 1974. "Is Female to Male as Nature Is to
Culture?" In Woman, Culture, and Society, ed. Michelle Rosaldo and
Louise Lamphere, 67-87. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
         Pandolfo, Stefania. 1991. " 'The Angel of Death Replied':
Absence and Longing in a Moroccan Space of Memory." Ph.D. diss.,
Princeton University.
         Personal Narratives Group. 1989. Interpreting Women's Lives:
Feminist Theory and Personal Narratives. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
         Rabinow, Paul. 1977. Reflections on Fieldwork in Morocco.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
         Reinharz, Shulamit. 1983. "Experiential Analysis: A Contribution
to Feminist Research." In Theories of Women's Studies, ed. Gloria
Bowles and Renate Duelli Klein, 162-91. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
         Rich, Adrienne. 1979. "Toward a Woman-centered University."
In On Lies, Secrets, and Silence, 125-56. New York: Norton.
         . 1986. Of Woman Born: Motherhood as Experience and
Institution. 10th ann. ed. New York: Norton.
         Riesman, Paul. 1977. Freedom in Fulani Social Life. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
         . 1982. "Fieldwork as Initiation and as Therapy." Paper presented
at the 81st Annual Meeting of the American Anthropological
Association, Washington, D.C.
         Rosaldo, Michelle Z. 1974. "Woman, Culture, and Society: A
Theoretical Overview." In Woman, Culture, and Society, ed. Michelle
Rosaldo and Louise Lamphere, 17-42. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
         Rosaldo, Renato. 1989. Culture and Truth: The Remaking of
Social Analysis. Boston: Beacon Press.
                                 234

        Rose, Dan. 1987. Black American Street Life: South
Philadelphia, 1969 1971. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.
        Rose, Hilary. 1983. "Hand, Brain, and Heart: A Feminist
Epistemology for the Natural Sciences." Signs 9:73-90.
        . 1986. "Women's Work: Women's Knowledge." In What Is
Feminism?: A Re-Examination, ed. Juliet Mitchell and Aim Oakley,
161-83. New York: Pantheon Books.
        Ruddick, Sara. 1989. Maternal Thinking: Toward a Politics of
Peace. Boston: Beacon Press.
        Said, Edward. 1978. Orientalism. New York: Pantheon Books.
        . 1989. "Representing the Colonized: Anthropology's
Interlocutors." Critical Inquiry 15:205-25.
        Sanday, Peggy, and Ruth Goodenough, eds. 1990. Beyond the
Second Sex. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
        Sangren, Steven. 1988. "Rhetoric and the Authority of
Ethnography." Current Anthropology 29:405-24.
        Schleifer, Aliah. 1986. Motherhood in Islam. Cambridge: Islamic
Academy.
        Scott, David. 1989. "Locating the Anthropological Subject:
Postcolonial Anthropologists in Other Places." Inscriptions 5:75-84.
        Sharawi, Huda. 1986. Harem Years. Trans., ed., and intro. by
Margot Badran. London: Virago Press.
        Shostak, Marjorie. 1981. Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung
Woman. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
        Smith, Dorothy. 1987. The Everyday World as Problematic.
Boston: Northeastern University Press.
        Smith, Mary F. [1954] 1981. Baba of Karo, a Woman of the
Muslim Hausa. New Haven: Yale University Press.
        Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 1987. In Other Worlds. New York:
Methuen.
        Stacey, Judith. 1988. "Can There Be a Feminist Ethnography?"
Women's Studies International Forum 11:21-27.
        Stahl, Sandra Dolby. 1989. Literary Folkloristics and the
Personal Narrative. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
        Stanley, Liz, and Sue Wise. 1983. Breaking Out: Feminist
Consciousness and Feminist Research. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
        Stewart, John O. 1989. Drinkers, Drummers, and Decent Folk:
Ethnographic Narratives of Village Trinidad. Albany: State University
                                 235

of New York Press.
        Stewart, Kathleen. 1988. "Nostalgia A Polemic." Cultural
Anthropology 3:227-41.
        . 1991. "On the Politics of Cultural Theory: A Case for
'Contaminated' Cultural Critique." Social Research 58:395-412.
        Stocking, George W., Jr. 1989. "The Ethnographic Sensibility of
the 1920s and the Dualism of the Anthropological Tradition." In
Romantic Motives: Essays on Anthropological Sensibility, History of
Anthropology, vol. 6, ed. George W. Stocking, Jr., 208-76. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
        Stoller, Paul. 1989. The Taste of Ethnographic Things: The
Senses in Anthropoloqy. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
        Stoller, Paul, and Cheryl Olkes. 1987. In Sorcery's Shadow.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        Strathern, Marilyn. 1987. "An Awkward Relationship: The Case
of Feminism and Anthropology." Signs 12:276-92.
        Tannen, Deborah. 1989. Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue,
and Imagery in Conversational Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
        Taussig, Michael. 1987. Colonialism, Shamanism, and the Wild
Man. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        Tedlock, Barbara. 1991. "From Participant Observation to the
Observation of Participation: The Emergence of Narrative Ethnography."
Journal of Anthropological Research 47:69-94.
        Tedlock, Dennis. 1983. The Spoken Word and the Work of
Interpretation. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
        . 1987. "Questions Concerning Dialogical Anthropology."
Journal of Anthropological Research 43:325-37.
        Trawick, Margaret. 1990. Notes on Love in a Tamil Family.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
        Turner, Edith. 1987. The Spirit and the Drum: A Memoir of
Africa. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
        Tyler, Stephen. 1986. "Post-modern Ethnography: From
Document of the Occult to Occult Document." In Writing Culture, ed.
James Clifford and George Marcus, 122-40. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
        . 1987. "On 'Writing-Up/Off' as 'Speaking-For.' " Journal of
Anthropological Research 43(4):338-42.
        Visweswaran, Kamala. 1988. "Defining Feminist Ethnography."
                                  236

Inscriptions 3/4:27-44.
        Wagner, Roy. 1981. The Invention of Culture. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
        Watson, Lawrence, and Maria-Barbara Watson-Franke. 1985.
Interpreting Life Histories. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University
Press.
        Weintraub, Karl Joachim. 1978. The Value of the Individual: Self
and Circumstance in Autobiography. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
        Wolf, Eric. 1982. Europe and the People Without History.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
        Wolf, Margery. 1968. The House of Lim. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
        Young, Robert. 1990. White Mythologies: Writing History and
the West. London: Routledge.
(this page intentionally left blank)
