                               CHAPTER          6

AN OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES             FOR THE CONJUNCTIVE            APPROACH

ee                the important and distinctive features of the conjunctive ap-
       proach lie in the mental attitude and the broad objectives with which the
archeologist attacks his research, and although actual methods and techniques
will differ in individual instances, nevertheless it is appropriate that some ex-
position be given of the practical means by which such an attitude may receive
concrete expression and through which such objectives may be attained. In the
following pages, then, an annotated outline of these means will be given. From
the start, however, it must be recognized that any archeological scheme is,
of necessity, subject to modification, elaboration, and even radical change in
response to particular circumstances and the dictates of practicalities such as
time and finance. Therefore, the outline to be set forth here has but one purpose:
to provide a more or less concrete exposition of ideas basic to the conjunctive
approach. Exhaustiveness is neither claimed nor achieved. The intent is merely
to project some of the “flavor,” some of the conceptualization behind this
approach.
   The concrete examples used in the following pages will be found to come
predominantly from my own, unpublished work. I do not wish this fact to
convey the impression that I consider myself to be the only archeologist to
have attempted such studies. I have already cited others whose work follows
the lines here advocated. The purpose of drawing from my own researches has
been to provide would-be critics with something tangible to analyze and cite,
inasmuch as my archeological writings have heretofore been very few. In
view of my many remarks on the published work of others, I felt that not so
to provide would open me to justifiable accusations of hiding behind the skirts
of non-publication,
    Table 4 gives the levels and sub-levels of procedure that characterize the
conjunctive approach. While in general the levels are sequentially arranged
according to actual procedure, it is obvious that much latitude may be allowed
in this regard. For instance, the studying of data may proceed together with
its collection, rather than after, as for instance in the case of material which
cannot be removed from the field or which is destroyed during excavation: e.g.,
Maya buildings and occupation levels within a shell mound. Nor are the
headings mutually exclusive or segregated according to cultural criteria. They
are inclusive and descriptive, representing merely a working scheme to suggest,
not dictate, the mechanics of archeological research.
    In the following analysis of Table 4, and hence of the conjunctive approach,
                                       152
TAYLOR   _                 A STUDY OF ARCHEOLOGY                        153


                                      TABLE     4



             A. PROBLEM
             B. Dara
                  1. Collection
                       a. Local cultural
                                1) Artifacts
                               2) Cultural refuse
                               3) Deposits
                       ou.   Local human biological
                       ©     Contemporaneous geographical
                                1) Geological
                                2) Meteorological
                                3) Floral
                                4) Faunal
                       d. Non-local human
                                1) Contemporaneous
                                2) Pre-local
                                3) Post-local
                       e. Non-contemporaneous geographical
                                1) Pre-local
                                2) Post-local
                  2. Study
                       a. Criticism of validity of data
                       b. Analysis
                       c. Interpretation
                       d. Description
                 3. Presentation
             C. Locat CHronoLocy (chronicle)
             D. SYNTHESIS AND CoNTEXT (ethnography or historiography)
             E. ComPARATIVE (ethnology)
                  1. Cultural
                  2. Chronological
             F. Srupy or CutturE, Irs NATURE AND Workin¢cs (anthropology)
154


the category Problem will be treated first. But from that point onward, the table
will be discussed in reverse order. The reason for this reversal is plain. The
type of data to be collected and the very manner of collecting depends on the
kind of information which it is desired eventually to utilize when the time
comes for synthesis and study. Thus, if there is given an idea of the informa-
tion which the conjunctive approach aims to include in its cultural contexts, the
required data and the means for collecting them can be more easily visualized.
If, for instance, it is shown that sound inferences as to modes and configurations
can be abstracted from particular archeological data, then the means can be
sought whereby these data and others like them can be brought to light.

                                   A. PROBLEM
     It has been said, and it is true, that the problems which have brought stu-
dents to the field of archeology and to their respective sites have been widely
varied. Given this range, it is natural that the approaches to, and the results of
excavation should also show considerable variation. Natural or not, this state
of affairs when reflected in the actual collection of archeological data is not only
unsatisfactory—it is also positively disastrous. Personal problems and objectives
which are pursued at the expense of collecting other data are unwarranted.
     The archivist and the experimental scientist may with impunity select from
their sources those facts which have for them a personal and immediate signifi-
cance in terms of some special problem. Their libraries and experimental fa-
cilities may be expected to endure, so that in the future there may be access to
the same or a similar body of data. If, however, it were certain that, after the
archivist’s first perusal, each document would be utterly and forever destroyed,
it would undoubtedly be required of him that he transcribe the entire record
rather than just that portion which at the moment interests him. He’ would
have difficulty in justifying his research if, knowingly, he caused the destruction
of a unique record for the sake of abstracting only a narrowly selected part.
     The gathering of data from archeological sites, in nearly every instance,
involves the destruction of the original record. Only to the extent to which that
record is transposed to the archeologist’s notes is it preserved for study either
by the collector himself or by other students. A good axiom for archeologists is
that “it is not what you find, but how you find it,” and it is superfluous to
point out that “how you find it” can be told only from notes and not specimens.
An archeological find is only as good as the notes upon it. Therefore only one
objective can be sanctioned with regard to the actual excavation of archeological
sites: that of securing the most complete record possible, not only of those
details which are of interest to the collector, but of the entire geographic and
human environment. That which is not recorded is most often entirely lost. In
such a situation, selection implies wanton waste.
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               155

     It should not be understood that the above remarks indicate a protest against
   special problems or specific objectives in archeological research. The case is
   distinctly otherwise. What the statements do mean, however, is that questions of
__problem and objectives, in so faras they are limiting and abridging factors,
 _should be confined to two stages in the procedure of investigation and, above
 _all, that they should not inhibit the excavations themselves.
       As the first of these stages, the choice of area of investigation and of the
  ‘sites to be dug should be made with reference to specific problems. And the
~ word should is used advisedly. These problems may be of many sorts and by
   their nature will indicate the type of final conclusions to be expected from the
   investigation. The archeologist’s interest may be in art or architecture, in phil-
   ology, or in the corroboration of myths and legends. His interest may be
   purely chronological, being directed toward the sequential arrangement of the
   data or toward the determination of specific dates for certain manifestations; it
   may be historiographical, leading him to construct temporally sequential series
   of cultural contexts or to describe the culture of a given area at a given time;
   or it may be anthropological, leading him to select his area and site with a view
   to testing some hypothesis as to the nature and workings of culture.
        But after the selection has been made and when the actual excavation is
   begun, there can be only one objective: to exploit fully and without abridgement
   the cultural and geographic record contained within the site attacked. There is no
   justification in discarding or failing to record projectile points, for example, be-
   cause of a single-minded concern with ceramic chronology. No more is there justifi-
   cation in neglecting the local, the peculiar, the atypical data, just because
   they are not useful for comparative purposes outside of the site. Within his
   broadly given cultural and geographic universe, the archeologist is a technician
   concerned with the production of data, and, although he should be aware of the
   concepts and goals of many disciplines, he should not be restricted in his exploita-
   tion of the site by the dictates of any of them. Time will come in his study and
   analysis when these factors will again assume the major role, but when he puts
 _spade to ground the archeologist should be dedicated to an exposition unconfined
   except by the broadest stretch of the cultural and geographic frame of reference.
  This is what makes archeology a technique and the archeologist, as archeologist,
  a technician. His particular problems are concerned with the production of
  ‘data. When he makes use of these data to some purpose, he becomes affiliated
   with the discipline whose concepts he employs and whose aims he serves.
       Likewise, the archeologist is obligated to preserve, whether in publication or
  some permanent repository, the full body of his empirical data and records.
  Since he has destroyed the original record, his transcript and the recovered
  specimens are the only substitute. The archeologist has no more justification in
  submerging part of the record than he would have had in destroying, without
 156


 record, a part of the original site. Practical considerations such as space and
 money have sometimes been blamed for the failure to preserve the record fully.
 However valid these factors may be, the extent of their victory over the ideal of
 full preservation is a measure of the defeat of the very excavations which have
 been accomplished.
      With regard to the publication of the record, practical considerations enter
 the picture. But whatever the means of accomplishment, one thing is certain:
 it is incumbent upon the archeologist to publish the empirical bases for all his
 inferences in order that the reader may judge for himself their acceptability.
 Conclusions unsupported by adduced empirical data carry the implication that
 they are to be taken at face value, without criticism or doubt. It is a dubious
 procedure to put the contributing evidence out of reach of interested students.
 This topic will be examined at somewhat greater length below; it is enough that
 it be mentioned here.
     The second stage of procedure wherein special problems may determine the
 nature of archeological research comes after the empirical record has been
 gathered. The archeologist has fulfilled his obligation by transposing the record
 from the ground to some form, both permanent and available. From this point
 onward, his own personal interest may again take possession and guide his
 further use of the data. Perhaps he wishes to study the chronological develop-
 ment of art forms. Perhaps he wishes to write history and construct a cultural
 context. Perhaps he wishes to study culture itself and also construct a context
 in order to examine its internal and external relationships. Whatever his interests,
 they may again take over.

                F, STUDY   OF CULTURE, ITS NATURE      AND WORKINGS
       That the study of archeological materials can, in fact, give insights into the
 modes, archetypes, and configurations of bygone cultures is contrary to the
 expressed beliefs of many anthropologists. Boas, Griffin, Kidder and Thompson,
 Lowie, Speck, among others, have made statements to the effect that archeology
 deals only with the material aspects of culture and cannot aspire to information
 regarding non-material aspects.’’° But if anthropology, as the study of culture,
 is to be able to generalize fully, to base its conclusions on the broadest founda-
_tions, it cannot be satisfied with data gathered only from the shallow depth pro-
 vided by the ethnographic reach. To quote Randall’s very pertinent remark
 made in a somewhat different context:
When one has reached an understanding of what materials are furnished by the world
around him, and what resources he can hope for inside himself, it still remains for
him to appraise the past as it is left to operate in the present. . . . (1940, p. 6)
     Anthropology cannot afford to reject the help of other disciplines, archeology
 included. It should at least attempt to give its statements as much perspective as
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                157

  possible, and the disciplineof archeology should attempt to help in this project.
 This can be done, in one way, by making full use of the archeological record
 _within the limits, not of dogma, but of demonstrated value. And “demonstrated
_value”’ calls for just that, demonstration: attempts to push archeological methods
__and techniques to their, utmost, willingness to excavate and record and describe
 with thorough utilization of the empirical data (both specifications andaffinities) ,
_.and then_a willingness to provide an interpretation for the finds.
     This last has been called “sticking the neck out.” But such a reaction to
  interpretation is unjustified. Once the empirical information has been presented,
__the archeologist has his right as well as hig duty,as the man on the job, to give
 _his understanding of the data. This understanding is open to criticism only on
  logical and empirical grounds. The fact that an interpretation has been offered
  is definitely not open to criticism ipso facto. Nor is it subject to refutation
  on the grounds of alternate opinion except in so far as this alternate opinion is
  itself founded upon more acceptable evidence than, or better and more economi-
  cal use of, the evidence originally adduced. In other words, reason and argu-
  mentation, not polemic, should be the resort of the critics. AsMandelbaum put
  it:
 No sociological understanding of the conditions under which the statement was made
 bears the slightest resemblance to an estimate of the truth or falsity of the statement
 itself. [After the truth or falsity is judged by recourse to other statements of fact, we
 may reexamine the original statement in the light of the stater’s background to
 ascertain how or why he made a correct or false statement.] (1938, pp. 183-184)
        With the proper and sensible proviso that conclusions are based on “the facts
 _at hand” and are subject to revision in the light of fuller and better data, it isa
 _ premise of the conjunctive approach that interpretations are both justified and
_ required, when once the empirical grounds have been made explicit. Why has
   revision been such a bugbear to archeologists? Other disciplines are constantly
   reworking their hypotheses and formulating new ones upon which to proceed
   with further research. When these are found to demand modification and change
   they are altered. Why should archeology assume the pretentious burden of in-
   fallibility? Why is it not possible to project hypotheses, specifically labeled as
   such, and then to go on from these toward testing and answering the questions
   thus raised? Why should every archeological hypothesis have to stand and be
   correct for all time?’
       Furthermore, as I have already said with specific regard to pottery taxonomy
   (Chapter 5, pp. 128ff), I do not believe that criticism merely on the grounds of
   too few data will hold water. If the data are conclusive enough, even a very
   few will serve to establish a point. A most pertinent statement is offered by
   Cohen and Nagel:
 In a well-known passage, Mill remarks that often a very large number of verifying
 158


 instances is insufficient to establish firmly a generalization (for example, that all
 crows are black), while a few such instances are sufficient to win our assent to others
 (for example, that a certain type of mushroom is poisonous). (1934, p. 279)

  If the evidence will not bear the weight of the interpretation, it is not merely
  that it is too scanty, but because it is first of all too poor and then too scanty.
  For example, if we should infer the presence of the atlatl from a single, rather
  heavy, chipped stone point found in some pithouse, there might be understand-
  able reasons for doubt because of the ambiguous nature of the criterion. But the
  fact that only one was found could not rightly be the reason, because if a single
  unquestionable atlatl hook had been found, there could have been no doubt at all.
  And finally, even if the data are not “good enough and conclusive enough,” if they
  are all the archeologist has, then he has not only a right but also an obligation to
  do what ‘he can with them, of course describing their nature and limitations. A_
__policy of wait-until-all-the-evidence-is-in can stunt the growth of archeology to
 _a dangerous degree. The man on the job has tremendous advantages over stu-
  dents who might wish, at some later time, to make use of his specimens and
  records.
      Returning from this brief digression on critical standards and assuming for
  the moment that archeology can produce information pertinent to the study of
  culture itself, it may be required to show that such information is of a sort
  sufficiently important to justify its derivation and presentation. It has been
  my experience on several occasions to be forced to answer challenges to the
  effect that: “Such material is much more easily obtained, and in much greater
  detail and quantity, from living groups. Why struggle to derive it from the
  archeological records?” A few answers to this question may be given here in
  cursory fashion.
       Granting that information as to the nature and processes of culture might
  more easily be abstracted from living groups, it still remains that nothing has
  been granted as to the adequacy of such treatment. The information may hold
  true for living groups, but nothing is thus proved as to its applicability in the
  past. Whether the same conditions existed then or are recent developments,
  whether specific aspects are due to demonstrable borrowing or are native as far
  back as we can go: these are vital questions not to be answered with data from
  a single time-plane. Furthermore, “‘as far back as we can go”’ does not end with
  the memory of the oldest living informant or the most ancient written document!
  Despite the interest and importance of cultural data from a shallow time-depth,
  statements of fact, without information as to how the facts got that way, have a
  faculty of badly misleading the investigator and of being highly inadequate
  therefore (see: Lesser, 1935; Miller, 1939, pp. 39ff.). What boots it if two end-
  points in our particular way of looking at things are similar, if actually they are
  the products of entirely different biological and/or social stimuli? For some
TAYLOR                        A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               159

purposes a bionomic classification which groups together whales, sharks, and fishes
is of value, but does this exhaust the possible and significant ways of viewing
them? Many anthropologists and a host of biological taxonomists have shown
that this is not so. By the same reasoning, then, it is maintained that the study of
culture is potentially a gainer from the use of the archeological record, providing
only that the record is capable of producing the pertinent information.
   The crucial test is whether data on the nature and workings of culture and
particularly on the non-material aspects of cultural phenomena can be derived
from archeological material. The following examples are given to demonstrate
that such derivations can be made and to give an idea of the sort of information
which archeological data will produce when viewed with a certain attitude, ice.,
that designated here as the conjunctive approach.     The examples are not finished
pieces of research, and represent some of the first attacks upon a difficult and
complex problem by one individual. Consequently they may seem to be isolated
instances rather than integral and widely connected parts of detailed contexts.
However this may be, the reader is asked to imagine them as actually in con-
text and to visualize what the picture would be if all aspects of the local culture
manifestation had been similarly treated.

     During cave excavations conducted for the U. S. National Museum in the
 State of Coahuila, Mexico, one small burial cave was found to contain a number
of large fragments of plaited mats and several coiled baskets in addition to its
other contents.''* Although the cultural relations of this site are not definitely
established as yet, it appears probable that the contained artifacts and skeletal
material are related to similar finds in the Laguna District of Coahuila immedi-
ately to the south. The latter area has produced the justly famous Palmer collec-
tion, lodged in the Peabody Museum of Harvard, and one burial bundle housed
in the U. S. National Museum. This latter bundle I have studied in detail, and
the Harvard specimens I have examined superficially.1’*
     When the material from the northern burial cave and the presumably related
finds from the Laguna District are examined, one thing is immediately apparent:
although clearly demonstrating a mastery of the various techniques of manu-
facture and indicating a strong tendency toward decoration, the fabrics display
a startling and pervasive lack of regular pattern or design. Symmetry and regu-
larity in the over-all use of decoration are absent. The areas in which variation of
weaving   technique     and use of color have   been employed   to create   decoration
appear to be placed with no regard for design unity or symmetry. Even within
the techniques themselves, although mechanically they are extremely well exe-
cuted, there is no consistency: spacing, weave-counts, and measurements vary at
random in all but an insignificantly few instances. Plate 1 will give visual support
to these contentions.
160


     In direct contrast to this lack of symmetry, to this unconcern with over-all
patterning, is the use of decoration among the San Juan Basket-Maker. Plate 2
will indicate the high development of a sense of design found in Basket-Maker
materials. Here there is a definite conceptualization of a decorative whole adapted
to the structural whole. The apparent ‘“‘need” or desire for decoration is channeled
by what seem to be the dictates of a visualized entity which applies both to textile
fabrics and to the obviously derived treatment of ceramic products. In other
words, whatever the origin, whether in the mechanics of weaving technique or
otherwise, the people represented by the Basket-Maker remains possessed a con-
ception of decorative wholes in their textile and pottery complexes.
     This difference between Coahuila and San Juan textile decoration cannot be
accounted for on the basis of differing techniques or materials. Although these
vary between the two regions, the mechanical excellence and control exhibited
in all the specimens rule out the possibility that the decorative idiosyncracies
of the Coahuila people are attributable to their lesser abilities as artisans or
to any relative intractability of their materials. For example, it surely is a fact
that plaiting is a simpler technique than either twining or coiling and no less
regular; yet the Coahuila plaited specimens, while showing remarkable versatility
 and control in technique, nevertheless are decoratively the most irregular of ail
and cannot be compared in this respect with the twined and coiled textiles from
Basket-Maker sites. Also, an analysis of Coahuila netting shows that there is an
exceptional control of technique and that the irregularities of design arise from
a failure to perform regularly the purely mechanical functions of counting rows,
 choosing colors, etc., and not from failures of manipulation. The fact that a few
 Coahuila textiles show regularity, at least in small sections, indicates that they
 could do this sort of work. That they did not do so more often conveys the
 idea that they were not concerned with producing regularity. I feel it is making
 only a permissible judgment to state that both areas show an equal control over
 their media and that the difference in textile decoration is due to other factors
 than techniques or materials.
     It seems merely to be a fact that one group had, and the other did not have,
 the inclination, the conceptualization, the uniformity of culture ideas, in short the
 configuration, which resulted in the construction of over-all designs on textile
 fabrics. What has been demonstrated from this set of archeological details, I
 believe, is a culture configuration in the sense in which Kluckhohn has used the
 term. He says:
 To a considerable extent patterns are arrived at by simple abstraction from trends
 toward uniformity in statement and deed. . . . Configuration looks to an immer
 coherence in terms of the large structuralizing principles which prevail in the covert
culture, Patterns are forms; configurations are, so to speak, interrelationships between
 forms. (1941, p. 126; see also: Kluckhohn, 1943)
                                                                        TAYLOR   PLATE   1

                           soit celtetiithe ,




KAR       XX KRYWW



                                                            I
                                                                Y
                                                                ¥
                                                                M4
                                                              xy
                                                              Vv
                                                              NA
                                                                Y
                                                                vv
                                                                 y
                                                           Voc>
                                                            <2
               CM 79-FI9
               a
                 10 cm.




                                                 (a)




                          \COVOTE CAVECES
                              i                 ONE
                                                 (b)
              a) Twill plaited mats from Cave CM 79, Coahuila, Mexico
                 (Black splotches represent areas covered by red paint.)
      b) Textile of knotless netting from Coyote Cave, CM 88, Coahuila, Mexico
                              (Actual colors not represented.)
                                                                                   TAYLOR     PLATE     2




Basket-Maker   basketry   from   Northeastern   Arizona.   (From   “Basket-Maker   Caves    of North-
  eastern Arizona,” by Samuel J. Guernsey and Alfred V. Kidder,
                                                                Papers of the Peabody
               Museum,    Harvard   University, Vol. VIII, No. 2, 1921. Plate 24.)
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             161


The pattern for the San Juan is over-all design fitted to the structure of textile
fabrics (and ceramics). The structuralizing principle which holds the pattern °
together is the configuration which may be verbalized as “regularized decorative
wholes.” The reverse configuration was present among the people who produced
the material found in the Coahuila caves, i.e., “unconcern with regularized
decorative wholes.”
     It should be pointed out that these configurations, as they appear from the
textile data, may be incomplete. It is possible, if not probable, that the currently
envisioned ones represent but parts of broader configurations which structure
other patterns of Basket-Maker and Coahuila culture. In fact, if the modern
Pueblos are to be viewed as the cultural decendants of the San Juan Basket-
Makers, it seems highly probable that the configuration, to which their ancient
textile patterns are but a partial clue, is actually something like “symmetry and
regularity of wholes.” Pottery design and turquoise mosaic, pilastered kivas and
the D-shaped pueblo form, the uniformity and symmetry of ceremonial and
social patterning among the recent Pueblo peoples, these and many other cul-
tural items of the Anasazi and their cultural descendants lend weight to the
belief that the pattern of over-all design on Basket-Maker textiles was supported
by a broad structuralizing configuration which entered into other patterns as
well. Here then, if the analysis has been correct and holds up in the light of
further evidence, is a cultural configuration of considerable temporal persistence,
and concrete evidence has been adduced from the data of archeology to the
hypothesis, offered by Boas and others (Boas, 1934, p. xiii; Kluckhohn, 1941,
p. 127), that culture configurations often have a remarkable permanency as com-
pared with specific content which shows more frequent change.
     The implications of this analysis for the definition of Coahuila culture are
also important, but more study will have to be done upon other aspects of culture
in this region before a clearer understanding of these implications will be pos-
sible. For example, does the configuration of “unconcern with regularized deco-
rative wholes” also imply the absence of regularity and symmetry in other
patterns? Or were there compensatory adjustments to counterbalance, with
regularity in other patterns, the lack of it in textile decoration? The test lies in
a fuller knowledge of the culture, and this will come only with further excava-
tion and more extended study of documentary sources. But one point seems
established: there is a marked difference in a broad culture configuration between
Coahuila and the San Juan, and thus it is expectable that more than one cultural
pattern is different in the two areas. These observations, taken in conjunction
with other information, reduce the possibility that the Basket-Makers and the
people of Coahuila were closely related culturally or are to be included within a
single category in any classification which professes to depict the more detailed
cultural relationships of human groups. In short, it is very doubtful that the
162


Coahuila people possessed a “north Mexican form of Basket-Maker             culture.”
(Roberts, 1932, p. 16; see also: Guernsey, 1931, p. 112)

    The next example has to do with the twisted fiber cordage from two locations:
six caves in northern Coahuila" and Lovelock Cave, Nevada (Loud and
Harrington, 1929). At the latter site, “twine” was usually twisted with a right
twist (see definition in Amsden, 1930): out of 1,973 specimens only 14 were
twisted to the left. Furthermore, when the ancient inhabitants of Lovelock
twisted two or more two-ply cords together to make what may be termed com-
pound cord, in all cases the basic cords were of normal (right) twist. But since
it seems to be a mechanical principle of string-making that the direction must
be reversed in each successive twisting (Roth, 1924, p. 112), the final product
of Lovelock compound cord was twisted to the ieft, which produced a contrast
with the normal. Their two-ply and their compound cordage are thus of different
spirals and different final appearance.

                                        TABLE   5


                                           INITIAL        FINAL           FINAL
                                            Twist         TwIst        APPEARANCE

                         Two-ply.....           —         right
      Lovelock                                                            different
                         Compound...        right         left

                         Two-ply.....           =         left
      Coahuila (CM 95)                                                    same
                         Compound...        right         left


     The specimens from Coahuila were twisted with a left twist in all but one of
the sixty examples studied. A quick survey of cordage from other regions of the
state indicates that this practice is the usual one throughout the area. In making
compound cords, however, the basic two-ply strings were first twisted to the right,
i.e., abnormally, so that when these were combined, through the mechanical prin-
ciple of reversing the direction of the spiral, the result was a compound cord with
a left, or normal, twist. Thus in Coahuila, two-ply and compound cords were
of the same spiral and the same final appearance.
      Although the numbers of compound specimens in this example are prob-
ably insignificantly few (eight from Lovelock including what seems to be a falsely
identified exception; four from one Coahuila cave, CM 95), this should not
 affect the implications of the results. In the first place, the four and eight speci-
mens comprise the total number of compound cords reported from the respective
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             163

sites and, therefore, represent a 100 per cent conformance within a total universe,
not a sample. Secondly, although this fact would appear to suggest some actual
validity for the data, in the present context the idea is the important thing, not
the eventually established truth of the conclusions. The example has been given to
show what sort of information may be derived from archeological materials, and
not to reach any verdict or solve any specific problems with reference to Nevada
or Coahuila cave cultures.
     To continue with the analysis: it seems that, as in the case of textile design
stated above, there are two conceptualizations, one being the opposite of the
other. It appears that the Coahuila people, when they desired a strong compound
cord, visualized the whole process and reversed their normal procedure at the
start so that the final product would conform to their idea of how finished cordage
should be twisted. The Lovelock people, on the other hand, appear to have
been unconcerned with the final form and merely continued their usual procedure
one step further and, by the machinations of technique, came out with compound
cords having a spiral different from the majority of their cordage. One group
visualized compound cord and allowed for it from the start; the other merely
put together several two-ply strings to make a stronger twine. The Coahuila
people would seem to have had an ideal pattern for string, and they saw to it
that the final product conformed, whether it was two-ply or compound. There
was a Sense of order, a conscious or unconscious structuring of a pattern.
    How does this configuration, with its implications of regularity, affect the
formerly identified Coahuila (textile) configuration of ‘“unconcern with regular-
ized decorative wholes?” To mention but one thing, it points to the probability
that the latter is not part of an otherwise possible, broader configuration such as
“unconcern with regularity and symmetry.” In this fashion it serves as a check
or balance, a modifier of the first conclusion. Just exactly what the two, some-
what opposed, configurations do mean in relation to one another and to the
culture as a whole is a problem which must wait upon more, and more compre-
hensive, data. But it is to be hoped, indeed expected, that when enough of
these structuring ideas have been defined on enough evidence, they may be
weighed against one another to arrive at an acceptable insight into the covert
culture of the Coahuila Indians. The importance of this outcome, for historio-
graphic depth and for the study of culture itself, needs no elaboration.

    In the south-central, mountainous portion of the Southwest, Haury and
others have uncovered materials which they have designated as the Mogollon
culture (Haury, 1936b). This is characterized in its earlier, more diagnostic
periods by a ceramic tradition of polished brown ware which, when painted, dis-
plays a red pigment. After a period of time, the Mogollon is thought by some to
have developed into the Mimbres culture with the aid of influences from other
164


areas. One of the elements by which the Anasazi influences are recognized is that
of black-on-white pottery.
    As transitional between the black-on-white ceramics of the later and the
red-on-brown ceramics of the earlier phases, the pottery type known as Three
Circle Red-on-white is found. Haury says:
The adoption of a white background and the appearances of small unpainted zones
in the decorative field is doubtless to be attributed to the influence of northern
potters, ... (1936c, p. 21)

If this hypothesis is accepted, what are the implications of the existence of the
pottery type called Three Circle Red-on-white? Concerning its value Haury
makes but one remark:
For this reason [its short temporal span], and because it did not represent a stage
when other traits, as architecture, had attained a characteristic development, Three
Circle Red-on-white has not been accorded the same value as other types, namely,
as a basic component of a phase. (1936c, p. 20)

That is to say: since there is little or no value to be found in the type for
taxonomic purposes, it is to be accorded no further attention. To date, as far
as I have been able to learn, there has been no analysis of the intra-cultural mean-
ing of the Three Circle pottery type.
    The ceramic tradition of the Mogollon culture included the use of an oxidizing
firing atmosphere which produced a brown surface color and a red decoration. The
Anasazi tradition included a reducing atmosphere which produced a white or
gray surface color and black decoration. Assuming the actuality of Anasazi
influence upon the Mogollon, what inferences may be drawn from the pottery
sequence in the latter culture: Mogollon Red-on-brown> Three Circle Red-on-
white >Mimbres Bold Face Black-on-white? The first two types are closely
related as Haury has said (1936b, pp. 94, 96), but this affinity is marred by the
white surface on the later one. This is most probably due to the northern influ-
ence. But Three Circle still carries red paint and is still fired in an oxidizing
atmosphere using an iron-free slip to achieve the white surface. The inference
is clear: at the incidence of Anasazi influence, the Mogollon potters acquired a
desire for white surface and a contrasting paint, but they attained their results
by variations upon their own techniques of manufacture. Later, possibly through
closer contact and a transference of a knowledge of pigments, or by their own
experimentation to obtain a more exact copy of the northern ideal, the Mogollon
potters attained, in their Mimbres Bold Face Black-on-white, the black decora-
tion characteristic of northern wares. But here again, their own oxidizing tech-
nique was employed, and a reversion to red decoration was occasionally achieved
by the expedient of changing firing conditions and/or paint composition.
     In the case of Three Circle Red-on-white, perhaps the Mogollon people had
tried to produce a black but had failed and were forced to retain their original
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               165

color. Perhaps they were impressed only by the white surface and were not
interested in producing black paint at all. Perhaps something in their own culture,
color symbolism for example, erected a barrier against the initial acceptance of
the color black. Whatever the answers to these questions, the importance of
Three Circle Red-on-white is not to be judged solely on its lack of taxonomic
value. If the above hypotheses are acceptable, here is an archeological example
of the persistence of techniques of manufacture during a radical change in decora-
tive style. It is a case to parallel that which W. W. Hill cites for ethnographic
data when he says:
However, they [the ceremonial examples cited] do seem to indicate not only a
stability of the religious aspects of the culture but also that any changes which are
made and attempted will be within the ideology of the existing pattern. (1939, p. 260)

    Spier and Wissler have both pointed to the fact that often a cultural
phenomenon is taken over by a group which then proceeds to make use of it
according to the patterns and configurations with which it itself is familiar instead
of those which have influenced the donor group (Spier, 1921, pp. 500, 511-516,
520-521; 1929, pp. 220-221; Wissler, 1915, p. 38). Also an archeological example
of the workings of stimulus diffusion has been illustrated (see Kroeber, 1940).

     For some years the area around Flagstaff, Arizona, has been recognized as the
meeting place of several ancient culture streams (Colton, 1939). The Museum
of Northern Arizona has been working on the archeological problems of this
region with a rare and exemplary consistency, and it is very apparent that the
purpose of its investigations has been to place the many sites and components in
taxonomic categories relative to each other. Except for brief sentences in rare
publications, the approach has been purely comparative, and the cultural contexts
and their implications for the nature and workings of culture have been left
strictly alone.
     However, there are other ways of looking at the data and an example will be
given here. In one of his latest papers, significantly entitled Archaeology and the
Reconstruction of History (1942), H. S. Colton, of the Museum of Northern
Arizona, gives some very provocative information on the diffusion and persist-
ence of “traits” over the frontier between        two of his taxonomic     categories
(Branches) which he identifies as “tribes.”
    1. The traits of the Kayenta [Branch] and Sinagua [Branch] which did not
diffuse are: (a) earth lodge shape .. . (b) two post roof support absent in Kayenta,
present sometimes in Sinagua; (c) ball court absent in Kayenta, present in Sinagua;
(d) sipapu . . . (e) method of shaping pottery ... (f) axes... (g) black pottery
paint . . . (h) firing atmosphere . . . (i) inhumation flexed in Kayenta, extended in
Sinagua.
    2. Traits that seem to have diffused from the Kayenta to the Sinagua, 900-1100
166


A.D., across the border are: (a) ventilators; (b) deflector; and (c) good masonry
construction. After 1100 the masonry, multifamily pueblo was accepted by the
Sinagua.                                                                   ¢
    3. No true Sinagua traits seem to have crossed the border to the Kayenta
between 900 and 1100 A.D.....        After 1100 A.D., the use of white paint on red
pottery crossed to the Kayenta.
    4. Certain traits are shared by both the Kayenta and Sinagua, 900-1100 A.D.:
(a) earth lodge entered through a hole in the roof; (b) four post roof support .. . (c)
coiled and bundle basketry; (d) cotton textiles woven on a loom; (e) grooved metate;
and (f) burial offerings. (1942, p. 37)

     Taking all these data at their face value for the moment, here is a set of facts
begging for attention. Colton addresses them with the purpose of “reconstructing
history” which apparently means to him the chronological arrangement and
taxonomic ordering of his units. But one can also view them as exhibiting
examples of differential diffusion and acceptance of culture traits (meaning ideas).
One might make an analysis of what traits were borrowed, what their character
might mean with regard to culture processes, and what meaning hypotheses
developed on these foundations might have for the individual cultural entities
involved.
     Looking over the examples in Colton’s paragraph No. 1, i.e., those that did
not diffuse, two common denominators appear: religion (sipapu, ball court,
burial posture, if we proceed on assumptions current in the Southwest today),
technique of manufacture (method of smoothing pottery, firing atmosphere and
its connected feature: paint color). Respecting axes, lodge shape, and roof
support, we advance with less assurance. It may be that they belong with the
category of technique. But on the other hand it may be that roof support has
religious import as among the Pawnee and that the shape of the lodge has reli-
gious sanctions, as is presumably the case of the Anasazi (Kayenta) house-kiva
complex before about A.D. 1300 (noted by Colton but to another purpose, 1942,
Divo   )s
     When we come to the examples which did diffuse from Kayenta to Sinagua,
i.e., Colton’s paragraph No. 2, something else is seen: they are all practical and
de novo improvements on house form. There were no conflicting practices al-
ready established and, if we argue from the fact of their very obvious efficiency,
the traits were perfectly capable of being taken over without any of the
original religious connotation which they might have had. Of course, the same
reasoning could possibly be used in the case of the ball game: that it could have
been taken over without any religious features; but the mere fact that it was not
diffused may indicate that these features were strong enough to prevent its trans-
mittal or acceptance.
    Here are a series of hypotheses erected on none too plentiful empirical evi-
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              167

dence, yet if they should lead to more intensive studies or if they should come to
be fully accepted, they would have a far-reaching influence on the cultural pic-
ture of the ancient Southwest. For one thing, they would greatly broaden and
strengthen the criteria upon which the Kayenta and Sinagua Branches are
separated. If their religious conservatism was of such a nature as to prevent the
interchange of ideas, then it is a justifiable inference that their religions were
different. If their a alaae were different, it is doubtful whether the two branches
could rightly be thought to represent an ethnic entity which actually existed in
the past. Also assuming the conservatism of motor habits and methods of manu-
facture as opposed to the changeability of end-results, we again find grounds for
segregating the two branches. Or reversing the assumption and admitting their
distinctiveness, we have found evidence to substantiate the conservatism of
methods of manufacture and the mobility of practical and efficient ideas. As
always in any discipline which, iike archeology, progresses by the method of
“successive approximation,” the need is for more data and for more intensive,
yet broader, study upon them.*4#

      Four examples have been presented: two demonstrated how non-material
 traits, even implicit culture, may be derived from archeological data, and two
showed how certain concepts as to the workings of culture may be tested and
given temporal depth. The examples have further indicated that analysis of
archeological data along such lines can be made without having or using a com-
plete cultural context. Immediate context for the cultural segment under investi-
gation is required or at least the material must be handled with regard for its
context whether it is explicitly given or not, but within these limits, almost
any cultural analysis will offer hints and leads for continued study. However,
the method is one of ‘‘successive approximations,” and the acceptance of the re-
sults will depend to a large extent upon the breadth and depth of the context from
which the data have been drawn.
      Thus, in the above pages, two configurations were shown to lie within the
decorating of textile fabrics and the making of cordage as practiced by the ancient
people of Coahuila. But the first was modified by the second and both are expec-
tably subject to modification by other configurations yet to be discovered.
Eventually it will require an analysis of the whole available culture roster
before there will be even a modicum of certainty that further knowledge will
not change the picture. The point here is: a start may be made upon data that
are incomplete, and a definite effort should be made from the beginning to study
the data from a cultural (not merely an empirical) angle, but it is understood
that the results will be in the form of tentative hypotheses and guides to other
lines of investigation and are expected to undergo progressive correction,
although perhaps not radical change, as research proceeds.
 168

                                   E. COMPARATIVE

       Under this heading is included the study of the relationships between cultural
contexts as wholes. Although it may utilize comparisons of elements or cultural
  complexes, its major objective is to place a given synthesis in its proper temporal
_and cultural position with respect to the broad picture of human life in the
_ surrounding territory. At this point in the procedure, interest has gone beyond
   the mere comparison of individual objects and culture traits and is focused on
 ascertaining the connections of cultural entities as manifested at sites, cohesive
 components thereof, and areas.
     These relationships are at the same time cultural and chronological, but for
 the purpose of study and in actual practice they can, and often must, be treated
 separately. It may be possible in one instance to discover the cultural relations
 of a site and not be able to define its temporal position with regard to other
  materials. Similarly it may be possible, through the presence of diagnostic ele-
  ments, relatively or absolutely to date a site, while at the same time it is impos-
  sible to recognize its over-all cultural affiliations. The ideal, of course, is success
  in both directions, but failure along one line need not make for failure along
  the other. There are, in practice, two problems, the solutions of which may be
  separate operations but the results of which are sought for a single purpose,
  the writing of archeological ethnology.)
.      In regard to such comparisons, the conjunctive approach has two tenets: (1)
  that they should be based ey cultural rather than empirical categories} and
  (2) that!‘quantitative analysis 1
                                  as absolutely necessary in order that warpings and
  errors be eliminated as much as possible. This is to say that trait lists, consisting
  of descriptive categories and based on mere presence and absence, have only a
  very limited function in these comparisons.
       As an example, the cave material from the Southwest and northern Mexico
  may again be used. For a long time, the list of similar items to be found in such
  sites (atlatl, grooved club, coiled basketry, sandals, twined bags, etc.) either
 confused and troubled the archeologists or led them to believe that all these mani-
 festations belonged to a single culture which could be given the name Basket-
  Maker.” Although the comprehensiveness of this “culture,” to my knowledge,
  was never defined, it is plain from their writings that many archeologists viewed
  these similarities between the sites, not as the reflection of a basic, broad, and
  ancient connection, but as indicating relationships much closer in both time and
  culture. In one of the most recent instances, R. R. Zingg is most certain in his
  assertion of “Basket-Maker” affiliations for material from Chihuahua, Mexico,
  on the basis of nine such items (1940).
      Although this position is not now held by all Americanists, nevertheless it is
  revealing that it should ever have been held at all, because it demonstrates
  very clearly the pitfalls of basing comparative studies on presence-and-absence
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               169


trait lists and incomplete and unweighted cultural inventories. To quote from
my review of another of Zingg’s papers:
In fact, it appears possible, and even probable, that Lovelock material is not Basket-
maker I or Basketmaker at all, if by Basketmaker we mean Basketmaker II of the
San Juan. The former depicts a littoral, hunting, fishing, and gathering culture quite
apart in economy, in the weighting of its techniques of manufacture, and in its
artifacts from agricultural Basketmaker. To equate these two economies under a
single cultural designation would appear to be misleading, and the disharmony is even
greater when the desert gathering cultures of southeast New Mexico and Texas are
included. If Dr. Zingg had re-analyzed the available cave material, I feel sure that
he would have rejected the current belief that the presence of the atlatl, coiled
basketry, twining technique, curved club, sandals, etc., indicates a cultural identity
with San Juan Basketmaker or any other specific group. These few generic similarities
of rather wide distribution have overshadowed for many years the detailed and very
real differences in cultural materials from cave sites. There has been little or no
consideration of total culture-rosters, and no extensive and determined effort has
been made to weigh the predominance of various traits within, and between, sites
or groups of sites. (Taylor, 1943, pp. 309-310)

Basic to this viewpoint is the axiom stated by Clark Wissler that:
    . we may take it for granted that wherever there are sharp differences in peoples
as to such fundamental necessities as housing, clothing, and feeding, there will like-
wise exist differences in beliefs and ideals, so great and having so much originality
of form, that the whole life complexes of these people must be taken as distinct
cultures. (1923, p. 3)

    Therefore what is necessary is that we compare, not individual items either
separately or in groups, but rather cultural contexts and/or broad cultural com-
plexes as wholes. These entities can be isolated for study only by using cultural
categories as opposed to empirical ones and by employing the rectifying factors
of quantification, each to the extent of their availability. Many individual
items may be expected to have wide distributions and thus to bring about a
leveling of cultural inventories if viewed from a presence-and-absence basis.
But when these items are taken in conjunction with, and in relation to, their
cultural matrix (and quantitative analysis is one of the best means to show
this relationship), they may be expected, and indeed are found (as in the textile
industry example given in Chapter 5 of the present study, pp. 134ff), to show
differences that are locally and comparatively significant. A determination of
the meaning of these differences is not always possible, immediately or ultimately,
but this is no reason for their neglect, and offers, in many cases, a further source
of archeological problem. The investigation and possible solution of such prob-
lems cannot help but enrich the productions of archeological research.
 170

                           D. SYNTHESIS    AND   CONTEXT

      In order to provide the materials for such comparisons as proposed in the
  preceding section, it is obvious that the synthesis of data from individual—
  archeological sites will have to be both cultural and quantitative. There is a
~ place in the procedure of archeological research for empirical, descriptive cate-
 gories, but that place is not here. Headings such as “Artifacts of Wood,” “Arti-
 facts of Stone,” etc., have no place in a cultural context. Ethnographies and his-
 tories are not written by the use of such rubrics, and it is not a quibble to insist
 that the viewpoint expressed by presenting data under the headings “Artifacts
 of Stone” and “Artifacts of Wood” is quite different from that indicated by
 “Exploitation of the Mineral Environment” and “Utilization of Wood.”
      It may be argued that in a great many cases the cultural use, function,
 meaning of an archeologically derived artifact is unknown and even unknowable.
 This is true and will reduce, more or less, the amount and detail of the data
 from which the archeologist can construct his cultural context. But there are
 many ways of viewing and categorizing the cultural materials, and it will be a
 rare find that is not amenable to some analysis, be it from the angle of material
 of manufacture, technique of manufacture, general use such as transportation
  or food or art, etc. By analyzing a puzzling form in one or a number of these
 possible ways, it is very probable that at least some information can be gleaned
  from it, by which the cultural context can be augmented. Perhaps the information
 will not be an aid to an interpretation of its actual use or function, but it should
 be remembered that an artifact is but the end-product of a mental process and
  that it is made of something and by some means. It is assumed that these contin-
  gent factors will have left some mark upon the find, which will be in addition to its
  use. Even use, of whatever sort, probably has left some signs upon the artifact,
  e.g., scratches, smoothed areas, beveled edges. For example, in the Coahuila
  cave CM 68 (Frightful Cave), evidence on the cutting methods, and thus to
  some extent on motor habits also, was obtained from an analysis of a multitude
  of cut twigs and agave stalks whose use, if they were not merely blanks or
  rejects, has not been ascertained. And the implications of the method of twisting
  fiber cordage, the specific use of which was not indicated, have already been
  discussed (pp. 162f above). It is hardly coincidental that a most pertinent
  statement has come from one of the few archeologists who has presented his
  material under broad cultural categories and written what, in effect, is an
 (archeological ethnography |(Clark, 1940). Grahame Clark says:
  Archaeology is often defined as the study of antiquities. A better definition would
  be that it is the study of how men lived in the past .... [the archaeologist] has to
  rely upon circumstantial evidence and much of his time is taken up with details
  which may appear to be trivial, although as clues to human action they can be of
  absorbing interest. (1939, p. 1)
 TAYLOR                        A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             171

     A suggestion may be put forward with a view to aiding the archeologist
 construct a cultural context or at least broaden the base of his thinking and
 research along cultural lines. This is that before, during, and especially after his
 field work he go carefully, heading by heading, through the Outline of Cultural
 Materials     (Murdock et al., 1945) or some other compendium of cultural items,
 e.g., Notes     and Queries   on Anthropology   (Royal   Anthropological   Institute,
 ed. 1929).
     The purpose of such a procedure would be to refresh the archeologist’s
 memory on cultural topics and to awaken him anew to the implications of his
 data. In the field this should result in a sharpened sense of problem and a
 broader envisioning of profitable leads for investigation. But the greatest poten-
 tial advantage would accrue to the laboratory analysis and to the construction
 and writing of a cultural context. With his data at hand, the Outline beside him,
 and starting with heading No. 1, the archeologist asks himself: ‘Are there any of
 my empirical data which could serve as the basis for an inference on this subject?
 Can I orient my way of viewing the material so that I can see light on this topic?
 With respect to the empirical data and general cultural hypotheses, is it likely
  or unlikely that this element was present among the people I am investigating?”
  In addition to helping the archeologist to establish a cultural outlook, such
  compendia will aid him in the construction and actual writing of his context by
  offering him ready-made outlines that are based on cultural categories. It
  devolves upon him to fill in these outlines as best he can, using his empirical data
  and explicit inference.
      Finally, brief mention may be made of another source of inspiration for the
  archeologist who would attempt to write ethnography-of-the-more-distant-past:
  the “universal culture pattern.” Murdock has given a considerable list of items
 “which occur, so far as [the author’s] knowledge goes, in every culture known
_to history or ethnography” (1945, p. 124). If, therefore, we may take it as
  probable that these items occurred in archeological cultures as well, the archeolo-
  gist has been provided with not a few basic assumptions, and it remains for him
  to examine his material to see if he can discover the particular form which these
 generalized “universals” took in his particular culture. About many of them
  he will be unable even to make acceptable inferences, but if his viewpoint is
  thus broadened and the scope of his analyses enlarged, it is to be expected that
  more will be forthcoming than if he should continue to treat his finds as Objects
  of Stone and Objects of Bone and leave it at that. If he accepts Murdock’s
  hypothesis, he knows that these items existed in some form or other, and that
 is half the battle!
      It is possibly gratuitous to remark that the ethnographies of local peoples
 will also serve as guides for the investigation, construction, and presentation of an
 archeological cultural context. Although they are rarely so used, these ethnogra-
172


phies have more value to the archeologist than merely to provide support for
interpretations of the use and function of artifacts or to supply leads as to
cross-cultural relationships.
    But the utilization of cultural categories of itself is not enough. The in-
formation within them must be evaluated, weighed, and given balance by the
use of quantitative and qualitative data and by taking into account the natural
and cultural matrix within which the culture operated. It is of little help to a
cultural context to state, as so often is done, that “among the rubbish in the
cave there occurred many pieces of worn-out and discarded mats” (Kidder
and Guernsey, 1922, p. 98), or that “there are several forms of ax heads”
(Roberts, 1940, p. 119) and then fail to give any figures on the number of forms
recognized or the quantities of specimens in each category. What it is vital to
know is how many pieces of matting there were and of what weaves, the relative
frequency of each ax type and how the category of ax heads (with its quantified
subdivisions) compares with, say, mauls or hoes or cutting tools in general.
For example, it would be important for a cultural interpretation to know
whether a site contained a great number of pottery bowls while at the same time
it was deficient in jar forms. In such circumstances, the archeologist might be
expected to look for storage facilities in other directions, to explain why storage
was not needed, to discover a nearby and constant water supply, etc. Many
problems and interpretations can be derived from equalities or inequalities in
the numbers of such things as basketry trays and bowls, the amount of netting
that could have been used for carrying compared to the number of carrying
baskets, the relative number of ulna and metapodial awls. Bennett has noted
the apparent withdrawal and fortification in Late Middle Mississippi times in the
Mississippi Valley and suggests the possibility of warfare (1943a, pp. 37-38).
Yet to my knowledge there has been no study of the sizes and numbers of
projectile points in order either (a) to help identify the type most prevalent,
assuming a war condition to have existed, or (b) to check on the hypothesis of
warfare, assuming that a small point or some other specific type was used
primarily for fighting. The mere listing of types and their descriptions does not
provide all possible data, or even enough. What is needed is a weighted and
balanced picture (as far as the empirical data will permit), and one method of
obtaining this is by thorough quantitative analysis.
    During the excavation of the Coahuila cave site CM 68, it was decided to
make a count of the fiber quids or “chews” which occur so numerously in the
deposits of most caves but which, to my knowledge, had never been subjected to
analysis.‘ After the count had proceeded for a short time, it became evident
that there were two types of quid present. One seemed to have been chewed
around-and-around in the mouth, giving it the appearance of a wad of chewing
gum. The other had been merely gnawed as one would bite the leaf of an arti-
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             173

choke, i.e., by squeezing, sucking, and chewing one end while retaining the other
end in the hand. It was then decided to continue the count, using these two
types as a basis of distinction. In all, somewhat over 20,600 quids were typed,
counted, and their frequencies plotted according to horizontal and vertical strat-
blocks within the cave. The graph resulting from this manipulation showed a
startling and definite modality. Although the gum-chewed quids exhibited a
considerable numerical superiority in the total count and in the great majority
of blocks, there were blocks in which the artichoke-chewed quids approached
parity with the round type and even surpassed it in some cases. By plotting the
percentage of round to long quids for each block, a definite bimodal curve ap-
peared: there were two distinct peaks showing the greater frequency of the long
artichoke-chewed type. This was an empirical fact, and possible correlations were
sought for it.
     It was found that the peak frequencies of the long type were spatially corre-
lated with the two major fire-rock areas within the cave, or rather that they
were just to the inward side of the cave from these cooking areas. Here again
was an empirical fact; it remained to be explained by inference. The most satis-
factory interpretation which has been projected to date suggests that the former
inhabitants, when their feast of agave or sotol was baked and ready for eating,
clustered around the opened rock oven-pit and grabbed leaf after leaf to extract
just the “cream” from each, tossing them quickly away to grab another. When,
however, they went away from the source of supply or when the urgency of a
community and somewhat competitive repast was not upon them, they chewed
their quids around-and-around to extract every bit of sweet nourishment con-
tained therein, spitting out the spent quids generally over the whole length
and breadth of the cave.
    The analysis might end here, or it might go on. There are implications of
hunger in the picture thus drawn. Are there other signs in the culture of a
marginal subsistence? The fecal specimens found throughout the site, although
they have not yet been reported upon by competent authority, seem to contain a
superabundance of woody and coarse fibrous materials, possibly indicating a
starvation diet mainly dependent upon vegetal foods. On the other hand, for
people willing to subsist on agave, sotol, lechuguilla, and other such plants,
there would seem to have been no lack of food. But the availability of nourish-
ment from these plants seems to be seasonal (at least in the present day and with
modern tastes), and this fact might give a clue to the problem. In any event, the
leads given by this one quantitative study and the cultural and geographical
researches thus called forth are ample evidence that presence-and-absence lists
do not exhaust the potentialities of even the simplest archeological data. The
cultural conjunctives within a site are a vast source of problem as yet hardly
tapped by those whose concern is with relationships ovtside the site.
174


    Another analytical attack is from the standpoint of quality. This is not an
empirical criterion like quantity, but so long as the archeologist is explicit as to
the standards he sets up, there is nothing to prevent its use. To take an example
from ethnography and one which could receive investigations and testing in the
archeological field, the question may be asked whether it is a function of the
group’s interest or some configuration of their culture that the Navaho have
assimilated and improved upon Pueblo weaving, while they have made a very
poor showing indeed at the art of pottery decoration. If Reichard’s suggestions
are correct, the Navaho entered the Southwest with a knowledge of both weaving
and ceramics (1936, pp. 162-177), but Navaho weaving in its recorded form is
undoubtedly of Pueblo inspiration in the great majority of its features, as
Reichard very clearly shows, and the painted decoration of Navaho pottery seems
also to be due to Pueblo influence. In these circumstances, then, the differential
emphasis, integration, and excellence of the two techniques among the Navaho
are all the more significant.
    Likewise, if from an archeological site (in Coahuila this is somewhat the case)
the artifacts of wood and fiber show a considerable degree of craftsmanship
while stone work is unelaborated, even crude, does not this fact have a bearing
on the cultural picture to be derived and also, indeed, upon the comparisons to
be made between sites and areas?
    And what about conjunctives between the people and their environment?
To what extent do artifacts and other cultural items represent the full range of
possibilities offered by the natural surroundings? Are there plant and afimal
forms identifiable as having lived at the time of occupation but which are not
found to have been culturally utilized at the sites? How much of the empirical
data along these lines appears attributable to the vagaries of preservation and
excavation and how much to actual bygone conditions? (This is a problem to
face, not one to dodge by bemoaning the inadequacy of the archeological record.)
How do the potential and actual utilizations of the mineral resources compare?
Did the people go distances for a substance, a like or substitute form of which
existed in the neighborhood? Along the latter lines, the results and implications
of Anna Shepard’s work on Rio Grande and La Plata pottery shows what can
be done (1936, 1939, 1942).
     An example may be cited from Coahuila. Plate 3 gives the vertical and
horizontal distributions of a land snail and of pifion nuts in Frightful Cave.”
Humboldtiana is a rare form and has been found in the higher, more moist
regions of the Sierra Madre of Mexico under conditions quite different from
those prevailing in the Coahuila desert today (Pilsbry, 1939, pp. 397-398)        18
The evidence from snails, then, indicates the presence of a form which was
disappearing because of increasing aridity in the region. The presence of pifion,
on the other hand, seems to require another interpretation. These trees are
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               WE

 found today only on the tops of the higher, and therefore more moist, moun-
 tains.‘*? Here is a case of a life form, which requires more moist and cooler
 conditions than exist today in the vicinity of the cave but which increases, rather
 than decreases, its representation in the deposits from bottom to top.
      Taking these data and having other evidence for a growing aridity in the
 Coahuila desert, it seems that the upward decrease of Humboldtiana is a function
 of this climatic shift. But the increase of pifion cannot be accounted for on this
 basis, since it directly contradicts the assumption of increasing dryness. If not
 controlled by the environmental factor, it seems that the utilization of pifion in
 the upper levels of Frightful Cave is a cultural phenomenon. Surely if it were
 present and used for food in the drier and later stages, it must have been present
 in the earlier and more moist stages but was not used for food by the people.
 Here, then, is an instance of failure to make full use of the environment.


  part of constructing a cultural context. Under this heading would come the
) sequential development) of a pueblo structure, a mound, a village site, or the
  deposits within a cave. The fact that a people were accustomed to strew fiber
  rubbish around their cave dwelling or to make definite occupation levels in an
  open village by the importation of clay for flooring is as much the result of
  cultural behavior as is the shape of a stone ax. While such factors may be of
  little importance for direct comparison with other sites, they nevertheless consti-
  tute basic and important information on the life at the particular site in question.
  The growth of a pueblo structure is as much a part of the cultural picture as the
  forms of metate or the number of pottery bowls—in fact it would appear to be
  more basic and not the secondary, by-the-way evidence which it seems to be in
  most reports of Americanist archeology.
       An example of what may be done along these lines will be offered here.
  Indulgence must be asked for it, however, because of several factors which
  contribute to make it far from an ideal one: both excavation and analysis were
  made before the ideas comprising the conjunctive approach had taken definite
  form; the excavation was not completed; the work was done by students under
  supervision which was not as close as it might have been, due to other duties
  having call upon my attention. Nevertheless it does indicate the potentialities,
  if not the utmost success, to be expected. It consists of the interpretation of the
  growth of two pueblo rooms in site Bc 51 in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico.‘
 Plate 4 will illustrate the text.
     The construction of Room 26 began by the excavation of its floor space some
 2 feet 3 inches below the then surface. Evidence from Rooms 28 and 24b indi-
 cate that there was an extensive excavation providing space for several rooms
 (the implications of this fact for group or family activity would possibly be
176


clarified by examination of other data such as artifact styles, fragments of
single vessels found in several rooms, etc.). This excavation cut at an angle
through a top, culturally sterile, wind- and/or water-laid sandy stratum and into
a cultural fill lying in what appears to have been an old pit structure. Floor
excavation went to, or a little into, the blue-yellow clay of the native earth.
    The construction of the east wall was begun with only one course of masonry
as a facing against the excavation but was increased outward to two courses some
16 inches above floor level.      This was probably controlled by the angle of the
original foundation excavation which, in turn, was a function of the use of dig-
ging sticks. With the use of such instruments, the sides of a pit are more apt to
be sloping than straight. The east and south walls were built as one job, the
former abutting the south wall of Room 24b and the latter the west wall which
serves both Room 24b and Room 26. Thus Room 26 was built after the former.
     With the exception of the north, the walls were built very high, yet there are
no indications of vigas or other roof construction in them. From this it might be
inferred that, after abandonment and some filling, the walls had been re-worked
and extended upward, covering beam-holes and other evidence. But despite evi-
dence for the reuse of the area (see below), there is no definite sign that the
walls were ever re-worked. Perhaps the ceiling was actually over 9 feet high. The
walls were plastered to a thickness of about one-half an inch, but no layer
count was made.
     The floor showed no trace of a fire-pit, nor was there any burned area to
indicate that fires might have been made in the room. Pit A was apparently lined
with thin plaster, and 3 inches from its bottom it contained a turquoise inlay
pendant. Pits B, C, D, and E were well plastered and well executed as to shape.
Pit E served as a pot-rest and contained a large corrugated jar fitted with a
stone pot-lid. The locations of a Gallup Black-on-white bowl and another corru-
gated jar correspond to the location of Pits B and C respectively, which were
probably pot-rests also.
    The abandonment of Room 26 seems to have been caused directly, or was
at least hurried, by the buckling of the north and west walls. The final northward
collapse of the former was probably the final consideration. This wall not only
collapsed and split in the center but also pulled away from its junction with the
east wall as much as 10 inches at the top. That this happened before abandon-
ment, or at least before any appreciable fill had accumulated, is suggested by
the absence of local down-dropping in the fill of Room 26.
     With abandonment, Room 26 began to fill with debris. At first, culturally
sterile sand blew in or was washed in and covered the floor. Then cultural ma-
terial began to be deposited over a considerable area of the room. The amount
of adobe clods and rock, which might indicate roofing materials, was very small
and confined almost entirely to the north end. No evidence of any roof supports
                                                                               TAYLOR   PLATE    3




                                                           o| %|bk]%


                            PINON

                                                          RAE)




                        HUMBOL DTIANA_

                                                 Bottom |23 6423]
                                                  TOTAL   |36|   |36

Distribution   of Humboldtiana   and pifon shells in Frightful Cave, CM   68, Coahuila, Mexico

     This chart depicts three-dimensional distribution. The vertical depths are indicated
vertically in centimeters. The horizontal meter-blocks from front to back of the cave are
represented from left to right by the numbered sections between double-dotted lines. The
horizontal meter-blocks from the center of the deposits to the west wall of the cave are
represented from left to right by the single-dotted subdivisions within each numbered section.
     In the summary tables, the numbers of specimens and blocks are identical because the
data were gathered only on a presence-and-absence basis according to stratigraphic blocks. On
the other hand, specimen percentages are figured according to total presences listed, while
block percentages are figured according to the maximum possible blocks within the respective
stratigraphic levels.
     The lack of specimens from the front of the cave is only apparent. This is due to the
fact that tabulation of these types was not begun before Line 14.
                                                                       TAYLOR   PLATE   4




                                                          L4a




         So:                                                          NV.
                                        (b)
a) Plan of the south-central portion of Bc 51, Chaco Canyon, New
                                                                 Mexico (schematic)
       b) Section through Rooms 24 and 26, Bc 51, Chaco Canyon, New
                                                                       Mexico
                          (vertical exaggeration is three times)
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              177


larger than finger-sized impressions in clods was found. The cultural fill, com-
posed of ash, sand, sherds, artifacts, as a loose and unconsolidated mass, banked
up against the south wall to a height of 5 feet. It appears that the angle of
repose controlled the amount of deposition and, when the angle became too steep,
increments slid downward and northward. The result has been that the fill of
the north end was found to be either horizontal or dipping slightly back toward
the south. These facts indicate that the deposition was cumulative and not the
result of short-term, purposeful action. But before the north end filled to more
than ,2 feet above the floor, a dump of almost pure sand, containing relatively
little cultural material, was thrown in, obviously for the purpose of leveling off
the partially filled room.
     At the top of this dump were found several features which further sub-
stantiate the hypothesis of intentional fill by giving a reason for its deposition.
A stone-sided fireplace and a corrugated jar set in stone slabs and covered with
a pot-lid were found at what had evidently been two separate levels of occupation
upon the room-fill. The top of the fire-pit was on a level with the floors of Rooms
24 and 24x, and the pot-lid was even with the floor of Room 24a. Roofing ma-
terial on the upper portions of the fill of Room 26 and below the south wall of
Rooms 24 and 24x indicates that the destruction of the roof of Room 24a was
effected after the use of the slabbed jar and before the construction of both the
fill fire-pit and the south wall of Rooms 24 and 24x. These correlations lead to
the conclusion that the area of Room 26 (abandoned and filled) served as an
open-air adjunct first of Room 24a (slabbed jar) and then to either or both
Rooms 24 and 24x (fire-pit). The south wall of Rooms 24 and 24x was built out
over the fill of Room 26.
     Above the level of the fill fire-pit, the deposits at the time of excavation
showed much re-working and disturbance. Aside from the obvious slope wash of
later years, there is nothing that could be determined concerning them. There
is no evidence of any superstructure on this room.
     Turning to Room 24, it is found that within the horizontal area designated
by this number on the original survey of the site, there were actually four rooms
on three levels. The lowest of these, Room 24b, had not been completely exca-
vated when this analysis was undertaken, and the information from it is less
complete than from Room 26 and the other Rooms 24. Nevertheless, its career
can be outlined with a reasonable enough fullness to permit its inclusion to
round out the picture.
     The floor of Room 24b was laid in the same excavation as that of Room 26.
The floors of the two were made as one continuous piece of construction separated
only by a low, rounded clay sill which also served as the foundation for the
party wall between the rooms. The floor of Room 24b was slightly lower than
that of Room   26 due to the dip of the native earth which acted as the base of
178


room excavation; the same control influenced the floor level of Rooms 28
and 29.
    Three walls of Room 24b were constructed clockwise from the northwest
corner, while the west wall was carried directly south from that point. The
south wall was finished off by an abutment against the west. This latter was not
ended here but was continued southward without a break for two more rooms.
Rooms 24b, 26, and the unnumbered one immediately south of the latter were,
thus, all part of a single sequential construction, starting at the north end.
      Both the west and north walls of Room 24b were found to be in poor
condition, bulging inward at precarious angles. The west one was plastered and
then chinked with stone spalls through the plaster. Sherds were set vertically as
chinking in the angle of the northwest corner. Due to incomplete excavation,
the floor features are not sufficiently known to be discussed. The abandonment
of Room 24b was caused, or hurried, by the imminent collapse of the south, west,
and north walls. Possibly the south one actually sagged before the room was
entirely deserted. But the increased dip in the fill near the wall indicates that
the party wall did not completely give way until some time after abandonment.
The first deposits in the deserted room were laminated sands. Upon these were
found several metates surrounded and covered by adobe clods and other evi-
dence of roof material. It seems, therefore, that the roof held for some time
and that it eventually fell or was torn down, causing the metates to fall together
with the roof debris. The impressions of wood found in the clods are not large,
and once more there is no evidence of beams having been set in the walls. In
view of the obvious re-workings and superposition of the rooms, such beam holes
might have been obliterated, but the similar conditions of Room 26 throw doubt
upon this interpretation. As the fill was building up, many manos became in-
 corporated in it, suggesting that it might have served as a depository for the
 refuse from some nearby working area. The horizontal bedding of most of the
 fill may indicate purposeful action of relatively short duration, but at least two
layers were definitely deposited as a single action: shale and yellow sand were
 brought in and dumped for the purpose of leveling the room area preparatory to
 laying the floor of Room 24a.
      Over the fill of Room 24b and on top of the prepared layers, a clay floor was
 laid within the limits of the still-standing walls of the old room area. A stone-
 sided fire-pit was constructed in the center of this Room 24a merely by digging
 a pit through the finished floor and into the soft fill beneath. The floor was also
 plastered—at least six times during the occupancy of the room. In order to com-
 plete the rectangle of the new room, a piece of wall had to be built to replace the
 badly bulged and collapsed segment of the old south, party wall. The new piece
was dove-tailed into the eastern portion which was still standing, and in order
to make a straight line and a rectangular room it was built out over the fill of
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             179

Room 26, which deposits had bulged into the area of Room 24b with the sagging
of the party wall. There was evidence of a door at the west end of this new
segment of wall, and, if this fact could have been more firmly established by
excavation, it would have lent a good deal of support to the hypothesis of an
outdoor occupation level containing a slabbed jar, lying on the fill of Room 26,
and connected with the occupation of Room 24a. The height of the walls of
this room is unknown since their upper parts were destroyed with succeeding
renovations.
“ At some time after the floor was laid and after one or more plasterings, the
threatened collapse of the west wall prompted the occupants of Room 24a to
erect a support. Two buttresses 18 inches high were built against it. The south
one was made of adobe with an occasional sherd, pebble, or twig; it blocked what
may have been the door to the fill occupation-level over Room 26; this opening,
door or otherwise, was closed by a thin stone facing on the indoor side. The
north buttress was of similar composition but was faced with one whole and
one fragmentary metate. The buttresses were not tied into the wall and are now
found to be separated from it by distances up to two inches at all points. After
these features were in place, occupation continued for a time, and the occupants
kept on plastering their floor—but not beneath the buttresses.
     Eventually, however, Room 24a was deserted. This may have been due to
an increase in the danger from the west wall, although it seems rather unlikely in
view of the buttresses. It was more probably due to some trouble with the north
wall, which was ultimately torn down to the floor, while the three others were
demolished only to the height of the buttresses. The room was filled to the latter
level with the resulting debris. The floor of the next room, Room 24x, was laid
directly upon this fill.
    The demolition and filling of Room 24a and the construction of Rooms 21
and 24x were connected operations. The south wall of Room 21, which was to be
the party wall between it and Room 24x, was built before the filling of the old
Room 24a and served to hold back the fill and permit the lenses of debris to
lie horizontally. But the construction of this and the east and west walls of
Room 24x was a single piece of work without breaks or abutments. On the
other hand, the east and west walls were built after the party wall since they
were placed over the fill which the party wall retained in horizontal position and
over the buttresses and wall-stubs forming the western limits of Room 24a.
The walls of Room 24x, the south wall of Room 21 (but not its other walls, a
fact which throws light on the contemporaneity of various masonry types in
Chaco Canyon), and the bracing wall built inside the neighboring Room 23 are
all of the same excellent workmanship and stand in contrast to the poor, weak
walls of Rooms 26, 24b, and 24a. Probably all of them were laid up at the same
time and to remedy the same condition: the buckling of the walls inherited from
180


Room 24b. On the west side of the party wall between Rooms 24x and 21, a
window with a sill joined the two apartments.
     The destruction and abandonment of Room 24x was caused by the build-
ing of Kiva 1. This operation disrupted part of the east wall and part of the
floor. The occupants were forced to move their east wall farther westward and
thus reduce the size of their room. In making this new and smaller Room 24,
they not only changed the east wall but also erected a facing against the party
wall shared with Room 21. This facing consisted of a wall in the better-style
masonry about 4 inches south of the old wall, and the intervening space was filled
with rock and adobe rubble. At this time or possibly earlier, the connecting
window was blocked with masonry. The space between the new east wall and
Kiva 1 was filled with debris from the old east wall. After the final abandonment,
Room 24 filled with its own detritus.
  / The above example has been an interpretation (not the raw data) of building
operations only. It has made no attempt, except for two parenthetical remarks, to
go into the broader implications or to bring to bear the weight of other finds
associated with and within the rooms. Nevertheless, I believe that the potentiali-
ties should be perfectly obvious. Combine such studies with the other cultural and
natural data, with similar analyses of other rooms, with interpretations of the
relationships and affinities of all these factors, and there will result a picture of
the site and the life of its people that is historiography every bit as much
as a report on a living group or a documented society At may not be as complete
or as sure in certain aspects, but these differences are of degree and not of kind.
Archeology can “do” historiography, can construct cultural contexts, but not
when it is concerned only with data that are of immediate comparative signifi-
cance outside the site.
     It is also true that, should the archeologist come to view his sites as units
which contained people with a past and a cultural context to be investigated,
then extra-local comparison itself will be better grounded, and a wealth of
problems, interpretive and descriptive, will develop to inspire new research.
According to the conjunctive approach, the first and most important task is the
construction of this context. As has been very clear from the above examples,
extra-local comparisons are vital means to this end, but until the cultural picture
has been developed from the latent image in the ground by the use of interpre-
tation and all the data, they will remain just that: means, not ends. If the
conjunctive approach is to come up for trial, it must rest its case on the primacy
of the cultural context, first of components and sites and then of areas, “culture
areas,” temporal groupings, or whatever. What does it gain us to know that one
 culture came after another and was in some way related, if we know little or
 nothing of either culture as it existed in the past among the people to whom it
 belonged?
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             181

                                c(LOCAL CHRONOLOGY|
      Since the chronological relations of one cultural context to another have
                                                     I
  already been taken up under the heading E. Comparative, the purpose of the
  present section is to provide for the analysis of chronological relationships within
__a single site. This step is important whether ‘the site prove to contain(one or _
 _several cultural entities] In the first instance, the development and change
   through time exhibited by a single component will be one of its most important
 __aspects, culturally speaking. In the second, a time differential may be one of the
  _important diagnostic features belonging to different components and, once
   established, will aid in the interpretation of the separate contexts Enemies and
  their interrelationships, if any.
        The analysis of room sequence in the Chaco Canyon site Bc 51 given above
   will serve as an example of what information is sought under this heading. The
   various building periods of a pueblo are crucial to an understanding of the
   structure as a whole and of the life that was led in it. The temporal relationships
   of varying pottery styles, of a mound to a nearby village, of obviously distinct
   complexes within a midden or shellheap are complicated problems in themselves,
   and their solutions, although they may be aided by comparative material from
   outside, are primarily to be attacked from within, from data found at the site
   itself. For this reason, local chronology has been given a separate heading in
   this outline of the conjunctive approach.
                                        B. DATA
     What is asked by the conjunctive approach with regard to the collection and
  study of the data should be apparent from the foregoing summaries of chro-
  nology, synthesis, and comparison. Therefore the contents of the following pages
  are to be construed as leads and suggestions. They are intended to give an idea
  of the sort of information sought, not to outline or define the range of desirable
  data.
                                    1. COLLECTION
                                   a. Local cultural

      The cultural material of a site, all of it, is included under this heading. In
   many cases, the artifacts, the cultural refuse, and the deposits will be difficult,
   if not impossible, to distinguish as separate categories. This is to be expected
   and in no way affects the break-down, which has been made for the sake of
   clarity and description and with a view to aiding the visualization of what kinds
   of data may be collected.
       Two generalized ideals may be stated with reference to the/‘collection! of
cultural data. The first is that excavation and recording produce more_satis-
_ factory results when executed according to the units by which the deposits were
_ formed, i.e., by occupation levels, by refuse layers, by periods of construction,
 182


_ by periods of natural deposition, etc. The placing of finds in relation to some
_ arbitrary, stratigraphic system causes the loss of much important, even vital,
  information. Many of the more significant associations of the material will be
  lost or badly obscured if left to be extracted from the assemblages of gross and
  often culturally unrelated blocks in a stratigraphic grid. In other words, that
deus ex machina, the stratigraphic method, if used mechanically and alone, will
  fail to provide the detail necessary to construct the fullest possible cultural
  context. It is realized, of course, that this ideal will meet with many practical
  obstacles. But as a mark to be aimed and shot at, it constitutes one of the
  tenets of the conjunctive approach.
       The second is that all cultural materials, i.e., all phenomena that were used,
  made, modified, or possessed by the human beings under investigation, directly or
  Halnyeie consciously or unconsciously, should be preserved for study or fully
  recorded in the field when preservation. is unwarranted or impossible. By_thi this
 procedure alone can there be achieved acceptable distribution studies, quantita-
__tive analysis, and weighting of segments within the cultural whole represented
 _by.the site or component. Here again, practicality will often and drastically alter
   the ideal which, nevertheless, has its important function and deserves to be
  kept well in mind, to be adhered to as closely as practically possible.
       1. Artifacts: An artifact may be defined as any material construct made or
  modified by the conscious agency of man. Dwellings as well as ax blades, picto-
   graphs and temple mounds, bedrock mortars and furrowed fields are artifacts.
 _ The relation of an artifact to a culture trait is that of the material objectification
  of a mental concept. It follows, therefore, that a fragmentary artifact represents
  a trait as much as does a whole specimen and should receive similar treatment
  and weighting. In other words, matting fragments represent the same culture
  trait as complete mats and should be preserved or recorded equally. This does
  not mean, of course, that fragments are to be counted as wholes. The significance
  of fragments for the context is a problem to be solved in terms of the actual
  conditions at the site, not hypothetical or generalized ones. But the fact that
  detailed and complete information often may not be forthcoming from a frag-
  mentary artifact does not alter the cultural factor. In fact, its very fragmentary
  nature may be indicative of a culture trait not present in the complete object.
  The cultural interpretation of whole and partial specimens may be different,
  complementary, or overlapping, but nonetheless both represent culture traits and
  are grist to the archeologist’s mill.
       2. Cultural Refuse: Cultural refuse may be defined as the debris or residuum
  from the cultural activities of man. Included in this category would be such
  things as food refuse, the detritus from the manufacture of artifacts, the fire-
  fractured rocks from a pit-oven, etc. Even the fecal specimens that are often
   found in sheltered sites may be considered here, representing as they do the
  dietary residue. Once more, complete recovery and recording is the ideal, but
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              183

  here there is even less chance of attainment than with respect to artifacts. In
  certain midden and cave sites, the very mass of refuse is so tremendous that full
  recovery is entirely out of the question. As a bow to expediency in such cases, it
  is suggested that if presence or absence is noted for the whole site or an
  acceptably large portion and according to reasonably small units of deposit, a
  satisfactory and representative sample will be obtained. This system is based on
  the assumption that the relative proportions of the forms in question will be
  reflected areally as well as quantitatively, but an analysis will have to be made
  for individual sites to ascertain the validity of this generalization in each case.
  Such analysis is one of the tasks to be handled under the sub-heading Criticism
  in the section on Study (see p. 193).
       But this concession to practicality may be overworked to the detriment of
  the context. Much information that is often discarded may be saved for study
  if its value is recognized and an effort made to lighten the burden of preserving
  it. Specimens that can be identified may be tabulated in the field for each unit of
  excavation, either on a presence-and-absence basis or by some relative designa-
  tion such as “abundant” or “scarce.” Unidentified specimens which, however,
  can be typed, may be similarly treated and several examples saved for future
  identification. All untyped and unidentified specimens should be retained, and
  they will probably not amount to a number too great to handle. In the excava-
  tion of Frightful Cave, for instance, although working with the bare minimum
  of a crew, it was possible to make presence-and-absence charts throughout the
  site for the more common vegetal forms and to save the less common and
  untypable ones, while at the same time every identifiable animal bone was
  saved and the unidentifiable ones recorded as “small, medium, or large.” The
  value of these records is demonstrated, among others, by the examples of snails,
  pinons, and fiber quids given above.
       3. Deposits: Here may be included such information as the details of mound
  structure, the manner in which cave deposits were built, the nature of fill in a
  pueblo room, etc.—in other words, the character of what above was called the
  “cultural matrix.” The formation of deposits within an abandoned room in a
  pueblo carries cultural implications over and beyond the fact that the deposits
  are the resting place for a certain number of artifacts. The cited example of site
  Bc 51, Chaco Canyon, should be ample argument, e.g., the nature of the fill
  indicated intentional leveling for an outdoor occupation area and also sug-
  gested the relative time of abandonment of certain rooms, thus helping to round
  out the cultural picture by the addition of temporal factors.

                              b. Local Human     Biological
       Three sets of data may be included under this heading: the! physical attri-
—
   butes lof the people under investigation, their ‘mortuary customs, and the cultural
  implications of these characteristics for other categories of the cultural whole.
 184


 The first requires either competency on the part of the archeologist or the
 services of a physical anthropologist.   The second would seem to be obvious, yet
 it is often a much neglected topic. For example, in three of the most recent and
 compendious of publications on Mississippi Valley archeology (Griffin, 1943;
 Ritchie, 1944; Webb and Snow, 1945), there is almost no information to be
 gained as to what cultural objects were found with what burials. Usually the
 orientation, the body posture, the sex or age (if identifiable), and the presence or
 absence of “grave goods” are noted. These aspects seem to have comparative
 significance as criteria of units in the McKern classification and are therefore
 given. But one looks in vain in the vast majority of cases for descriptions of the
 actual artifacts found in the graves. In the Ritchie citation, for instance, grave
 goods are listed by type in the photographs of certain burials, but in the text the
 contents of specific graves are not given except incidentally. In other words, the
 attempt has not been consistently made to’associate the sex, age, physical attri-
 butes and pathology, posture, orientation, location, and associated cultural ma-
 terial in all possible examples. /
    With regard to the cultural implications of such data, even less is usually
 given. For example, Webb says:
 Burial practices and the resultant traits which point to them may thus be conceived
 as the social act of the body politic, in contrast to, for example, the manufacture
 of a particular type of artifact. ... (Webb and Snow, 1945, p. 167)

 If this is true, and if Webb and his colleagues were actually interested in
 depicting the life of the social entities that lived in their areas in the past, it
 seems impossible that they would not have made a more concious effort to
 give the complete picture of burials as found. The cat is let out of the bag,
 however, when on the next page Webb says:
 | If this be true [that burial customs change more slowly than the material aspects of
/ culture], similar burial traits should be of prime importance in establishing close
‘ connections between peoples. .. . (p. 168)

 Obviously, his interest in the “social act of the body politic” was not for the
 purpose of understanding the culture of that body, but for comparative purposes
 outside the site.
     But there are other ways of looking at the data. Why have there not been
 studies of the burial offerings associated with individuals of a given age or sex?
 Is it not worthy of further thought that a seventeen-year-old girl was buried with
 a large celt in addition to some six other artifacts (Lewis, 1943, p. 310)? Like-
 wise, Ritchie finds a female buried with a harpoon (1944, p. 282). These facts
 lead the inquiring archeologist to ask: If the grave goods belonged to the de-
 ceased, what do they imply; if they did not belong to the deceased but were
 donated by others, what are the implications? The need is obviously for more
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             185

information in order to tell whether these instances are atypical or of common
occurrence. Comparative data are called for, not for classificatory purposes alone,
but also so that the cultural significance of such finds may be clarified by evi-
dence from several sources. In another place, Ritchie makes the observation that,
although previously they had been rare, “beginning with the earliest [European]
contact, grave goods were lavished upon the dead” in Iroquois sites (1944, p. 26
fn. 1). Proceeding from the knowledge of the importance of women among the
Iroquois at least in post-contact times, it would be interesting to know whether
the abundance of grave goods had any correlation with the sex of the person
interred. Furthermore, many physical characteristics have cultural factors and
connotations as well, e.g., knife marks on skulls indicating scalping, death rates
and pathology indicating war and dietary deficiencies, the possibility that an
analysis of fecal specimens may shed light upon diet, season of occupation, as
well as the biological attributes of metabolism and endo-parasites.
    In short, if the physical remains are looked upon as bearing in themselves
and their associations the evidences of cultural activities, capable of variation
and indicative of other cultural features, they can be studied with profit to one
interested in the cultural context. It is assumed, as in other phases, that the
burial complex was more or less integrated within the general culture and will
therefore not be an isolated phenomenon divorced from other cultural complexes.
If this assumption is conceded, then it follows that the burial complex will have
implications for those other aspects with which it was integrated. Similarly,
granting that culture has an effect upon physical constitution and biological
functioning, it follows that, whether they can be recognized or not, there must be
reflections of cultural lifein the physical characteristics of a people. It remains
to see whether or not they can be acceptably demonstrated from archeological
data. The challenge is there to be met.

                        c. Contemporaneous Geographical
     In order properly to evaluate a given culture,/t is necessary to know what
possibilities were offered it by the geographic as well as by the cultural environ-
ment/ Until there is some idea as to the potentialities of the natural surround-
ee it is very difficult to understand just how culturally significant a certain
trait really is. For example, it will make considerable difference in the analysis
of a culture if it is found that clay was present and not used for pottery, that
clay was not available, or that clay was not available in the vicinity but was
brought from a distance for use. Shepard’s work on the pottery of Pecos
(Shepard, 1936) is an outstanding instance. Before she demonstrated that certain
pottery types had been constructed of clay not native to the Pecos valley, it
had been assumed that these vessels were the products of local potters. When
it became apparent that they must have been made in another area or that their
186


ingredients must have come from a distance, the cultural meaning of the vessels
changed. The implications for inter-pueblo relations, for industry, for culture
conservatism, and many other facets had gone unrecognized because of a lack of
information on the potentialities of the geographic region.
    Similarly, before it was established that edible fish were native to the salines
and marshes of the Cuatro Cienegas region of Coahuila, the absence of fish
bones (with the exception of one artifact) from the deposits of nearby caves was
regarded as an environmental deficiency. But when fish were found to have
existed in those waters at the time of the first Spanish entrada, and when cultural
comparison showed that the Coahuila culture without fish remains is compara-
ble to the Pecos River cave-dweller material which includes fish remains, the
meaning of the data changed. It can no longer be assumed that the lack of fish
bones is due to environmental causes. In fact, it becomes highly Saas that
this condition is attributable to cultural factors.
    The extent to which a society utilizes its natural surroundings is one of its
most particular and significant aspects. But utilization means more than merely
that which concerns the subsistence economy or material items. It also means
the degree to which the environment enters into the ideas and other non-material
aspects of the cultural picture. A quotation from A. I. Hallowell may be given
at some length because it so well expresses this point:
Man’s   psychological   responses   to the physical   objects   of his external   environment
can only be understood . . . in terms of the traditional meanings which these latter
have for him. He never views the outer world freshly or responds to his fellows
entirely free from the influences which these meanings exert upon his thought and
conduct. /Celestial and meteorological phenomena, for example, or the plants and
 animals of man’s habitat, even its inanimate forms, are never separated as such from
 the concepts of their essential nature and the beliefs about them that appear in the
ideological tradition of a particular cultural heritage. Man’s attitude toward them is —
 a function of reality as culturally defined, not in terms of their mere physical existence.,
 Thus, to treat the physical environment in which a people lives independently of
 the meaning that its multiform objects have for the people involves a fundamental
Psychological distortion if we aim to comprehend the universe which is actually theirs.
‘While useful in certain kinds of analysis, even the assertion that two peoples occupy
 the same natural environment because the regions inhabited by them exhibit the
 same climatic type, the same topography and biota can only have significance in
 the grossest physical sense/ It is tantamount to ignoring the very data which have the
 most important psychological significance, namely the differences in meaning which
 similar objects of the phenomenal world have for peoples of different cultural tradi-
 tions. Consequently, the objects of the external world, as meaningfully defined in
 a traditional ideology, constitute the reality to which the individuals habituated to
 a particular system of beliefs actually respond. As applied to the sphere of ecological
 relations, for example, an inventory of all the natural resources of a specific human
 habitat does not necessarily correspond to the “natural resources” of that habitat.
 TAYLOR                               A STUDY          OF ARCHEOLOGY                                        187

[The physical objects of the environment only enter the reality-order of the human
 population as a function of specific culture patterns. It is the knowledge and techno-
 logical level of the culture of a people that determines their natural resources, not
 the mere presence of physical objects. To people without a tradition of pottery
 making the presence of clay in their habitat is no more a natural resource than
 was the presence of coal and iron in the habitat of the pre-Columbian Indians of eastern
 North America. (1935, pp. 20-21)

     A series of data which, in my estimation, has been inconceivably neglected
 by the students of Americanist archeology is to be found very pertinent to this
 point. I speak of the life-forms depicted upon the pottery bowls of the Mimbres
 region in southern New Mexico. These forms certainly reflect an interest in the
 natural and human environment, but here the question of significance is: an
 interest in what aspects of this environment? A tabulation of some published
 life-forms reveals the following data:
                                                       TABLE   6

    EEUIIIATA Sine taco. ents ea hoketeic ws      65               Partots teretereise cy               6
    1 Cal4aig0 och ne            ee ee            53               Snakes peri       a. ter eee         2
    FS eee ae dara tcl a ies,                     50               Snails.       crane abe.             1
    IMSECUStmem    cept sacesieia vocals eae      30               SCORPIONS era erie Cece              1
    BGO Carer ero,                 ae ee he       24
    Mountain sheep.e. ++...                       21                              SUMMARY
    daNfal(2)Fo)oY aceWeer aa                     20               Birds tela       oe See     ee      96
    pIrtleshiemes seins te seen                   19               EtUumianss jt eee          ee       65
    Swallow-like birds..........                  17               Deer, sheep, antelope.......        57
    Gamivores ark teeins. saci                    16               FS Hyayctg hectic ene che eetay:    50
    IDGEr Shi)    hainigenitien orstaysled Hang   16               INSECTS ued nya hema heer ene       30
    rk 67s werecard              kocher           14               Hrogsrand liZarcSentssetameie       26
    BirogS eer. :eee cht See bce                  13               ISS ofyh Oepa Okay LReomheoauer
                                                                                                 ees   24
    TEIZaTO Sivan  erereeieyee   ee eaters        13               EUV ULES ae rye cau cine Se ee:     19
    (Oli es Ree ea eee aaa At                      6               CAmIVORES wan aterm     ea wire     16

 Discounting for the moment the possibility of error in a few identifications and
 the failure to list some doubtful forms, the above table may serve as a representa-
 tive sample.’**
     The life-forms on the pottery do not correspond quantitatively, nor typo-
 logically as a whole, with the animal remains found at Mimbres ruins (e.g.,
 Cosgrove and Cosgrove, 1932, pp. 3-5; Nesbitt, 1931, p. 19). Nor do they corre-
 spond, very closely at least, with the diet of Pueblo people as it is generally
 recognized. Insects, reptiles and amphibians, carnivores, and finally humans are
 not within the range of food usage. As for fish, the picture presented by the
 ethnographic accounts is neither complete nor very clear, but it is safe to say
 that this article of diet was never important and is actually taboo among the
188


Hopi and Zuni. It is probable that neither parrots nor scorpions were eaten,
and the relative numbers of swallow-like and other small birds are quite surely
out of proportion to any food utilization they might have had. There remain
only rabbits, snails, and herbivorous quadrupeds to represent the food quest.
But among these, rabbits occur less frequently upon the pottery than do humans,
small birds, fish, and insects; deer occur less than insects, turtles, and swallow-
like forms; antelope and mountain sheep less than insects, fish, humans, and
small birds. It is apparent that the decoration of Mimbres pottery was in-
fluenced by other considerations than the food quest.
    Nor does it appear that clothing or other utilitarian arts were the vitalizing
factors. Little or no vegetal material is depicted and the hide-producing forms,
such as deer, antelope, sheep, and rabbit, have been shown to be of less
numerical importance than the non-hide-producers. The predominance of birds
might point to an interest in feathers for dress or ornamentation, but this still
does not explain the prevalence of fish, insects, and turtles. In the light of these
facts, it seems highly probable that the non-utilitarian forms, as well as those
which might be thought at first glance to have some practical significance,
actually contain an esoteric, non-material import and indicate the concern of
the Mimbrefios with environmental aspects other than subsistence and material
things.
    Another lead may be suggested. Throughout the Southwest among the living
Pueblos, the potters are predominantly women. However, with the exception of
delineations of childbirth, the scene which is so similar to the Aztec manner of
showing sexual intercourse (Cosgrove and Cosgrove, 1932, plate 225e; Nesbitt,
1931, plate 25a), and a very few other possibilities, all human figures on the
examined Mimbres pottery are male, and depict purely male activities. The
same correlation can be noted for the non-human figures: there is a concern
with usually masculine occupations, with game and the hunt or with ritual as
implied by parrots. Perhaps the presence of fish, reptiles, insects, and the like
indicates female participation, but the dominance of male-connected activities
where the identification is sure would appear to make this unlikely. Furthermore,
the tendency toward geometric design and stylized rather than natural life-forms
in the Southwest where female artisanship is undoubted makes the uniqueness of
Mimbres artistry all the more suggestive of male authorship for at least the life-
forms. Whether the making of pottery and the drawing of the geometric designs
which appear on Mimbres pottery were also the work of men is another problem
which, together with the testing of the above hypothesis, should prove an inter-
esting study. A thorough and careful analysis might lead to acceptable inferences
as to the religious ideas and organization of the Mimbres people.
     When it comes to the identification of animal bones found in archeological
excavations, the amount of information to be sought does not end with a specific
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             189

or generic designation. The age, sex, and part of the organism are also important
 aids to the interpretive work of the archeologist. For example, the age of the
 individuals can often provide information on seasonal occupations and food
 preferences. Immature birds and mammals are alive only at certain seasons of
 the year. Similarly, migratory birds are present in given localities only at times
 definable within relatively narrow limits. Should numbers of bones thus reduce-
 able to seasonal limits be found within particular strata, it would be possible to
 date the deposits to their season. With this as a known factor, inferences could
be made as to the significance of consistently associated materials: buffalo bones
 appearing with young birds would indicate a spring hunt, a ceremonial object
 with goose bones in New Mexico would mean either a spring or late fall cere-
mony, etc. Such seasonal data might also lead to hypotheses as to the seasonal
 occupancy of shell mounds and caves, which would, in turn, lead to modification
of ideas concerning the length of occupation, nature of the human groups using
 the sites, meaning of the absence of certain expectable artifacts.
     Of course the same procedure is applicable to vegetal remains. Plants ripen
and produce edible seeds only at definite times during the year. Pinon nuts are
available at specific times which are not the same as those when the maguey
stalks are ready for roasting. If these two forms are associated in a cave deposit,
what does it mean? Were the nuts stored and, if so, where? If they were stored
in the cave, does it mean that the people lived in the cave permanently or that,
being migratory, they returned to the cave and their cache of nuts at the time
when the maguey sap began to run? What evidence for caches is there in the
cave itself? What indications are there of permanent or intermittent occupation?
If the people could count on their cache of nuts being safe in the cave from the
fall until spring, what implications does this fact have for the human groups
occupying this region? Might it signify hunting and gathering territories, or
possibly the sole use of transient stopping places by certain nomadic groups?
Or does it merely mean that they took the chance of hiding the cache well
enough to escape notice until they returned? Whatever might come of such
speculation and the analysis and testing that should follow, the point which I
wish to raise is that there is more to the presence of pifon nuts and burned
maguey stalks than just their existence in the cave.
     The climates under which bygone peoples lived are also of importance in the
construction of a cultural context. The fact that biological forms appear naturally
in constellations, that there are such things as ecological groupings, that a
certain biota is indicative of certain climatic and physiographic conditions can
be of great assistance to the archeologist bent upon obtaining a picture of past
actuality. Success along these lines will depend upon his collections of floral,
faunal, and geologic materials and upon thorough analysis by competent
specialists.
 190


                               d. Non-local   Human
       There should be no need to point out the importance of obtaining cultural
  and biological information on the human societies that lived in the neighborhood
  of a site at a time either before, during, or after its occupation. But it should
  be mentioned that the value of this perception lies not only in its use for com-
  parative studies and the interpretation of use and function, but also for the
  insight it gives into other, possibly more obscure, cultural aspects. Just as
  knowledge of modern Hopi (or Keres?) culture will be of help in interpreting
  the murals found at the ruined pueblo of Awatovi, so will other, perhaps less
  obvious and more far-fetched, information serve to clear up problems (and to
  lead onward to new ones) that otherwise might not be answered on purely
  archeological grounds.
       For example, within the Coahuila site called Frightful Cave, there were
  found nearly a thousand sandals made of plaited fiber. Some of these are long
  and some short, obviously having been made for feet of different sizes. But
  what sizes? Perhaps it would be possible merely to measure the length of each
  sandal and assume that this dimension represents the length of the foot which
  wore the sandal. But the wear on individual sandals shows that they were
  made somewhat longer than the feet which wore them. But how much longer?
  A short and informal study of the living Mexican, sandal-wearing population of
  the region demonstrated that their modern sandals extend, on an average, one-
  half inch both before, behind, and beside the foot. Some questioning elicited
  the statement that this extension is necessary so as to protect the foot against
  rocks and cactus over which one is constantly traveling in desert and moun-
  tainous country. A broader extension would make the sandal too clumsy and
  unwieldy. A test of a sample lot of the archeological specimens shows that, when
  heel and toe depressions are present, they also range closely around a point
  one-half inch from their respective margins. With these data, it will be possible
  to estimate the range of actual foot size among the bygone people of the area
  and to make some hypotheses as to stature and age-group of the population,
  e.g., adults, adolescents, children. If it is assumed that the proportion of these
  age-groups within the cave as a whole reflects their relative numbers within
  the bands that occupied the cave, some idea will be forthcoming as to the
  constitution of these bands.
       Ethnographic accounts, documentary sources, other archeological reports,
  the habits, customs, practices of living groups, all provide valuable hints and
| leads. (Going on the assumption that an interpretation has more chance of
  being correct if it corresponds with some known practice of similar or neighbor-
  ing societies than if it finds no parallel in any known human group, the value
  of non-local information on cultural or physical subjects is plain./
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              191

                      e. Non-contemporaneous     Geographical
    The value of the information included under this heading is of a rather
special and restricted kind. In most instances, it has to do with such things
as the /‘physiographic changes which might have caused a site to be occupied
or abandoned and the geographic factors which may have kept earlier or later
people from using the same location; These data are often difficult or impossible
to secure, and even then ‘they may be of little significance either for constructing
a cultural context or for comparative purposes. It is probably not an over-
statement to say that this is the least important category into which pertinent
data fall.

    One final point may be mentioned in connection with the whole matter of
the collection of archeological data. I believe it is possible to say without
injustice to any particular field worker that, however carefully the archeologist
preserves his findings either in the form of notes or specimens, he always finds
that there is information which he needs for his analysis but which he does not
have in his records. Critical details will beg for elaboration and clarification
during laboratory study, but there will be no way of bettering the situation.
Only experience and the failings of former jobs will tell the archeologist what
he should be on the lookout for in his next investigation. For these reasons
there is only one axiom to be remembered: when in doubt, preserve! Many
things which may seem trivial and merely an added burden at the time of
excavation may turn out to be of great importance to a full-blown cultural
picture. It is worth preserving these data at the expense of a little extra labor
and the following out of a few blind leads. When in doubt, preserve!

                                     2. STUDY

    In the preceding pages, the type of materials to be collected and some of
the reasons for collecting them have been given. Therefore, the character of the
study upon    them has been implicit in the whole        discussion. Briefly, study
should be detailed and go beyond the mere requirements of a comparative
approach. For comparative purposes, it may be sufficient to know that two
basketry trays found at two sites are descriptively similar in their gross
features of materials, technique of manufacture, and design. But in order to
extract as much of the cultural significance as possible from the tray at one
particular site, it is necessary to notice its charred pitting indicative of live
coals, the extent to which it is pitted, the sources of its component materials,
the quality of manufacture, the presence of dried mush in its crevices. Two
superficially similar bone awls may be found to have entirely different types of
scratches on them, or their points may be sharpened or worn in contrasting
192


ways. The direction of beveling on stone points may be consistent in specific
associations, sites, areas, and thus indicate handedness among the people or
some culture norm over and above shape, material, and other gross attributes.
The wear on the bottom of a certain pottery bowl, in contrast to the wear on
the bottoms of other like forms, may be indicative of the length and manner of
its use. Errors in weaving technique may not have extra-local comparative
importance, but they have a cultural and individual significance, especially if
carelessness in weaving is in opposition to care in some other technical process
or if only a few textiles show poor workmanship while the majority are well
fashioned.
   _ Once more it may be asked: what good is it if a cultural item is foundto
have counterparts in other sites, if nothing is known of the significance of
that item within its own cultural context? Of what value is it if a comparative
study demonstrates temporal and cultural relationships between sites, while
little or nothing is known of the culture of those sites? What is the purpose
of working out the distribution of flanged bowls in the Maya area? If the answer
to this is that it will tell us the temporal and cultural relationships which existed
between certain Maya sites, we may continue to ask: what is the purpose of
learning which sites are later than others in the Maya area and which had
cultural relations with which? Is it not for the purpose of understanding the
nature, the change, the growth of Maya “civilization”? If this is granted, the
next question is: How can we understand the nature, change, or growth of
anything about which we know only superficials? Would it not be wiser, in
addition to learning the spatial location of flanged bowls or plumbate ware, also
to make every effort to learn their materials, techniques, use, function, meaning,
in other words their places within the cultural whole?
     From the foregoing, it is apparent that not only will the archeologist have
to study his material with finer perception, but also he will have to employ
the services of many other scientific specialists in order to secure the informa-
tion which he needs for his purposes. In order that materials of manufacture
may be identified and traced to their sources, in order that the more compli-
cated techniques may be recognized, in order that the environment and its
utilization may be understood, the archeologist will be forced, except in rela-
tively rare cases, to call upon the aid of colleagues in other disciplines. If a
society consistently used a particular wood for its projectile foreshafts or if
it obtained its pigments or clay from distant deposits, these facts are in addi-
tion to the information on trade and contact relations. They are of importance
for a picture and an understanding of the culture itself. Therefore, the identifica-
tion of all possible materials and techniques is a goal which should be constantly
in mind and consistently sought. This is a hampering requirement, but the
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              193

  information is vital. I shall refer to the practical aspects of this problem at a
  later time in this chapter.
                                      a. Criticism
      As the term is used here, criticism involves the making of judgments as to
  the validity and applicability of the archeological finds. Is there any doubt as
  to provenience; is there any indication of disturbance, reversed stratigraphy, or
~ other movement in the deposit after primary deposition? Can a find be accounted
  for on other grounds than human agency? Does an increase in, say, pifion
  shells signify a cultural phenomenon, or is it a function of environmental
  change? Criticism in many instances will have to come after analysis and
  interpretation, but usually it is one of the first avenues of attack upon arche-
  ological materials.
                                      b. Analysis
    /Analysis involves the study of archeological data in terms of their em-
_Pirical attributes, including their provenience, associations, and specifications,
_in other words their /empirical “forms.’/ Analysis also includes the typing and
  classifying of forms according to their empirical attributes and affinities. With
  regard to cultural data, form is the most obvious feature, being empirical, and
  the most readily comparable. It is not to be wondered, then, that it has
  received the bulk of attention by archeologists since that time when they became
  conscious of the ‘objective’? method and eschewed the free and easy inter-
  pretation of the earlier workers.
      But form may be misleading even in comparative studies, and most certainly
  it is a very superficial aspect of any cultural item. It is a prime requisite for
  further investigation, but it should not be the end-point of archeological study.
  Form is actually only the outward shell of the matter. The kernel lies inside.

                                   c. Interpretation
        Interpretation’ involves the study of archeological data for the purpose of!
    discovering their technique of manufacture, use, function, and the idea or ideas
    which lay behind them. It also includes the typing and classifying of cultural
  _phenomena on the basis of groupings which are inferred to have been pertinent
_ to the culture and people under investigation. It is at this point that the
   cultural conjunctives, the relationships between the archeological data of a
" society or cultural entity, play their important part. Often this interpretation is
    neither easy nor the means obvious, but if archeology intends to attain the level
    of context, if it professes to become either anthropology or historiography, this
    is an essential step in the process. Archeology should not deal only with empirical
  form.
194


                                 d. Description
    Description follows analysis and interpretation in this outline because the
determination of the attributes which are considered important enough to
describe depends upon these two preliminary steps. It is impossible to describe
fully and “objectively” even the simplest object. Analysis and interpretation are _
necessary, therefore, in order to distinguish those features that are important
(and those that are not) within the given frame of reference which, in this
instance and speaking broadly, is that of human culture.
                                3. PRESENTATION

    Presentation of the mass of detailed, descriptive data gathered by their
research is one of the major problems faced by all archeologists. The greater
amount of both data and detail demanded by the conjunctive approach only
adds to the difficulty. It has already been maintained that these data should
be preserved in their entirety and that the empirical bases for all published
interpretations and inferences should be given to the reader. Archeology, as
well as other disciplines, must endeavor to make its findings cumulative.
    In view of these needs and their attendant problems, it is evident that special
methods and techniques for handling this wealth of detail will have to be
developed. And once more it seems that compromise will have to be effected
between the ideal and such contingent factors as finances, space, time. This
will be so either until the archeologists work out means to present the mass
of material or until more abundant subsidies and publication facilities are
available to them. Nevertheless, it may be possible to make some practical
suggestions as to ways in which the ideal may be approached, even ultimately
attained.
    First, it should be remembered that the presentation of the detailed descrip-
tive data is primarily for the specialist who wishes to check or follow out the
archeologist’s conclusions or who seeks material for further comparison and
study. For those whose interests lie solely in the broad cultural picture and
not in intensive study, the cultural context should be sufficient. Therefore the
publication of the descriptive data themselves may be as technical, as abbre-
viated, as tabular, in short as “dull and uninteresting” as demanded by the
dictates of practicability, yet consistent with the limits of clarity and fullness.
There is no call upon the archeologist, at least in his sections devoted to the
evidence, to attempt a work of literary art.
    The presentation falls roughly into three divisions: excavation procedure,
description, and interpretation. In practice, these will often overlap and may be
impossible to treat separately. For example, it is often impractical to divorce
the account of excavation procedure from the description of the deposits
excavated or the cultural features, such as caches or fire-pits, found during the
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              195


course of the work. On the other hand, there is one point which should be
strictly observed: to make explicit and clear what is interpretive description
and what is description of an observational order.

                             a. Excavation   Procedure
    This section is primarily concerned with the archeological deposits and
how they have been handled by the archeologist. It is designed to provide the
means for a critical judgment and analysis of the methods and techniques
employed by the excavator to obtain his data. It may be profitable, in some
cases, to include the provenience and details of association of the material
found during excavation. In other cases, especially when there is a large
quantity of findings, it may be better merely to recount the excavation methods
and to leave the description of deposits and their contents for separate treatment.

                              b. Descriptive Section
     This is concerned with the nature of the deposits and their contents or, in
the case of unburied material, with the particulars of these phenomena. The
section is purely and admittedly empirical and descriptive and therefore can
best be served by the use of descriptive rubrics. Here is the spot in an arche-
ological report where such headings as Bone Artifacts, Objects of Shell, Pits, etc.,
have their proper place. In fact, special care should be taken that no inter-
pretive question is begged by the use of cultural, i.e., inferential, headings, the
implications of which have not been thought out and explicitly demonstrated.
Here the concern is with empirical form, type, and class.
     Furthermore, description should cover the full range of variation. Purely
typological exposition, even when accompanied by quantitative data, is not
sufficient, Cultural phenomena are amenable to categorization only within
limits, and variation is one of the most characteristic and one of the most sig-
nificant factors about all culture. It is this fact that has given rise to Linton’s
valuable concepts of ideal and actual patterns (1936b, pp. 99ff, esp. p. 101).
The archeologist is dealing with the results of actual behavior, with the
objectifications of actual patterns. There is every expectation that these will
show variation, and variation of a culturally significant sort. If, therefore, the
archeologist completely replaces these actual phenomena with generalized pat-
terns of his own, he is not only obscuring the picture but also throwing away
some of his most realistic and precious data. While it is true that he should
attempt to abstract the ideal patterns inherent in the actual patterns of his
material, he should not completely submerge his observational data in a
classification of his own devising. If he presents only his own groupings without
indicating the actual variation, no matter how closely his categories may cor-
respond to the ideal patterns of the culture under investigation, he is at best
196


losing much of the significance of his material and at worst may be seriously
warping his picture of the culture.
    It is suggested, therefore, that the archeologist present his empirical cate-
gories and then proceed to indicate the range of variation and the specific
details of the finds which come under that heading. For example, after giving
a typological description of “triangular stone points” covering the specifications
and affinities of the type as a whole, there should be added the dimensions,
petrography, and other individual features of each specimen. Many of these
data can be tabulated or given in predesignated outline form.

                              c. Interpretive Section
    This has to do with the techniques of manufacture, use, function, the
culture ideas, and the meanings of the archeological material. Analysis and
discussion along these lines may be segregated in a separate section or incor-
porated with the preceding one, either following or being interlarded with the
pertinent empirical data. Close physical proximity of these two aspects within
the body of the report need be ino cause for confusion, so long as the observa-
tional and interpretive details are explicitly identified.
    At this point in the account, the interpretive groundwork for the subsequent
cultural synthesis should be the first concern of the author. It will save much
lengthy, disconcerting, and highly parenthetical discussion when it comes time
to develop the cultural context if the interpretive analysis, the weighing of
evidence, the arguments pro and con are all finished and at least some con-
clusion, negative, neutral, or positive, is reached at this early stage in the report.
     It is, of course, realized that in order to accomplish this purpose, extra-local
comparisons of artifacts and other individual items will have to be made. And
this is the best place for them to be made. In contradistinction to the compari-
sons made on the basis of cultural contexts or extensive cultural complexes,
those to be made at this place are of single items or categories. The full range
of distribution may be treated here and hypotheses as to relationships made on
more tenuous and far-flung likenesses than would be advisable to use for the
comparison of larger cultural units such as complexes or contexts. In other
words, in the presentation of the empirical and inferential analyses of individual
finds, comparative studies of individual finds and categories are also in order.
     One last point may be mentioned. There is a definite and urgent need for
some method of reference whereby each and every find can be identified during
the course of an archeological report without having to be redescribed or
identified at length at each citation. It should be possible to discuss the finding
of a given stone point and to give its associations in the section on excavation
procedure, to describe its form in the descriptive section, and to make use of its
cultural implications in the final section on cultural synthesis, without being
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 197

 forced in each instance to make long, detailed, and repetitive identification. It is
of the utmost importance that the reader be made aware that the description
on page so-and-so refers to the same point whose provenience is given on page
such-and-such and which is utilized for cultural interpretation on yet another
page of the report. The failure to provide such cross checks is one of the most
confusing and frustrating features of current publications on Americanist
archeology.
     A remedy for this situation may be suggested. As an appendix to the
archeological report, a serial catalogue of finds may be given, listing, after a
serial number and short identifying tag such as “stone point,” “mano,” “fore-
shaft,” etc., the provenience of the item. In order to kill several birds with one
stone, other data might also be included, specifications such as dimensions, ma-
terial of manufacture, etc., and even an index to the textual citations of each
item. By such a catalogue and with constant reference whenever a find is men-
tioned in the report, the data will be “brought down to units” capable of being
assembled and reassembled any number of times and in any number of ways.
The individual items and their potentially significant variation from the cate-
gorical norm will not be smothered in a welter of taxonomy and more or less
arbitrary groupings made by the archeologist. Such a method would help to
preserve and keep to the fore the associations and relationships, the all-
important cultural conjunctives, which are vital factors in the construction of
cultural contexts.
     The system advocated here is a modification of that employed by ethnog-
raphers to refer to information received from certain, specified informants
(e.g., Kroeber, ed., 1935b; Wyman and Kluckhohn, 1938), but an archeological
illustration may be taken from the records of the U.S. National Museum
Coahuila Expedition of 1940-1941. As part of the laboratory work, the field
catalogue was transferred to an “Accession Book” wherein the specimens of
each’ empirical grouping such as stone, bone, fiber, shell, were listed serially for
each site excavated. This record is such that it can be transferred directly (with
only minor corrections) to an appendix of the final report. By using this roster
in writing the sections in the body of the report, it will be possible to proceed
generally as follows:

In the .50-1.00 m level of block E 16, at a point .30 m from the west wall [etc.], a bone
artifact (Z-21) was found lying just two cms. north of a charred tray of coiled basketry
(E2523) er

then in the Descriptive Section under Bone Artifacts:

Z-21: a bone point .01 m wide, .20 m long [etc.], from its appearance and its proximity
to the basketry tray (F-523), it may be interpreted as an awl... .
198


then in the cultural context under Textile Industry:
.. . for use in basketry, the people of Frightful Cave employed rather long, thin
awls made of deer metapodial worked down to sharp but short points (Z-21)....

It might be possible, if the descriptive and interpretive sections had been handled
fully and clearly,   to forego numerical   identifications   in the writing   of the
cultural context. Such a practice would make for easier reading and a more
vivid picture and would, in fact, be the ideal presentation. However, a compro-
mise course, one in which the least obvious points would be clarified by refer-
ence, might serve expediency,    clarity, and accuracy.

    In closing this account of the conjunctive approach, a word may be said
about practical considerations, which in the usual run of archeological affairs
mean financial considerations. It should be evident that the requirements of such
detailed and intensive work, both in the field and in the laboratory, will demand
not a little revision of the expenditure of archeological funds. Assuming a more
or less constant budget, how can the work be done and the money to do it
with be balanced? A few ideas may be put forward along these lines but,
whether they prove satisfactory or not, it remains a fact that the detailed work
must be accomplished—otherwise the archeologist may as well shut up shop as
a historian or anthropologist.
    The first and major solution is, I believe, to excavate less extensively and
more intensively for shorter periods of time. If the data are extracted with
anything like the proper refinement and if they are studied in the necessary
detail, the product of a very brief excavation will occupy the efforts of the
archeologist and his assistants in the laboratory for a remarkably long time.
But when the job is done, the ensuing report may be expected to provide more
valuable and better grounded information than one resulting from a longer and
less intensive excavation with a more hurried and superficial study.
     Such intensive field work requires an increased amount of supervision. Two
solutions are offered for this problem. First, the professionally trained personnel
should work more than my observations have led me to believe they are
accustomed to do at present. An effort should be made to make the most of
every member of the trained staff during the period of actual field work which,
however, should be short enough to forestall “going stale.” Second, and perhaps
 more congenial to expedition directors, a plan should be worked out to attract
 more (and the more serious) students to the field, either to act as laborer-
 technicians or merely to supervise other labor. Such students would receive
 no remuneration.
     Experience in archeological techniques should not be looked upon either by
 the student or by the professional and academic group as a side-line which can
TAYLOR                    A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             199


be picked up in desultory fashion. It is only by continued and broad experience
that the archeologist learns to recognize what is significant and how to record,
concisely and completely, those data which he will require for his cultural
interpretations. Just as he should be conversant with culture in the ethnographic
realm, so he must become familiar with culture viewed archeologically. The
data seen from each of these two angles are different to such an extent that
proficiency in one does not necessarily or automatically indicate proficiency in
the other. Relationships of cultural phenomena in the ground often appear
quite different from those that are observed or described in actual practice
among living peoples. Experience, and the imagination born of experience and
reading, are essential parts of the professional’s repertory, and it should be
made possible for the student, and attractive to him, to obtain as much of
both as he can before he attempts to do his own work. Archeological field work
of an intensive sort should not be considered a vacation; perhaps it is a change,
but is hard and tedious work and deserves recognition as such.’
    Therefore, it should be possible for a student to earn academic credits by
diligently performing archeological work under an accredited professional and
according to the same standards set up for other scholastic performance by
the student’s institution. What is being advocated here is a system of arche-
ological apprenticeship, whereby the student is given the incentive of academic
credit for field work under proper direction. Such a system would relieve the
pressure on archeological budgets and would develop a pool of student arche-
ologists with considerable broad and practical experience.
    What is perhaps even more important, it would involve passing judgment
upon the professional archeologists themselves. In other words, it is to be
presumed that an academic institution or department would give credit only
for work done under what it considered to be competent and exacting direction.
In this fashion, only the better-regarded archeologists would be able to obtain
the desired student help and a practical premium would be placed on “good”
archeology. This would serve to improve the field from the professional as well
as from the student level and would expectably bring about a stiffening of
professional standards which current book reviews and criticisms do not seem
able to do. If it came down to awarding academic credit, I believe a more
rigorous judgment would be passed, assuming the institution to be jealous of its
standards.
    Concerning the laboratory study of the excavated material, three points may
be raised, two of which are similar to the above. If it is granted that the
time in the field should be utilized to the utmost, then much study and
analysis can be accomplished there by the personnel of the expedition. Trade-
union hours have little place in the schedule of archeologists in the field, and
the day does not need to end when work in the trenches is through. On the
200


supposition that the effort will not carry on unduly, it can be asked of the
personnel that they exert themselves to the maximum for the duration. It is
needless to mention that this field study is also of great advantage because of
the problems it raises and the leads it gives toward further and more pertinent
investigations. Second: when students are available and can be supervised, they
may be used in the “home” laboratory as well as in the field. Academic or
publication credit may be provided or even the allotment of small subsidies
which, nevertheless, would be less strain on the budget than the extended
services of some salaried professional, e.g., the expedition director or a specialist.
    And third: some arrangement should be made on a broad and long-range
basis so that the costs of special laboratory investigations such as dendro-
chronology, petrography, serology, botanical identification, can be underwritten
by philanthropic institutions as a regular and recognized part of their programs.
The dependence    of archeological   research   on such identifications   and special
studies is understandably greater than that of other anthropological sub-
disciplines, and so crucial a factor in its success or failure that too much
emphasis cannot be laid upon such help. Yet one of the worst blocks that faces
the archeologist is his inability to get identifications and pertinent information
on his varied materials within a reasonable time or with the necessary detail.
     The main reason for this situation seems to be that the specialists have
been doing the work as an incidental, rather than an integral, part of their own
research. For the most part, the identifications and other studies have been
done without charge, as a favor to the archeologists or to their institutions, and
apparently often as “spare time” projects. To my knowledge some specimens
have. been in these channels for five years and more! This unhealthy situation
might be remedied, I believe, if the specialists could be led to look upon this
work as a personally rewarding part of their own regular research program, not
merely as a favor or service to another discipline. What is necessary is to
demonstrate that there is something of value in it for them. If they can be
convinced that the work is a joint project of mutual benefit and if they were
given enough financial support to enable them regularly to devote time, then
I believe that the block would be well on its way out.
    There are at least three means of promoting this attitude among the
specialists. First is to bring to their attention the fact that archeological sites
have preserved, and are producing, materials of great importance to their own
studies, e.g., materials from that twilight zone between the modern and the
strictly paleontologic. Here are the immediate forerunners of modern forms
and all given to them, often dated to the year over a long span of time, with
no expense to their own budgets. Second is to encourage the specialists to
conduct investigations and to publish papers along the interests of their own
professions, based upon the archeologically derived materials. In the past, it
TAYLOR                         A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                          201

seems that much of the work was viewed merely as wearisome identification
for another discipline, for which at best they were allotted an appendix and
many   times only a footnote of acknowledgment in journals which their col-
leagues would never see. In place of this, they should be encouraged to publish
in their own periodicals, under their own names, and on topics pertinent to
their own interests, the-only proviso being that they furnish either there or
separately the data needed by the archeologist. Third is to collect the materials e
from archeological sites in such a manner that they can be utilized by the
specialists, not only for identification purposes but also for their own investiga-
tions. This means (a) the collections must be adequate samples or total universes,
not representative specimens, in order to permit conclusions; (b) the collections
must be in as good physical condition as possible (clean, labeled, boxed, etc.),
so that too much work of a purely preparatory nature will not have to be done
by the specialist; (c) the catalogue should be as detailed as possible and
available to the specialist/
    One of the major problems in implementing the above proposals is that of
finances. And here is a function which a central agency or clearing house, so
long needed in Americanist archeology, could perform to the undying gratitude
of the profession. To my mind, there is a definite and urgent need for an
organization with little operating costs to put all its funds into services, and
forego the impressive but non-utilitarian aspects of a large and beautiful plant.
And one of its major functions would be to subsidize the technical research
requirements of institutions actively engaged in archeological excavation. I do
not mean that it should merely have money available on application for such
projects. It would best assist in breaking the technical stranglehold on archeology
by conducting a permanent project of subsidization, not by employing and
housing a stable of specialists on any premises but by providing them regular,
yearly grants to be expended either in the field or in their own laboratories on
projects sent to them through the central agency. In the first place, this would
eliminate the overhead of many laboratories and specialists. It would also permit
the latter to remain in familiar and established surroundings, to plan their
yearly work, and to regard the identification and study of archeological speci-
mens as an integral part of their research program. The agency on its part
would make it generally known that it was in a position to subsidize a certain
amount of research by specified specialists; it would solicit projects; with the
participation of the specialist, it would select those that seemed the most worthy
and filled best the requirements established for collections; and it would forward
a note to the specialist that such-and-such a collection was coming to be worked
on under the year’s allotment.
    The archeologists would get better service. The specialist would benefit by
being able to plan for himself and/or his students. The agency would be able
202


to some extent to raise the standards of archeological collecting and bring home
to the archeologist the fact that there is more to the cultural picture than archi-
tecture and potsherds.

    In the preceding pages, a summary treatment of the ends and a few of the
means of the conjunctive approach have been offered. An archeological report
according to this viewpoint has been outlined as consisting of, first, a statement
of problem; second, a description and interpretation of the findings; third,
an analysis of local chronology; fourth, and of most concern, the construction
of a cultural context; fifth, the study of extra-local relationships of the material
as a cultural entity; and a possible sixth, the study of the cultural context and
its relationships in terms of special problems such as culture itself, art, archi-
 tecture, ceramics, etc.
      Once more it should be pointed out that the conjunctive approach is a
 conceptual scheme made explicit in a set of goals which, in turn, are best attained
 by certain means. This scheme is one which views archeological data as cultural
_data. It considers the writing of history to be the construction of cultural contexts
 with due regard for time, not merely the arrangement of events and cultural
 phenomena in temporally sequential order. It considers the writing of anthro-
 pology to be concerned with the nature of culture and cultural dynamics. It
 believes that even the fullest attainment of the objectives apparent in a purely
 comparative approach will not provide adequate material for the writing either
  of history or of anthropology. And it does not believe in the conception of
 archeological prestige which is apparently held by those who pursue the compara-
 tive approach, i.e., that it is more praiseworthy to dig much material from the
  ground than it is to make a full study of the material already excavated.
       The conjunctive approach is not concerned as to whether the particular
  archeologist has for his objective historiography or anthropology. But it does
  believe that, to justify itself as a social science as opposed to antiquarianism,
  archeology must at least writeyhistory, must at least construct the fullest pos-_
  sible cultural contexts. Beyond ‘this point, it recognizes the personal inclinations
  of the individual, either to stop or to go on to another level of procedure, be it
  the study of culture or any segment of the cultural whole: sociology, art,
  economics, mechanics, or whatever.
