                                  CHAPTER           4
              A CONCEPT OF CULTURE               FOR ARCHEOLOGY
       LTHOUGH much was said in the pages of Part I about “cultural contexts”
         and although the terms culture and cultural were freely used, these con-
  cepts were not defined. But some agreement as to a concept of culture is ab-
  solutely vital to a conceptual scheme for any discipline, such as archeology,
  which identifies its subject matter as cultural. Thus it is a necessary and integral
_ first step in the conjunctive approach to) establish a concept of culture. In the
  present study, the definition of this concept will be specifically oriented toward
  archeological materials and serviceability to archeologists. Although I believe
  that the concept will be found useful for other disciplines dealing with cultural
  studies, it is not to the present point to argue this belief. If the concept proves
  of value for archeology, that will be justification enough, and the course of the
  conjunctive approach can be charted forward from there.
       There have been many definitions of the concept culture. Some of them have
  been complex and a few have been overly simple. My only excuse for offering
 another, somewhat modified version is that none of the current examples appears
 to fulfill the needs of archeological study, and some of them seem to be actually
 misconceived. But above all, there is one point, consistently encountered in
 statements about culture, with which I find I must take particular issue. To
 anticipate briefly: the word culture denotes not one concept, but two. This fact
 is regularly overlooked by the culture-definers. The two concepts are related, but
 they are distinct and on two different levels of abstraction. This ambivalence is
 the source of basic misconceptions and will be the first point taken up in develop-
 ing a concept of culture for archeology.
     In the following discussion, I have made an especial attempt to keep down
 the number of quotations and references in the text. For those who might be
 interested in pursuing the topic, a bibliography is included in the Notes. But
 it has seemed conducive to a clearer presentation of my own point of view not
 to interrupt the train of argument too often with corroborative or antithetical
 documentation. I wish to thank the authors in the cited bibliography for their
 stimulating ideas and to draw attention to the obvious fact that, without their
 thoughts acting as a back-board against which to bat my own, it would have been
 impossible to develop the concept offered here. I admit to having made extensive
 use of their ideas and do not mean in any way to slight or plagiarize those who
 have fed my mental processes. Nevertheless, in these days of expediency, I
 hope my manifestly great debt will be forgiven without more specific credit for the
 sake of easier reading and more concise argumentation.*°°
     The development of a concept of culture for archeology may be inaugurated
                                          97
   98

    by making three fundamental points. First and most basic is that, as it is now
  ~ commonly used, the word culture designates two concepts: (1) a concept which
    is holistic/and used to distinguish phenomena that are “cultural” from those
    that are “natural,” i.e., organic and inorganic: biological, geological, chemical,
    etcy, and (2) a concept which is on a secondary level of abstraction, which is
   partitive, ‘which denotes a segment of the holistic concept, i.e.,)a@ culture. |The
Y  “second point is that culture is a mental phenomenon, consisting of the contents of
    minds, not of material objects or observable behavior. And the third point is that
    a “trait” or unit of culture can be either shared or idiosyncratic, i.e., it can be _
    common to many individual minds or to the mind of a single individual. These_~
    three points will be taken up in order, and their substantiation will constitute a
    reasoned development of a concept of culture.
          The archeologist who finds an oddly shaped stone during the progress of his
    excavations will ask himself whether that stone is “natural” or “cultural.” By
     this question, he means to inquire whether it is a product of human activity or
    merely a peculiar formation caused by some geologic or meteorologic force. A
     recent article in American Antiquity (Goldsmith, 1945) is at great pains to dis-
     tinguish between skulls exhibiting a pathologic anomaly called the ‘‘Catlin Mark”
     and skulls which have been modified through the act of trephining. In other
     words, the article desires to distinguish between the “cultural” and the “biologi-
    cal.” Lowie has said that “ethnology is simply science grappling with the
     phenomena segregated from the remainder of the universe as ‘cultural’ ” (1936a,
     p. 320). In effect, this is saying that there must be categorization on the basis of
     cultural as opposed to non-cultural phenomena before ethnological study can
     begin. Strong said that the major aim of anthropology is to elucidate the rela-
     tionship between “man and culture” (1936, p. 364), and Kroeber said the aim
     is to interpret those phenomena into which both “organic and social causes enter”’
      (1923, p. 3). For problems involving two factors, the primary procedure must
     be to differentiate between those factors. Thus both Kroeber and Strong imply
     that the prerequisite for anthropological study is to distinguish the cultural or
     the social from the organic and then to examine their interrelationships and
     mutual products.
          If, as seems to be the case, the cultural is to be segregated from other cate-
     gories in the problems set for themselves by the archeologists, ethnologists, and
      other students of the so-called social. sciences, then it is an absolute necessity
      that the primary breakdown of their data be made upon exactly that basis: the
      cultural and the non-cultural. The fact that non-cultural factors often impinge
      upon and influence phenomena which are considered cultural does not alter
      this requirement. The fact that culture is not literally “super-organic’”’ means
      only that there actually is a relationship between what can be defined as cultural
      and what can be defined as organic. But the crucial point is that the two sets of
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               99

    phenomena have to be defined, if only for the sake of study. If two factors are
    so hopelessly mixed that they cannot be separated, there are no means of study-
    ing their interrelationships or their individual effects upon tertiary phenomena
    into which they both enter as factors or “causes.”
         Thus it is that for all the so-called social sciences the primary breakdown of
 _ data, the first level of’ abstraction, hinges upon a concept of culture set against
    concepts of the same level, such as the organic, the inorganic, the geologic, the
  _chemical, etc. Culture must first be defined so as to discriminate between it and
    those other concepts which are on the same level of abstraction.
         The second concept of culture is on a secondary level of abstraction and
    serves to denote a culture. Whereas the first was holistic, the second is partitive.
    It designates a more or less cohesive and separable segment of that whole which
   was denoted by culture in the first sense. The first concept serves to designate what
    is cultural from what is not; the second serves to distinguish between the unitary ‘
   segments of the whole that is culture. For example, we identify Western
   European culture, Eskimo culture, or the culture of second generation Swedes
   in Minnesota. But we would be unable to partition the whole into segments
   unless we had already determined what made up that whole, i.e., what was cul-
   tural and what was not. The logical order of procedure is first to determine what.
   is cultural and then to determine whether certain of these cultural phenomena
> are such that they can acceptably be grouped into a culture.
        It may appear that discriminating between these two meanings of the word
   culture is splitting hairs, that actually we are faced with a single concept and
   its constituent parts rather than two concepts. This would be a justifiable criti-
   cism if all those particular individual cultures denoted by concept No. 2 added
   up to the whole denoted by concept No. 1. But this is not the case. The holistic
   concept is in a manner of speaking an emergent. It includes more than the sum
   of those separable segments denoted by concept No. 2. The whole that is culture
   is greater than the sum of all the particular cultures which are part of it. This
   assertion will not be defended at this time because the entire third section of
   this chapter, i.e., the one devoted to the point that culture “traits” can be
   either shared or idiosyncratic, is nothing more than such a defense. Here, only
   two aspects of a corroborative nature will be presented.
        In the first place, as far as the need to distinguish between the two concepts
   is concerned, it makes little difference whether the whole is, or is not, greater
   than the sum of its parts. The need is still present. It has been shown that we
   are dealing with two levels of abstraction when we talk of cudtwre and a culture.
   This fact alone is sufficient to make a separation worth while. This is distinctly
   so, if only in order to avoid theoretical confusion and guard against falling into
   the Fallacy of Misplaced Concreteness (Whitehead, 1927, pp. 73-86). In the
   second place, this quasi emergent quality of culture should not be difficult to
 100


 visualize, for the case here is no different from that in, say, zoology. For example,
 a sport or drastic mutation in an ornithological species may be unassignable to
 any one particular species. It may be taxonomically isolated and unclassifiable on
 a specific level, but it nevertheless must still be regarded as a bird. Thus the
 Class Aves is greater than the sum of all the members of all the identifiable
 avian species. For another example, let us imagine the offspring of a mating
 between an Eskimo and a Hottentot. This ““Hotteneskimo” could not be pigeon-
 holed with either of these “pure” biological categories. As the only one of his
 kind, he would not fall into any “racial” group. Yet, our Hotteneskimo would
 surely have to be classified as Homo sapiens, and thus he would increase by one
 the number of the whole, i.e. Mankind, while altering the statistics for the
 “races” not a whit. That this same set of circumstances is operative in the realm
 of the cultural will be shown later in this chapter.

      It should be most clearly stated that, in the following discussion, I shall be
 defining culture only as a holistic concept. The relation of the partitive to the
 holistic concept will perforce have to follow the establishment of the latter.
       The second point in this definition of the concept culture is that culture is a
_mental construct, having to do with the contents of minds and not with material
 objects or observable behavior. This contention is based on deductions from two
  premises which have assumed axiomatic character in the literature of cultural
  studies. The first is that “the prolonged infancy of man is regarded universally
  as one of the necessary conditions of culture” (Powdermaker, 1945, p. 310). As
  Linton has said (1936b, p. 72), the importance of this long period of parental
  dependency is that it permits and insures learning on the part of the infany That
_is to say, it facilitates the acquisition of mental constructs.
                                                               /Its value for culture
  most certainly does not lie in the acquisition of material objects or the accumu-
  lation of behavioral acts divorced from their mental residue. The advantages
 of a lengthy infancy are not in the collection of innumerable old shoes, building
  blocks, parts of internal combustion engines, and radio tubes. Nor is it of any
  advantage to the child to perform whole constellations of behavior without retain-
  ing in his mind a residue of ideas pertaining thereto. By themselves, neither ob-
 jects nor behavior will be of value to the infant or to culture. The important
 factor is obviously the one which remains in the mind to be carried on, modified,
 transmitted. The premise that prolonged infancy is important for culture implies
 and is based on the fact that culture is a mental phenomenon.
     The second premise is “the fact that the cultural content is a heritage of the
 past and that it is cumulative” (Goldenweiser, 1929, p. 566 fn.). The culture-
 whole existing today owes its form and at least the majority of its content to
 what is called the cultural heritage. Students of culture seem to be agreed on this.
 point. The reason we are able to progress the way we do (they say) is because
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             101


  we are able to build on pre-existing culture foundations. The reason that certain
  civilizations have flourished more than some others (they say) is because they
  have received more, or more elaborate, “culture streams.” The deductions from
 this premise are the same as from the first: culture is a mental construct and does
 not consist of material objects or observable behavior.
     The test of this contention is in an examination of the transmission of
 culture. The reason that the culture corpus is more elaborate today than
 formerly is not because of the transmission down through the ages of a lot of old
 Roman chariots or Chinese firecrackers, or because the actual acts of early
 Teutonic, Slavic, or Arabic behavior have survived, or because the actual sounds
 produced by bygone Africans have been preserved to the expansion of modern
 music. These objects and acts of the empirical world have long since passed
 away and become as nothing. What has remained to fertilize present-day culture
 are the mental components of these phenomena. The modern steamboat is based
 on Fulton’s ideas, not on physical additions to the structure of the original Cler-
 mont. Once a dance pattern has been stepped out upon the ground of some tribal
 plaza, it has gone. What remains to be passed on as a culture heritage, to be
 added to and taken from, are the mental constructs pertinent to that pattern
 and from which that pattern was derived.
     Malinowski has several times made this point (e.g., 1931). Mere physical
 form is extraneous as far as culture is concerned, being a property of the world
 of physics and not of culture. But in one place Malinowski has also maintained
 that culture “is nothing but the organized behavior of man” (1936, p. 440)
 and in another that culture is “the integral whole consisting of implements and
 consumers’ goods, of constitutional charters for the various social groupings, of
 human ideas and crafts, beliefs and customs” (1944, p. 36). These statements
 seem to encompass a large range and to controvert the limited view expressed in
 the present study. There arises the question, therefore, of the relations between
 behavior, implements, and the concept of culture as a mental phenomenon.
     According to the concept of culture being developed here, culture is a
‘Tmental construct consisting of ideas. Under the termi idea; for present purposes,
  are subsumed such categories as’attitudes, meanings, sentiments, feelings, values,
  goals, purposes, interests, knowledge, beliefs, relationships, associations,/These
  ideas are not themselves observable. They are objectified and made observable
_ through the action-systems of the body, being activated in the form of behavior
  that is observable both visually and audibly. In turn, this behavior results in
“material objects such as axes and automobiles, and non-material manifestations
 “such as dance patterns, musical tones and rhythms, styles of graphic and fictile
  representation, etc. For example, there is present in an Indian’s mind the idea
  of a dance. This is the trait of culture. This idea influences his body so that he
  behaves in a certain way. The result of this behavioral activity is the pattern of
102


the dance, the sequence of body motions, etc. Both the behavior itself and the
resulting patterns are observable, but for this very reason they are fleeting. The
culture idea is not observable but endures in the Indian’s mind to be repeated
again.                                                                         :
    Both behavior and the results of behavior, if they stem from ideas, pertain to
culture. They are not culture, but they are|“‘cultural! “Thus we are dealing with
three orders of phenomena, two of which pertain to mate and are thus cultural,
but only one of which is culture~A stone axe, a song, a dance performance are
not culture traits. They are objectifications of culture traits. The elements or
traits of culture are unobservable and must be inferred from their objectifica-
tions, from behavior or the results of behavior. This is true whether we are
dealing with data that are ethnographical, archeological, archival, verbal, ob-
servational, or whatever.
     It also follows from this that the concept of “material culture” is fallacious.
Culture is unobservable and non-material. Even behavior, although observable,
is non-material. It is only when we come down to the third order, the results of
behavior, that thereis a problem of material and non-material categories. But
this order consists only of objectifications of culture and does not constitute
culture itself. Therefore, the term material culture is a misnomer         and the
dichotomy between material and non-material relates only to observable results
of cultural behavior, not to culture itself.
    Thus it is that culture itself is completely inferential and non-experiential
from the observer’s or objective point of view. The primary data of all culture
studies, therefore, are found in categories of the second and third orders, in
cultural behavior and the material and non-material results of cultural behavior.
The implications of this fact for archeology are easily envisioned. A detailed dis-
cussion of this point, however, will be postponed until the next chapter.

     The third point in this definition of the concept of culture is that culture
traits may be either shared or idiosyncratic, belonging either to one mind or to
several individual minds. It follows that an object or a bit of behavior may be
cultural even if it is the only example of its kind in existence or ever to have
been in existence. These assertions are in contrast to the stated or implied beliefs
of the majority of those who have written on the subject of culture. Variously,
it has been said that culture is “social behavior” (Sapir, 1927, p. 117; 1938, p.
9), “social heredity” (Linton, 1936b, p. 80), or that one indispensable factor
of a trait of culture is its quality of being shared (Kluckhohn and Kelly, 1944,
pp. 4-6, 32). These views, I believe, are the result of shifting between culture
concepts No. 1 and No. 2 without making due allowance for the change in level
of abstraction. They are the result of starting to talk about culture and ending
by talking of a culture, or vice versa. For example, Linton says:
TAYLOR                        A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 103

Any item of behavior, and so on, which is peculiar to a single individual in a@ society
is not to be considered as a part of the society’s culture. ... Thus a new technique
for weaving baskets would not be classed as a part of culture as long as it was
known only to one person. (1945a, p. 35, italics mine)

I would be in agreement with his first sentence: an individual peculiarity is not
part of a society’s culture, part of a particular culture. But on the holistic level,
where the anthropologist must distinguish between what pertains to culture and
what pertains to the organic and inorganic realms, just how is this weaving
technique to be classified? It seems to make more sense to categorize it as cultural
than to say that it is biological or chemical. Whatever the decision, it is very
apparent that Linton has slipped from talking about the culture of a society,
or a culture, to talking about what is part of culture. Perhaps this is a literary
slip, but that fact in itself might be significant. It becomes more so, and one
begins to wonder if after all it was purely literary, when one finds him virtually
repeating himself by saying that “culture as a whole consists of the sum total of
a society’s patterned responses to its needs” (1936b, p. 411, italics mine). The
case begins to look even more conceptual when we find Kluckhohn and Kelly
saying:
 But culture is like a map. Just as the map isn’t the territory but an abstract representa-
 tion of the territory so also a culture is an abstract description of trends toward
 uniformity in the words, acts, and artifacts of human groups. (1944, p. 26, italics
 mine)

     For another, Murdock lists the seven basic assumptions of culture by starting
 with ‘‘culture is learned,” “culture is inculcated,” and then for his third assump-
 tion saying:
Habits of the cultural order are not only inculcated and then transmitted over time;
they are also social, that is, shared by human beings living in organized aggregates
or societies and kept relatively uniform by social pressure. They are, in short, group
habits. (1940, p. 365, italics mine)

 And again, Dollard says that “ ‘culture’ is the name given to these abstracted
  (from men) intercorrelated customs of a social group.” (1939, p. 50, italics mine)
      I believe that there is shifting from one level of abstraction to another in these
 examples, and I also have two other beliefs concerning the statements themselves:
 first, that demanding the shared or “social” criterion before archeological data
_can be considered cultural is an unworkable and impractical requirement; and
 second, that when the ethnologists and sociologists demand it for their own data,
 they are confused between the discrimination of one culture from another and
the discrimination of what is cultural from what is non-cultural. I believe that,
if they were taxed with this conceptual ambivalence, they themselves would
deny the criterion of sharing as a requisite for the holistic concept. As I will
104


attempt to show somewhat later, it is a logically untenable position and is not
held even in their own writings. First, however, I shall argue a more immediate
claim: that the requirement is unworkable and impractical for archeology.
    Let us return to the archeologist who dug up the oddly shaped stone and
wished to know whether that object pertained to his research as a student of
cultural phenomena or whether it belonged to the investigations of his colleagues
the geologists, the students of “natural” rock formations. Let us suppose that
the archeologist found (as we did in Coahuila, Mexico) the surface of the stone
to be covered with tool marks, its present shape obviously the result of carving,
and its color due to an application of red paint. And let us suppose that only
one specimen was found at the site and that no other examples were known in
archeological literature. In what category would the archeologist be justified in
classifying this specimen? According to those who would restrict the terms
culture and cultural to shared or “social” ideas and objectifications, this single
specimen could not be classified as cultural and therefore would fall outside of
the range of cultural studies. It would be foreign to the investigations of the
archeologist as a student of culture. Is this what the culture-definers have
intended? Is this stone to be rejected from consideration by ‘“‘social scientists”
and turned over to... but to whom? Does it fit more readily into the researches
of the physicists? Or is it more significant to geological studies or chemical
studies?
    Perhaps we should demand that the archeologist find another similar stone
before we permit either example to be the subject of study by students of culture.
Here the problem arises as to just how exact the likeness must be before the
two stones can be adjudged the results of a shared idea and thus attain the
status of cultural objects. Let us suppose that the archeologist does find another
similar stone. How is it to be told whether the second is the work of the same
or a different artisan? If both stones were the product of one man, they represent
but a single, unshared idea and would consequently fall into a non-cultural
category. On what grounds is the archeologist to tell whether two worked
stones were made by two individuals? Does the closeness of similarity indicate
a single artisan or a single idea shared by two craftsmen? Does a difference
indicate a change in one man’s idea or skill, or does it signify a single idea in the
minds of two men but subject to variations in skill? These questions must receive
an answer if we are to determine whether an idea is shared and whether material
objects are indicative of a shared idea. It is rare or impossible that the, inferences
necessary to such answers can be made from archeological materials without an
unconditional surrender to purely subjective, unsupported, and non-testable
hypotheses. In ethnology, sociology, and other disciplines working on living socie-
ties and with living informants, such hypotheses can be checked and validated,
but with archeological materials this is out of the question.
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               105

      In other words, whatever the case may be for living societies, the requirement
 that an idea must be shared to be cultural is not a practical criterion for arche-
 ology. It serves no purpose for the ethnologists to insist that archeologists cry
 for the moon or that the archeologists themselves should seek it. Archeological
 materials at best are meager and, having run an almost mortal gauntlet between
 the ranks of preservation and excavation techniques, they are in no condition
 to be attacked from what should be a friendly flank. If the archeologist is pre-
 vented from treating as cultural all those finds of which he has been unfortunate
 —or fortunate—enough to discover only one example, he is being further and
 probably disastrously handicapped. If, beyond this, he must disregard, as non-
 cultural, even those multiple specimens for which a shared idea cannot ac-
 ceptably be inferred from the archeological data, the archeologist might as well
 shut up shop. He will better employ his efforts merely collecting pots and other
 objets dart. As a discipline deaiing with cultural phenomena, archeology is
 finished; in fact it never started!
     Some may argue that this is exactly the present status of archeology. Perhaps
many would say that archeology can serve the “social sciences” by developing
the time and space coordinates of the past irrespective of cultural content, but
that as a student of culture the archeologist is out of the running. I believe
that this would be an unfair judgment. I believe that archeology can provide some
very important data for the study of culture. If it can be demonstrated to the
general satisfaction that this criterion of sharing is an unwarranted restriction,
even in non-archeological researches such as ethnology and sociology, then
much of the foundation for this derogation of archeology will be shorn away. If
the demand that a culture trait be a shared trait can be assigned to a confusion
between concepts of culture No. 1 and No. 2, between concepts of culture as a
whole and a culture, then the argument will fail, and the archeologist may pro-
ceed with his work as a student of culture and things cultural.
     In not a few anthropological and sociological monographs, we find statements
which, in effect, say that ‘“‘culture always, and necessarily, satisfies basic biologi-
cal needs and secondary needs derived therefrom” (Murdock, 1940, p. 366).
This same thesis has been expounded many times by Malinowski (e.g., 1931;
1944, Chaps. 9-13). If culture is in any way responsive to biological needs and
if we must accept the “social” or sharing criterion, how is it that an idea which
is common to, and caters to the biological needs of, several individuals is culture,
while an idea which caters to the needs of one individual is not? Are we to
imagine a Group Biology which creates culture and an Individual Biology which
creates something else? Is this not perilously near to the repudiated “Group
Mind” type of thinking? I do not think that the culture-definers intend this
conclusion to be drawn from their work. There is some misunderstanding here,
and I suggest that it lies in a failure to recognize a holistic concept of culture.
106


     To take another example, we note that La Barre (1938, pp. 111ff) says
that the Kiowa appear to have obtained the peyote cult from the Mescalero
Apache, that in 1868 or 1870 Big Horse was the only Kiowa using the narcotic,
and that by 1886 Mooney found the Kiowa as a group embracing the cult.
How do these facts throw light on the present discussion? Taking the sharing
criterion as our standard for the moment, we find that peyotism was shared
by the Mescalero as a group and was, therefore, a “trait of culture.” By 1886,
it was also shared among the Kiowa and was thus a “trait of culture.” But what
was the situation between those dates? To an investigator of the Kiowa in 1868,
there was but a single individual using peyote. Peyote represented an unshared,
idiosyncratic idea. If that investigator did not happen to have the Mescalero
data at hand, he would have been forced into the position of saying: “Peyotism
belongs only to Big Horse; it is idiosyncratic and therefore non-cultural; I am a
student of culture and should investigate only what pertains to culture; there-
fore, this peyote business is no concern of mine; I will forget about it.”
     I believe that there would be general agreement that when Big Horse alone
practiced it, peyotism was not a part of Kiowa culture. But was peyotism, there-
fore, noncultural? Was the ethnologist justified in rejecting the evidence of
peyotism as impertinent to his studies? If he had rejected it, would he not have
been losing important evidence which did, in fact, pertain to cultural studies,
even if at that time, and to him, it did not show signs of being shared? Can a
single idea be alternately cultural and non-cultural in a holistic sense? If so,
what does it become when it is no longer cultural?
      Suppose for a moment that by 1868 the peyote cult had disappeared from
 Mescalero life and that Big Horse was the only living practitioner. Would it
 then have no importance or significance to ethnologists? Can an idea, whose
 antecedents and whose descendants both are admitted to be traits of culture,
 suddenly change and require classification in some other category on the same
 level of abstraction? While Big Horse’s idea cannot be considered a part of
 Kiowa culture in 1868, I maintain that his idea was even at that time a trait
 of culture in the holistic sense. Yet the culture-definers say that “to be cultural,
 it must be shared.” What they really mean is: “to be part of a culture, it must
 be shared.” They fail to recognize that some phenomena, which may be cultural
 in the sense that they are not organic or geological or some such, at the same
 time may not be a part of some particular, separable segment of the whole that
 is culture.
      All individual instances of a shared trait are usually not experienced by the
 investigator simultaneously. The normative or shared character of these instances
 must be pieced together from many multiple observations over what is possibly
 a long period of time or a considerable range of space. The individual cases,
 therefore, although they may appear idiosyncratic for the time being, must be
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               107

recorded in order even to ascertain any shared or normative characteristics.
The ethnologists do this very thing and thus admit, if only tacitly, that
individual cases are grist to their mill. By doing this, they further admit that
single instances are cultural in the holistic sense, whether or not they are
eventually found to be cultural with respect to the particular segment of the
culture-whole that is béing investigated.
    In short, it does not seem that the idiosyncratic can be overlooked in studies
of culture. It is the basis for the development of the normative or shared.
Linton, it seems to me, assumes an untenable position when he says:
Individual Peculiarities cannot be classed as a part of culture, in the sense in which
the term is ordinarily used, since they are not shared by any of a society’s members.
At the same time they are of extreme importance in cultural dynamics since they
are the starting point of everything which later becomes incorporated into culture.
(1936b, p. 274, italics mine)

His shifting from one level of abstraction to another is very clear in this state-
ment. It is also apparent that what he means by culture ‘‘in the sense in which
the term is ordinarily used” is a culture, not culture as opposed to the “natural,”
the “biological,” etc. How something which is “the starting point of everything
which later becomes incorporated into culture” is not to be considered as cultural,
pertaining to culture, is difficult to understand. What is it then? If it is not
pertinent, if it is not cultural in some sense or other, may we be permitted to dis-
regard it in our cultural studies? For one who has written that:
Except in the most superficial terms, the workings of society and culture cannot be
understood without constant reference to the needs and capacities of the individual.
(1945d, p. v)

this refusal to admit that Individual Peculiarities constitute culture, at least in
some sense, is indeed a paradox. Further, Linton says:
Individual Peculiarities occupy somewhat the same position with regard to culture
that individual mutations occupy with regard to a biological species. (1936b, p. 274)

In the first place, he equates culture as a whole with a species, whereas the
equation should have been between a culture and a species. Furthermore, while
mutations may have little importance as far as species or other particular taxo-
nomic categories are concerned, they are still classifiable and of importance to
more generalized taxonomic groupings. To cite but one simple example, a muta-
tion produced by parents of the species Falco sparverius sparverius (the Spar-
rowhawk) might not be assignable on a rigid taxonomic basis to that species.
But it might very well be assignable to the genus Falco or to the family Fat-
CONIDAE, and the very fact that a species of Falco had a tendency to produce
mutations might be of considerable interest and significance to ornithologists
108


studying the genus or the family. The range and number of mutations within
the species of the genus, the direction of the variation, the geographic and eco-
logical relationships and signficance, all are factors of importance to a student
of the genus Falco—whether or not the individual bird can be assigned to the
species sparverius or not.
    Similarly, just because some idea or man-made object is not shared and can-
not, therefore, be assigned to a particular culture, we are not justified in saying
that it has no significance for the study of culture, in short, that it is not cultural.
Are we to believe that the range of individual variation from a shared or norma-
tive trait is of no significance in cultural studies? And if it is of significance in
actual fact, then is not the individual variation cultural? Logically, for one
phenomenon    to have significance for another within a particular field of study,
both phenomena must lie within a single frame of reference, at least for the
purpose of that study. Some common denominator is required before comparisons
and relationships can have significance. When a mouse is compared with the
Empire State building, some common ground for pertinence must be established,
weight, cubic content, location, etc. It would be useless to compare them on
the basis of whiskers or eye color. Thus, if idiosyncratic ideas or objects have
significance for other ideas or objects within the framework of culture studies,
it must be assumed that both the idiosyncratic and the normative are within the
realm of culture. Therefore, traits of culture and objectifications of culture
traits may be either idiosyncratic or shared.
     In point of actual fact, as it is used today by the ethnologists, this criterion
of sharing is based on the implicit premise that the sharing be within a culture,
a society. Although they do not specifically make the point, they obviously do
not mean that any idea which is the possession of more than a single mind is
“social” and to be designated as a culture trait in their terms. It is assumed that
the sharing will be within the confines of one of those separable segments which
they have identified as societies or cultures. This was the conclusion reached by
the analysis of Kiowa peyotism above (p. 106). I will give another, brief ex-
ample, part fictional and part factual.
     During the recent war I had occasion to teach the disassembly and assembly
of the Colt .45 caliber pistol. During the course of this teaching I worked out
two minor short-cuts in the operation. Among my students were a Gurkha from
India, a Frenchman from Marseilles, a Navaho from New Mexico. Let us suppose
either that these men were the only ones to whom I taught the short-cuts or
that they were the only survivors of those who received this special instruction.
When they returned home and once more took up the life and culture of their
own people, what would be the status of the idea concerning the two short-cuts? It
would be a shared idea. But would this fact of itself be enough to make the
idea ‘“‘social”? Would similar handling of the Colt .45 by single individuals in
France, India, and the United States be enough to satisfy the criterion of “social
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                109

  behavior” or shared behavior? I believe not. If, on the other hand, once the
  Gurkha got home he taught the tricks to his fellows, and the short-cuts spread
  to many thousands of Gurkha soldiers, what then would be the status? I believe
  that then the idea would be considered to be part of Gurkha (military) culture,
  a socially shared idea and thus a part of culture according to the culture-definers.
  But this example has shown that a critical factor is not sharing per se, but rather
  the sharing by a culture, @ society. In other words, the criterion of sharing is
  itself premised on sharing within a separable, unitary segment of culture. The
  criterion of sharing operates on a lower, partitive level of abstraction. It pertains
  to culture concept No. 2.
       If the anthropologists, sociologists, and other culture-definers insist that the
  term culture be reserved for those phenomena which are shared and “social,”
  they will have to do one of two things. They will either have to recognize the
  difference between the holistic and partitive usages of the term and make the
  distinction clear in their thinking and writing, or they will have to find another
  name by which to refer to the holistic concept. The property of being shared
  must not implicitly and erroneously be demanded of phenomena which are
  cultural in the holistic sense. If it is realized, as Bidney has done, that
       . a particular cultural trait may be either individual or social; . . . [and that]
   cultural behavior may be socially acquired by man as a member of society without
_ being social or common to all members of his group. (1944, p. 35)

  there will probably be no need to burden the literature with another term. Never-
  theless, it is of the utmost importance for archeology and other disciplines deal-
  ing with cultural matters to make, and keep clear, the distinction in levels of
  thinking between the holistic and the partitive concepts of culture.

     The three points have now been made: (1) the term culture stands for two
 concepts, one holistic and the other partitive; (2) a trait of culture in the holistic
 sense may be either shared or idiosyncratic, but in the partitive sense it must
 be shared; (3) the concept of culture designates a mental construct consisting
 of ideas. These are but three factors in the definition I propose to develop for
 archeology.
     From this juncture onward, however, I shall be following, with merely
 minor modifications, the arguments brought forward by Kluckhohn and Kelly
 (1944). I shall, in part, use their terminology and shall imply by this procedure
 that their arguments express my views and may be used to justify the present
 definition. And as I have already said, the concept defined will be the holistic one
 unless otherwise stated.
     A “descriptive” concept of x tells what x “consists of.” By culture as a
|descriptive concept,|I mean all those mental constructs or ideas which have been
learned or created after birth by an individual. As I said above, for the present
110


purposes the term idea! includes such categories as attitudes, meanings, senti-
ments, feelings, values, goals, purposes, interests, knowledge, beliefs, relationships,
associations. I have not used Kluckhohn’s and Kelly’s factor of “designs” be-
cause, whether they meant it so or not, the word has overtones of the sharing
criterion which has been repudiated as a factor in the holistic concept ofculture.
    An “explanatory” concept of « tells what « “does.” By culture as an explana-
tory concept I mean all those mental constructs which are used to understand,
and to react to, the experiential world of internal and external stimuli. In this,
I have rejected Kluckhohn’s and Kelly’s use of the word men because it begs
the question, not yet settled to the general satisfaction, of whether non-human
animals can be said to have culture. Also I have not used their factor of “proc-
 esses” since I believe that processes such as diffusion, culture contact, and
 acculturation (which they name) do not constitute culture. They are sometimes
 cultural in that they pertain to culture, but they are by no means confined only
 to that category. Diffusion, for example, is a concept which denotes either a
 dynamic force or the state resulting from a dynamic force. It may mean the act
 of diffusing or the results of having diffused, and the concept may refer to culture,
 to plants, to animals, or even to such objects as glacial erratics. The concept of
 diffusion is merely the designation for a set of relationships existing between
 certain phenomena which may be ideas, objectifications of ideas, rocks, elephants,
 or whatever. Culture itself consists of ideas, not processes. In the same way, an en-
 gine consists of pistons and spark plugs, not of combustion or electrical energy.
      By a culture, i.e., by culture as atpartitive concept, I mean a historically de-
 rived system of culture traits which is a more or less separable and cohesive Seg-
 ment of the-whole-that-is-culture and whose separate traits tend to be shared by all
 or by specially designated individuals of a group or “society.” This concept must
 be distinguished from the holistic concepts which were defined in the first two
 definitions above. Except for word changes which I believe to be minor, there
 is no difference between this and the definition given by Kluckhohn and Kelly.
      To summarize: culture consists of the increments which have accrued to
individual minds after birth—when the increments of a sufficient number of
 minds are enough alike, we say we are dealing with a culture. Culture traits are
 manifested by cultural agents through the medium of vehicles; to borrow Soro-
 kin’s terms (1943, pp. 4ff). In the case of human culture, these agents are human
 beings; the cultural vehicles are the objectifications of culture, i.e., the observa-
 ble behavior and the results of behavior. Cultural processes are the dynamic fac-
  tors involving culture traits; they do not constitute culture but comprise the
 relationships between culture traits.

     Culture, consisting as it does of mental constructs, is not directly observable.
 It cannot, therefore, constitute the empirical data of any discipline. Culture can
 be studied only through the instrumentality of observable phenomena, through
 TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               111

_what have been called the objectifications of culture: cultural behavior and the
 material and non-material results of such behavior. A tribal dance, the avoidance
 of a woman by her son-in-law, the identical appellation used between a small
 child and an old man, the designs of a Navaho sandpainting, a stone axe, all
 these are observable phenomena. The culture ideas behind them can only be
 inferred. Even the statéments of a living informant do not empirically demon-
 strate and establish the ideas they allege to reproduce. Checking and cross-
 checking of informants is a common practice and a vital requirement. Its purpose
 is to attain by progressive stages an ever closer approximation to the actual idea
 held in the informant’s mind. But whether or not the idea is ever exactly repro-
 duced cannot be a matter of certain demonstration. It remains always in the
 realm of plausible inference. If the inference explains other phenomena satis-
 factorily and if it serves as a practical and trustworthy premise for logical
 reasoning and the explanation of observable fact, then it may be accepted as an
 approximation of a culture idea. It is only to this extent that any culture trait
 may be ascertained.
      The method is one of successively nearer approximations. Conclusive assur-
 ance or exact knowledge is forever out of reach. It develops into a question of
 continued testing and modification in order to reduce error and attain a closer
 correspondence between inference and actual idea. It is for this reason, if for no
 other, tha context |is of such tremendous importance in all culture studies. If it
 were possible empirically to test inferences about culture ideas merely by some
 laboratory experiment which would produce a definitive answer, context would
 be of much less value. For example, the mineral cobalt, when subjected to blow-
 pipe analysis involving borax and sodium metaphosphate beads, invariably gives
 a blue flame in either oxidizing or reducing atmosphere. This is a very delicate
 and sure test. If by some such empirical procedure we could obtain as conclusive
 knowledge about the ideas which gave rise to a certain Navaho sandpainting, the
 constant checking and modification, the continual recourse to cultural context
 would be eliminated or, at least, much curtailed. But we have no such open-
 and-shut tests for mental constructs. We must turn to other procedures. In effect,
 we must say: “A set of observed facts leads us to make a given inference. How does
 this inference fit and explain other related observations: not at all, exactly, or
 askew? If askew, in what direction and what modification can be made to bring it
  more in line? How does the modified inference fit yet other empirical data imping-
  ing upon the current frame of reference? If exactly or not at all, is this coincidental
  or can we assume actual correspondence? We shall need to check other aspects of
  the context.” And so it goes. The testing and alterations require an ever increasing
  circle of context.
       This context consists of two sets of data: first, the objectifications of culture
   (behavior and results of behavior) ;second, those culture traits which have been
, accepted as plausible or which are assumed as plausible for the sake of the im-
 112


   mediate investigation. In addition, the relationships between objectifications and
   traits, between objectifications themselves, and between traits themselves are of
   intrinsic concern in the development of a cultural context. By the term relation-
   ships is meant, for example, such factors as the connection between ideas of eco-
   nomic value and the behavior of parents in giving and receiving wedding ex-
   changes, the relation of designs on Pueblo pottery to Pueblo kiva paintings, the
   concordance between concepts of the supernatural and empirical knowledge of
   the natural environment, the relative quantitative utilization of stone and bone
   or of animal and vegetal foods, the relative care displayed in the manufacture of
   ceremonial and utilitarian goods, etc. In other words, in addition to the de-
   scription of cultural behavior and its results, a cultural context consists of the
_ associations and relations of these elements, of the balance between them, of their
   relative quantitative and qualitative positions within the whole.
       It is not being too pedantic to point out that there is a difference, in the
   conceptual scheme proposed here, between a cultural context and a/culture con-
   text. \The former has just been described. The latter consists of a context of
   inferred ideas, of configurations of mental constructs. Historiographies, whether
 derived from documentary, ethnographic, or archeological materials, when they
 attain the level of context, are cultural, and not culture, contexts. To be sure,
 ideas and their relationships are often part of such writings. They serve many
 times to tie together and give integration and balance to the recorded acts of
 behavior and results of behavior. But they are secondary to the primary purpose
 of a historiography, which is to elucidate, not the ideas which structure the par-
 ticular culture, but rather the observable and recorded phenomena, to offer
 some explanation for their actuality, to integrate the cultural picture which the
 investigator wishes to paint. The difference between historiographies and culture
 studies is one of the degree to which emphasis is placed on objectifications of
 culture traits or on the traits themselves. The difference lies in the purposes and
 end-results of research. Here, we come back once more to the points raised in
 Chapter 2 above. Many historians use culture traits, i.e., inferred mental con-
 structs, to help them interpret and fill out their cultural picture of past actuality.
 Likewise cultural anthropologists use cultural contexts, and they develop their
 inferences about the culture of the particular people and about culture in general
 therefrom. The two disciplines use the same range of materials but have different
 emphases and aims.
                                 CH ARAERS 5
      THE NATURE        OF ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA:             TYPOLOGY       AND
                              CLASSIFICATION
                        Sd



  flBeas materials upon which the archeologist must work are restricted. Never-
        theless, while the cultural contexts of ethnography, sociology, and his-
  toriography may thus be fuller and broader, it should be pointed out that they
  are not to be considered ciwture-contexts any more than those of archeology.
_ Students of written documents and of the living, as well as the archeologists,
_must rely on inferences from cultural contexts to construct a culture-context or
  to attain understanding of culture and its workings. Therefore, the difference |
_between archeology and the other disciplines lies in the fullness of their re-
  spective materials and in the number, and potential corroboration, of the infer-
  ences derived therefrom, not in the inability of archeology and the ability of
  the others to obtain immediate knowledge of culture itself. The difference is
  thus one of degree and not of kind.*°*
      The archeological materials are restricted both as to quantity and range of
 representation. In the first place, as in all cultural studies, the archeologist can
 empirically deal only with objectifications of culture. But his data are further
 reduced because behavior is transitory and does not “‘fossilize.’’ Therefore the
archeologist is dependent upon the results of behavior. Even here there is re-
 striction. The non-material results of behavior, i.e., the forms of dances, the
 cadences and rhythms of song, the patterns of religious ritual do not endure.
 There remain for the archeologist’s study only the material results of behavior,
 and only such of these as have withstood the inroads of man and the elements.
      However, there is one source of archeological data, not mentioned above and,
 oddly enough, rarely mentioned or fully utilized in archeological literature. I
 refer to what may be called the affinities existing between the material remains:
 between individual cultural objects, between groups of objects, between objects
 and the natural environment. These affinities are as much facts and as much
 integral parts of the archeological data as are the material objects themselves.
 For example, the fact that a particular bone tool has been found within a
 certain coiled basket is to be dealt with in a manner exactly comparable to the
 fact that there existed at the site a bone tool and a basket. That there is a three-
 to-one ratio between axes and celts.in a site or region is just as much a bit of
archeological data as that axes and celts were present. The circumstance that a
shell came from the Pacific Ocean is to be reckoned with just as much as that
 the shell formed part of a necklace. If the archeologist does not specifically
search for, and consciously make use of, these affinities, he is overlooking a great
                                         113
 114


 proportion of his already meager data. Often they lie hidden to the casual eye
 within the cultural and natural contents of an archeological site. But without
 them there is possible only description and superficial quantification of material
 objects; interpretations must depend on only a fraction of the potential evi-
 dence; and the result is a flat and shallow picture which foreswears even those
 few integrating factors which have survived the swath of time. The general
 neglect of these affinities seems to be the greatest failing of Americanist arche-
 ology in the United States. Evidence for this viewpoint has been presented in
 Cha
   napter 3 of the present study.
   | Archeological _ data, then, consist of ther material results of cultural be-
 havior) and the affinities—quantitative, qualitative, spatial, etc——which can be
found to exist among them, and between them and the natural environment.
But mere description of these phenomena cannot satisfy the requirements of
 archeological study—if the archeologist is bent upon writing history or studying
 culture. Description must be made, to be sure; but there is also the need for
 interpretation and synthesis. The empirical facts which have been produced by
 a archeologist’s spade and the affinities between them must be interpreted in
   “cultural sense” and combined into a cultural context. The significance of the
 een             facts for the life and custom of the site must be drawn by,~infer-
 ence. ‘This is the work of ¢onstruction which falls to the archeologist.
     An archeological cultural context} therefore, is based upon material results of
 cultural behavior and their affinities. On the other hand, it consists of a presenta-
 tion, in narrative or synoptic form, of the life-ways characteristic of the former
 occupants of the site, component, area under investigation. It should be most
 emphatically stated that it does not consist of a series of descriptions and
 quantifications under what may be termed empirical categories.
     There is a most definite and important distinction to be made between
 empirical and cultural categories. The former include such rubrics as Stone, Bone,
 Objects of Copper, Environment. The latter include Food, Dress, Hunting, Textile
 Industry, Utilization of Environment, Containers, Transportation. In fact, one
 may make a very trenchant comparison between the empirical categories of
 almost any standard archeological monograph and the cultural headings found
 in such a work as the Outline of Cultural Materials (Murdock et al., 1945).
 “Cultural headings” may, in some ways, be equated with the “trait complexes”
 or “activities” as described by Linton (1936b, p. 397ff).
      Empirical categories have their very specific place in archeological studies
 and reports, but they do not comprise, either singly or in the aggregate, what
 may properly be called a cultural context. This point will be treated at some
 length later in this chapter. Here it is sufficient to indicate that an archeological
 cultural context, by the very nature of the basic materials, is constructed by
 inference to a greater extent, perhaps, than contexts based on written or living
TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               115

sources. But there is no other means to construct them, and without contexts there
is no way either to write history or to study culture. Therefore it behooves the
archeologist not to maintain the untenable position of “sticking to the facts,”
meaning the renunciation of inference, hypothesis, and testing. It rather is
incumbent upon him to derive his observational data as objectively as possible,
to differentiate between observed fact and derived inference, to make explicitly
labeled interpretations of as detailed and full a nature as possible, and then to
look, either in the ground or among the data at hand, for evidence by which
his hypotheses may be tested. Thus, more interpretation is called for, not less!
If his readers find fault with his conclusions, they have but to examine the
observational data and make their own inferences or set about producing, from
the ground or elsewhere, more empirical evidence upon which to base alternative
interpretations.

     The question of the difference between empirical and cultural categories
brings us face to face with the problems of archeological typology, classification,
and so-called culture classification. But before it will be possible to enter upon
a discussion of these problems, it will first be necessary to make a somewhat
arbitrary distinction between the concept of type and the concept of class, be-
tween typology and classification. The purpose of this discrimination is, once
more, to offer a conceptual scheme whereby the processing of archeological data
will be clarified. Once the steps of procedure are known for what they are,
their validity and pertinence can more easily be tested. By establishing concepts
and showing their mutual relationships, even if the concepts are thought to be
overly precise, the muddied waters of archeological theory will be settled, and
the light, whatever it is, will have more chance of penetrating. “Hair-splitting”’
seems to be anathema to some archeologists but, even more, an implicit and
confused conceptual scheme is anathema to straight thinking and acceptable
results.
     As used in the present conceptual scheme, type and class are concepts of dif-
ferent orders, and each may be empirical or cultural depending on the nature
of the criteria used. The accompanying tabular presentation will serve to make
this clear and also to bring out graphically the other points which will be discussed
below. (See Table 1)
     In this table, the borrowing of concepts from Linton (form, item, use, func-
tion, meaning), Kluckhohn (configuration), and Rouse (designs, techniques,
specifications, group and modal types, mode) has been adaptive in nature and
not precisely exact. Therefore considerable explanation is called for in order
to justify their use in the present scheme.
     Linton’s concepts of form, use, function, and meaning (1936b, pp. 402ff)
were originally developed with specific regard to trait complexes and not to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   116




                                IVOIMIdny       SAIMOOALVD                               TVANLITAD     SdTaOOaLV,)                                             AANITAD                        SIMOOALVD
                                                                               ATaVvie
                                                                               VT
                                            (jeuoreaAtesqg)                                      (Iewerazuy)                                                               (TetUarajUT)

                      [eENPIAIpPUT     ‘SUOT}e}SajIUeUI
                                             ITY} “Wd
                 jeotid     satjiuyye
                                 pue Ilay}        yusn}1}suod                   padioyut                                                            ‘Bapl-ainjjNnd   9y}
                                                                     pue                      Jo/pue                                                   ay}
WaOT         ‘syed              SUBUIIA,,
                                  «¢            S99NqU}IB,,
                                                  «     -9Pp,,                                   ue                                                        94}                                      “EJSOPURU
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -qO UL
                                                                         Jo                         JAed                                               UL
               ,,“SUBIS                suoeoyioeds,,
                                          ;                          ,.asn,,                                                                               OS[e
             ‘                          ‘                                anbruyseq               Jo                                                    payryol
                    «¢
                 SUISYL,, O39                                                                                                                                                                           JsaflUPI
                                                                                se
                                                                             [eNpTA                     oy}
                                                                                              ,uoljoUny,,
                                                                                                 aInjovJnueU                                        ayy fu0T]               [ENPIAIPUL
                                                                                                    10)                                   9POul,,
                                                                                                                                          V«¢
                                                                                                                                           40                                                    ‘Jie1}-91N}[Nd
                                                              Byep   ay,        /(jo                                                                                            ,.SUTURIT,,
       y         dnoi3
                     Jo                suolze}sayiuew
                                              yotqM-sod y        dnois
                                                                    jo                  suoneysasiueu
                                                                                             yey} -sod     dyy,     9y} -Ipul [eourduia
                                                                                                                           -a104}
                                                                                                                       vapt-ain}jno ‘payioaf{qo
                                                                                                                                             Jo/pue
                                                                                                        Woy)
                                                                                                    UoVeysoytueUI
           ssas        urejis0    payioeds                 ssas
                                                   ur)soryirepimts   urez199    peyloods       Soles94}
                                                                                                     U.              ,SUTUPOU,, YsoftueW
                                                                                                                                   UI B@     g[suls
AdAL
   |        i0yq}          Sarjtuyye 410/pue                                 )     (73          uorjoung,,
                                                                                                   ¢
                                                   Juanzysu0d
                                                            I13y}       polioyur ‘asn,,          C
                                                                                                            dh oyyto           I0
                                                                                                                            peourdars “TeIn}[Nd
                                                                                                                                             uy
              ‘sj1ed
                  Jo           [eeprjue” paypeysqy -9194}       10/pue      anbruyse}
                                                                               jo               ‘ginqorynueul   OdAJIYIIL,,
                                                                                                                  ¢,
             WO} Jay}1a ‘uvoul ‘Tepour    Jo       ‘ueIpaul

       y          dnoi3
                     jo           yeoutdura
                                         sad4}10)    sadA4jy       dnois
                                                                      yo     sad4q10)    sodA}pue     (sui1oy ayy,          vapt-ainqynd ‘payisefqo  Jo/pue
           pue       (SuIO}jey}      ssassod ure}199 -1oads     194310      yeotidura
                                                                                Jo         ‘yeinqjno
                                                                                                 ey} -sod dt}             ,SUTUROUT,, qsojtuRU
                                                                                                                                           UT &      ‘ssejo
           poy                   Ul
                            satjuepMts Itsy}         SalyIUyessas       urez190      paywods       solyeyIUs 19y}10
                                                                                                      UL                     Jo
                                                                                                                          yeotdu9 [eInq[Nd   UY      -aYyoie,,
ssvIg
  |              10/pue         IYsouseIp “ellay1Ia            Il9y}       Polayul .{asn,,            «
                                                                                                     UOIUNY,, ,,’SSPTO Woyoy}          sassep>d JapunSTy}
                      jo
                   surdnoi3 ‘sdnoiz                               10/pue      onbruyse}
                                                                                  jo              ‘oInjovynurw Suiprayoie    peroiq     ‘ysnous
                                                                                                                                            31 st    -qoid
                                                                                                              ATqe ysaq0}         9JVUSISap
                                                                                                                                       JY}           SULNJONIS
                                                                                                              BPI BSB                UOTRINSYUOS,,
                                                                                                                                      ;
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               117

  individual manifestations. Nevertheiess, there seems to be no reason why they
  cannot be applied to single objectifications. Linton was concerned with “func-
  tional studies” of whole cultures and was speaking from the viewpoint of the
  society itself and not of the ethnographer. But the definitions he has given may
  be paraphrased, with equally applicable results, into an archeological frame of
  reference. For example, he says:
  The form of a trait complex will be taken to mean the sum and arrangement of its
  component behavior patterns; in other words that aspect of the complex whose
  expressions can be observed directly and which can, therefore be transmitted from
  one society to another. (1936b, p. 403)

   Converting this concept into one serviceable for archeology, we find the defini-
   tion to read something as follows: The: lempirical form of an archeological mani-
   festation will be taken to mean the sum and arrangement of its component
   chemico-physical parts taken together with its empirical affinities ; im other words
_ that aspect of the phenomenon, whose expression can belobserved directlLy | ‘and
   which, therefore, can be utilized as empirical data by the archeologist. Thus the
   form of any archeological representation includes not only its “design,” “tech-
  nique,” and “specifications” as Rouse has indicated (1939, p. 11) but_also its
   associations and position relative to other cultural and natural phenomena, i.e.,
yits affinities. )
—      "When fe concept form is understood as a cultural rather than an empirical
   category, the following definition may be used: The (cultural form of an
   archeological phenomenon will be taken to mean its technique of manufacture
   and its|use
            useand function |within the body of cultural activities of the particular
 human {group under investigation, as inferred from its empirical form.   The em-
 ployment of Linton’s concepts use and function is more exact than in the case of
 form. He says:
 The use of any culture element is an expression of its relation to things external
 to the social-cultural configuration; its function is an expression of its relation to
 things within that configuration. Thus an axe has a use or uses with respect to ihe
 natural environment of the group, i.e., to chop wood. It has functions with respect
 both to the needs of the group and the operation of other elements within the culture
 configuration. It helps to satisfy the need for wood and makes possible a whole
 series of woodworking patterns. (1936b, p. 404)

 Other than changing the word culture to cultural and making a reservation as
 to his use of the term configuration, we may apply Linton’s concepts to archeo-
 logical data without modification. The use and function of any empirical form
 as well as the technique by which it was made/must depend upon inference. /
 Therefore, cultural forms are inferential in archeological studies. The same is not.
 true in ethnographical investigations, for in these the investigator may directly
 118


 observe the use, function, and making of at least a good number of the empirical
 forms.
     Rouse’s concept) ‘mode hhas been adapted to the present scheme and denotes
 “form” as a culture- -category or a mental construct. Rouse himself appears to use
 the term to denote both the actual attributes observed by the archeologist (1939,
 p. 11) as well as “ccconcéptual patterns set up by the archeologist to represent
“ideas )possibly held by the artisan” (1939, p. 15, italics mine). I have chosen
 to have the term mode stand for Tdeas rather ee for physical attributes or
 both, because I believe that in this way an important point is clarified and
 emphasized, namely, the mental nature of culture itself as opposed to the
 chemico-physical and behavioral nature of the objectifications of culture. Also
 by this means, the chances of falling into the fallacy of misplaced concreteness,
 of confusing between two levels of abstraction, are reduced.
     The concept meaning was also defined by Linton in connection with his trait
 complexes. He said:
 The meaning of a trait complex consists of the associations which any society attaches
 to it. Such associations are subjective and frequently unconscious. They find only
 indirect expression in behavior and therefore cannot be established by purely objective
 methods. (1936b, pp. 403-404)

     It is, perhaps, a debatable question whether or not archeologists can derive
 “meanings” from their data. Although, in the final chapter of the present study,
 I shall attempt to demonstrate that this is indeed possible, here the question is
 not of immediate concern. It is enough to say that, if the derivations are possible,
 then Linton’s concept is usable for archeology. It need only be pointed out that
 “expression in behavior” in archeological terms means “expression in results of
 behavior.” These results are themselves empirical, but inferences are required to
 derive meanings. Hence Linton’s last statement is perfectly applicable.
     The concept type as defined in the above table represents very closely the
 concept which A. D. Krieger advocated in his paper The Typological Concept.
 He says:
 Any group which may be labeled a “type” must embrace material which can be
 shown to consist of individual variations in the execution of a definite constructional
 idea; likewise, the dividing lines between a series of types must be based upon
 demonstrable historical factors, not, as is often the case, upon the inclinations of
 the analyst or the niceties of descriptive orderliness. (1944, p, 272)

 When he argues the importance of “demonstrable historical factors” he is advo-
 cating, in the terms of the present conceptual scheme, the study of those affinities
 which were said above to comprise archeological data equal in importance with
 purely chemico-physical characteristics. In other words, Krieger has obviously
 felt the need both to regard archeological specimens as objectifications of ideas
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                119


_ and to demand      that their Foe ahar       and relationships be included in any
 _typological treatment. af
      The distinction between an ideal or modal type and one which is composed
  of the actual objects has been made by Rouse. It seems a valid and important
  one and is, therefore, included in the present scheme. He says:
  In current anthropological literature, the term “type” seems to have been applied
  to at least two different concepts, a group of artifacts or an abstract kind of artifact
  which symbolizes the group. .. . [The latter concept] refers to the attributes which
  artifacts of a given kind have in common, not to the artifacts themselves. (1939, p. 11)

  A type which is, in effect, the abstract least-common-denominator, median, mode,
    or mean of a series of empirically similar and associated artifacts has much
   value in the course of archeological study (see Osgood, 1942, p. 24, fn. 8).
    For example, it is only through the medium of such abstractions that we can
    hope to infer the ideas which lay in the minds of the former artisans and thus
    attain an insight into their culture. It is those attributes which a group of
    specimens have in common that provide data for an interpretation of the maker’s
   ideas and conceptualizations. A single specimen or a group of specimens, however
    well described in their heterogeneity and variability, cannot provide these data.
    Even the use and function, i.e., the basis for the cultural type, often cannot be
    interpreted mithout the a oeeriam of an ideal type. By an analysis of the
  [central tendency |Wwithin a series of artifacts, it is frequently possible to obtain
__an insight into their basic and requisite features and thus to make a hypothesis
a~~ as to the ideas, the purposes, aims, beliefs, etc., which influenced the original
  makers.
       Also it is possible from such ideal types to note the range of variation
 _and the dispersal around the central concept. From this it may be possible to
   make some inferences as to the integration of the particular type within the
  culture. For example, the hypothesis may be made that a type which shows
   great homogeneity in all its elements and associations is better integrated into
   the culture than one which shows considerable variation and dispersal. Such a
   hypothesis will call for testing, and this in turn will lead to ramifying investiga-
   tions which carry the expectation of further understanding of the culture and
   of culture in general: are there any inferable reasons why this particular type
   should vary so; are there outside sources which could account for it, or are
   local origins to be hypothesized; does this type vary more than others, and if
   so in what ways and why; is the range of variation equal on both sides of the
  central tendency or is there skewing; is similar variation found in other types,
  and if so, in what types and what might be the relation between them; is the
  degree of homogeneity, i.e., integration, due to the length of its existence within
  the culture, to its intrinsic nature which permits or demands that particular
 120


 degree, or to what? These and other questions can be profitably investigated, but
 only after an ideal or abstract type has been established.
      On the other hand, the concept of type as a group of actual objects also has
 its uses. In not a few instances it will be impossible to establish any ideal ab-
 straction: the variability of the phenomena may be too great and too general
 to permit of being represented by a single set of elements and associations. This
 in itself might be culturally significant, and the only way of making use of the
 data is to describe the artifacts themselves. The success of Southwestern pottery
 study, is ample proof of the practicality and applicability of such types, based
 as the study is upon the concept of type as a group of objects.
     The concept archetype has been evolved in order to provide a convenient
 term for the handling of inferences as to culture ideas. The term pattern has not
 been used because, in the first place, it is too useful a word to be restricted and,
 in the second, the limitation of its meaning to mental constructs would require
 tedious and rather unconvincing argument in the face of other more inclusive
 definitions such as Kluckhohn’s (1941). In the present conceptual scheme,
 observable patterns, as for example the patterns stepped out by the feet of
 dancing men, the patterns of painted design found on pottery vessels, the
 regularities of city plan, the consistent avoidance of a mother-in-law, are con-
 sidered to be results of behavior and therefore the empirical data of culture
 studies.{ Patterns in this sense are not behavior, nor are they culture traits. They
 are the results of behavior which has been performed by human agents under
_the influence of ideas (culture traits). Thus they are overt, behavioral, action
patterns. The covert, ideal, and idea patterns of which Kluckhohn wrote (1941,
 pp. 114ff) are not included. It seems best, therefore, not to make further modi-
 fications of the concept of pattern but to offer another term which will cover
 the so-called covert segment of the broader concept. Webster’s dictionary defines
 archetype as

 The original pattern or model of a work, or the model from which a thing is made
 or formed. . . . Metaph. In Platonism, one of the pure ideas or realities of which
 existent things are imitations.

 Under the heading of prototype, the dictionary further defines archetype as
 “. . an original, often ideal, pattern or model.” The word has been chosen in
 preference to prototype because the latter is the more common word and is
 already in general use for a number of valuable concepts, and because in
archetype \there is conveyed an implication of mental constructs, which is con-
 genial to its use in the present conceptual scheme.
     The concept configuration, used in connection with the archeclass compart-
 ment, has been adapted from Kluckhohn (1941, pp. 114, 124). Here there is no
 need for modification, as in the case of archetype, because Kluckhohn’s concept
  TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               121

  is stated to be concerned with so-called covert or mental constructs and to have
  no overt segment. He says:
 —_

‘(Configuration |‘looks to an inner coherence in terms of the large structuralizing
 ke.          which prevail in the covert culture. Patterns are forms; configurations
   are, so to speak, interrglationships between forms. (1941, p. 126)

   Thus if an idea, conscious or unconscious, be inferred to structure several types
   or classes of culture objectifications, that idea may rightly be designated as a
   configuration. If a single idea, simple or complex in nature, appears to be one
   of the principles underlying, say, the decoration of pottery, the performance
   of religious rites, the construction of dwelling units, it may be termed a con-
   figuration. In the final chapter of the present study, an example of just such
   a configuration will be given.
        In summing up this explanation of Table 1, we may examine the relationships
   first between the vertical compartments and then between the horizontal ones.
   The concepts of form, type, and class may be explained by adapting an example
   presented by C. C. Zimmerman (1938, pp. 75-78). In describing a certain com-
   munity, he says: “Littleville is parasitic, good natured, negroid, rural and
   urbanistic.” These adjectives are the descriptive units which together comprise
   the “form” of Littleville in so far as Zimmerman is presently concerned. They
   constitute the basic, observational data from which both the type and class
   will eventually be derived. According to the present scheme, a type is a primary
   grouping which brings together certain individual forms which have specified
   descriptive attributes in common, exactly which depending upon the needs or
   whims of the investigator. Thus, Littleville might be included with other
   hamlets within a type whose sole criterion is a parasitic nature; or the type
   might include all hamlets which are parasitic and good natured; or it might
   include all towns that are parasitic, good natured, have a population of exactly
   503 souls, and contain a water tower painted green. In other words, a |type} may
   be characterized by specific similarities of any number, degree of “detail, or
  intrinsic character.
        The concept class designates a secondary grouping. It consists of types which
   manifest ‘specified similarities in some, but not all, of their type characteristics.
- Thus let us say that Littleville belongs in a type which is parasitic and good
   natured, that Bigville belongs in one which is parasitic and ill natured, and that
   Mediumville belongs in one which is good natured and has green water-towers.
   When it comes to classifying these types, we may class Littleville and its co-
  members with Bigville and its co-members on the basis of their parasitic charac-
   ter; or we may class the Littleville type with the Mediumville type on the
   basis of their good nature. In both instances, there has been a grouping of groups,
  a classifying or classing of types, not of individual hamlets. It is not the number,
  122


   the nature, or the detail of the specified criteria that distinguishes a type from a
   class in the present scheme, but rather it is the difference between a primary
   and a secondary grouping. It is perfectly possible for identically the same
   criteria at one time to designate a type and at another to designate a class. Type
   and class are concepts of different relative, not absolute, magnitude based upon
   the same range of data, and this holds true whether we are dealing with
   empirical, cultural, or culture categories.
       We may now examine the relationships between the horizontal compart-
   ments of the above tabulation, between the empirical, cultural, and culture
   categories. Although all three are creations of the archeologist, it is important to
   note that they pertain to different realms of phenomena, that they are established
   by different means, and that, unless the archeologist is aware of these differences,
   he is apt to go astray when it comes to drawing conclusions from his data. The
__ differences to be noted are those that obtain between (a) the empirical categories
   and (b) the cultural and culture categories: (1) the former relate to the world
   of the archeologist; the latter relate to the world of bygone people; (2) the
   former are based on chemico-physical attributes and their affinities; the latter are
   based upon criteria pertaining to cultural or culture attributes, such as tech-
   niques of manufacture, use, function, meaning, and culture idea; and (3) from
   the archeologist’s standpoint, the former are the only ones having wholly observa-
   ble criteria and thus the only empirical ones; cultural and culture categories,
   although they may be partially or wholly based on observable data, are estab-
   lished by means of interpretation and hypothesis and are thus inferential. Thus
   when investigations lead into the latter realms, they advance by inference
   from the empirical, and the results are to be viewed as hypotheses to be tested.
   For the archeologist, the empirical or purely observational has only a mediate
   function, forming merely the basis, not the goal, of his studies. By definition,
   he is interested in cultural contexts or in culture itself, and the categories which
   obviously he should seek are those pertaining to those fields. Also, and for the
   same reasons, his interests lie, not in the phenomena of his own world, but in
   the world of the original makers, users, or possessors, individually or as groups.
   In other words, the pertinent question to be asked is, ‘“What may be inferred
__today from present evidence as to those things that were relevant, significant,
   meaningful to the bygone individuals and societies under investigation?”
        As long as these differences are fully realized by the archeologist, he is
   forewarned and forearmed and will be able to act accordingly. But if they are
   overlooked to the extent that he regards the empirical categories of his own
  making as if they were, axiomatically, the same as the cultural or culture cate-
  gories of a bygone people, he is making an assumption which may lead him into
  serious error. From the standpoint of theory and method, it is not permissible to
  transmute an empirical category into a cultural or culture category except as a
  working hypothesis explicitly stated or as a conclusion drawn from a reasoned
  TAYLOR                       A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                               123

   argument. To do otherwise is to beg the cultural question. There is no auto-
__Imatic, axiomatic assurance that the forms, types, and classes established today /
   by the archeologist are coextensive with any separable entities that existed in||
 _ the minds or life ways of a bygone people. At best, the declaration of any such |
   correspondence is a matter for explicit hypothesis and testing, not implicit
   assumption. It constitutes one of the archeologist’s greatest problems, not one
   of his self-evident truths.
       This fact lies at the foundation of the theory of archeological typology pro-
   posed by the present study (in the following, only typology will be mentioned,
   although the same things could be said with regard to classification). For when
__an archeologist says that the presence of Type A at both Site 1 and Site 2
__indicates some sort of direct cultural relationship between them, he is really
 _ Saying one or both of two things: either (1) that actual specimens of Type A
 _had come from one site to the other by some means, however direct or devious,
__or (2) that the idea of Type A or how to make Type A had been transmitted
  _from one site to the other with the recipient proceeding to manufacture one or
     more examples. In either case, the archeologist is forced to assume that the idea
 _ behind Type A or the idea behind the technique which produced Type A was a
__consistent factor, conscious or unconscious, in the mind(s) of a bygone individual
 _or group. In order to be applicable to interpretations concerning cultural rela-
 _ tionships, the typological similarities which the archeologist recognizes must
     be proved, or assumed, to be based on an actual idea and on one consistent
   _enough to have produced, at a minimum, two similar specimens.
         Since such ideas are not among the archeologist’s empirical data, it further
     follows that the seeking for, and the demanding of, “objectivity” in archeologi-
     cal studies is only partially a valid point of issue. In fact, the concept of ob-
     jectivity should be clarified before we even discuss this point at all. It is some-
     times said that an individual is thinking “objectively” or that a certain group
    of phenomena is an “objective” category. And it is often implied that “objective”
     thinking is concerned with “objective” categories. Now this may be so, but is
    not necessarily so. According to the way one uses the terms, one can do a lot of
    objective thinking about highly non-objective categories, and vice versa. The
    crux of the matter lies in the difference between a procedure or method and the
    data to which this procedure is applied. It would perhaps be better if we reserved
    the terms objective and subjective to describe the nature of thinking and used
    some terms such as empirical and inferential to refer, respectively, to the
    observational and non-observational nature of the phenomena thought about.
    Thus it would be that one could think either subjectively or objectively about
    phenomena that were either empirical or inferential. To make these distinctions
   would help to keep our own thinking clear, and this is, after all, the purpose
    of this or any other conceptual scheme.
     Returning to the question of “objectivity” in archeological studies, it appears
124


in most instances that when the archeologists use this term they mean what I
am here calling “empirical.” This can be seen from the fact that they use it in
connection with the criteria basic to their typologies and hence in connection
with the nature of their data and not of their thinking. This being so, it may
be categorically stated that their insistence upon “objective” criteria for their
so-called culture classifications reflects a misconception as to the nature of
archeological analysis as applied to cultural studies. I have been at some pains
to show that empirical types and classes (and this applies especially to those that
are founded on chemico-physical attributes alone) are only mediary to cultural
studies. This is true for the plain and simple reason that, of themselves, they
have nothing to do with the cultural world of the people under investigation.
It is only by inference from them that the archeologist can reach the realms of
past actuality. He may transmute his empirical categories into cultural ones
if he is willing to make explicit hypotheses or to present his evidence and argue
his views. In fact, this is the only way which is open to him! But by this very
procedure he leaves the empirical and embarks upon the tide of inference.
    And so it is not for the archeologist to cry blindly for “objectivity.” Rather
let him realize that his empirical studies are but mediate and that, if he aspires
to historiography or anthropology, he is required to deal with the inferential
as much as with the empirical. But let him deal with all categories of data as
explicitly (objectively) as possible, eschewing the emotional and implicit (sub-
jective) approach. And above all, let him analyze whatever in fact he does do,
so that he may bring into the open the procedures and premises upon which
his results are based. Perhaps, if he accepts these admonitions, he will also
come to realize that empirical typologies based on chemico-physical specifica-
tions alone are not satisfactory for cultural studies because they fail to take
into account many data that are vital as foundations for the necessary inferences.
And perhaps he will come also to realize that we have returned to the point which
I have stressed from the start} criteria for the empirical designation of form,
type, and class include provenience, association, qualitative and quantitative
facts and relationships, etc., in addition to the chemico-physical specifications. eS

    After this glimpse into the theoretical aspects of archeological typology, it
might be profitable to examine hurriedly some of the typologies and classifica-
tions appearing in the literature of Americanist archeology.
    W. D. Strong says of his version of Thomas Wilson’s chipped-stone-point
classification that
For the purpose of describing and comparing types of chipped arrowpoints, spear
heads, and knives, a Classification based entirely upon form [read “shape”] rather
than assumed function has been employed. . . . These outlines [of shapes] are
entirely irrespective of size. (1935, p. 87)
  TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             125

  The obvious intent of this denial of “assumed function” in favor of shape is the
 _usual one of wishing to be “objective,” i.e., to deal with empirical rather than
  inferential attributes of the points. With this desire there can be no quarrel—
  as far as handling the specimens on an empirical level is concerned. But when
  later (pp. 279, 281, 282) Strong uses these types for the purpose of ascertaining
  cultural and temporal relationships between sites, he forfeits his purely empirical
position and, albeit implicitly, assumes that his groupings are coextensive with
 cultural groupings developed consciously or unconsciously by the bygone people
 _who made them.       __ :
       In other words, ‘he is taking for granted that those people saw the same
  shapes as he does and grouped them in the same way. Any conclusions which
  Strong might base upon the presence or absence of “parallel-sided stemmed”
  points would be vitiated if the former people were completely indifferent as to
  whether their points had parallel-sided or contracting stems or if it made no
  difference to them whether their points had stems at all. Furthermore, if the
  ancient people viewed “side notches” as functional equivalents of the indenta-
  tions produced by an “expanding stem,” and if they thus classed them together
  and made them interchangeably as a means of securing binding sinews, the
  separation of these two shapes because of “the niceties of descriptive orderliness”
  in a modern empirical classification would most probably warp the archeologist’s
  conclusions. On the other hand, if the people classed together all points which
  were developed from a triangular-shaped blank as against those developed from
  an oval blank, an empirical classification which separated side-notched points
  from those with expanding stems might be in accord with the cultural facts.
  The crucial aspects of the matter, of course, lie in data over and above mere
  physical shape. They lie in the interpretation of associations, in making infer-
  ences and interpretations, and in following an “‘if-then” method until the
  archeologist can satisfy himself (and eventually his colleagues also) that his
 answer fits best with other data and has the most chance of being correct. Mere
 “objectivity” is of little value by itself.
     As the facts actually stand, Strong himself cites documentary and archeologi-
 cal evidence to the effect that the significant functional difference between the
 various chipped points is size and not shape (pp. 260, 267). Yet in his mono-
 graph we find no following up of this lead, no analysis of the provenience and
 distribution of large and small points within the pre-Pawnee sites in Nebraska.
 In the face of an apparently significant cultural dichotomy, he has continued to
 manipulate a purely empirical classification as an entity discrete from other
 data. He has not analyzed the associations in which the points were found nor
 given cross-references between the descriptions of specimens and the account
 of their finding within the sites. In short, to summarize the issues brought up
 in the preceding paragraphs, a classification such as Strong’s permits comparisons
126


with specimens from other sites only on the basis of shape. If to the criterion of
shape were added other attributes and the empirical affinities, the classification
might expectably be more precise and valuable; but it would, of itself, be no
more applicable to cultural comparisons. It would still remain purely empirical.
     Indeed, there is other, possibly even more conclusive evidence to support this
contention. How can it be maintained that Strong’s classification represents the
cultural categories or culture ideas of the former inhabitants of Nebraska, when
the same classification has been used for central California (Gifford and
Schenck, 1926; Schenck, 1926; Schenck and Dawson, 1929), and the Columbia
River region of Oregon-Washington (Strong, Schenck, Steward, 1930), and
southern California (Wedel, 1941a), unless it is further argued that all these
groups were culturally identical with regard to chipped stone points? It is even
more obvious that such classifications are purely descriptive or empirical, when
a classification of stone work developed for a late pueblo in New Mexico
(Kidder, 1932a) is used to group specimens at Uaxactun, Guatemala (Ricket-
son and Ricketson, 1937), and specimens found in the La Plata district of
northern New Mexico and Colorado with dates ranging from Basket-Maker III
to Pueblo III (Morris, 1939). The classification of bone work, developed for
artifacts dating from around A.D. 1300 onward at Pecos (Kidder, 1932a), is
likewise used irrespective of time and location: Wedel uses it for his Kern Lake,
California, specimens (1941a), and Cressman finds it applicable to specimens
taken from Oregon caves minimally dated at 5000 years ago. The latter even
goes so far as to say that:
Kidder’s system of classification of bone awls (1932) is followed as far as possible,
not intimating that there is any connection between our area and Pecos, but because
his system has great utility and provides a convenient frame of reference. (1942, p. 63)

It is hardly to be thought that the archeologists themselves believe that one
classification of stone and one of bone reproduces the cultural groupings and
ideas of American aborigines ranging from the State of Washington to Guate-
mala and from 3000 B.C. to around A.D, 1800. Their use of the Pecos systems
is primarily for descriptive convenience and not for cultural elucidation. But
they sometimes make the mistake of employing the categories as if they were
actually cultural ones. Unless the archeologist is willing explicitly to assume,
or to argue, that his empirical types and classes are coextensive with the cate-
gories characteristic of a bygone culture, he is wrong to use them to draw
cultural conclusions.
    The same can be said of typology within the field of Southwestern ceramics.
In fact, if the difference between empirical types and cultural types had been
clearly envisioned, the great proliferation of pottery types, which has aroused so
much criticism, would have been seen in its proper light and the long-standing
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              127

argument between the “splitters” and the “lumpers,” recognized in print by
Brew (1946, p. 55), Judd (1940, p. 430), Kidder (1936b, pp. xxv, Xxvil, 626),
Martin and Rinaldo (1941, p. 655), and Reiter (1938, pp. 489, 490), would not
have been inflicted upon the literature and discussion of Southwestern arch-
eology. Both parties to this quarrel seem to be off the mark: the “splitters,”
proceeding from their Starting point of descriptive analysis, make the mistake of
assuming without demonstration that their empirical types represent cultural
types; the “lumpers,” viewing pottery primarily from a cultural angle, refuse
to believe that the minute differences recognized by the other faction have any
real cultural significance either as indicators of relationships between sites or as
separable entities within the aboriginal ceramic complexes. If it had been
realized by both sides that empirical categories are one thing and cultural
categories another, much needless misunderstanding would have been avoided.
The “splitters” would not have attempted, without discussion or explicit assump-
tion, to use their empirical types as cultural entities, and the “lumpers” would
have seen that the fine discriminations made by the other faction were potentially
basic to, but not identical with, the cultural discriminations in which they them-
selves were particularly interested. Both would have realized that the reconcilia-
tion of their differences lay, not in an agreement as to the degree of refinement
acceptable in descriptive analysis, but in the correlation to be inferred between
empirical and cultural types. Both would have seen that the support of either
position required field and laboratory research, not polemics or ex cathedra
pronouncements as to the number of pottery types acceptable or unacceptable
for the Southwestern area and fractions thereof.
    Arguments against a multiplicity of types, if by this is meant empirical or
descriptive types, will not hold water. In the first place, from the viewpoint of
archeological reporting, it is of the utmost importance to grant the archeologist |
freedom to recognize and record all those similarities and differences which,
within his experience and a cultural frame of reference, seem significant to him. —
The publication of his empirical descriptions, named for convenience of handling
and usually called types, serve to acquaint his colleagues of his findings, to elicit
from them the antithetic or corroborative information urgently required, and to
provide the general literature with comparative material with which to lend
depth and significance to other finds from other sites.
    For the archeologist to sit on his ceramic eggs with no attempt to bring them
forth into the light of day through publication is recognized as bad practice. If this
is true, then the only limits are those set by the potential cultural significance
of the descriptive minutiae. But who can determine these limits? The archeolo-
gist is never sure, nor will he ever be, just what detail may turn out to be of
importance to his own studies or to those of his associates. If the limits are un-
definable because, in all probability, there are no limits, then the archeologist
128


himself is the only possible judge of the extent and detail to which his descrip-
tions should break down the material. His particular judgments may be adversely
criticized by specific argument, but his right and duty to make as detailed
judgments as he sees fit cannot with justice be denied.
    Furthermore, the often intimated criticism that such atomizing typology
produces too many names and descriptions and “clogs” the literature will not
hold water either. Surely the critics do not mean to imply that they are able
now, and plan to be able in the future, to memorize and retain in the mind the
names and descriptions of even the generally accepted types within the South-
west. If this is not implied and they will admit the necessity of recourse to
published descriptions   for their comparative    studies, the addition   of more
names is of no import, providing only that the names and descriptions can be
systemized for easy reference as, for instance, in a key like the one developed in
the Handbook of Northern Arizona Pottery Wares (Colton and Hargrave, 1937).
Taxonomists of other disciplines make no such effort to keep in mind their
entire typology or to work from memory when comparing specimens. There is
no reason for Southwesternists to restrict the scope and refinement of their
descriptive typology merely for the sake of a primitively simple system which
might safely be retained in the mind. To do so would be to fly in the face of
scientific progress, which has consistently advanced by way of more detailed
analysis as the basis for more far-reaching synthesis.
    Also there have been depreciations of the practice of defining a pottery type
on the basis of a single potsherd. Strictly speaking, according to the system
proposed by the present study, this is indeed an impossibility because any single
manifestation is by definition a “form” and cannot be a “type.’’ However, two
sherds of the same form can and do constitute a type and, although I may be
mistaken here, such a two-sherd type would probably be subjected to the same
criticisms as have been directed at a single-sherd category. By way of example,
let us suppose that from some definitely pre-Spanish ruin in the Southwest an
archeologist has excavated two small sherds which exhibit a bright orange glaze
upon which flowers had been painted in blue. For the purposes of the example,
let us further suppose that it could not be conclusively demonstrated one way
or the other whether the two sherds originally belonged to the same or to different
vessels. Such unique and unprecedented specimens would surely warrant descrip-
tion, and when   they were discovered    to be significantly alike they would be
thrown together in a common account. What else would this be but an empirical
type? Whether or not the description was dignified with a name for the sake of
ease in reference is of no theoretical consequence. It is to be very much doubted
whether any archeologist would suppress the data concerning these two sherds,
and if he did so it would be a glaring example of malpractice. The description of
a single sherd thus constitutes an empirical form, and the description of two or
 TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             129

  more sherds with specified similarities comprises an empirical type. If this is an
  acceptable procedure in the case of unique sherds, it is also possible and ac-
  ceptable with sherds which display a lesser degree of unusualness. As before, the
  dividing line between the non-conformities which warrant type differentiation
  and those that do not is not “given.” It is safe to say that no one is qualified
  to lay down the law in this regard, and so each archeologist must be his own
  judge, letting both his conscience and his experience be his guide. If, at some
  later date, other data indicate that the archeologist was in error, then let his
  statements be revised and corrected. This is the way of any scientific discipline,
  and it is perfectly properly the way of archeology. (See below, Chapter 6, pp.
  157f)
       Up to this point I have been talking of empirical types. The correspondence
  between these and cultural or culture types is an additional matter which calls
  for further study, assumption, and argument. Types which have been established e
  on the basis of descriptive analysis are not, ipso facto, cultural types. Often they
  will be found to have no inferable cultural significance. Often they will have
  to be regrouped or subdivided in order to satisfy the cultural implications of the
  data. Differences which, from an empirical point of view, had been thought of
  no significance and which had not been used to separate types, might later be
  found to distinguish important cultural categories and would thus require more
  minute break-downs. The reverse might also be the case: several categories,
  which had been distinguished on empirical grounds, might be discovered to have
  identical cultural significance and thus to call for amalgamation into a single
  cultural type. These eventualities in no way adversely affect the validity of
  empirical types or complicate the cultural issue. All that is required is for the
  archeologist to be aware of the difference and use the categories with regard for
  their limitations and potentialities. In doing this, he should find a welcome free-
  dom of research procedure and a considerable clarification in his archeological
  thinking.
       This brings us to another point which has been the cause of some confusion
  among the archeologists. In a recent publication, J. O. Brew has made much
  of the fact that typologies (and classifications, to use the present terms) are
  arbitrary, that such systems are made by the student, and that types are not
  discovered but rather created and put in a system (1946, pp. 44-66). This
  appears to be a perfectly true statement as far as it goes. The archeologists,
  as well as students of other disciplines, can and do build their categories on
_ the basis of criteria of their own choosing, depending on the requirements of
  their current._problems. It is possible to type automobiles on the basis of the
  length of the scratches in their paint, to classify sand-tempered potsherds on the
  number of sand grains in each, or to group together all chipped stone points
  which have side notches. It would be possible, but the pertinent question is
 130


 “So what?” And the answer to this is, of course, “So that the results will be
 of help in pursuing the investigations in which I am currently engaged.” Now the
 alleged aim of archeological research is to obtain a knowledge of the culture of
 the people of some presently uninhabited site. Therefore it is wrong to say, as
   Brew does, that “No typological system is actually inherent in the material”
   (1946, p. 46). In cultural material, as it is found by the archeologist, there are
  inherent systems, namely, the ones developed by the people who made, used, or
  possessed that material. Brew says, ‘Systematic classifications are simplifications
  of and generalizations of the natural situation” (1946, p. 46), but a cultural
  situation is not a “natural” situation! Those bygone people imposed their own
  particular system upon nature and their own products, they had their own
  way of thinking about things, and it is their, and not our, system(s) which the
_ archeologist should attempt to discover. He should try to make his systematic
  creations (and his typologies are just that) conform to those of the former
  culture. How else can he hope to understand it? Inherent in cultural products is
 the systematics of the people who produced them, 2and Brew’s biological analogy
  has but led him astray. (See also McKern, 1939, p. 312)
       It is probably true that culture—the whole of culture, i.e., in the holistic
  sense defined in the preceding chapter—is a continuum and that any attempt
  to break it up into segments on a purely cultural basis is arbitrary. This fact
  accounts for some of the difficulties in applying the culture-area concept. But
  when the term is used in its partitive sense, meaning a culture or a socio-political
  grouping, where we are dealing with a well-defined segment possessing a charac-
  teristic culture, culture is not a continuum, except in time. Individual ideas,
  patterns, types are often adhered to consciously; and even to those that are
  unconscious, there is a more or less consistent adherence which produces recog-
  nizable aspects of the particular culture. Brew himself, while insisting upon the
  arbitrary character of typology, commends the Beals-Brainerd-Smith analysis
  of pottery decoration styles (1945) which is nothing more nor less than an
  attempt to arrive at an understanding of the decorative concepts of bygone
  potters. Their analysis is their own construction, but it aims to discover the
  ancient concepts inherent in the material. The extent to which they have been
  successful in this is the extent of their attainment, and I hasten to add that I
  heartily concur in Brew’s enthusiasm for their results. Therefore, while the
  distinction between what is called Plains Culture and what is called Eastern
 Woodland Culture may be purely arbitrary, the distinctions which do exist be-
 tween the designs on Hopi ceramics and those executed by Acoma potters,
 beween spiral-grooved Pecos axes and the three-quarter-grooved axes of Snake-
 town, between the moccasin patterns of various Plains tribes, are the results of
 ideas held by the Indians themselves and are inherent in the results of their
 culture-influenced behavior.
ene                       A STUDY OF ARCHEOLOGY                                131
    Following this line further, some light may be thrown on a problem which
seems to have vexed the archeological taxonomists for a considerable time. Many
of them have found difficulty in deciding just what attributes should be recog-
nized in making their types and classes. They have been uncertain as to the
degree of refinement which their analysis should encompass and have been look-
ing for some mechanical means of determination. They have been worried about
the proliferation of recognized ceramic attributes as opposed to the paucity of
those within some category such as chipped stone points or bone “awls” (e.g.,
McKern, 1939, pp. 306f). But I believe that there would have been much less
of this uncertainty if the archeologists had viewed their material in some such
light as that proposed in the present study, if they had viewed culture traits as
ideas and not as material objects, if they had envisioned cultural behavior as
mediate between ideas and material objects, in short if they had recognized the
difference between their own empirical, descriptive groupings and the cultural
and culture categories pertinent to the peoples they were studying.
    For example, let us take the attribute of hardness so common in the pottery
typologies and classifications in both the Southwest and Midwest. Here we
have a physical property, an empirical specification which is useful in describing
the objects. But culturally speaking what is it? Is the archeologist willing to
contend that the Indians recognized hardness or had an idea as to the appro-
priate hardness of their pottery in terms of the modern mineralogical scale? If
he is unwilling so to argue, then hardness is an empirical specification only and
does not belong in cultural and culture typologies. Even if the archeologist
argues that hardness is the result of some technique of manufacture which was
indeed recognized by the Indians, hardness itself is not cultural but only a
sign of some cultural attribute, an indication of the existence of a certain
technique. Thus, while hardness remains empirically valid, the really significant
attribute from any cultural point of view is the technique of manufacture, say
the firing temperature or the paste composition, which were the products of
consistent ideas, i.e., culture traits.
     From this, a test may be established for the inclusion or exclusion of any
specified attribute. In his empirical descriptions, the archeologist is free to
include any specification that he wishes. In his cultural categorizations, he may |
include any specification which he is willing to assume is the material embodi-
ment of a consistent idea in the mind(s) of the former maker, user, or possessor.
Such a test permits great freedom to the archeologist but, at the same time,
makes him explicitly responsible for the cultural implications of the systematics
which he uses. If he is willing to assume that the side notches which he has
empirically described under a classification such as Strong’s were also recognized
by the Indians, then he is free to incorporate the attribute of side notches in
any cultural classification he might create and to make use of them in cross-
132


culture comparisons. The testing of his working hypothesis will be his responsi-
bility or that of his critics, and it will depend upon the marshalling of evidence
pro or con. In other words, so long as the archeologist is willing to make an
explicit assumption and to look upon it as a working hypothesis, he is free
to make his cultural and culture groupings in whatever manner he sees fit.

     This brings us to the final point in this discussion. The theoretical problems
of the so-called culture classifications of the Southwest and Midwest have
 received considerable attention. The similarity of these systems to the Linnaean
 classification of biology has been attacked on a number of occasions (e.g.,
 Brew, 1946, pp. 44-66; Steward, 1941) and not without some justice, although
I shall have something to say about this later. However, two of the most basic
points of misconception seem to have escaped the critics, with the result that
their arguments are somewhat beside the point.
     The first of these is the use of presence-and-absence “trait” lists as the
foundation of classification. This usage is based on the assumption that the
important factor about archeological discoveries is their presence or absence
within a given site. And although the fact will probably be vehemently denied
by the taxonomists, this assumption is accompanied by its corollary, namely,
that the location, association, quantitative and qualitative relation to the cul-
tural and natural environment is of no, or at least of secondary, importance.
But actually, and contrary to McKern’s statement (1940, p. 19), a list showing
the presence and absence of “‘traits” does not represent the former inhabitants
of a site, at least in any cultural sense; nor do cultures, archeological or other-
wise, consist of lists of typological tags as Griffin implies (1935). Surely there
is more to “a culture” than this.
     But the taxonomists, in their preoccupation with such lists, have gone so
far as to modify an anthropological concept of long and respected standing and
to involve themselves thereby in not a little confusion. I refer to their use of
the term culture complex or, as it sometimes is written, trait complex. In the
bulk of anthropological literature this concept is defined, as Linton put it
 (1936b, p. 397), as “a larger functional unit,” the traits within which “are all
more or less interrelated and interdependent from the point of view of both
function and use.” But the taxonomists applying the Midwestern system have
adopted the term in the sense of a mere assemblage or congeries of “traits” or
descriptive items which they have seen fit to isolate, name, and list. McKern
says:
If substantially the same traits are found to occur repeatedly at site after site, one
can be quite sure that this persistently grouped lot of traits is characteristic of a
single culture. Such a repeatedly recurring series of traits is called a culture complex.
(1940, p. 19)
 TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                133

  Earlier he had said:
  The more simple and direct method is that of analyzing materials from a site or
  community as such, comparing the list of traits so determined with similarly determined
  trait complexes from other sites or communities, and classifying on a basis of
  similarity or dissimilarity to establish foci. (1938, p. 370, italics mine)

 Throughout his work he seems to use complex in this, rather than in the in-
 tegrative, sense. Cole and Deuel, on the other hand, in their Rediscovering
 Illinois use it sometimes to signify a mere assemblage (1937, pp. 34; 207, fn 4)
 and sometimes as it was defined by Linton (1937, pp. 36-39, 209). Ritchie
 makes the same shift (1940b, p. 100; 1944, pp. 52, 325). Fairbanks (1941,
 p. 12) uses complex and activity, following Linton, and Griffin (1943, pp. 328,
 330) follows McKern.
     With regard to ethnographical data, Opler has pointed out the dangers of
 dependence upon trait lists. Specifically, he says:
_ The difficulty in placing these traits and deciding whether or not they belong on
  our list involves a critique of a statistical approach to anthropological data which
 assumes that a trait in one culture is the counterpart or equivalent of a formally
 _similar or comparable trait in another culture. (1935, p. 705)

 The same warnings apply to archeological materials and even more so, because
 the qualifications which Kluckhohn has apparently rightfully made pertain
 much less to archeology than to ethnology. He says:
   . . what he [Opler] seems to me to demonstrate is that formal similarity can some-
 times mislead us. So far as I am aware no one has given an inductive demonstration
 that in the greater number of cases (or in any number sufficient to disturb statistical
 results) highly specific similarities (within a not too great geographical area) do not
 indicate some sort of historical connection past or present, direct or indirect. Granted
 freely that the same trait is by no means always the same behavior, it does not
 follow that detailed parallelisms are without historical significance. (1939, pp. 351-
 352)
 In the first place, the archeological classifications which are based on “formal
 similarities” use, for the most part, very simple and not “highly specific” simi-
 larities. An ax is an ax, and an awl an awl. Even within the more elaborate
 complexes such as ceramics, the whole is broken down to such a degree that the
 items which are compared on a one-to-one basis are, of themselves, very simple.
 Secondly, at least within the Midwestern system, the comparisons are often
 made irrespective of time and space, so that Kluckhohn’s strictures about “a
 not too great geographical area” do not hold. Finally, Kluckhohn is talking of
 the value of formal similarities for comparative purposes, for the connections
 and cross-culture relationships which they imply. He is not talking from the
 standpoint of constructing a cultural context. To be sure, a list of typological
134


tags will give some idea as to the nature of the culture, but is “some idea” what
the archeologist is looking for? Is it enough to take the place of the fuller
contexts available to the ethnologist and historian? Can the archeologist depend
on his comparative studies if they are based on no more than “some idea’’?
I think not, and an example will show why.
     Let us take the textile industries as reported from two cave sites: Lovelock
Cave, central Nevada (Loud and Harrington, 1929), and Frightful Cave, central
Coahuila, Mexico, as excavated by the U. S. National Museum’s 1940-41
Coahuila Expedition.1°’ Tabulating these industries on a presence-and-absence
basis, we find the following results (Table 2). Looking at the two industries as
wholes, we certainly see a “highly specific” similarity. It is hardly to be doubted
that any of the archeological taxonomists would hesitate to equate the textile
industries of the two sites or, if other industries showed a like similarity, would
fail to classify the sites together.
     When quantitative information is added, the results are as shown in Table 3.
The picture has changed radically. The quantitative data indicate a decided
 difference rather than a similarity between the sites. The frequency order of
the categories is different, pointing to a different orientation of cultural needs.
 The frequency order within the categories (in five out of six where it exists)
 shows a reversal as between the two sites. The differential number of ‘“‘miscel-
laneous artifacts,” absolutely and relative to the total textile category, points to
 a haphazard versatility among the Coahuila cave people which was not char-
 acteristic of the inhabitants of Lovelock, and it also marks a definite cleavage
 between the two sites. These and many other implications can be derived even
 from the few data and slight manipulation presented here. For instance, it is
 much more significant that wicker basketry is present in Lovelock Cave and is
 the dominant type while it is absent in the Mexican site, than that it is merely
 present in one and absent in the other. A presence-and-absence table would
 tend to smooth the line of what is really a sharp peak in the graph of basketry
 difference. A presence-and-absence table would show absolutely no variation in
 the knot complex, while in actual fact the variation is noteworthy, both within
 the category and within the textile industry as a whole. The vast quantitative
 difference in the sandal category provides another lead for hypothesis and
 investigation, Can it be accounted for by the former presence and subsequent
 decay of leather footgear at Lovelock? The finding of a few leather moccasins
 suggest such a possibility. Does the disparity indicate considerable travel, even
  nomadism, over the jagged limestone rocks of Coahuila and a more or less
  sedentary existence near the tule marshes of the Nevada lake? What other
  evidence can be adduced to the support or contradiction of these hypotheses?
  Or assuming their correctness for the moment, what light do they shed on
  other facts of the respective cultures?
TAYLOR                                   A STUDY      OF ARCHEOLOGY                                         135




                                                      TABLE       2
                                                                                LovELock       FRIGHTFUL

          Basketry
            Wl CRETE          SPAR    arenas  COA EA Cog                               x            —
            SONe Rn, Met            At! ee          eee       ae                       x             Xx
               BENE SUECH Seer to hk ak cron Bee «                                     x               x
            {NAL OCSLG HRS weyRtn arn ee CeRe ORE ex ina cP bhai                       x               x
            DIAILOG cree eich sare 8 ays AM ee           a oc                      —                   aR

         Matting
              CWLOEG      tee      Poet         red    ae    ay       Nace ee       x               x
              Dlaitede    6)        as    eh    ee           eS           iy                        x

         Netting
                  aIrere Metspaycht Mhy's, ONE oe
             [eGTO}                               PacE 2                            x               x
             cn GELESS pene tee ee MRARETE Gas ee gus ee                           —                Xe

         Knots
           Sheet Dendua mts      ote ee ne    ne he et                             x                x
           GVETHANC i Se     eRe se oe a eee See toe nee                           x                x
           PTAUNVE wok save eo ree Pere Peeies bere ayers eg c -                   x                x
             Fe       eo eit ck NR Sk ee   Cee    a                                a                x
             wentatiem ees cae UMP ae SLES de areas Ss                             x                x

         Cloth
           TOALNCESS eee ce RR PON        Se coon COTES os                         x               —
           HORE) pape OR COME, Sete SEIS eC       ED, era                          x                x
           tw]CL Moeenet ei Cea te Gi          ieaeas er Te Ge                    —                 x

         BraiGeeaee      Shs     Renee          TE are” NIRS. o ORR                ie               x

         Sandals
           EWITCC        EIN       etek. + tadetts ache Gita          krRes        x               —
             TINO        ne     ee Pee    een   en Kee       ik GyeWe             —                 x

         (ADrOlion     ett cone     rt nee et Moore kc omen       oe oe    RS      x                x

                 otal stemsiirom) DOthsIteS.                       obs
                                                            ee weeds              21
                 Items/cammon to both sites 7.77.5. <0.                           13 or 62%
                 Lovelock items common to both sites.....                         13 out of 16 or 81%
                 Frightful items common to both sites.....                        13 out of 18 or 72%
136


                                                          TABLE 3
                                                                                           FREQUENCY
                                                                                             ORDER
                                              LovELock               FRIGHTFUL              WITHIN
                                                                                           CATEGORY

      Basketry
        MVICKED Mee tsaie eee                  1115                     0
        Coiled)! sta        eet                 309                   112
          SPS tic hiaen neta                   typical               rare                     same (?)
        twined eset          meee               104                    10
        plaited 4a. eee       ee    ee            0                     6

                                                          1528 (1)              128 (4)
      Matting
        ‘twined taper           are rae        1418                    24
        plaited 2.2./-cya serenity a:              0                   76                     reversed
                                                          1418 (2)              100 (5)
      Netting
        knotted:.a.ee eee                      1016                    10
        knotless: cee ee                           0                   70                     reversed

                                                          1016 (3)                80 (6)
      Knots
        sheetbend= seen
                      soe er                     185 (1)                5 (5)
        OMAVGING. oocccocsce                      83 (2)              294 (2)
        Prana                                     22 (3)               17 (4)                 reversed
        Slipias ae ae oe ee ee                    14 (4)               28 (3)
        Scared eps ee:                             4 (5)              379 (1)
                                                           308 (4)               723 (3)
      Cloth
        feather,     Sanat vga:                  203                    0
        hALb eae Aaa nse sia oro                  40                   12                     reversed
        twihed asncsnees Seen:                     0                   15

                                                           243 (5)                27 (7)
      Braid soporte
                 eee ee                          142                   26                     (none)

                                                           142 (6)                26 (8)
      Sandals
        TWIN                 tc eee               87                    ()
        plaited PRG    St   yore Cn te   an        0                  912                     reversed


                                                            87 (7)               912 (2)
      Misc.   artifacts      (exclusive
        Ol cordage) mewacerane                                       3540                     (none)
                                                            64 (8)              3540 (1)
      IADTONS i       tinct crete                     9                     S                 (none)

                                                             9 (9)                 5 (9)
              TOTAL nrayerenteee               4815                  5541
TAYLOR                        A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  137

    Without the weighting and balance given by, among other things, the
quantitative data, the cultural context is the loser. But is not the comparative
study also? It has been shown above that even the not inconsiderable presence-
and-absence similarities to be found in a broad complex such as the textile
industry can be very misleading as the basis for cross-culture comparisons and
taxonomy.
     Before proceeding, it should be emphatically stated that the example given
above is not a rigged case. It was discovered in the course of routine compara-
tive study in connection with the writing of an archeological report. The only
crucial assumption that has been made is that there was not too much difference
in the efficiency of the two excavations. Granting a representative sample from
each cave and a conscientious effort to save and report the evidence of human
handiwork, there is no bar to full and detailed comparisons. The first of these
provisions is, of course, a limiting one with respect to some archeological
material. Where there is no assurance that the complete site has been excavated
or a representative sample secured, as for example in much of the data used
by Griffin for his study of the Fort Ancient Aspect (1943), quantitative infor-
mation is unreliable and would be misleading to use without qualification. But
such extenuating circumstances are not the rule, fortunately, and most of the
so-called culture classifications have been built on the basis of sites recently
excavated where, if not the actuality, at least the possibility of a representative
sample was present. When this is the case and when the archeologist fails to
give his comparisons the depth afforded by quantification, he is in grave danger
of error. And even if his presence-and-absence tabulations are eventually shown
to depict actual conditions, the demonstration of this fact must rest on just such
added information as provided by quantification, association, provenience, etc.
The tabulations themselves are but one part of the evidence, and of doubtful
reliability at that!
    Thus it is that when Steward criticizes Colton’s taxonomic attempts by
attacking the smallness of percentage differences between the various groupings
(1941), he is hitting at a secondary phenomenon. Instead of analyzing the
value of the lists themselves, he seems content to accept them. In fact, he says:
Were percentage tables [based on presence-and-absence lists] given for all classifications,
the reader could ignore the formal classification and observe for himself the true
relationships. (1941, p. 367)1°
The reader might be able so to observe, but I doubt it. The real weakness lies,
not in obfuscating the percentages, but in the source from which the percentages
were derived.
    Likewise, the dichotomy which Phillips sets up between “the stratigraphic
and the analytic (McKern) methods” seems to hit beside the point. He says:
138


[the faults of Webb’s Pickwick Basin report] lie almost wholly in the domain         of
interpretation and are the result of mixing the stratigraphic and the analytic (McKern)
methods. In spite of all that has been said to the contrary, I believe that the two
methods cannot be harmonized, one must give way before the other. . . . For once
stratigraphy speaks so plainly it must be heard. No classifier could be happy in the
contemplation of a mere focus which comprehends everything from a culture lacking
even flint to one dominated by pottery. This is the focus to end all foci. Yet in all
conscience what else could the authors do? The stratigraphy plainly offered no
opportunity for a break-down that could be expressed by trait lists. This is the
important point. Your archaeologist unhampered by a classificatory bias, would find
no trouble at all in breaking the series down into sequent periods, each marked by
the appearance of a new type of material. Persistence of the older types would not
bother him at all. (1942, pp. 197, 198)

He seems unable to get away from the idea of “trait” lists. Why is it necessary
even to have “a new type of material” before a series can be broken down?
Why would it not be possible, and culturally significant, to recognize a break
when the quantitative or qualitative relationships change? The cultura! roster
could remain exactly the same so far as presence-and-absence was concerned,
but would it not be significant if, for example, the ratio of harpoons to fishhooks
went from 75:25 in the lowest deposits to 25:75 in the upper levels? Would
not that point at which it passed the 50:50 mark represent a possible point
of division? What about a case wherein the quality of twined-woven sandals
obviously improved from bottom to top within an archeological deposit? If the
Midwestern taxonomists cry that this is not enough, that we are probably
dealing with the evolution of a technique within a single human group, then
let them not maintain that they deal only with “cultural factors.” It is only
by the assumption of a socio-political or “tribal” unit that this example can
fail to call forth a division. Formally, the end-points are considerably different
and should be so classified, if ‘cultural’ factors alone weigh in the balance.
According to the Southwestern system, if only it would recognize qualitative
data, there would be no difficulty in separating the two end-points, because the
space-time factor is not denied. The crux of this particular matter would, of
course, be whether further evidence or the archeologist’s explicit judgment
seemed to warrant the break-down. Potentially and ideally it should be possible,
but it is not so under the rigid tenets of a presence-and-absence system.
    Therefore it does not seem probable that there is any unresolved conflict
between the stratigraphic and the taxonomic methods. The trouble lies in the
manner in which these tools are used by the archeologists. It is likely that much
of the fault found, here and in other places, with the Gladwin-Colton and
McKern systems would be eliminated if quantitative, qualitative, and other
relational data were applied throughout the analytical procedure. In this fashion,
cultural rosters made up of cultural and culture forms, types, classes, could be
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              139

utilized for constructional and comparative purposes, and sequent groups of
material could be assigned to different classificatory units, even though the
actual cultural roster proved to be identical from bottom to top.
    All this business of the objectivity of “trait” lists, and the adding and
percentaging of “traits,” is a fine instance of what Professor Sapir used to call
“spurious accuracy.” He made the point that because we feel we “must be
accurate,” we often limit ourselves in our analyses to those phenomena which
are amenable to finite accuracy. This leads to an overemphasis of certain aspects
and the neglect of others. The taxonomists are as aware as anyone that all
culturally important data do not lie in the chemico-physical properties of the
material nor in the mere presence or absence of objects at archeological sites.
Yet because such things as quality, ratio, association do not readily lend them-
selves to tabular presentation and simple statements, they have been neglected,
even shunned. The result is a warped picture of the culture and the cross-
cultural relationships.
    Furthermore, even the “trait” lists which have been established are suspect
from the viewpoint of “objectivity.” At the risk of seeming overly to dwell
on one archeologist, I shall again turn to Griffin for illustrative material because
his monumental work The Fort Ancient Aspect (1943) contains within its ample
pages not only a classic example of the taxonomic method but also much
detailed exposition to which specific reference can be simply made. He often
speaks of the “objectivity” of the method which he employs (e.g., pp. 3, 303,
334, 335, 340). But, making the distinction between objective-subjective on the
one hand and empirical-inferential on the other (see p. 123 above), we find that
his method does not insure either objectivity or empiricism. To be sure, there
is much which is of these orders, but also there is much which is no more
objective or empirical than is to be found in the works of others following other
methods. Intrinsically and of itself, the taxonomic method is no more objective
nor based upon more empirical data than non-taxonomic methods.
    In the table of non-pottery “traits” given following page 376, Griffin lists
Plain bone beads, long and Plain bone beads, short. Empirically, it probably
is a fact that there are some bone beads which are longer than others, but the
decision as to the dividing line between what are to be designated as long and
what as short is definitely not empirical. It is a matter of Griffin’s judgment
with regard to the significance of bead length within the cultural setting. The
same can be said for his decision to make two categories instead of many.
And finally, it has been his judgment which has brought about a subdividing
of the bone-bead category and not of such categories as bone tubes, stemmed
stone points, antler handles, etc. He has seen fit to give bone beads double
weighting in his tabular lists, and this could have been done only on the basis
of an inference as to the significance of the length of bone beads and the
insignificance of length within other categories. As for his objectivity in so
140


dividing the beads, one is in the dark because there is nothing in the text which
will indicate the grounds on which he determined the significance of bead length
or what actual lengths are designated as long or short. For this reason the
division must be considered not only inferential but subjective. This lack of
observational and explicit criteria makes it impossible for the reader to repro-
duce Griffin’s results or to know on what basis they were achieved.
    The same applies to the creation of others of his categories. He has distin-
guished between side or corner notched knives, side notched points, and corner
notched points, in other words, between “‘points” and “knives” which display
the same notching. Again the segregation is inferential and subjective. Thus,
no matter how objective are the procedures applied to these categories, the
results will still retain a strong subjective and inferential element. Basically,
they will still be founded upon what the archeologist thought was important
and significant. This point seems to have escaped Griffin because he says that
he has used arbitrary divisions based on material of manufacture in order to
“eliminate the use of subjective groupings based upon such terms as ‘art’ and
‘ceremonial’” (p. 3). At the same time he tabulates specimens under such
headings as bone hair-spreader, whetstones, shell knives and scrapers, musical
rasp, etc., which beg no less interpretative questions than the terms art and
ceremonial.
    It is not conducive to a strong belief in the “objectivity” of his method,
when we analyze some of his judgments upon which we can make a check after
a fashion. For example, in Table XIV he lists the bell-shaped pestle from seven
of the possible nineteen Fort Ancient sites, and in the text he says that
“although the evidence is not clear, it seems likely that the Fort Ancient
peoples may have had the bell-shaped pestle” (p. 231) and that ‘‘in spite of
the fact that the bell-shaped pestle is listed as an aspect trait, its place in this
culture is uncertain” (p. 197). In other words, seven out of a possible nineteen
site-records is not enough to establish bell-shaped pestles within the aspect. On
the other hand he lists stone hoes from eight of the nineteen sites and says:
The Iroquois used the wooden digging stick or more rarely an antler hoe instead
of the stone hoe or shell hoe, as the Fort Ancient people did [sic]. (p. 231)
Here the stone hoe is credited with being a Fort Ancient implement on the basis
of eight occurrences, while there was evidently considerable doubt as to the
bell-shaped pestle on the basis of seven. I wish to emphasize that I am not
holding in suspicion Griffin’s judgments on these topics. What I am doing is
trying to show that they are in fact judgments and that, therefore, his method
is not the “objective” one he claims. Of itself, his method does not make his
results any more objective or empirical (and it probably does not make it any
less so). The mere putting of archeological data into lists instead of paragraphs
does not make it more “objective,” nor is this accomplished by the operations
of adding, percentaging, or other mathematical manipulation.
TAYLOR                       A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 141

    The second point I wish to make, and one which is possibly even more basic
than the last, is that the so-called culture classifications of the Southwest and
Midwest are classifications neither of separable cultural entities nor of archeo-
logical materials in any cultural sense. Except by the odd chance of coincidence,
there can be no connection between the groupings which result from taxonomic
manipulations according to these systems and the aboriginal “tribal” or cultural
groupings. Although the general tenor of explanatory statements (e.g., Colton,
1939, pp. 6-16; McKern, 1939) has been to the effect that, actually or poten-
tially, the taxonomic units are equivalent to pre-existing socio-political or cul-
tural units, there is no justification to be found for such a contention within
the systems themselves. This is due to one fact: the taxonomic units, entirely
or with but rare exception, are constructed from empirical types and classes,
not cultural or culture ones. The attributes of quantity and quality, of
provenience and association, and of their respective affinities have not been
utilized in creating categories. Segregation has been accomplished on the basis
of empirical attributes of a very restricted range and of significance more to
the archeologist than to the bygone peoples. For example, Cole and Deuel say:
To test this conviction [that both Woodland and Mississippi Patterns occur in Fulton
County, Illinois], also to obtain a purely objective view [sic] of all materials recorded,
the larger cultural complexes, such as pottery and projectile points, were spread out
and separated into types without regard to place of occurrence or association with
other objects. (1937, p. 39, italics mine)
And, although it was apparently not of his own doing, Griffin’s analysis of
Webb’s Norris Basin pottery “was conducted without any knowledge of the
other material found at the sites.”’ (Griffin, 1938, p. 253)
     How can it be expected that types, created with so little regard for cultural
data, will, when classified, yield a picture of the cultural relationships that once
existed? The mere fact that some types come from a single site or geographic
locality is, of itself, no proof that they should be grouped together culturally.
Camp sites and cave sites and other stopping places of more or less transient
peoples can conceivably preserve within a very limited space the products of
not a few separate cultural and political entities. Distinct strata, with or without
interspersed sterile layers, will help the archeologist to discriminate in many
cases, but what is to help him if there are no such aids and the deposits are
found to be without a break from top to bottom? How can he be sure as to just
what cultural entities he is dealing with, unless he analyzes the provenience and
associations of his material for consistent and significant cohesions and separa-
tions? At some sites, such as small pueblos or individual pithouses, cohesion is
quite apparent; but at a great many, as for instance the camp sites and shell
heaps upon which much of the Midwestern classification has been built, there
is the strong possibility that contiguity is due to historical accident rather than
cultural relationship. To have reasonable assurance of the latter there is required
142


more than formal similarity coupled with gross spatial propinquity. These may
be profitable leads, but they cannot be expected to tell the whole story either
from the point of view of cultural comparisons or cultural contexts.
     In short, what the taxonomists are doing, for the most part at least, is
grouping their material on the basis of purely chemico-physical similarities and
saying that the resulting categories represent “cultural divisions,” i.e., separable
cultural entities which actually existed as such in past times. The Gladwin-
Colton system avowedly uses the added criterion of space-time and, in Colton’s
case at least, identifies one of its categorical levels with former tribes (Colton,
1939, pp. 12, 71; 1942, p. 39). The McKern system professes to use only cultural
criteria, but its advocates obviously believe that its categories are potentially
representative of formerly existing units, cultural, linguistic, “tribal,” ethno-
geographic, etc. (Griffin, 1937a, 1937b, 1943, pp. 337-338, 1945a; McKern,
1943, pp. 314-315; 1944, pp. 445-446). Here I believe the Southwestern system
has the greater possibility of attaining its goal, because the added factor of
space-time reduces the likelihood of identifying chance aggregates as cultural
or socio-political entities. Nevertheless, what the archeologists are really doing
is putting together what seems to them to be similar in appearance, instead of
combining what they have explicitly inferred was culturally cohesive in those
bygone days from which their material derives.

    In closing this chapter, I wish to bring up the often repeated criticisms of
the similarities between Americanist taxonomies and the Linnaean classification
of biology. Granting that the archeologists have for the most part applied their
systems too rigidly and apparently often without a full awareness of the impli-
cations of their procedures, still it seems to me that a great deal of the criticism
which I have heard and read has been beside the point and shows an almost
equal inflexibility and a comparable misunderstanding.
    For example, Brew has elaborated at some length the fact that cultural
phenomena do not reproduce sexually and, therefore, are not susceptible of a
genetic or biological classification in any literal sense (1946, pp. 46-57; see also
Steward 1941, p. 366). To add weight to this attack, he makes much of the fact
that, even in biology, the species concept which is the basis of the system is ill-
defined and open to serious criticism. These arguments are definitely beside
the point and add nothing to the force of his denunciation of archeological
taxonomy. If, as Brew maintains, the relationships of cultural phenomena are
incomparable to those of biology, if the two spheres are so distinct as to make
the classificatory generalities of one impertinent to those of the other, then by
the same token the classificatory deficiencies of one are not pertinent to those of
the other! If it is held, for example, that the classification of European hedgehogs
is completely separate from that of Anasazi pottery, it affects the latter not
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                             143

one whit to demonstrate, however conclusively, that the classification of the
former is grossly in error. A case must be tried on its own merits, not on those
of another jurisdiction. It behooves us then to examine the problems of arche-
ological classification on the basis of archeological materials themselves.
    It is a fact which can hardly be rightly disputed that culture relationships
exist between cultural materials. If the word genetic, when applied to these
relationships, bothers the archeologists and brings before their eyes bisexual
images which are not warranted by the data, then by all means let us use other
terms, say, affinal, correlative, or legatary.*°® But it cannot be denied that 1947
Ford cars owe many of their characteristics to ideas obtained from the appear-
ance and performance of the Fords (and even Chevrolets) of previous years,
or that the saddles of the Plains Indians are related to the saddles of the Spanish
horsemen who came to America many years ago, or that the atomic bomb is
an assemblage of many modes (culture ideas) and many cultural forms.
     The significance of the above examples lies in the word idea and in the
human factor. The culture relationships which do exist have been brought
 about through the minds of living beings, in the present examples through
human agency. Inanimate products themselves do not reproduce, modify, copy,
or influence one another culturally. It is the mediate agency of a mind that
brings about the culture relationships between cultural products. Therefore,
any classification which attempts to portray the relationships of human cultural
materials must do so in terms of the people who made, used, or possessed those
materials. We cannot say that Plains saddles are related to Spanish saddles
unless we are willing to define what we mean by Plains Indians and Spanish
people and unless we can prove or reasonably infer some connection, direct or
indirect, between these human groups. In other words, we must be prepared
to define, however crudely or exactly, the groups or individuals that acted as
agents for the culture relationship. Since it will be a rare case in archeological
research when a single individual can be identified as the agent, it follows that
in our discipline a more general designation will usually have to be made, i.e.,
by groups of individuals.
     Now, both in anthropology as a whole and in historiography, the human
groups which seem to have given the most satisfactory returns to investigation
are those based on one or more of the following criteria: biological heredity
(“race,” etc.), socio-political coherence (“nation,” “tribe,” village, “clan,”
family, etc.), cultural or linguistic heritage (Norse, Indo-European, etc.), and
geographic propinquity (“European,” “Midwestern,” “Danubian,” etc.). There-
fore, either as a historian or an anthropologist, the archeologist has the criteria
for several possible and demonstrably significant groups of people already set
forth. He has at least one series of classificatory goals staked out for him:
namely, to classify together in one unit all those cultural materials which can
144

be shown or reasonably inferred to have pertained to such groups of people.
This is to say that the cultural contexts which will have the more important
results, if we may judge from current historiographic and anthropologic practice,
will be those characteristic of biological, socio-political, cultural, linguistic,
and/or local groups.
     And these classificatory units are inherent in the archeological material, a
contention which is at variance with the expressed views of several arche-
ologists who have essayed theoretical discussions (e.g., Brew, 1946, p. 46;
McKern, 1939, p. 312). The objects and other manifestations with which the
archeologist deals were made, used, or possessed by individuals belonging to
groups that had definite biological heredity, lived with more or less socio-
political cohesion (unless the archeologist has discovered a hermit’s den), had a
specific cultural heritage, spoke as a mother tongue a particular language, and
occupied a determinate geographic range. And whether or not these groups can
be defined by archeological research does not alter the fact of their existence.
For example, the fact that Berlioz, the composer, was of French nationality lies
immanent in his musical compositions and provides, therefore, one way of
classifying them. The fact that from a musical point of view, i.e., culturally,
he was influenced by Beethoven is also inherent in his music and permits us to
classify it among those culturally related to Beethoven or to the “German
school.” The facts that Berlioz spoke French and lived and studied in Paris give
us other inherent ways of classifying his work. Thus, although it is the classifier
 who actually constructs the classification, as Brew has said (1946, p. 46), this
 does not controvert the fact that there are classifications which are inherent in
 the data. In archeological research, the student may or may not wish to seek
 and use them, but they are there. Although he is at perfect liberty to make his
categories arbitrary, there are inherent ones if he wishes, and is able, to
 discover them.
     Thus, as in the case of the typology and classification of objects and other
 individual manifestations, classifications of cultural contexts lie immanent in
 themselves and pertain to bygone people, not to the immediate world of the
 archeologist. The latter should realize that, potentially at least, he works on
 two levels. Empirically and “descriptively,” he may group his findings to his
 own tastes and as “arbitrarily” as he wishes. But when he either professes or
 attempts to group them “culturally,” ie., with significance for the bygone
 culture under investigation, then he should try to group them according to the
 relationships pertinent to that culture, not to his own. It is a fact, as Brew
 states (1946, p. 46), that the data do not “fall into” types or classifications:
 they must be put there by the archeologist. But this does not mean that there
 are not inherent groupings which, with luck and conscious effort and by the
 use of reasoned but free interpretation, the archeologist may succeed in repro-
 ducing or approximating, The closeness with which his groupings fit past
 TAYLOR                       A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             145

 actuality will be one      prime measure   of his service   to anthropological   and
 historiographic studies.
      This brings up another point which was mentioned at the beginning of this
  chapter and which is vital to an understanding of archeological theory,/The
 empirical data with which the archeologist has to work consist of the material
 objectifications of culture traits and their empirical attributes. The archeologist
 who works in undocumented cultures has only three sets of “these attributes
_upon which to base all his studies. They are (1) spatial relationships, (2)
_quantity, and (3) chemico-physical specifications. For example, most of his
  temporal relationships are inferences drawn from vertical or horizontal space,
  the associations of his material are purely spatial, his conceptions of cultural
  values are taken largely from relative quantity and from chemico-physical
 attributes leading to judgments of quality, his inferences as to use and function
  are taken either from,spatial association or from the physical properties of
  shape, material, etc,/His work is entirely a pyramiding of inferences based on
  these foundations, and there is no remedy for this situation. It is in the nature
  of the archeological materials, and the student might as well face it! The only
  recourse for him is to make his multitude of required inferences congenial to the
  empirical facts and as acceptable as possible to his own reasoned opinion and
  that of his colleagues.
      Therefore the problem resolves itself into how, on the basis of these empirical
  data and with only an acceptable amount of inference, the archeologist is to
  construct classifications of archeological materials which will reflect cultural
  relationships as they existed among actual, pre-existing human groups. Since
  the broader and fuller experience of historiography and the anthropology of
  the living appears to have concentrated with advantage upon groups based on
  common biological, socio-political, linguistic, cultural, and geographic factors,
  it would seem best to follow suit, if only for the sake of the comparability of
  results and at least until the systems are proved impracticable for archeological
  research.
       However, even a superficial check will show that some of the group criteria
  are, in fact, impracticable. In the first place, “racial” and other groups based
  on purely biological factors, as currently defined by the physical anthropologists,
  have proved too broad and inclusive to satisfy the requirements of “culture
  classification.”’ Also, because Americanist archeology deals, for the most part,
  with non-literate and undocumented groups, there is little if any possibility of
  using linguistic criteria for classificatory purposes. Unwritten language does not
  “fossilize,” i.e., it does not produce material objectifications to be preserved.
  Only in the case of the “direct historical approach,” when the archeologist starts
  with a documented group, or in the case of a literate society such as the Maya
  hierarchy is linguistic evidence available. Statements as to specific linguistic
  affiliations of an undocumented people are inferences, usually of a highly
146


unsupportable sort, and are based on cultural factors other than linguistic.
Although it is perhaps legitimate to assume that a culturally homogeneous site,
and one which appears to hold the remains of a relatively small social group,
say a single house structure, formerly held people who spoke a single tongue,
nevertheless when it comes to relating this site linguistically to some other site,
the archeologist is on very insecure grounds. And this is true even if the sites
seem to be culturally identical or very similar. In short and in general, neither
biological nor linguistic classifications are satisfactory for Americanist archeology.
    There seems to be at least some likelihood of correctly identifying the social
character of individual groups, as for example the family connections of single
house sites or the “clan” connections of Southwestern ‘unit dwellings.” But
here again, when it comes to projecting social inferences between such units,
the procedure is precarious. Social or political organization is not objectified
materially except through secondary phenomena such as house- and village-plan,
“clan” devices and symbols. Therefore, as with language, the relating of
bygone peoples socially or politically depends for any validity it might have
upon the similarity of predominantly, if not wholly, non-social and non-
political phenomena, i.e., a general cultural likeness in so far as it can be
inferred from material manifestations.
    Thus, whatever the case may be with regard to the characteristics of indi-
vidual undocumented groups, whenever relationships are sought between them,
the major dependence has to be placed upon cultural factors other than linguistic
and socio-political. Similarities in the material objectifications of culture are
taken to indicate cultural relationships, and the latter are often interpreted to
include socio-political or linguistic, and sometimes even biological, relationships.
But as McKern has said, “The only taxonomic basis for dealing with all cultural
manifestations, regardless of occasional direct historical tie-ups, is that of
culture type.” (1939, p. 302)
    Therefore it is the archeologist’s task to abstract his empirical data (the
spatial and quantitative attributes and relationships of his finds plus their
chemico-physical specifications) and to construct from them a picture or defini-
tion of the “culture type” of the group of people whose remains he has found
and aims to classify. The procedure by which this is to be done is more or less
laid out for him by the nature of the archeological materials. In the first place,
the archeologist is empirically given nothing more than a series of cultural
remains grouped, i.e., localized, in space. The cultural materials at one geographic
location, usually called a site, pertain to the people who occupied or utilized
that location and can be so classified empirically without recourse to inference.
Exceptions occur when, for example, the remains have been moved from their
original locus by non-human action, as of water, glaciers, rodents, but such
instances do not appreciably alter the generalization. Cultural materials “un-
disturbed” and in situ, represent the local group that made, used, or possessed
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               147

  them in the past. Since the local human groups represented by these localized
  finds are the only empirical ones with which the archeologist of non-literate
  and undocumented cultures deals, they are basic and constitute the starting point
  of all archeological taxonomy. On purely empirical grounds they may be
  marshalled into larger units based on geographic propinquity: all cultural
  materials within a certain valley or on a certain mesa or within a designated
  radius of a certain spot may be thrown together as representing the people who
  once were in that particular geographic region.
       But for the delineation of cultural relationships such geographic taxonomy,
  although empirical, is often misleading and of little value. The archeologist who,
  because he finds Mousterian and Magdalenian remains in a single cave, would
  lump them together and seek cultural comparisons for this whole undifferen-
  tiated mass of material, would find himself in serious difficulties. To be sure, he
  might find another such series of material and thus make telling comparisons,
  but would not his conclusions as to bygone cultural groups and their relation-
  ships be mistaken? In other words, it is necessary for the archeologist to analyze
  the data from his individual locations or sites and to make a judgment as to
  what remains, if any, represent a human group which actually existed as a
  cultural unit in the past. This is to say that his primary obligation is to interpret
  his site in terms of the human group or groups which used it. This is nothing
  more or less than the construction of a cultural context for the site or its
  separable components. When this has been done and, if necessary, some defini-
  tion made of the “‘culture type,” then will come the time when comparative
  and taxonomic studies can profitably be initiated.
       To put it most simply, the archeologist first separates his material empiri-
  cally on the basis of space, defining a local human group; then he separates
Lit inferentially on the basis of cultural cohesiveness, defining a cultural group;
  then he constructs a cultural context for this cultural group; and finally he
  compares this context with others similarly derived, typing and classifying
  them in order to bring out what he considers to have been their cultural
  relationships. In these procedures, two things should be emphasized again: first,
  that the primary concern of the archeologist should be directed toward a depic-
_tion of the culture of a human group represented at a single site or fraction
  thereof, not toward the placement of certain cultural manifestations in a broad
  panorama of archeological sites; second, that presence-and-absence trait lists,
  while they may prove useful tools, are neither the primary goals nor the
  vital factors in the present method that they are in the current taxonomic
 ‘systems of the Southwest and Midwest.
      As many others have pointed out, the criteria upon which taxonomic
  systems may be made (once the contexts have been constructed) can be
  widely variant depending upon the wishes, knowledge, compulsions of the
  archeologist. Furthermore, it is obvious that the criterion upon which the
  148


  primary break-down is made will be of signal importance to the results (see
  Kluckhohn and Reiter, 1939, p. 152). But granting the premises of the present
> study, the purpose of all such systematization is to depict as exactly as possible
  the cultural relationships of culturally cohesive groups of people. Therefore, if
  any classification, no matter what its primary or other criteria, seems satis-
  factorily to reflect these relationships, then its use is justified. The particular
  system is but a means to an end and if, for example, one based on a primary
  break-down along ceramic lines appears to fill requirements, there is no cause
  to attack it because it is based on only one criterion. What the archeologist is
  trying to do is to find some classification which will correspond most fully to
  what actually were the cultural relationships of human groups in the past. If he
  comes to the conclusion that the similarities of even some “inconsequential”
  category, say stone axes, follows most closely what this and other evidence
  indicates were the actual relationships, then he would be vindicated in using
  a classification of stone axes to express broader cultural relationships. By doing
  this he is not saying that the most important cultural category is that of axes
  or that he is classifying cultural wholes. He is merely saying that a primary
  break-down on this basis seems to make the most sense, serves to provide him
  with the most productive leads, is congruent with the most empirical and
  inferential details, and depicts most exactly his opinion of what the cultural
  relationships actually were.
        _Nor is there any reason to believe that a classification which has proved
  valuable in one area or for one temporal period will prove equally practicable
  in another area or at another time. It is conceivable that at one time sandals
  will be found most sensitive, while at another they will become stable and
  apparently indifferent to cultural connections. It is possible that in one region
  the paste of ceramic products will be the conservative element, against which
  design will vary with foreign influence; in another area the reverse might prove
  to be the case. Therefore I do not believe that McKern is to be followed when
   he advocates thel*Standardization”\ of classificatory determinants for systems
  as broad as that which he proposes (1939, pp. 306-307). The archeologists, like
  other students of culture, must be prepared to assess their data and change their
  tenets accordingly. The formation of a rigid system and its mechanical prosecu-
  tion is hardly warranted in view of what we already know of the nature and
  workings of culture.
      Thus, with relationships which actually obtained to be depicted and human
  groups which actually existed to be categorized, the archeologist is faced with
  the problem of developing some method for the presentation of his hypotheses.
  To date, the most satisfactory way in which relationships in general have been
  depicted has been that of( binomial classification\such as is used in biology.
  But it is important to note that this method can be used to present only those
  relationships which have already been hypothesized by the classifier. Of itself
 TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              149

  it does not establish relationships. It serves merely as a tool, a filing system
  into which already classified data can be put for ready reference and as an aid
  to future study.
       Therefore it is illogical for students of culture to belabor the binomial
  system because it was developed in the field of biology where sexual and bi-
  parental relationships are the rule. There is no reason to look upon it as the
  exclusive property of biology or to assume biological connotations when it is
  used. If viewed as a tool, the only problem is whether it can be of service in
  the exposition of cultural relationships and whether its mechanisms for showing
  ever widening circles of affinity can be of advantage to cultural studies. It be-
  comes a question of whether the lineages which range from ‘“‘mono-parental” to
  “multi-parental” and the asexual relationships characteristic of culture can be
  handled profitably with such a tool.
       But actually, if we examine the way in which the Midwestern and South-
  western taxonomists apply the binomial system, we will find that it is quite
  different from the way the biologists use it. This rather important fact seems
  to have escaped both the taxonomists, who have failed to use it to defend their
  position, and the critics, who have thus been arguing largely at cross purposes.
  But what is more to the present point, it provides a means of adaptation whereby
  the binomial system can be, and has been, applied to cultural matters. First,
  however, it will be well to show just how the two applications differ.
      In)biology, the name of the lowest classificatory order; the species, is truly
 /binomial,| having two terms which cannot stand apart. Thess terms represent
  not only ‘the specific characters but also the generic characteristics and affilia-
_ tions as well. Thus the specific name canadensis when appearing alone may be
  indicative of many different groupings: the bighorn sheep (Ovis c.), the elk
  (Cervus c.), the Canadian goose (Branta c.), the columbine (Aquilegia c.). Only
  when the generic term is understood does the specific term have meaning. This
  brings about a considerable rigidity in nomenclature, because, before a species
  can be identified at all, it is already burdened with more or less definite and
  broad relationships. Should the hypotheses concerning these generic relationships
  be changed, the resulting disruption in terminology, as well as in the student’s
 _thinking, is proportionately great.
      In archeology, on the other hand, the nomenclature is not binomial at all
 in any Linnaean or biological sense. Although the name of the lowest classificatory
 order consists of two terms as in biology, e.g., Orr Focus, only one of these
 terms stands for the characters of the specific group and neither represents the
 characteristics or affiliations of a higher order. The word Focus merely identifies
 the magnitude of the category and Orr designates the set of determinants. It is
 the same as if the biologists were to say “canadensis species.” There are no
 automatic ties to a higher category, and when the system is expanded and the
 Orr Focus is affiliated with the Oneota Aspect, it is only by juxtaposition and
    150

    is not inherent within the name Orr Focus itself. Therefore the archeolopical
    nomenclature is flexible, the units of classification being “free swimming”
“entities which can be attached and unattached |
|                                              ‘to larger units,‘without changing
    their given names or definitive characters.
        I believe that it is this very flexibility which makes practicable the binomial
    system for cultural manifestations in archeology. It permits the classificatory
    assignments to be changed without changing names and without an undue
    amount of confusion to plague the archeologist. If one day he decides that the
    Orr Focus belongs in the Oneota Aspect and the next that it belongs in the
    Fort Ancient Aspect, he is not required to change his nomenclature or to re-
    arrange other units whose relationships to the Orr Focus are proclaimed by
    their names. All he has to do is to shift the Orr Focus bodily into another
    pigeonhole and take care of the resultant gymnastics in his thinking when he
    deals with it. Taxonomy in archeology should be viewed as a system of working
    hypotheses which may be changed as the evidence warrants and opinion changes.
    It is illogical to cry with one breath that cultural taxonomy is incomparable to
    that of other fields, yet with the next to condemn it because it is not equally
    steadfast and sure! It is very possible, if not highly probable, that the very
    incomparability lies in its uncertainty and more tentative character, which in
    turn is due to the nature of its materials and the procedures required to handle
    them.
        These same factors contrive to make archeological taxonomy a matter of
    judgment and not the automatic and “objective” outcome of manipulating
    cultural abstractions. The cultural contexts and their constituent elements have
    been established on the basis of large amounts of interpretation and hypothesis,
    and it is hardly to be expected that suddenly on the comparative level there
    will be a reversal so that mechanically applied systems will solve the problems.
    We can agree with Steward that
      . . strict adherence to a method drawn from biology inevitably fails to take into
    account the distinctively cultural and unbiological fact of blends or crosses between
    essentially unlike types. (1941, p. 366)

    But the archeological method, whether drawn from biology or not, at the
    present time does not resemble the biological method except in so far as it
    attempts to depict the branching quality of relationships by the use of a
    dendritic or tree-like pattern. Brew has taken exception to this usage because
    of its biological overtones (1946, pp. 52ff), but it is not too much to point
    out that a dendritic pattern is not the exclusive property of biology, e.g., it is a
    characteristic of river drainages and the deposition of minerals upon stone. That
    it is also a characteristic of cultural relationships can be easily seen if one takes
    the trouble to analyze graphically such a body of data as given by Kroeber on
    the spread of the alphabet. (1923, pp. 263ff)
         It is true that cultural derivations are often multiple and the dendritic
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                             151

 pattern thus complicated. But this means nothing more than that the archeolo-
 gist who would set a given manifestation upon some one “branch” or “stem”
 must decide which, if any, are the most fundamental and significant influences,
 either for his present problem or the cultural context as a whole. In a compar-
 able instance, Leslie Spier found no difficulty in identifying Havasupai culture
 as fundamentally Basin, although it has obviously received strong influences
 from several other sources (1929, p. 219). Spier analyzed the data, made his
 decision, and assigned the culture to the category with which it seemed to him
 to display the most basic connections. The same can be done with archeological
 data, providing only that the bases for the decision are made plain for the
 evaluation of the reader. Trait lists and mathematical treatment may well be of
 service in clarifying the material, but alone they cannot be expected to solve
 the problem for the very reason that these relationships ave multiple and an
 assessment of their relative importance is in the majority of cases a question of
 judgment, not of mathematics.
     To me there seems no barrier to classifying a given cultural manifestation
 as a whole in one category and, either for other purposes or for a more detailed
 accounting, to classify its component parts with completely different units. For
 example, the cultural context of Component A as a whole might appear to have
 its most basic relationships with Component B, while at the same time its
 ceramic complex shows overwhelming influence from Component C. As long as
 the evidence is given, I can see no trouble in grouping Components A and B
 together when the intent is to show over-all relations. When, however, detailed
ceramic studies are in order, Component A could be grouped with Component C.
 The same procedure can extend down the scale: when the data require, the
 ceramic complex as a whole might be grouped one way while some of its seg-
ments are grouped otherwise.
     In short, as Brew has said (1946, pp. 46, 65), we need more, not fewer
classifications. But there is little reason to expect that any rigidly applied,
mathematical, ‘‘standardized” system will of itself be satisfactory for the
presentation of cultural relationships. The archeologist and his system need to
be flexible and able to change with the changing demands of his complicated
and disconnected material. If so many judgments must be made throughout the
process it comes to a question, not of denying and shunning them, but of
seeing how explicitly and how soundly the necessary ones can be made, pre-
sented, and supported. On these grounds, then, there seem to be no substantial
arguments against using a binomial system to depict cultural relationships as
they are envisioned by the archeologist. If he will not apply it after the fashion
of biology and then decry it because it brings biological connotations, but if
he will adapt it to his own needs and at the same time keep it flexible, he may
feel free to use it as a means. Let it carry him as far as it will, and then let
him leave it. In a burning desert, let us not throw away our parasol because
it is marked “Made in Japan.”
