        AN ANALYSIS        OF AMERICANIST ARCHEOLOGY                  IN THE
                              _UNITED STATES

Haves establishéd a critical standard, it will now be possible to examine
        critically the character of Americanist archeology in the United States. In
a later chapter, this will be done by implication through the advocacy of a par-
ticular and somewhat different approach to archeological problems and materials.
Here, however, the task will be to analyze what the archeologists say they have
been doing and what they have actually done, and then to see how these two
bodies of fact compare. This will be accomplished explicitly, by reference to
the published writings of particular archeologists and in terms of the definitions
arrived at in the preceding chapter.
     It is not to be thought that, in the following pages, the men selected for
analysis are being criticized on a personal basis. Both the analysis and criticism
will be of published results. It is realized that many times the archeologist may
wish to include in his reports certain data or certain treatment of data but is
prevented from doing so because of publication or other restrictions. In such
cases, the vision and intentions of the archeologist may not be criticized, or
perhaps may not even be known. The only fair criterion for judging Americanist
archeology is, therefore, the extent to which the final results of empirical research
measure up, or do not measure up, to the aims stated or implied by the various
researchers themselves. If the results do measure up, it is probably safe to give
the archeologist credit. On the other hand, if they do not measure up, the placing
of blame is an unimportant detail for the present study. It will be sufficient to
have shown that the archeological reports do not come up to the expectations
claimed for them.
    Thus, the men will be examined and criticized as representatives of the tradi-
tions, the aims, and the methods which have been recognized as the best in
Americanist archeology in the United States. The choice of those who are to be
analyzed will in no way be a measure of central tendency. It will be consciously
weighted toward men whose influence in academic and professional circles has
been of the highest. Furthermore, selection will lean toward men whose direct and
most intensive influence is contemporary rather than of an earlier time. But even
within these limits, it will be impossible to include all the influential archeologists
of what might be considered the contemporary period. Some influential men,
J. A. Ford, for example, have not published enough to provide a fair basis for
analysis; others, such as H. B. Collins, Jr., while authorities in their fields, have
been omitted because their influence is restricted. But complete coverage is
hardly necessary for the present study. After the writings of certain men have
                                          45
46


been examined, the critical findings will be found to fit, with but minor accommo-
dations, the work of the majority of Americanists, most of whom employ more
or less patterned variants of a single approach and are concerned with more or
less the same range of data.

    The influence of A. V. Kidder upon archeological research in the Americas has
been, and is now, of the greatest proportions. It is not too much to suggest that
he is the most influential exponent of the discipline active in the Western
Hemisphere today. It was his vigorous and enlightened prosecution of the trend
initiated by himself, Nelson, and Spier,*® which brought Southwestern archeology
out of its Cushing-Fewkes stage and to the lines of investigation which have
been but broadened and intensified in the succeeding years. It was his re-orienta-
tion of the Carnegie Institution’s Maya program that has set those researches
upon their way toward a sound chronology and a knowledge of cultural rela-
tions throughout much of Middle America. It has been his influence upon both
these fields of archeology which has developed the broad foundation of their
research programs and served as a guide for most of the subsequent investiga-
tions in the regions.
    While specifically an archeologist, Kidder has maintained his broader affilia-
tions predominantly with the discipline of cultural anthropology. Although his
Chairmanship of the Division of Historical Research of the Carnegie Institution
might seem to controvert the last statement, it can be demonstrated that over
the years he has been associated overwhelmingly with cultural anthropology,
both academically, professionally, and with respect to learned societies.*?
From this it would seem legitimate to impute anthropological aims, or at least
some variation thereof, to his researches. In his own words, Kidder has pro-
claimed archeology to be “that branch of anthropology which deals with pre-
historic peoples” (Kidder and Thompson, 1938, p. 494) and has called the
archeologist “the mouldier variety of anthropologist” (1940a, p. 527). He has
also identified the aims of the two disciplines:
Together with and closely allied to acceptance of dogma comes failure to grasp the
bearings of our researches upon those broader problems of anthropology whose solution
should be the final aim of all our studies. (1937b, p. viii)

    At the same time, in his writings upon general and theoretical archeological
topics, he has consistently held to the point of view that archeology is “doing”
history:
We must not, of course, lose sight of our ultimate historical goal... . And this we can
most effectively accomplish by grasping the fact that archaeology, because of the nature
of the materials spared to us by the hand of time, must, in the first instance, be a study,
not of history in the commonly accepted sense of that word but of the history of
material culture. There we can be on solid ground. (1942, p. iii)
 TAYLOR                         A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                   47

 Archaeology, rightly conceived, is a historical discipline. Its primary task is to re-
 construct man’s career through the uncounted centuries of his preliterate, undocumented
 past. (1937c, p. 160)

  In designating the group engaged in studies of the pre-Columbian career of the American
  Indians, the term history has been used as symbolic of a desire to do away with the
  somewhat rigid distinction which has generally been drawn between archaeology and
  history. The work of the Section [of Early American History, Division of Historical
  Research, Carnegie Institution] is, of course, archaeological in that it deals with material
  remains rather than with written records. But archaeologists seek to gather from ruined
  buildings and potsherds the same sort of knowledge that historians derive from books
  and manuscripts, and while the subject matter and, therefore, the primary methods of
‘ the two disciplines are naturally unlike, their ultimate aims are identical, for both
  archeology and history strive to recover and to interpret the story of man’s past.
  (1930a, p. 91)§8

      Kidder, however, unlike most other Americanists, has provided a resolution
  for this anthropology-history ambivalence. This way out is neither clearly
  marked nor a point of frequent reference in his writings; in fact, its only explicit
  statement is pretty well hidden from the general archeological public, being
  found in an obscure typewritten progress-report filed in the library of the Pea-
  body Museum of Harvard:
  It should be emphasized, I think, that the sort of [archeological] work the Museum
  is doing on the Mimbres is not merely the accumulation of curious information about
  an extinct tribe, nor solely the collection of handsome exhibits for the Museum’s cases.
  It is much more than these, for it constitutes a definite contribution to one of the most
  important problems of anthropology. . . . Anthropology seeks to reconstruct the history
  of man, of his works, of his bodily structure, and of his mind, in order that there may be
  deduced from a study of that history, the basic laws which have governed in the past,
  and which therefore may be expected to control in the future, the destinies of the
  human race. (1926, pp. 1, 2)

      While there are no other such direct statements, Kidder has implied what is
  virtually the same thing in several other papers.®® In the light of the definitions
  arrived at in the preceding chapter of this study, these views expressed by
  Kidder are some of the most pertinent and significant comments that have
  appeared in the literature of Americanist archeology. Here, both archeology and
  anthropology are said to be doing historiography for the purpose of aiding
  further, more specialized research. But the next question which arises is: How
  do these statements conform to the actual contributions which Kidder has
  made through his field work and through the field work of those under his direc-
  tion?
      The answer is that there is little or no conformity. To date, no cultural syn-
  thesis, no picture of the life of any site or any group of sites, has come from his
48


pen. Nor has he used his empirical data to analyze or discuss specifically and in
detail any cultural process, regularity, “law,” or so-called non-material aspect.
He has “‘done’’ neither historiography nor cultural anthropology.
     His nearest approach to these accomplishments has been his discussion of the
pottery of Pecos in the light of Shepard’s findings (Kidder, 1936b). But even
here the tone is not so much one of analyzing and presenting the nature and the
changes of the ceramic complex of a people, as it is one of investigating the
significance of certain ceramic evidence for the relationship of Pecos as a site to
other particular sites in the vicinity, chronologically and in respect to culture-
influences. The discussion seems primarily comparative rather than an exposition
of the ceramic complex, its position and significance within the total culture of
Pecos pueblo. Not that Kidder is unaware of the latter possibilities, for he asks
some very pointed questions as to the nature of the ceramic complex: for ex-
ample, the question of the relations between pictography, ceramic decoration, and
the ornamentation of ceremonial objects (p. 626). But these problems are merely
stated, and the failure to pursue them is credited to lack of time. If such prob-
lems had been attacked with regard to the nature and interrelations of pottery
within Pecos itself, Kidder would have been “doing” historiography, at least of
the ceramic complex. If he had then proceeded to compare his findings with
similar findings from other sites or areas with the intent of abstracting the regu-
larities between the two sets of (ceramic) data, he would have been “doing”
cultural anthropology. As the matter now stands, he has done neither.
     Other than this, Kidder has not even approached the construction of a
cultural synthesis of Pecos pueblo. He has not brought his raw data together
in any cultural sense, much less painted a cultural picture. We know roughly the
broad outlines of the growth of the pueblo, but for all the superposition and
sequent construction mentioned in his reports (Kidder, 1924, pp. 16-32) there
is no analysis or presentation of the details of that growth or of the cultural ob-
jects found associated with its various phases. For all the descriptive detail in
The Artifacts of Pecos (1932a) and despite the establishment of several periods
of ceramic art (1936b), there is neither any provenience given for the vast
majority of artifacts nor any consistent correlation of these specimens with the
ceramic periods. The description of the artifacts seems to be for its own sake
and for the sake of comparative study on a purely descriptive level with similar
artifacts from other sites. It may well be asked whether the meaning of the arti-
 facts for the culture of Pecos is thought to lie in their form and classification of
 form, or whether it lies in their relations to one another and to the broad cultural
and natural environment of Pecos.”° If it is true, as Kidder says (1932a, p. 12);
 that provenience “would be of interest to a very limited number of persons,”
then this is the most damning criticism of Americanist archeology that has ap-
peared in print to date!
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                49

     The influence of Kidder and Guernsey’s Archaeological Explorations in
Northeastern Arizona (1919) has, I believe, been second to none in the develop-
ment of Southwestern archeology. For this reason and because there is a rather
widely held idea that Basket-Maker II “is certainly well understood” (McGregor,
1941, p. 207), this and his other Marsh Pass report (Guernsey and Kidder, 1921)
must be considered here, although they were written many years ago upon work
done at an even earlier time. An additional reason for consideration is that, other
than these and his Pecos publications, Kidder has nowhere to date published a
detailed site-report.
     The Marsh Pass reports make two vitally important contributions to the
field of Southwestern archeology: they once and for all established the chron-
ological priority of the Basket-Maker over the Cliff-Dweller materials, and they
provided a body of clear and pioneering descriptive data. Beyond this, however,
they do not go. Even taking into account the work of Nusbaum, Prudden, and
Pepper, it is impossible to agree that Basket-Maker II is “‘well-understood.” Ex-
cept for detailed descriptive knowledge of a range of artifact types and some
apparently correct and very sagacious interpretation of use, we know very little
about Basket-Maker II from the papers of Kidder and Guernsey, or from any
source.
    For example, on the one hand we have Guernsey and Kidder’s word that
the Marsh Pass caves were occupied sporadically if at all and were probably used
more for storage and burial than as dwellings (1921, p. 110). On the other
hand, there is considerable evidence, in the reports themselves, of habitation
features such as thick ash beds, floors, layers of grass, smoked roofs, and other
cultural refuse (1921, pp. 30-31; 1919, pp. 27, 31, 75-77, 86). Whatever may be
the actual case, it is impossible to reconcile these apparent contradictions by
appeal to the publications, since excavation procedure and the details of the
deposits have not been reported. At the present time, we do not know, and can-
not know without further excavation, even such an important cultural fact as
whether the Basket-Maker people used the Marsh Pass caves as habitation sites
or not.
    Nor do we know much of the cultural objects beyond descriptions of certain
selected artifacts. We know that the Basket-Makers made twined woven bags,
and we know the weaves of some of the individual bags. But we do not know the
weaves of all bags, nor which weave was the most common, nor the quantity of
twined bags in relation to, say, coiled basketry, other textiles, or other containers.
This is because no account was taken of fragmentary specimens or “rags,” and
there is no quantitative summary of bags, textiles, or containers. Nor is it pos-
sible for the reader to make such an enumeration from the data given in the
reports. No information is given on the proportions within the several descriptive
categories that do show variation; for instance, on the ratio of the several sandal
50


types, or of the different kinds of sandal ties, or of the number of decorated
sandals in relation to the number of decorated baskets. Above all there is little
information on the provenience of the majority of objects, except as to the
cave from which they came. Even this site-provenience, in a great many cases,
must be extracted from the tables explaining the illustrations and cannot be ob-
tained from the text.
    There is no analysis of the association of object with object; contents of cists
are listed, but it is often impossible to identify the finds of a particular cist
with the descriptions of specimens given later in the report. There is no analysis
of cultural categories, such as the textile industry: its materials, its methods,
its products, and its quantitative and aesthetic position within the cultural whole
of the site or area. In other words, there is no summation, no bringing together,
no synthesis, of the wealth of descriptive material. As at Pecos, description seems
to have been an end in itself and has been used almost wholly for the purposes
of comparison with other descriptive material. No picture of the culture has been
constructed from even those data that are at hand.
     It is apparent, therefore, that these reports have attained, but not fully,
the level of data; have attained the level of chronicle with respect to the separa-
tion of Basket-Maker from Cliff-Dweller data; but have attained neither the level
of historiography nor that of cultural anthropology. Once more, however, I
would like to point out that this is not a criticism of the authors of the reports, to
whom allowances can be made for a pioneer effort. It is, rather, to point out
that these reports do not constitute, at the present date, an acceptable basis for
constructing a picture of Basket-Maker culture.
     The archeological work of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, which
has been under Kidder’s direction since 1927, is seen to fall into the same pat-
tern. Although in his capacity as Chairman of the Division of Historical Research
he has many times proclaimed that archeology, especially Maya archeology,
aims at “reconstructing” history, it is a fact that no history, at least in the
sense defined above as historiography, has come from Carnegie’s work in the
Maya field, either under Kidder’s direction or before. This work has been
recently and, in my opinion, justly criticized from the standpoint of theory
 (Kluckhohn, 1940). In the present study, however, the task will be to inquire
into the field work and publications accomplished under Kidder’s direction and
to see how these results compare with Kidder’s stated aims.
     Individual reports of the members of the staff will be dealt with only by way
of example. It is the over-all program and its results, together with his own
publications, that will best and most fairly reflect Kidder’s influence upon
Carnegie’s archeological research. The papers dealing with the Temple of the
Warriors and with Coba will not be included because, although they appeared
during Kidder’s Chairmanship, they had been started and nearly completed
before he came into full charge.
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                     51

    In the following crude, but nevertheless adequate, classification of Carnegie
publications, only those works are included which deal with Maya archeology.”!

DESCRIPTIVE                                 Mayor Works      MInNoR       Works   TOTALS
  Reconnaissance and brief excavation              7               5                12
  Site reports                                     3               0                 3
  Ceramics              ’                          1               i                 8
  Artifacts                                        5              14                19
  Buildings                                        7               0                 7
  Topical synthesis                                1               0                  1

                                                                                    50

EPIGRAPHY, CALENDAR, AND CHRONOLOGY                5              16                21

                                                                                    21


INTERPRETIVE
  Religion                                         1                  2              3
  Cultural inferences                              4                                 4
  Topical synthesis                                0                  1              1

                                                                                     8

                                                                                          79

It is immediately apparent from the table that Carnegie’s publications under
Kidder have been overwhelmingly descriptive. Even within the category of
Epigraphy, there are a great number of papers which are primarily, if not wholly
descriptive. Out of a total of seventy-nine papers, there are only eight which are
specifically designed to interpret, in a cultural sense, the mass of descriptive data
collected by the Institution’s field workers. Seven of these eight papers are by
Thompson; and of these, six deal with religion and associated epigraphy (1934a
and b, 1939b, 1942b and c, 1943) and one deals with tobacco (1946). In other
words, we have Roy’s paper on The Engineering Knowledge of the Maya (1934)
and Thompson’s paper on tobacco, as the only contributions of the Carnegie
Institution toward an interpretation of the non-hierarchal culture of the ancient
Maya, and even here it is probable that engineering, if not tobacco, was char-
acteristic of the hierarchal rather than the common Maya.
    Apart from these few papers, we have descriptions, with now and then a
sentence or paragraph interpreting the use of individual artifacts or buildings
or assigning some class of objects to some cultural category, again mostly
religious or at least calendrical. Pollock’s publication on the round structures
(1936b) is not primarily an interpretive, but rather a descriptive synthesis, and
will be discussed later. We have descriptions of Maya artifacts, of Maya build-
52


ings, of Maya epigraphy together with comparative data designed to determine
their derivation or inspiration and their chronological position relative to
other material from other parts of middle America. But we have no discussions
of the place of all these objects within Maya culture, or even within the culture
of any one site or part of one site. For example, we have many detailed descrip-
tions of hierarchal buildings and many maps of Maya cities. But except for
Ricketson’s work in the plaza of Group E at Uaxactun (1937), we have no
detailed studies of the growth and integration of Maya cities or their constituent
parts. Reports on the sites intensively excavated, such as Chichen Itza and
Uaxactun and Copan, do not give the details of interrelationship between plaza
floors, separate buildings, stelae, or other objects. In the sites visited during
reconnaissance little excavation seems to have been done, the major interest
apparently lying in epigraphy, mapping of the city plan, hierarchal architecture,
and in collection of potsherds by occasional test-trenching. Obviously, it is not
the cultural pictures of the various sites, but their comparative materials, which
have been sought, and if it were not for the writings of Bishop Landa and other
documentary sources our knowledge of pre-Columbian Maya culture would be
meager indeed, despite over thirty years of work.
      For example, what do we know of the houses of the ancient Maya? Of the
hierarchal buildings we have many descriptions, but these have so far produced
little insight into the lives even of the Maya hierarchy and none into the lives of
the presumed majority of Maya population. Many Carnegie archeologists have
becried the lack of excavation in house or domiciliary mounds which Ricketson
has said “occur in every part of the [Yucatan] peninsula which has been in-
vestigated” (1937, p. 15). But their literary tears remind us of those shed by
the Walrus and the Carpenter: most copious but accomplishing little to remedy
the situation. As early as 1934, Kidder said:
For example, we know next to nothing as to what Maya “cities” really were... .
Excavations are needed in the inconspicuous little mounds so abundant at Chichen
Itza, which presumably cover whatever is left of the domestic structure.   (p. 93)
But as the matter stands today, we have a single report on four house mounds
and part of a fifth excavated in 1932 by Wauchope at Uaxactun (Wauchope,
1934). This work occupied seven weeks and constitutes our only Carnegie pub-
lication on ancient Maya dwelling houses, despite the fact that Ricketson found
no less than seventy-eight in 0.3 square miles of habitable land near Uaxactun
(1937, p. 16). Wauchope     makes a very urgent plea for more such work and
gives the names of other archeologists who at earlier times had pointed to the
same need (1934, p. 113). Yet four years later, he still finds it necessary to give
considerable space to the same plea (1938, pp. 146-153). At Benque Viejo,
Thompson chose to excavate in an area thought to contain residential mounds.
But his purpose, as stated (1942a, p. 2), was to obtain sherds which he reasoned
TAYLOR                       A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 53

would be more abundant in such an area. Although he gives some details of “con-
structional activities,” he fails to give an analysis of whether the mounds actually
were residential or not. It is quite obvious from the report that his interest in
the Benque Viejo mounds was in their production of pottery which could be used
for comparative purposes. The mounds as vestiges of former Maya dwellings and
as sources of cultural information of a domestic and plebian sort appear to have
intrigued him little, if at all.
    What do we know of the food habits of the ancient Maya? Gleanings from the
Carnegie Institution Year Book tell us of excavations in refuse deposits con-
ducted by Roberts, Brainerd, and before Kidder’s time by Vaillant at Chichen.7?
But we have no published results of these operations. Trik found 50-60 centi-
meters of black refuse at one place in Temple XXII at Copan (1939, p. 103).
This deposit contained many sherds, animal bones, obsidian flakes. In another
place in this same ruin, an entire floor was covered with a thin layer of ash refuse
with sherds, several bone tools, burned stones. But Trik grants only two short
paragraphs to these finds and fails to list quantify, describe, or identify any of
the contained materials. He says that the ruin was selected for excavation be-
cause it contains “‘one of the finest compositions of architectural sculpture known
in the Maya area” (p. 87). He is apparently not interested in the associated cul-
tural material of a less artistic type. In Ricketson’s report on Group E at
Uaxactun (1937, pp. 204-205), there is mention made of refuse and a list of the
animal species found. But the implications of these finds for the subsistence of
the Maya are not developed. There are no quantitative data given; nor is anything
said as to signs of fracture, cutting, cooking, or general use; nor is the age or
edibility of the individuals or species discussed. What we have in this instance is
mere biological identification and no cultural information. Such data may be of
use to a biologist but are hardly usable by one who would wish to approach cul-
tural problems. Smith and Kidder have said that
... even in the refuse deposits and domiciliary mounds that have been dug, surprisingly
few implements and weapons have come to light. (1943, p. 162)

But what is even more surprising in view of Kidder’s contention that he is
attempting to “reconstruct” Maya culture history is the scarcity of reports upon
even those deposits which have been dug. Since the nature of the information
which has appeared in print about excavated refuse is such as to be virtually
useless for attack on cultural problems, we are left to assume that other aspects
of the research program are more important and more rewarding of publication,
so that as a result they have been published instead of data on food refuse and
other cultural detritus.
    What do we know of the costumes of Maya ceremonial personages? There is
a chapter on Representations of Dress, Ornaments and Accoutrements in
54

Ricketson’s report on Group E at Uaxactun (1937, Chap. V). But the description
is typological, i.e., examples of feathered and other types of headdresses are de-
scribed, as well as examples of robes and sandals, etc. But quantitative data
are given only incidentally, and we are not able to know which type is most
prevalent. Nor are we able to know which type of sandal, for instance, is found
with which type of headdress or what type of accoutrement is found in what
sort of depiction upon what sort of monument. In other words, the descrip-
tions given by Ricketson, being atomized and not synthesized, cannot be used
to “reconstruct” the habiliments of Maya personages or used to make in-
ferences as to the role or cultural significance of the figures that wear them.
The descriptions can be used only for comparing the representations of headdress
and sandals at Uaxactun with similar representations at other sites.
    What do we know of the pottery of the ancient Maya? Here again the
Carnegie archeologists have becried the inadequacy of investigation but have
done little publication to remedy the situation. In 1932, A. L. Smith said that
ceramic studies in the Maya area were handicapped by a paucity of specimens
and the rarity of any specimens whose exact provenience and stratigraphic rela-
tions were known (p. 3). In 1935, Kidder said that ‘our present knowledge of
Maya ceramics is almost exclusively based on fine mortuary vessels” (1935a, p.
119). In 1939, Thompson speaks of the ‘abysmal ignorance of ceramic history
throughout almost the entire area” (1939a, p. 7). And in 1943, Andrews said:
Perhaps one of the greatest barriers in the way of an understanding of the general
perspectives of Maya history has been a really blissful ignorance of the ceramics of the
Yucatan Peninsula. (p. 62)

Thus, from some of the earliest to some of the latest of Carnegie’s publications
under Kidder’s direction, we hear the same cry. And when we remember the
major role which ceramic studies have played in the development of archeology in
other areas of the Americas and abroad, and particularly when we recognize
the growth and value of ceramic knowledge in such regions as the American
Southwest and the Mississippi Valley within the same period from 1927 to the
present, any comparison with Carnegie’s work in the Maya area is prejudicial to
the latter institution’s program.
    It has long since been recognized in areas where pottery has helped in de-
veloping a chronology and a series of cultural relationships, that descriptions
must be detailed and standardized in order to be usable. Yet Carnegie’s descrip-
tions of pottery are meager, superficial, and far from consistent in the aspects
covered or in amount of detail. In fact we find Thompson as late as 1942, writing
for a professional audience and saying:

Maya pottery reveals such diversity of form, and so few descriptions of material other
than the more grandiose mortuary types exist, that the task of combining an adequate
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  2)

enumeration of types with a due regard to cost of publication and the necessity of not
burdening the reader with too many pages of description presents a serious problem.
(1942a, p. 4, italics mine)
To anyone fully aware of the value of ceramic studies and equally aware of the
requirements of comparative study, the real need would seem to call for a fuller
and more regularized description rather than an apologetic effort to produce the
reverse.
     But if the descriptions are inadequate for satisfactory comparative studies, it
still remains that the Carnegie archeologists are primarily interested in this very
comparative study and not in the ceramic complex per se. They apparently are
intent upon using pottery to establish cultural and temporal relations between
sites. They are not intent upon developing and analyzing the pottery complex
at a given site or in deriving, from a study of such pottery, any inferences as to
the nature of the particular cultural expression or of Maya culture as a whole.
There are many examples to support this contention.
     One of Kidder’s first acts on becoming Chairman of the Division was to
inaugurate a combined pottery-architecture study (Kidder, 1939, p. 238). This
was for the express purpose of placing the respective types in proper chron-
ological sequence and of supplementing the epigraphic chronology (Kidder,
1930a, p. 101). A. L. Smith seems to be offering a vindication of Carnegie’s
concern with the fine, mortuary ceramics when he observes that the utility
wares are conservative and show local and temporal variations only in subtle tech-
nological differences, while the fine wares, on the other hand, reflect the
individual maker, vary more, and hence are more reliable criteria for “regional
and chronological” classification (1932, p. 3). At a later date, we have the
statement of Kidder and Shepard:
We have described these specimens in detail because, as has been said, they exhibit
the earliest known examples of the decorative use of stucco; also because preliminary
study of stuccoed vessels from subsequent horizons at Kaminaljuyu and elsewhere in
Mesoamerica indicates that various materials and techniques were employed and that
these may prove to have regional and chronological significance. (1944, pp. 28-29, italics
mine)
In his report on Structure A-1 at Uaxactun, Robert Smith says that the six
complete mounds of the structure constitute the most perfect single medium
yet discovered in the Maya area for the correlation of architecture, ceramics,
and burial customs (1937, p. 226). But in the succeeding pages he fails to go
into this correlation or to give information on the burials found, and he leaves
the pottery to be treated in another, to date unpublished volume (p. 230). His
conclusions are occupied with inferences as to chronology.
    Thompson’s use of pottery is likewise dominated by chronological and com-
parative considerations. His very approach to Benque Viejo was instigated by
56

such concerns and his use of the pottery of San José was wholly “to fit San
José into Maya history by comparisons with ceramic types already placed in
sequence at other sites” (1939a, p. 7). How else can one explain the fact that at
both the sites he worked only with rim and “significant” base sherds or kept only
rim, bottom, and shoulder sherds unless some other fragment revealed ‘‘signifi-
cant” form or decoration (1939a, p. 65; 1942a, p. 4)? Furthermore, other sherds
apparently were not even counted, at least at San José. One may legitimately
ask: what made those certain sherds “significant” and why, in the Maya area, is
shape “of more importance than ware in classifying the common monochrome
forms” (1942a, p. 4)? A glance at the reports themselves will return the answer:
not for an understanding of the ceramic complex of the sites or of Maya ceramics
as a whole, but for comparative studies on a regional and chronological basis
with a view to establishing the relation of one site to another.
    In Carnegie’s publications on excavation or reconnaissance, rarely if ever
are we provided with sherd percentages, the ratio of decorated to undecorated
pottery, the relative amounts of the several pottery types within or around the
several types of buildings, an analysis of the types and quantities of ceramic
objects found with burials of varying categories such as age, sex, location, etc.
As quoted above, Kidder and others have noted the incompleteness of our
knowledge of Maya ceramics other than the mortuary wares. Yet despite this
awareness, there has been no increase of publications covering the domestic
wares, and this in the face of much field work and much publication in the
architectural, religious, artifactual, and epigraphic realms. I am aware, of
course, that Roberts and Brainerd have worked a great deal on ceramics and
that Shepard has been doing ceramic technology; but I am equally aware that
published results have been indicatively few and that other Carnegie archeolo-
gists have neglected ceramics, at least in publication if not in the field. What-
ever the reasons behind this situation may be, the results are clear. Carnegie’s
publication list and the contents of its various papers indicate much less intensity
of stimulation along ceramic lines than along other lines. If Kidder’s direction
had been vigorously oriented toward comprehensive and detailed ceramic studies,
it seems highly probable that more published results would have appeared, and
the ratio of ceramic to, say, architectural or epigraphic studies might have been
more on a par. Our knowledge might now encompass more than merely mortuary
ware, and we might know more about ceramics as a cultural complex. And
all this would be in addition to comparative and chronological information
which would hardly have been impaired by such further data.
     Before taking up the final point in the analysis, I would like to mention
 four papers which go beyond mere description and contribute most substantially
 to our knowledge of Maya culture. I refer to Roys’s The Engineering Knowledge
 of the Maya (1934) and three papers by Thompson, Maya Chronology: the
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                57


Fifteen Tun Glyph (1934a), The Moon Goddess in Middle America (1939b),
and Maya Arithmetic (1942b). In his monograph, Roys says that he is writing
. .. to present facts which will allow us to picture the mental traits and trends which
were responsible for the spectacular results which the student and the traveler now
see in Yucatan and Guatemala. (p. 35)

And Thompson projects an idea along a similar vein when he says that “if we
are ever to achieve a comprehensive reconstruction of Maya culture, we must
have some insight into Maya mental processes” (1942b, p. 41). Earlier he had
said that the bridge between our mentality and that of the Maya should be
strengthened by making our translations of the glyphs follow as closely as
possible those distinctions which were made by the Maya themselves (1934a, p.
253). Other than these few papers, it has remained for non-Carnegie archeolo-
gists to give us even our topical syntheses, for example Butler’s work on dress
and ornament (1931). Although Morris as early as 1931 said that “it would be
of marked    interest to know    what units of measurement       were   employed”    by
the Maya in their architecture (p. 210), it remained for a non-Carnegie student
actually to make a study of this problem (Cramer, 1938; see also, Blom, 1935).
Tschopik analyzed and synthesized the weaves of textiles and textile patterns
painted on Uloa Valley pottery (Ms., 1937), and Cresson attacked the problem
of whether the Maya used sweat houses (1938). Such problems and approaches
to problems have been left strictly alone by Carnegie, except for Thompson’s
brief note on Some Uses of Tobacco among the Maya (1946). Pollock’s mono-
graph on the Round Structures of Middle America (1936b) is descriptive, classi-
ficatory, and distributional. As a topical review, it is descriptive rather than
interpretive or integrative. There is little which helps to fit these structures into
the culture of their respective sites or into Maya culture as a whole. They are
without cultural contexts, except certain Quetzalcoatl and Mexican connections.
    And so it goes. Carnegie has sought and found the hierarchal, the grandiose.
It has neglected the common, the everyday. And even within its chosen segment
of Maya culture, it has produced data for the most part in a narrowly descriptive
range. Kidder himself has several times alluded to this one-sided predilection for
the grandiose and the “fancy” in archeology:
Non-ceramic specimens have proved to be relatively rare at all Middle American sites
so far investigated. This is partly to be accounted for by the fact that excavators
have confined themselves largely, as did we at Guaytan, to work in ruined ceremonial
structures in which, of course, little was left at abandonment and into whose massive
rubble construction went clean, new material, unlikely to contain artifacts of any
sort. (Smith and Kidder, 1943, p. 162)

Thus, archaeologists are often only allowed to excavate when spectacular discoveries
may be expected and are turned aside from their proper business, which is the study
58

of the long, slow growth of human culture and the formulation of those problems of
the development of society whose solution is, in the last analysis, the common aim of both
anthropology and history. (Kidder, 1937c, p. 160)
But this realization seems to have produced little or nothing in the way of
action in the field or results in print. A most illuminating case in point is the
excavation at Kaminaljuyu (Kidder, 1945a).
     At this locality, the original intention had been to conduct stratigraphic
tests in a midden which had already produced a large amount of material and
which is evidently of considerable extent. Gamio had previously worked there in
what appeared to be early deposits, and Lothrop had discovered sculptures
which seemed late. The site presented, therefore, “a likely place for finding
deposits representative of at least two phases of Guatemala Highland culture”
 (p. 65). In the face of the scarcity of stratigraphic excavations in the Maya
area as a whole, this would seem to have been a very worthy project and one
which might give promise of some well-grounded conclusions upon cultural
manifestations, their modifications, and their sequence. But the road to Hell
and the field of Maya archeology are paved with good intentions. The project
was abandoned for an attack on a mound which they “figured could be cleared
in three weeks or so at the cost of about a hundred dollars.”           (p. 66)
    The readiness with which stratigraphic excavation was abandoned for a
mound which promised no more than three weeks’ work is the point that I wish to
emphasize here. Expediency and a need to preserve the mound from destruction
cannot be considered to have been of vital importance in making the choice
between midden and mound. Five meters had been cut off the mound to enlarge
a football field, but the bounce of an Association football would hardly endanger
the structure, and there were some 198 other mounds in the site. Perhaps Dr.
Villacorta was importunate in asking “if the Carnegie Institution would care to
make further investigations” (p. 66). But it is very questionable that the
strongest urging would, of itself, have made Kidder abandon excavations that he
considered more important or induced him to attack a project that did not hold
equal or more promise from his own point of view. This promise could not have
been stratigraphy or impressive finds, because these were not in evidence in the
mound. Nor could it have been the promise of shedding light on Gamio’s or
Lothrop’s finds, because material of such types had not been encountered in the
mound. Nor could it have been a promise of clarifying the culture of the site
as a whole, because the mound was obviously hierarchal on the evidence of a
substructure already exposed. Kidder says that the offer to excavate the mound
was accepted because
. . . the potsherds found [in the mound] were not of Miraflores types. Furthermore,
aside from the “brick-kiln” stairway, no remains of buildings had appeared at any of the
Kaminaljuyu mounds and we were keen to learn something of the site’s architecture.
 (p. 60)"
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                  59


That this reason is based purely upon an interest in comparative studies out-
side the site can easily be demonstrated. For even if the dig were successful in
uncovering a quantity of those as-yet-unknown potsherds and a specific example
of Kaminaljuyu architecture, if these discoveries could not be associated with
the trash accumulations and other cultural aspects of the site, what value had
they? The answer is that they had value as data to be compared with other
potsherds and other architecture from other sites for the purpose of showing
regional and chronological relations. Excavations in the hierarchal mound alone
would leave their connection with the life of the ancient inhabitants of
Kaminaljuyu an almost unknown factor.
    And this is exactly what happened. The archeologists found a great deal of
entirely new material, but Kidder says that the epoch represented, the so-called
Esperanza phase, is “the only period in the life of that site with which we are
even reasonably familiar” (p. 74) and that even about this phase, the only
information concerns the ceremonial set-up:
. .. aS to the people who labored under so heavy a weight of service to their rulers and
their rulers’ gods, we know very little. Some day we shall get around to excavating
the village sites and the little unspectacular house mounds. [Cf. what he said in 1934
about Chichen Itza, quoted p. 52 above.] These will give us an insight into the
domestic arrangements of the commoners: their houses, their implements, their methods
of cooking. Their graves may teach us, perhaps, something of humble folk cults. Such
work will also be of the greatest archaeological significance, for the small amount of
digging we did outside of the mounds showed that temple furniture and the mortuary
equipment of the overlords was in a class by itself. It no more represented the general
contemporary culture of Esperanza Kaminaljuyu than the contents of a Park Avenue
drawing room does that of the United States. (p. 75)

The cultural objects from the Esperanza phase are merely ceremonial specimens
usable for comparative purposes. At the site itself, they are descriptions floating
unattached between the Miraflores and the late prehistoric phases. They cannot
be fitted into a cultural picture of Kaminaljuyu because they represent at best
only the hierarchal segments of their own phase, because they have few, and
only the vaguest, ties with the other local cultural phenomena, and because these
other phenomena are themselves virtually unknown. Once more we have heard
about what needs to be done, while observing the results of the very opposite
procedure.
    From the facts cited above, it may be concluded that both the field work and
the publications of the Carnegie are weighted overwhelmingly toward the
hierarchal. They have hardly touched, and then only incidentally, the cultural
remains of the common Maya. But even within the hierarchal culture, the
emphasis has not been to construct a picture of how the Maya hierarchy lived:
what they did and where, when, how, and with what. Such intensive excavations
as have been made have not been directed toward the clarification of these
60


problems, but rather toward the finding of material for comparative and
chronological studies or, many times, just to excavate a structure which appeared
to be of rare or unknown type or was prominent or artistically beautiful.”
Architecture, sculpture, epigraphy, and ceramics to a lesser extent have occupied
the efforts of Kidder and his archeologists, and these categories have been
treated for their comparative value with regard to origins, influences, and
chronology. It is a further fact that, when comparisons have been made, they
have been of physical descriptions of phenomena rather than of the relation-
ships of these phenomena within one site compared with the relationships of
similar phenomena at another site. In other words, comparisons have been based,
not upon similar cultural contexts, but upon similar physical appearance.
Description and not culture has been compared.*®
     On the assumptions that such physical similarities indicate cultural connec-
tions and hence a rough contemporaneity under normal circumstances, com-
parisons of this sort are valuable for the establishment of chronological relation-
ships between sites and areas. But the nature of the cultural connection, whether
trade or stimulus diffusion or migration or whatever, and the significance of the
connection for the cultures themselves, cannot be told from descriptive simi-
larities alone. Inferences as to such factors, if they can be made at all, have to
be made with the added evidence of their contexts at the two sites or areas in
question; and in addition much information, both cultural and natural, about
the intervening area will have to be known. In short, a comparison of artifact
descriptions may indicate chronology and the fact of cultural connections, but
what those connections were and how exact the chronological indications may
be, can be learned, if at all, only from the relationships of the compared artifacts
to their own and to each other’s cultural and natural contexts.
     This point will be treated at some length later in the present study. It is
mentioned here only to emphasize the fact that Carnegie’s work does not
picture or compare the culture of Maya sites nor provide the information for
others to do so. Relationships outside, rather than within, the site seem to be the
results consistently attained and thus, presumably, those that have been sought.
There is little or no attempt to use comparative methods for the purpose of
making inferences as to the significance of the material for the culture of the
individual sites or for the Maya culture as a whole. Some of Thompson’s papers
are exceptions to this generalization, and from time to time others have hazarded
a word or two of comparative interpretation and synthesis. But it is quite
apparent that Kidder has not set his staff especially to work on such problems;
and they have not done so themselves, of their own accord. Supporting this
view is Kidder’s own emphasis on reconnaissance and spot excavation:
During that period [the nineteen thirties] the Division’s archaeological activities have to
a certain extent been reorientated, in that emphasis has shifted from large-scale exca-
TAYLOR                       A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 61


vations at single sites to surveys designated to extend knowledge of the development
and distribution of various elements of Maya culture. . . . In archaeology, for example,
we must still further decentralize, devoting less of our resources to large excavations
and more to small reconnaissance digs which will aid in delimiting the range of Maya
culture and determining its chronological and cultural relations with other Middle
American civilizations. These minor excavations should be supplemented by comparative
studies of certain categories of evidence which earlier work has shown to be of out-
standing significance: pottery, architecture, sculpture, the hieroglyphic record. (1939,
p. 238)76

 Why, we may ask, are these categories of evidence of such outstanding signifi-
 cance? Is it not because they have provided “regional and chronological” com-
parisons with other sites on a hierarchal level? Surely it is not because they are
 especially significant for Maya culture as a whole, including the way of life of
both the common Maya and the hierarchy. It cannot be because these categories
 provide the only or yet the best means of constructing a picture of the life of
any particular site, even of the hierarchy.
     Information on such cultural topics would be better obtained from re-
searches of a different nature. For example, we might have papers on such
topics as: Food and its preparation among the Uaxactun Maya during Tepeu
times; The costumes of Maya religious personages connected with the quetzal
bird; A quantitative study of pottery in domestic and hierarchal structures at
Benque Viejo; The social organization of the Uaxactun Maya as seen from their
domestic architecture; A comparative study of the making and use of pottery
at three Maya sites; The effects of environment and cultural diffusion upon
sandal types as seen from the art of Peten and Yucatan; The relations of Maya
mathematics to Maya architecture, city planning, and graphic art; The ball court
as a functional part of Maya city planning; Evidence on the domestic and civil
religion at San José at two different periods; A comparison of the relative
importance of religious and lay culture in early and late Maya sites. If papers,
or pages, had been written on such problems by Carnegie archeologists, or if
the excavations had been conducted to produce the data on which they could
be written, our knowledge of Maya culture as opposed to Maya chronology
and extra-territorial relationships would probably be much advanced over its
present state. In addition, it is safe to say that our “regional and chronological”
studies would be set upon a much firmer foundation due to the weighting and
balance given by a fuller cultural context.
   In the light of this analysis, it is quite apparent that Kidder, despite his
stated aims, has neither “done” nor provided the data for “doing” anthropology
or historiography, at least in the sense in which these two terms have been
defined in the present study. Certainly there is more to historiography than merely
making physical descriptions of architecture, ceramics, and cities and placing
62


them in chronological order. This is chronicle. What Carnegie has been doing is
really chronicle of a restricted range of Maya culture: the artistic, religious, and
epigraphic remains of the hierarchy.
    It is my opinion that three factors are responsible for the character of
Kidder’s archeological work, both in the Maya area and in the Southwest. It is
possible that these factors are, in turn, due to confusions arising from a failure
to analyze thoroughly and explicitly his own conceptual scheme. But before
proceeding to discuss these particular points, a possibly significant example will
be given by way of introduction.
   In 1940, speaking in general of Middle American studies and specifically of
the Carnegie Institution, Kluckhohn noted the tendency to ignore the concept
theory or to use it in a derogatory sense as a synonym for speculation. He force-
fully and most convincingly pointed to the need for an explicit awareness of
theory and its place in scholarly and intellectual pursuits, not as hypothesis
and speculation but as “the conceptual framework of a single discipline.” The
very next year a new series of publications was inaugurated by Carnegie entitled
Theoretical    Approaches to Problems. In the second issue, Thompson says:
The fact that the paper is published in the present series is sufficient indication that
the case is not considered to have been completely proved. (1944, p. 23)

From this statement and the tone of the papers themselves, it is plain that
Carnegie still subscribes to the view that theoretical means speculative or hypo-
thetical, One may wonder whether Kidder, in starting this new series, was trying
to answer Kluckhohn’s criticisms and was confused, whether he was implicitly
denying Kluckhohn’s definition of theory, whether it was an oversight, or just
what.
    The first of the factors held to be responsible for the character of Kidder’s
work is the need to develop a chronology as the first step in archeological re-
search. To this may be attributed the high development of epigraphic, archi-
tectural, and art studies in his Maya program. These remains of hierarchal
culture are relatively easily observed, of considerable aesthetic and esoteric
interest in themselves, and therefore are represented by a considerable body
of literature from the time of the earliest explorers to that of the present arche-
ologists, and extending over the length of Middle America. They thus provide
a wealth of comparative data which are more voluminous and ready-to-hand
than those derived from the so-called minor antiquities such as ceramics, do-
mestic architecture, and other everyday artifacts. Chronology is chronology, and
one built purely from a small range of hierarchal material is perfectly satis-
factory—provided either of two premises: first, that one is interested only in the
chronology of hierarchal material; or second, that other cultural materials can
be tied into the hierarchal chronology by association. Chronology is admittedly
an important factor in any archeological research, and the earliest and surest
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              63

method of establishing it is to be commended. But after a sequence of periods
has been established, if then the very culture of those periods is unknown, we
may justifiably ask “so what?” If we claim that chronology is a means to the
end of understanding culture and if we erect our chronology but produce no
cultural information, we delude ourselves, for we are no further along in our
study of culture than before. This seems to be what has happened in the case
of Carnegie’s work in the Maya area. A series of time periods have been set up on
the basis of epigraphy, architecture, art, and ceramics; but outside of this
restricted range of subjects, little or nothing is known about the life of the
Maya during those time periods. Food, shelter, clothing, implements, social
groupings, domestic religion, methods of manufacture, motor habits, the nature
of trade, these subjects and many more are to all intents and purposes as un-
known today, after nearly twenty years of research under Kidder’s direction,
as they were when Maudslay and Maler worked the Maya area. Chronology is
vitally important for cultural studies, if culture is also studied.
    Possibly connected with the first is the second factor of Kidder’s work. He
has seemed to favor a wait-until-all-the-evidence-is-in policy with regard to any
broad-scale treatment of Maya history. It may be that controversies in the
chronological research and the failure to build an absolutely sure sequence,
especially in Yucatan, has led him to this position. But whatever the cause, his
words indicate that the policy is in effect. In 1939, he said that a history of the
Maya should be synthesized at the end of the 1940’s to be based on all the
various branches of investigation which the Carnegie Institution has pursued in
that area (p. 239). In 1935, he had said: ‘“‘Many data have to be accumulated
before synthesis can become worthwhile” (1935b, p. 115). To this policy may
be attributed the scarcity of topical syntheses and the failure of the Carnegie
archeologists, with the exception of Thompson (1943), even to essay chronological
syntheses of hierarchal events from the mass of collected data.
    While it is true that many data are needed for any history and that an exten-
sive and detailed history requires much information from many sources, it is also
true that waiting for over twenty years to begin assembling the cultural data
necessary for writing history is a dubious procedure. It would seem better to
have written certain sections of the proposed historiography as the data came
in or as research projects on certain topics were completed. As the situation now
stands and as it has been demonstrated in the preceding pages, Carnegie’s
publications contain little information which can be used to construct a picture
of ancient Maya culture, its character and its development. If Kidder’s history,
which he has proposed to write at the end of the 1940's, is to come from those
publications, it certainly will not be historiography as that term was defined in
the preceding chapter of the present study. Nor is it at all probable that un-
published field notes or uncompleted research projects, aimed, as they quite
64


certainly have been, at chronological and comparative conclusions, will be able
to provide the details which are necessary for abstracting other cultural in-
 formation out of the archeological materials. Even were this possible on the
basis of Carnegie’s unpublished information, such a procedure would demand
a complete and intensive reworking of the data already worked. This would be
a thankless, expensive, repetitive, and thus wasteful task and one which therefore
has small likelihood of receiving attention. It does not seem likely that Kidder
intends completely to re-orient the Carnegie’s approach to archeological ma-
terials, to wash out and wring dry once again the same data in order to abstract
a completely different set of inferences. It is much more likely that when he
finally accomplishes the synthesis and interpretation which he has several times
mentioned (1935b, p. 114; 1933, p. 83), he means to bring together and
interpret, on a foundation of more data, the same “regional and chronological”
aspects of the same range of (hierarchal) materials. He probably does not mean
a cultural interpretation and a synthesis into a cultural picture of Maya culture
as a whole.
     Perhaps the writing of Maya history does not mean to Kidder the descrip-
tion of their cultural life and its concomitant events moving and changing in
time and space. Perhaps when he claims that Carnegie’s program of Maya
research is dealing with the history of the Maya (1932b, 1933), he does not
mean that it is attempting to write history in the sense of historiography as de-
fined in the present study. Perhaps Kidder has a different idea of what consti-
tutes the writing of history. This, I believe, is the crux of the matter.
     It is concerning his conception of the writing of history, the third factor of
his work, that Kidder shows most clearly those contradictions which confuse
and make difficult any analysis of his writings. In some of his publications and in
his own field work together with that of the men under his direction, he seems to
hold the opinion that the writing of history concerns itself with the grandiose,
with the rise and the flowering and the fall of civilizations. This tendency has
already been demonstrated explicitly and by implication in the preceding pages:
a tendency which appears to go beyond the requirements of expediency in estab-
lishing a chronology. One of Kidder’s own statements may be used to lend
support to this analysis:
Likewise, though the career of the Maya has even less bearing upon the problems of
the moment, it gives opportunity for study of the rise and spread of a culture, the
dominance of absolute rulers, political rivalries and civil wars, the decline and eventual
fall of a virile civilization, submission to foreign military conquest, adjustments between
a dense native population and a small class of alien overlords. Such events and such
situations have shaped the course of history at all times and throughout the world.
(1940b, p. 261)
This reads like a prospectus of one of Gibbon’s or von Ranke’s Staatsgeschichte
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                 65

historiographies. With the exception of the phrase about adjustments between
a native population and their overlords, there is nothing that might be called
culture-history, and it is a far cry from the tenets of the New History and other
recent historiographic trends. The “pomp and circumstance” of the Maya past
are what seem to impress Kidder here. The rise, flourishing (or spread and
flowering), the fall of the Maya civilization is a theme which runs through a
significant number of Carnegie publications.’7 To attain such Gibbonesque
results, it is obvious that events and not cultural conditions must be given first
place in research. Or at best, what cultural context is provided will be of the
hierarchy and not of the Maya as a whole.
     It is confusing to find that Kidder has several times made statements whick.
can only be interpreted as direct contradictions of this point of view, as when
he says:
Only when we have much fuller knowledge of everyday household utensils, corn-
grinders, common stone and bone tools, objects which were not subject to shifting
whims of fashion or influenced by new and perhaps quickly and widely spreading cults,
shall we be able to discern the basic relations of cultures. (1945a, p. 75)

Only by constant repression of the desire, ingrained in human beings as well as in
magpies, to collect for collecting’s sake, can the archaeologist force himself to eschew
the sensational, to search for in the field, and to study in the laboratory, the common
everyday objects which alone can tell him the true story of cultural development.
(1937a, p. 218)78
To such preaching we can but say amen—and continue to search in Carnegie’s
record for the practice.
    A second aspect of this third factor is that Kidder appears to regard events,
rather than “descriptions of cultural life and its concomitant events” as the
hall-mark of history-writing.
The first step [in a historical discipline] is to make record of the chain of sequent
events marking the career of the people under investigation. The second and more
difficult step is to seek the causes and to explain the inter-relations of those events.
And, finally, attempt must be made to extract, by study of the above two classes of
information, materials for use in formulating those fundamental laws which have
governed in the past and which therefore may reasonably be expected to shape,
in the future, the course of human affairs. (1937a, pp. 218-219)7°

Here the laws are to be derived from a study of events and the explanation of
events. Perhaps what Kidder means by an event is something on the order of a
change in pottery style, the diffusion or development of a religious idea, the
modification of dress design, and so forth. But it is impossible to believe that
this is a true representation of his viewpoint when his own and Carnegie’s
publications are taken into consideration. Events to him seem incontrovertibly
66


to consist of such phenomena as the abandonment of the Peten, the return of
the Itzas to Chichen Itza, the arrival of basal-flange bowls in Yucatan, the
date of the appearance of slab-legged vases at Uaxactun. For example, such
topics as the impact of the arrival of those vases upon the ceramic complex
of Uaxactun and the significance of such an event for the culture of that site
seem not to have been investigated by Kidder or the Carnegie archeologists
at all. Their interests appear to have lain in the time-at-which and the direction-
from-whence. Beyond that, they have not been inclined to go. Such “surveys” as
those of Thompson (1943, 1945), while they contain remarks and even sentences
on the results of such impacts upon the recipient cultures, are primarily and
predominantly taken up with “episodic” events 4 la Kidder and with compara-
tive studies to determine the chronology and derivation of the hierarchal ma-
terials from which these events have been inferred.*°
    When Kidder refers to Carnegie’s “pan-scientific” program, whereby arche-
ology, documentary history, biology, and other disciplines are being employed in
the study of Maya history, it is the light which these studies throw on the events
that he constantly stresses:
As I have said, the Carnegie Institution’s work in the Maya field was originally
epigraphic, then more broadly archaeological. At the conclusion of the first decade
of the investigation we were in possession of a large body of facts, and many concrete
problems had been formulated whose solution could be counted on to throw additional
light on the nature of the Maya culture and upon events in the Maya area. But
other questions had arisen which could not be answered by the purely archaeological
methods we had, until then, been using. Furthermore, early attempts at interpretation
of our archaeological findings in terms of history found us without adequate
information in many fields which the archaeologist has neither the ability nor the
time to till. So there has gradually been organized what might be called a panscientific
attack... . (1937c, pp. 162-163)

It is difficult to escape the conviction that only by coordinated research, involving
the cooperation of all the disciplines devoted to the study of man, and the collateral
support of many biological and physical sciences, can we attain understanding of
any given episode [read “event”] in human history. (1932b, p. 91)8*

If one could believe that Kidder meant “events against their cultural back-
ground” or events in the sense of “every and all cultural change,” one could
gladly accept these statements. But on his record, Kidder cannot be thought
to mean these things. By “event,” he quite apparently means a mutation in the
life of the Maya hierarchy, not the cultural variations, both magnificent and
minute, which occurred throughout the entire Maya culture and which in the
aggregate comprise the stuff of which Maya history was made and of which
Maya history should be written.
   To Kidder, history seems to be a series of episodic events and their dates of
TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                67

relative chronology. When he mentions a historical development he most often
means a chronological development; and he has actually identified a historical
viewpoint in the broadest sense as “a consciousness of the implications of the
time element in the recording and interpretation of phenomena” (1930c, p. 391).
When he mentions a historical problem, he seems to mean a problem of
chronology, or more specifically the chronology of large events.®?
    But once more we are faced with contradictions. For in other places he seems
to hold for a writing of history more in keeping with the definition of his-
toriography as proposed in the present study, for example, in his Te Develop-
ment of Maya Research (1937a, p. 221). But despite Kidder’s occasional bows
to a different and broader conception of history writing, it is impossible to
understand how he expects, given his more usual viewpoint, ever to derive laws
of cultural evolution or
. .. to reach understanding of the all-important whys and wherefores of Maya history
and by so doing contribute toward comprehension of the infinitely complex interaction
of those biological, environmental and social factors which govern the evolution of
man? (1935b, p. 114)8

The attempt upon such goals he envisions for archeology, but it is difficult to see
how he will be furthering these ends while actively engaged in such restricted
researches as those of the Carnegie Institution’s program.
     I believe that enough has been said to bring out the points I have wished to
make concerning Kidder’s archeological work. It is obvious that his results
have led to the clarification of three aspects of the sites and areas which he has
investigated: their more episodic events and their chronological and cultural
relationships relative to other sites and areas. But it is also obvious that his
efforts have not placed these findings within a context of culture, which would
be historiography. They have placed them chronologically and demonstrated by
comparative methods the fact of their cultural derivations; this is chronicle, or
perhaps better, comparative and derivational chronicle.
    Kidder has provided us with some of our finest statements as to the obliga-
tions, aims, and potentialities of archeology. But he has been saying one thing,
while his results have added up to quite another. When Kidder writes theory
he often talks historiography and anthropology. When he directs field work
and publishes reports, he talks comparative chronicle.

    Kidder’s tremendous influence upon the development of archeological re-
search in the United States is nowhere more apparent than in that region known
as the Southwest. Although both Nelson and Spier shared with him the revolu-
tion against the archeological approach characterized by Cushing and Fewkes,
it was Kidder who remained in the field. It was he who became the guide and
champion of the new approach: the search for cultural and chronological rela-
68


tionships over the length and breadth of the Southwest by the use of compara-
tive studies and extensive as well as intensive field work. His An Introduction to
the Study of Southwestern Archaeology (1924) sketched the major outlines of
those relationships, and the work of the archeologists who have followed has
but filled out, and in some spots corrected or sharpened, those outlines which
he drew with such remarkable insight. The aims and objectives, however, have
remained as they were established by Kidder, Nelson, and Spier: to ascertain
the coordinates of time and space for the cultural manifestations in the South-
west.
    In the intervening years, two men have been especially outstanding in the
furtherance of those aims: F. H. H. Roberts, Jr., and E. W. Haury. In the case
of these men, as it will be found to be in the case of those to be discussed later,
definite statements of aims, by which results may be judged, are virtually
absent from their writings. Unlike Kidder, the majority of archeologists have
not been articulate as to what they are doing or intend to do. They seem to
assume that their proper aims are not only well known but also much alike, so
that there is no need to make themselves explicit on these points. One thing is
certain, however: both Roberts and Haury, for one reason or another, consider
anthropology to be their field. Both have taken their higher degrees in depart-
ments of anthropology; Haury is head of a Department of Anthropology, and
Roberts is connected with an organization which may justifiably be considered
anthropological (the Bureau of American Ethnology), and from time to time,
largely by implication, each has indicated that he believes himself to be con-
ducting anthropological research.** In view of this, in analyzing their work, we
may look for anthropological results, or at least we may expect to find cultural
contexts from which anthropological results might be derived.
    We may expect to find these things, but we do not. Both Roberts and Haury
have been responsible for great and valuable increases in our knowledge of what
the people of certain localities and certain times had or did not have in the way
of cultural objects. They have defined and set upon a sound basis the objects
characteristic of the so-called cultures and culture-periods of the Southwest.
But their recordings have been almost entirely in the way of presence and
absence, and they have offered little or nothing to explain the relative im-
portance, the associations, the “depth” as it might be called, of all these objects.
They have neither provided us with a picture of the life of those “culture-
periods” by synthesizing their discrete facts nor given us the data with which
we might construct such a picture ourselves. They have been signally success-
ful in erecting the coordinates of time and space, but they have failed to
superimpose the graphic diagram of life and culture upon the axes thus
delineated.
    For example, in his Canyon Creek paper (1934), Haury has provided really
TAYLOR                      A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                                69

fine descriptive detail and even used synthesizing categories such as Food, Dress,
Cradles and Household Articles. On the other hand, neither provenience, associa-
 tion, nor quantitive information is given except very rarely and incidentally.
 Specimens have been described, but their relationships to the site and to other
 specimens within the cultural whole have not been analyzed and cannot be
 derived from the data published. There is no cultural synthesis of the mass
of descriptive data, and the Conclusions are concerned with chronology, episodic
events, and comparative studies to determine the time and space relations of the
 site with respect to other sites and areas. And these comparative studies are
not of cultural categories such as textiles, food, dress, etc., but of specimens
and specimen types on a descriptive level.
     In his Mogollon report (1936b), quantitative data on specimen types have
been provided, but in this case description is the stepchild. It is very meager and
not oriented toward the range of variation. Classificatory tags on a descriptive
level are offered instead of detailed information designed to indicate the signifi-
cance of the specimen for the cultural picture of the site. No provenience or
association is given. The Discussion is purely chronological and comparative
with an outward rather than an inward view.
     It is difficult to evaluate Haury’s part in the account of the Snaketown exca-
vations (Gladwin et al., 1937). But those sections that carry his by-line will be
analyzed as indicators of the direction which his contributions, if not his
original and personal intention, have taken in this particular case. The whole
tenor of his sections and the implications of his approach to them indicate that
his interest lay in demonstrating the horizon-markers for the various “culture-
periods” represented at the site. These time criteria and their relations with
similar materials from other areas are very important aspects of the Snaketown,
or any, archeological problem. But they are only aspects among others, and it
seems that Haury has dealt with them to the exclusion of the others. This is
most apparent from the fact that quantification, provenience, and association,
except rarely, are given by Period and Phase and not by actual association or
position in the ground. The dangers of this procedure are obvious when we
consider what would happen to these vital associational data if ever the present
classification should be changed or modified. Nothing would remain to which
to tie the finds. Here, the point to be raised is that an interest in the life of the
Hohokam people as they lived in those bygone days would have dictated a
different policy, one which would have assembled and analyzed as a unit all
the evidence which could be associated together, say, in particular houses or
single rubbish pits. Of course, the publication of house data did not fall to
Haury, and pits seem not to have been individually treated at all, but his treat-
ment of Figurines shows the same disregard for any but the horizon-marking
potentials of the material. He says:
70


As in Mexico, where figurines have been used so successfully as indicators of
horizon, so here, they have definitely shown their value in this respect and have
added one more significant element in rounding out our conception of the phases.
(Gladwin et al., 1937, p. 233)

Surely this “conception of the phases” cannot mean a conception of the life
of those phases. For, time and time again, he notes the presence of “head-
dresses”   (p. 234), “articles of clothing and leg and ankle bands”      (p. 235),
“ornaments” and “tattooing” (p. 236), yet nowhere is there an attempt to
describe, interpret, or synthesize these items to derive a picture of the costume
and ornamentation of the ancient Hohokam. We read of several types of
figurines which are rare and not to the usual fashion; it might be of interest to
know the provenience and associations of these specimens so as to attempt some
interpretation or abstract some inference as to their cultural implications within
the site. But they are mentioned and then ignored. Could this be because, as
freaks and non-representative types, they are of little importance as horizon-
markers? Animal figurines are not common and “most” of them were found in
the rubbish (p. 238; Plate CCVIII). If some of the remainder were found in
other, possibly more significant, associations, is it not important from a cultural
standpoint to know in what association they were found? How may we interpret
them, if we are ever going to do so, unless we know what other material they
were found with, in what surroundings, in what possibly significant position,
etc.? If I should dig tomorrow in a Hohokam site and find animal figurines in
two different associations, how am I to make use of the Snaketown data? I can
say that at Snaketown they “probably do not antedate the Santa Cruz Phase”
(p. 238) and that, therefore, my finds indicate such a date for my site. But if my
examples were found in a house entrance and also in child cremations, how may
I make comparative studies with Snaketown to help me interpret the cultural
significance of my figurines? Thorough comparisons might indicate that such
objects began in Santa Cruz times as house offerings and then were transferred
to child-burial offerings. This in turn might corroborate other evidences pointing
to an association of children with houses or with certain animals. This in turn
might lead to comparative data between the Hohokam and those groups that
customarily buried the children in their dwelling rooms and interred the adult
dead in refuse mounds or other locations away from the living quarters (Roberts,
1931, p. 170). More evidence and more inferences along these lines might lead
to a hypothesis that in those ancient times there was an idea that child spirits
were harmless while adult spirits were to be feared.
     Such chains of interpretation and inference, if made explicitly and with an
awareness of their contingent nature, may potentially lead to results which will
be accepted, at least tentatively, by the majority of archeologists and which will
help to fill out our sequent pictures of the life of the past and the cultural
TAYLOR                     A STUDY   OF ARCHEOLOGY                              71

dynamics thus implied. If such results are accepted as working hypotheses, they
will not only point the way to new problems but also by their very weight, when
a body of them has been assembled, serve to set our comparisons of a temporal
and spatial nature upon much sounder bases. A further discussion and empirical
examples of this point will be taken up in the final chapter of the present study.
     Although in general the information provided by Haury in his Forestdale
 report (1940) is of a much higher order than in his earlier works, he still does
 not present his data in such a way as to enable the reader to conduct his own
research upon the material. One example will suffice. The Bear Ruin contains a
cultural manifestation which is a blend of Mogollon and Anasazi features of a
most interesting and significant sort. This fact was one of the major reasons for
its excavation. An examination of the burial-data table (p. 65) produces the
fact that of forty burials only five were without pottery offerings and that, of
these five, four lacked all offerings and one had a “bone” at its shoulder. Of
the graves with pottery, however, those with, and those without, other grave
goods were about equally divided, there being sixteen with and nineteen without.
This would seem to suggest a correlation between no pottery and no other grave
offering. Turning to the appendix on skeletal remains, we discover (p. 132ff) that
the majority of crania seem to be brachycephalic, but two are dolichocephals of
a Basket-Maker-like type. We further discover that these two atypically long-
headed burials are two of the five which had no pottery and that one of them is
the one which had no pottery and the “bone” offering at the shoulder.
     In view of the intermediate cultural and geographic position of the Bear
Ruin, the suggestions of correlation in the above-cited facts might seem to
warrant further investigation. But we have gone as far as the report will take
us. Was the “bone” really an offering or was it a point which might represent a
wound? In what locations and with what associations were the pottery-less
burials found? The one very Anasazi-like house contained a “great number of
specimens (fifty-eight)”: could one of these have been of the same type as
the “bone” grave offering? We learn that the pottery type Forestdale Plain shows
much Anasazi influence, but we do not know from what parts of the site these
sherds came or whether some, many, or none were found near the long-headed
burials or the Anasazi-like house. These are just a few of the things we do not
know and cannot find out from the report.

   Although F. H. H. Roberts, Jr., has given us what are undoubtedly our best
and most thorough descriptions of the architecture at Southwestern sites, the
over-all impression to be gathered from his work is much the same as from
Haury’s: the seeking for temporal and cultural relationships with other sites on
a descriptive level. Like Kidder and Haury, he has been “doing” comparative
or derivational chronicle, not historiography or anthropology. The houses and
ile:


their individual features have been treated at great length, but there has been
no assembling, no synthesis of those “lesser,” “minor” objects of “material
culture” which have been found in those dwellings. The houses and their features
are descriptive units; the smaller artifacts are also descriptive units; and both
are discussed for the purpose of comparisons with other such phenomena at other
sites, not as the material environment of human activity. The data are not
brought together into an assemblage for the purpose of making inferences as to
the life and customs of the people who lived in those rooms or those house blocks.
And the information is not provided whereby such assemblages, as they were
excavated in the field, can be regrouped. Provenience and association, except
rarely, are given only for those specimens which are illustrated, and even these
locations are noted only within the range of a room or pithouse, with some
burial, or merely from “trench south of house E” (1929b, p. 151) or “E refuse”
 (1931, p. 180).
     For example, although five bone awls are said to come from a single burial
 (1931, p. 152), the only means of identifying that burial is to find the illus-
tration and check its number in the Appendix where the provenience of
illustrated specimens is given. We find that they come from Burial E-5, but I
have been unable to locate any other reference to Burial E-5 in the volume.
What   sort of person   was   buried   in Burial   E-5, where   was   it, what   other
material was with it, what context or significant association went with it? These
data are not provided. The section on Human Burials (p. 168f) is taken up
with generalized, typological, and narrative account of this cultural aspect.
There is neither detailed nor specific reference made to individual burials,
except the single rare finding of a skeleton in a ventilator, and here one short
sentence is given merely stating the fact (p. 169).*° For the rest, the generaliza-
tions are compared with generalizations from other regions, and a cursory
attempt is made to make inferences, or rather to refute possible inferences, as
to the meaning of certain practices. There are also statements as to the dif-
ferences between the pit-house and the pueblo interments for the purpose of
differentiating them chronologically and typologically.**
    At two sites, Kiatuthlanna (1931) and the Village of the Great Kivas (1932),
Roberts was able to demonstrate and delineate exactly several sequent phases
of building activity within pueblo structures. It seems that to anyone interested
in the cultures of those sites, in how the people lived and changed over the
years, this would have presented an unrivalled opportunity to develop room
by room, section by section, artifact by artifact, feature by feature the nature
and changes of the cultural picture. From such data, for one interested in the
problem, it would be possible to make inferences and even to come to some
conclusions as to the nature and workings of culture itself as represented at
those sites. Since Roberts has attempted neither to construct a cultural context
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               73

nor to study culture in the abstract, it is permissible to assume that such
investigations were not his intention.’ What he has done is to provide the time
and space coordinates for his finds as discrete entities. As in his other reports,
he has not put back in place, by writing, those data which his excavations tore
from their setting and his laboratory study teased apart for typological and
comparative analysis. "The vestiges of cultural integration which had endured
in the ground for centuries have generally been ignored. The weighting that
quantification might give has been neglected. The natural environment, in
which the cultures were set and from which they satisfied their needs, has
itself been treated as a separate unit, and relationships that might be inferred
between it and the cultural environment have not been pursued with consistent
and vigorous purpose.
     To perform the tasks and develop the information which I have implied in
the above analysis of Roberts’ reports would involve making many inferences
and proceeding upon the basis of many assumptions. But it has been shown in
the preceding chapter of the present study (pp. 31 and 35) that any picturiza-
tion of past actuality requires more or less inferences and assumptions; direct
and empirical proof is an impossibility when one is dealing with the unique
happenings of the past. These tools of method are the very foundation of a
historical, nonempirical discipline such as archeology. And Roberts has made
them himself, and along lines which, if followed out, would have led him to the
construction of much fuller and more significant cultural contexts for the sites
of his investigations.
    For example, in his Piedra District report (1930), using environmental and
cultural factors connected with an underground structure presumably cere-
monial, he has made some inferences as to winter and summer ceremonies of
the former inhabitants. If all the other data from the site had been combed,
with imagination and persistence, for evidence bearing upon this topic, or if it
had been explicitly stated that such a study had been made with negative
results, he would have been demonstrating his concern with the life of those
ancient people. As it is, his remarks on the ceremonies seem incidental and
rather by-the-way. It is difficult to agree with him when he says:
The writer believes that the data from the Piedra investigations give a clear and
distinct picture of the life of the people of the Pueblo I period in that portion of
the San Juan archeological area. (1930, p. 168)
From time to time, he has in fact made remarks upon the life of the people,
as when he discusses the question of family privacy and suggested “several
sidelights on the character of the builders” of a certain house (1931, p. 35).
From time to time he has quantified his data, rarely if ever a full quantification
(except on individual or rare specimen types), but sometimes a series of per-
centage figures based on total counts (e.g., 1940, pp. 10-11).
74


     It is only in his latest paper on the Southwestern field that he has taken
account of the stratified fill of abandoned pit-houses and pueblo rooms (1939),
and even in this report, as in his others, refuse mounds, although they were
trenched, have not been dealt with stratigraphically or in detail. However, the
use of the stratigraphic data from dwelling-fill is very disappointing. For
example, in calculating his percentages for the different ceramic wares, he has
lumped those from the Developmental with those from the Great Pueblo period
to arrive at the relative amounts of gray utility, black-on-white, smudged,
black-on-red, and fugitive red wares for the site as a whole irrespective of
period or provenience (1940, pp. 10ff). The value of these findings for cultural,
or even comparative, purposes seems doubtful, although he notes correspondence
with like figures from Pueblo Bonito. No other percentages and absolutely no
raw figures are given for ceramics. The stratigraphic sherd counts for dwelling-
fills or refuse-mound trenches are not given, and very little use of these data
seems. to have been made at all. He says:
Some of the more significant features emphasized by the material from the stratigraphic
tests are those pertaining to the Modified Basket Maker wares, progress in the
development of the culinary or gray wares, the sequence in which some of the early
Developmental period black-on-white types made their appearance, and changes in
the burnished-black group. (1940, p. 11)

    There is even less stratigraphic, quantitative data given for other categories
of material objects. He says:
There is little in the way of period or horizon differences in the bonework. Except
for the fact that the short, stubby cannon-bone awl was more numerous in the early
part of the Developmental Pueblo stage than later and the long awls made from
the same bone predominated at the end, the bone tools were the same throughout the
occupation. From first to last the tubes, whistles and gaming dies exhibit the same
forms. The rings presumably were restricted to the Great Pueblo horizon. (1940, pp.
116-117)
Bone awls might have exhibited the same forms from first to last, but there
might also have been a significant difference in their numbers relative to other
bone artifacts or to some other significant control factor. In other words, there
are other ways of looking at the data than the mere presence or absence on the
basis of form or type. But if the reader of the monograph wishes to view the
finds from some angle other than that of Roberts, he is prevented from making
these regroupings by the lack of raw figures, provenience, association, and other
details of the material as it lay in the ground before excavation. As they now
stand, the data can be used only for those ends for which Roberts used them:
comparisons on the basis of form for the purpose of extracting temporal and
spatial relationships.**
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               75

     Archeological practice and publication in the Mississippi Valley and eastern
field reflect the same time-and-space approach, the same development of
comparative chronicle, that characterize the Southwest and Maya areas.
Whether this is due, directly or indirectly, to Kidder’s influence or that of the
Southwest as a whole, is interesting as a subject for thought but irrelevant for
the present discussione What is important to note here is the dominating role
taken by the Midwestern or McKern classification. The need for some ordering
of archeological materials, already felt for a considerable time (McKern, 1937),
was greatly increased by the accelerated program of research carried on under
the auspices of the various Federal relief agencies during the 1930’s and early
1940’s (Setzler, 1942). With a vast body of data being produced by these
excavations, there was urgent call for some method whereby the information
could be ordered quickly and clearly and thus become usable rather than a
mere jumble of extraneous detail. The answer was a so-called culture classifica-
tion which is primarily of a time-and-space nature, which deals with descriptive
types of cultural manifestations for the purpose of comparing them with other
descriptive types from other sites, and which has colored the archeological
program and performance throughout the entire area since its inception. As is
to be expected, however, its impress upon the several archeologists conducting
researches in the eastern field has not been identical. In the following discussions
of W. S. Webb, W. A. Ritchie, and J. B. Griffin, it will become quite apparent
the extent to which the ideas and requirements of this classification have
impinged upon their work.
     As in the case of Roberts and Haury above, these men have written very
few statements as to their aims or disciplinary affiliations. But it may be noted
that the latter two have taken their higher degrees in departments of anthro-
pology and are affiliated with the anthropology sections of their respective
museums; the former is Chairman of a Department of Anthropology and
Archaeology. From this and their common membership in the American Anthro-
pological Association, one may legitimately infer a connection between their work
and the discipline of anthropology.
     The researches and publications of W. S. Webb have been among the most
important and extensive in this eastern area. He has given us some of our
clearest and fullest reports and has developed for his readers cultural pictures
and cultural interpretations more consistently, I believe, than any of his col-
leagues. From his earlier works (e.g., Webb and Funkhouser, 1928, pp. 55-62,
180) to his latest contributions (e.g., Webb and Snow, 1945, pp. 313ff), Webb
has continually demonstrated his interest in how his archeological subjects
actually lived (e.g., Webb and Haag, 1940, pp. 106ff), how and for what
purposes they used the material objects which he has found in the ground
(e.g., Webb and Haag, 1939, pp. 5Off; Webb and Elliott, 1942, pp. 394ff), and
76


how these same objects reflect ancient customs which themselves have left no
material embodiment (e.g., Webb, 1942, pp. 362ff).°° Although his cultural
syntheses are brief, nevertheless it remains that he has made them, and in this
he is practically unique among the recent Americanist archeologists in the
United States.
    But Webb presents a paradox. In the face of this very obvious interest in
cultural contexts, we find that his cultural syntheses fail to take into account
many facets which might have been included on the basis of his excavated data.
For example, his summary in The Adena People (Webb and Snow, 1945,
pp. 310ff) fails to treat in detail of houses and house life, foods other than
vegetal, textiles and clothing, the manufacture and use of pottery, weapons and
implements, and many other categories of cultural phenomena, the evidence
for which had been given in his previous publications on Adena sites. In his
report on the Pickwick Basin sites he has attempted in two places to give a
picture of the life of the people who made the great shell-heaps along the
Tennessee River (Webb and DeJarnette, 1942, pp. 307ff, 317ff). But he has
done so only in generalities. He has failed to make use of all the published data
in constructing these contexts. Instead he has given a list of traits “which seem
to present the outstanding customs, as revealed by excavations” (p. 311). This
is a purely presence-and-absence listing and gives no quantification or associa-
tion of traits within the occupational levels. That this procedure may obscure
some valid and significant cultural groupings is evident from the obvious breaks
which occur in the stratigraphic columns, for example the break in stone and
bone-work at the 5-foot level or Zone A at site Lu°®’ (pp. 180, 190ff). Nor does
this trait list help us to visualize or assay the importance of the not inconsider-
able evidence for a sporadic or even seasonal occupation of some of these
river-side shell-heaps.®° Neither is the list applicable to studies of burial customs:
for one thing, there is no way to identify the sex of burials except rarely and
incidentally, and thus to learn what materials were buried with adults of what
sex. There is some indication that children and infants were accompanied more
often than adults with cultural objects (Webb and Haag, 1939, p. 13; Webb
and DeJarnette, 1942, e.g., sites Lu°®’, pp. 186ff, site Ct°’’, pp. 239ff), but this
investigation has not been pursued, apparently because Webb is more interested
in the typology of adult burial and its stratigraphic and comparative sig-
nificance than in the totality of the burial customs of the shell-mound people.
This is explicitly stated when he says:
It is believed that in the case of infants the type of burial was not significant, hence
they are not considered in the study of depth distribution. (Webb and DeJarnette,
1942, p. 240)
    If a guess may be hazarded as to the reasons behind this evident paradox
in Webb’s work, the suggestion is made that it is due to the particular trend
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                77

 taken in his development as an archeologist and to the influence, upon this
development, of the Midwestern classification. By training a physicist, he seems
originally to have approached archeology as an avocation out of an interest in
local antiquities and the ancient life of the local Indians. This is very evident
 from his book Ancient Life in Kentucky, stated to be written for the layman
 (Webb and Funkhouser, 1928). From such beginnings, Webb has developed
into one of our most accomplished field technicians and a comparison of his
later reports with those of earlier date will indicate the extent of his advance
toward controlled, pertinent, ‘scientific’ excavation and publication. But this
progressive “‘scientification” has not followed his original and obvious interest
in how the Indians lived. He has not refined and elaborated his techniques for
cultural interpretation. He has not extended his range of materials for con-
structing cultural contexts. Nor has he sought, by the use of assumptions which
he so admirably defends (Webb and Snow, 1945, pp. 200ff), to delve ever
deeper into the culture of the people whose remains he has been digging from
the ground. Or perhaps it might better be said that he has not advanced along
these lines to the extent that he has advanced in field technique and—and this
is the important point—along the lines of comparative study and a grasp of the
classificatory picture as it is now envisioned in eastern archeology. Since his
interest in cultural pictures has endured, however curtailed, a paradox has
arisen from his definite and, of late, dominant leanings toward a concern with
taxonomy as exemplified in the Midwestern system. His original interest in
Indian life has been allowed to languish, and he has followed current custom
and developed his work in comparative and classificatory directions.
     It seems hardly coincidental that his first trait list appears in a report
 (Funkhouser and Webb, 1937) which is probably the first to be written and
published, in its entirety, after the Indianapolis Conference which inaugurated
the Midwestern classification and which Webb attended. This innovation was
undoubtedly to be expected since the eastern archeologists turned as a body at
this point to fit their data into the classification, and trait lists are the basis of
the classification. But the point to be raised here is that from this time onward
Webb has bent his major efforts to elaborating trait lists and their comparative
implications and has made a stepchild of his former interest in more detailed
cultural pictures of life as it was led. For example, while in two of his earlier
reports he gave much study to the weaves of textiles as seen from impressions
upon pottery (Webb and Funkhouser, 1929b, pp. 14-17; Webb and Funkhouser,
1931, pp. 375-388), in his post-Midwestern-Classification reports no such de-
tailed examinations have been effected, and he has not anywhere dealt with
these fabric impressions except in connection with pottery typology. In other
words, he has not attempted to get at the textile complex of the people through
analysis of fabric-impressed potsherds. Similarly, in an early publication he
78


analyzed the cordage (Funkhouser and Webb, 1929, pp. 86-87), but in later
works he merely mentions cordage and knots and passes on (Webb, 1938, p. 48;
Webb, 1939, pp. 50, 56). It seems that those objects which are thought to have
no importance for comparative and classificatory studies have been relegated
to passing references and omitted from consideration in final syntheses.
    This preoccupation with trait lists may be responsible for certain         other
aspects of Webb’s publications. There is a tendency to slight description of
artifacts and to give instead a typological tag: a bone awl is a bone awl, a hoe
is a hoe, with often not so much as a word about shape, size, material, details of
use, wear, or such matters (Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 116ff, 224ff). Often
potsherds or vessels found in graves are left unidentified (Webb, 1939, pp. 76-77;
Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 117, 188). There is a tendency to neglect
associations such as inclusions in midden pits (Webb and Haag, 1940, pp. 72,
107) and to fail to give provenience from which associations could be worked
out (Webb and Haag, 1939, pp. 17ff). There is a tendency to omit quantifica-
tions as a regular adjunct to typology and instead to give illustrations of types
or “the best” examples without giving the quantities within the various cate-
gories (Webb, 1938, pp. 110, 130; Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 40, 42). It
should not be understood from these remarks that there is no description,
quantification, association, or provenience given. Actually, there is a great deal
of quantification and somewhat less description, association, and provenience,
and in this respect his University of Kentucky reports surpass those issued as
Bulletins of the Bureau of American Ethnology. But the effort to provide such
data seems largely incidental and not consciously consistent. Lapses are too
frequent for there to have been a rigorous prosecution of these points of detail
in assembling his material for publication. His failure to utilize fully the special
geographical and biological studies included in two of his more recent works
(Webb, 1939, pp. 9ff; Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, pp. 337ff) may be another
sign of his unconcern with factors not readily applicable to trait-list comparisons
and classifications.
     From the above, it should be very apparent that Webb has not constructed
cultural contexts as fully as the data to hand must have warranted. It is also
clear that, from his published data, it is impossible for the reader himself to
construct a cultural synthesis, weighing and balancing the quantity and quality
of the various traits and complexes, searching associations for constant features,
noting breakage and wear to arrive at an idea of use, investigating the sources
of raw materials in the hopes of defining trade routes and possible extra-regional
connections, and probing other lines of evidence to extract the cultural sig-
nificance and “depth” of the finds. This is so because the necessary details are
not given.
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                79

    Perhaps Webb considers that he has given a cultural synthesis by compiling
those trait lists. His own words might lead one to this belief:
In order to understand the life of the shell-mound dwellers and to characterize their
culture prior to the use of pottery, a list of traits has been prepared. Table 43 is a
list of traits which seem to present the outstanding customs, as revealed by excava-
tions. . . . (Webb and De Jarnette, 1942, p. 311)

The following list of traits describes the cultural manifestation at this site as
accurately as present knowledge permits. (Funkhouser and Webb, 1937, p. 200)%
If this is the case, as it seems to be, here is one more proof of a fundamental
assumption underlying his field work and publications: namely, that the im-
portant factor about a cultural manifestation in archeology is its presence or
absence within a given site. This assumption is accompanied by a corollary: that
the manifestation’s location, association, quantitative and qualitative relation to
its cultural and natural environment seem to be of secondary importance.
These two assumptions are basic to the current comparative approach, and
Webb is not alone in his acceptance of them. They lie at the bottom of the
so-called McKern or Midwestern system of classification. This point will be
dealt with at some length at a later time in the present study. Here it is only
necessary to state that culture, and thus a cultural context, does not consist
of artifacts or other material manifestations alone. It is impossible to get at the
cultural significance of any artifact merely by classifying it with certain more
or less similar artifacts and noting its presence within an archeological site.
There is, I believe, more to the study of culture than this.
     Before leaving this analysis of Webb’s contributions, I wish to state once
again that I believe he has given us some of our best archeological reports.
Although it is true that he has failed to make the most of his opportunities,
it is possible to abstract more out of his publications than from those of the
majority of his colleagues. There seems to be no doubt that he has been
influenced toward a purely time-and-space, comparative approach by the need
to go along with his fellow archeologists and find a place for his discoveries
within the Midwestern system. Perhaps this need has changed the course of a
development that would have led to more detailed and refined cultural pictures
and thus eventually to more detailed comparative studies. Perhaps if he had
managed to carry on according to his own inclinations, he would not have
become so concerned with presence-and-absence trait lists and comparative
studies. As the matter now stands, Webb’s contributions are considerable and
he presents an enlightening paradox.

    The publications of W. A. Ritchie present in general the same character as
those of Webb. While his pictures of ancient life have not been even as full as
80


Webb’s and whereas he has gone over to the Midwestern classification with an
even greater wholeheartedness, nevertheless his development has been essentially
parallel. He demonstrates an incidental, unformulated, but quite definite interest in
how the Indians lived, especially in his early reports but also appearing in some
of his later papers. However, this incipient inclination has been almost com-
pletely overwhelmed by his enthusiastic embracing of the classificatory system,
and his latest works are occupied exclusively, to all intents and purposes, in the
effort to place his archeological material in some taxonomic pigeon-hole. His
interpretations as to the contextual significance of his data have become fewer
and fewer and more incidental, while the elaboration of trait lists and his cross-
cultural comparisons have proportionately increased.
     His association with Parker’s already-established “culture sequences” in
New York State, based as they were on comparative studies of artifact types
(Parker, 1922), might have made him an easier mark for a system such as the
Midwestern. But his publications up to the Castle Creek report (1934), which is
the one immediately preceding his first mention of the classificatory system,
show an increasing number of inferences and interpretations and a growing
concern with filling out the bare bones of excavation and artifact description.
Although no effort was made to make full and elaborate syntheses of the data
retrieved, a considerable amount of the means by which this can be done is
present in the reports. For example, he gave a detailed interpretation of local
events involving a violent fire at the Alhart site (1930, p. 72); and in the same
report he discussed the method of manufacture of a bark barrel (p. 67) and later
included the use of bark buckets to round out an inferential picture of the Mason
site (p. 75). In his monograph on the Lamoka site (1932), he gives an ecological
setting for the site (p. 83), infers the importance of fishing from the artifact roster
 (p. 104), interprets methods of manufacture (p. 108f), infers a feast from artifacts
associated with masses of mammal bone in the refuse pits (p. 115), gives a
somatological picture of the ancient inhabitants (p. 131), and gives a brief
picture of the life of the people at this particular site (pp. 131-132). In the
Castle Creek report (1934), he has gone into great detail on the structure and
contents of some of the pits encountered (pp. 10-29). Interpretations of pit
groupings are given (p. 10), even seasonal use of some is envisioned (p. 11),
events in one special pit are recounted (p. 29), and throughout the discussion
many data are given which, if assembled and studied in a body, would produce
a very adequate picture of their nature, use, contents, and position within the
cultural whole of that site.
     Of those reports issued after he explicitly recognized the Midwestern system,
only the first two, New Evidence Relating to the Archaic Occupation of New
York (1936a) and the Canandaigua paper (1936b), contain interpretations such
as are found in his earlier works. In the first of these volumes, the artifacts are
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                              81


described under what might be termed cultural headings, i.e., vegetal food,
game-getting, fishing, cooking (pp. 4-8). In the latter (1936b), the categories
“hunting as well as fishing paraphernalia” and “domestic industries” are men-
tioned, followed by the listing of a few artifact types (p. 70), but there is no
further discussion of such cultural aspects. His interesting analysis of the mean-
ing of multiple burials showing signs of violent death (pp. 79ff) is the only
other instance of such interpretation in this report. In his monograph on the
Frontenac Island site (1945a), he gives two short paragraphs on the mode of
life reflected in the finds (p. 26), but the major part of the volume consists of
trait lists and cross-cultural comparisons. However, there is one sentence which,
had it been developed, would have added a most interesting and valuable
cultural insight:
When interpreted in terms of existing knowledge of Lamoka and Brewerton burial
customs, the Frontenac data appear to afford a case of cultural inertia, reflecting
the persistence of diverse traits already known from each. (1945a, p. 18)

     However, these occasional bits of cultural context, synthesis, and interpreta-
tion appear to be an incidental rather than a consciously integral part of
Ritchie’s reports. This is nowhere more clearly seen than in the case of his
recording of the quantities, provenience, and association of his artifacts and
other finds. In general, he has divided his accounts into two sections, one
dealing with the excavations and “occupational” features and another dealing
with the artifacts found. In the excavation sections he gives both provenience
and association for the various artifacts but he distinguishes these objects only
by a typological tag such as arrow point, potsherd, bone awl, etc. In the second
section, he describes the artifacts, sometimes individually and sometimes gen-
erally, but he does not give their provenience or association and fails, except
in two reports (1934, 1940b), to cross-reference the specimens. Thus, there is
no way to tell which bone awl was found in which pit or which burial. In the
case of awls this might or might not be of importance, but in the case of pot-
sherds it would surely seem of great importance to know what type of pottery
was found with what other cultural material. But even in those reports (1934
and 1940b) which do cross-reference their descriptions and provenience by
giving the field catalogue numbers (and for this Ritchie is to be loudly praised),
this system is not followed consistently, there being many instances of speci-
mens described or located without an identifying catalogue number (e.g., 1934,
the sherds, sinkers, awl, and celt, p. 23; 1940b, the scraper, p. 12; the
chopper, p. 15).
    The extent to which Ritchie has quantified his data is to his great credit.
But here again the procedure is not consistent. In the Lamoka report (1932)
for example, while many classes of artifacts are given exact quantification, there
are not a few which are designated with such terms as “several,” “a number,”
82


“not infrequently . . . among these” (p. 105). Two facts seem to point to the
probability that from Ritchie’s viewpoint quantification is primarily for the
purpose of cross-cultural comparisons and not for the purpose of assessing the
various complexes at the sites themselves. First, the consistent quantification is
found only in those reports (1936 et seq.) published after Ritchie began to be
influenced by the Midwestern system. If one wished to be generous, this might
be attributed to his developing realization of the importance of such informa-
tion. But when, even in these later reports, he fails to quantify fragmentary
artifacts of uncertain type (1940b, p. 64), we may be permitted the suspicion
that it is really the comparative approach which motivated him: for comparative
purposes within the Midwestern system, typology is required, and typology as it
is practiced requires virtually complete specimens. However, at least for some
aspects of the assessment of cultural complexes within a given site, a point is a
point and a drill a drill whatever the type may be or whatever the condition of
a specimen may be. Therefore, for one really interested in the culture of a site,
fragmentary points and drills may be as important as whole specimens—and as
deserving of quantification. A failure to realize this fact may be an indication of
the comparative, cross-cultural trend of one’s archeological thinking.
     With regard to Ritchie’s magnum opus, The Pre-Iroquoian Occupations of
New York State (1944), Johnson has already said what I should wish to say,
namely that Ritchie has excluded any feeling for his material as the product of
human behavior (Johnson, 1944, p. 535) and that method, by which both
Johnson and I mean the Midwestern system, has been favored over considera-
tions of culture and human life (p. 533). This monograph, just because it is
such a broad and inclusive compilation, is the final step in Ritchie’s march toward
submersion in the taxonomic system.

    Although J. B. Griffin is not a field archeologist and although he has
specifically implied that he considers himself to be a “laboratory student”’ (e.g.,
1939, p. 128), his works will be included in this series of analyses for a number
of reasons. Griffin’s knowledge of eastern ceramics and his taxonomic studies
have given him an influence in eastern archeological circles that is of very
considerable proportions. A look into the bibliographies of publications cover-
ing work in that region will be sufficient demonstration of the extent to which
his influence goes: Griffin’s publications are rarely absent. In the second place,
marking an exception to the common practice, he has given us statements that
generalize upon methods and theoretical topics, and these may be used as
touchstones against which to compare his empirical research. Finally, since his
monograph on The Fort Ancient Aspect (1943) has been acclaimed as “the
most comprehensive treatment of a single major North American archaeological
cultural manifestation” (Ritchie, 1945b, p. 398) and as “the most exhaustive
TAYLOR                     A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               83

study of an archeological ‘culture’ in the history of eastern United States
archeology” (Collier and Quimby, 1945, p. 143), it will be of interest to
examine the volume to see just what sort of information has been provided by
this “most exhaustive and comprehensive” study. It will be interesting to note
the extent to which it exhibits correspondence with Griffin’s own statements of
theory and method and the extent to which it attains the levels of historiography
and anthropology as defined in the present study. In the succeeding pages, there-
fore, particular cognizance should be taken of reference to (1943) which is the
bibliographic designation of The Fort Ancient Aspect.
     Pertinent to these interests, Griffin’s publications show several important
contradictions between statements of theory and method on the one hand and
the results of empirical research on the other. In the first place, on a number
of occasions he has either stated or implied that the ultimate aim of archeological
investigation is to reconstruct the life of the past.®? But it is difficult to credit
him with anything more than lip service to these ideals. Time and time again
he has failed to make use of the data at hand, to synthesize into any sort of
picture the information gathered from a site or area, to abstract from the
material objects their meaning for the life of their former possessors, to interpret
in terms of broad categories such as subsistence and social groupings the
information from archeological materials. He has consistently failed to follow
up leads which might have led him to some significant information concerning
the life of the people and has been content merely to investigate factors of
taxonomic, i.e., comparative, significance. For example, in several sites which
are Classified as within the Fort Ancient Aspect a net-impressed pottery has been
found (1943, pp. 85ff, 141, 177f), but nowhere is this netting analyzed or
described. Surely the netting thus indicated was a factor in the life of those
ancient people just as was pottery—possibly not as important a factor, but the
making of netting and the making of pottery were both characteristics of the
culture of those sites and both are intrinsic to a proper picture of the life of the
people who lived at those locations. And again, it may be satisfactory for com-
parative purposes to say, as he does (1943, p. 168), that ‘‘on hardly a single
sherd from any of the Fort Ancient sites are there the fabric impressions”
which prevail on salt-pan-type vessels in other regions. But for a student who is
interested in the life of those people, the implication contained in this remark,
namely that there were some sherds that did carry fabric impressions, is but a
tantalizing indication that if all the data had been given, the nature of the
Fort Ancient textile industry, at least in part, might be added to our informa-
tion. That Griffin has neglected to go into this matter is hardly to be reconciled
with his profession of interest in reconstructing the life of the past.°*
     Similarly, it may be adequate for comparative purposes, i.e., for the dif-
ferentiation of one site or series of sites from other such units, to note that
84

“little use was made of shell for such implements as hoes or spoons, in marked
contrast to its frequent use as such at Fort Ancient sites” (1943, p. 236). But
this information is hardly significant in any cultural sense, until the environ-
mental aspects are checked. That is to say: if the shell which was used for
hoes and spoons had been equally available to both types of sites, then it might
be proper to infer some culturally significant difference between them. If, how-
ever, within the environment of one type of site the proper shells were not
present or equally available, one could hardly draw the same cultural inferences,
although for the purely comparative purposes of distinguishing the two types of
sites the situation would not be altered in the least.°* In his publications, Griffin
is satisfied to note presence and absence, or sometimes the relative frequency
of such objects without relating these data to environmental factors. Once again,
this is hardly the procedure one would expect of a student bent upon recreating
the life of the past.
     A second contradiction is to be found in the fact that he demands the full
culture-roster, or the “total complex” as he calls it, in order properly to
compare two groups, yet he consistently fails to synthesize and compare full
subdivisions of that roster, full subcomplexes of that total. He says:
In my own opinion such [diagnostic] traits, though interesting and valuable, are
in some ways rather a side issue in archaeological research, for our proper aim is
the recovery of the total complex of the group to be studied, and this total complex
must be compared with other artifact assemblages equally complete in order to
determine the true connection between groups. (1944b, p. 366)%°

If this is true with regard to the “total complex” of a group, why is it not also
true of, say, the total complex of their bone work, their hunting equipment,
their utilization of the environment, their seasonal activities, their patterns of
design, etc.? Griffin gives the impression that such groupings of data would be
too subjective, when he says:
In the discussion of the artifacts from each site, arbitrary divisions based upon the
type of material used in their construction have been made, in order to simplify
treatment and comparison and to eliminate the use of subjective groupings based
upon such terms as “art” and “ceremonial.” (1943, p. 3, italics mine)

When he says “total complex,” he apparently means the total number of those
particular discrete entities which he has seen fit to isolate and describe.
    To group these entities under headings which state or imply their position
within the cultural whole seems to be too subjective a procedure for him. Yet,
to me at least, it appears to be assuming a false position to call an artifact a
fishhook and then refuse to postulate a fishing complex, or to identify an object
as a gorget and then refuse to admit a complex of personal ornamentation, or to
note a “musical rasp” and not associate it with “rattles” in a music complex
(1943, trait list following p. 376). In other words, despite Griffin’s implied
TAYLOR                      A STUDY     OF ARCHEOLOGY                                85

contention that the entities in his comparisons are non-subjective, he himself
actually begs many questions, and at the same time he does not permit
himself the freedom of following out his implicit hypotheses to see where they
lead. When he labels an illustration (shell) “spoons” (1943, plate XLVIII), but
nowhere gives his reasons for thus identifying the shells, he begs the question
of their identity by the use of a descriptive or classificatory “tag.” When, there-
fore, he refuses, on the grounds of subjectivity, to list some object as “cere-
monial” or to group certain designs, shapes, or decorative elaborations under
a heading of “art,” he is only misleading himself. It is no more subjective to
include the designs found on pottery and gorgets and incised beads under “art”
than it is to identify, with no supporting evidence, a particular shell as a spoon
or some bone object as a hair-spreader or some rock as a whetstone.
     Nor is objectivity being served by a refusal to group objects already identi-
fied as fishhooks, net-sinkers, gorges, and the like, into a fishing complex and
to compare it with the fishing complex at another site. Let us, suppose, for
instance, that at two sites the typological range of fishing gear is identical but
that at one site the harpoon heads greatly outnumber fishhooks, while at the
other harpoons and fishhooks are approximately equal and net-sinkers are
vastly more common; or that at one site the fishing gear is quantitatively much
less than the hunting gear while at the other the reverse is true; or that at one
site fishing gear is found with many burials, while at the other it is never so
found; or that at one site, which lies five miles from the nearest fishable water
there are many harpoons and many large fish bones, while at the other, which
lies on the shore of a large lake containing today many large fish, there are very
few harpoons but a multitude of fishhooks, gorges, and bones of small fish. Are
not these findings valuable for comparative purposes, and are they not valuable
for developing inferences as to the mode of life characteristic of each site? Might
we not demand comparisons of such separable segments of the “‘total complex”
as well as comparison of the total number of discrete, descriptive entities? When
Griffin demands the latter and fails to consider the former, is there not an
inconsistency, even a contradiction, between his theory and practice as well as
a loss to his archeological information?
     Connected with the above is the third contradiction: although Griffin states
that quantification of the data and the giving of relative amounts of various
categories is of great importance, he has failed to follow this precept in his own
publications. In 1935, he said:
Another objection was that the relative amount of materials was of as much significance
as their occurrence at all. I tried to show this difference in the percentage of the
material, which was difficult to obtain and to present. (1937c, p. 54)

Later he said:
One of the most important factors by which cultural connections may be ascertained
86


is the relative abundance of an individual trait, of a group of traits, or of all the
traits. In many instances the text description of the cultural elements at each site
contains a record as to whether a trait is common or rare. It will be noted that
the prevalence of a trait is not indicated on the nonpottery trait lists. To make an
accurate quantitative trait comparison it would be necessary to have data which
were not available. (1943, p. 3)

But he gives the show away when in the next sentence he says:
Moreover, to express trait quantities in the comparative lists would   confuse   rather
than clarify the record for the reader. (1943, p. 3)

Ritchie’s use of quantities in trait lists (e.g., 1940b, 1944, 1945a) has shown
that this practice is not necessarily confusing. But even if this were the case
and if Griffin were thoroughly convinced of the importance of quantitative
evidence, it seems unlikely that he would delete it so completely from his pub-
lished data. Griffin has actually given some relative quantitative information
throughout The Fort Ancient Aspect (1943), by recording “rare,” “abundant,”
etc., for many categories; but no raw figures or percentages have been given.
Now it is true that some of these designations (rare, abundant, scarce) must
have been taken directly, as the only data, from the original sources. But also
it is apparently true that many of these designations were made by Griffin
himself on the bases of original figures which, perhaps, seemed more or less
inconclusive to him and which, therefore, he changed into approximations rather
than to reproduce in cold, rigid numbers what he considered to be incomplete
or doubtful data. Nevertheless, if this is a true representation of the case, it
must be pointed out that Griffin has merely compounded the approximation. He
has imposed approximations of a second order upon approximations of a first
order. If the original sources were inconclusive, they still constitute the basic
data upon which all judgments must be made, and approximations of a second
order merely make the results more inconclusive. That Griffin has offered the
reader only his own judgments rather than the original figures removes the
reader’s control over the data just one step further.
     Two other contradictions will be no more than mentioned here. First, at
certain times, Griffin asserts that the Midwestern taxonomic system is an
objective means of arriving at an idea of cultural relations.®’ Yet at other times,
both by word and deed, he contradicts this viewpoint and gives definite evidence
 that the system is not objective but highly subjective.°® Second, he has main-
 tained that the higher units of the Midwestern system, such as the aspect and
pattern, do not represent a “historical entity” or a cultural actuality, but rather
 are merely classificatory abstractions assembled from a synthesis of focus
 “traits.” For example:
When   foci are combined into the more generalized unit called an aspect a personal
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                87

conception of the important features is introduced and individual elements are
selected and recombined in a pattern which, in a sense, never actually existed.
Abstracting the pottery elements common to the pottery of the four foci of Fort
Ancient does-not reproduce a type that was ever made by any Fort Ancient artisan.
The resultant list of traits does have, however, an individuality which, presumably,
would not be exactly matched by any similar list made up for another cultural
division. (1943, p. 205)

If by the word cultural, used in the last sentence, Griffin meant “pertaining to a
(particular) culture,” he is both misleading himself and contradicting himself.
If the pattern “never actually existed” it can hardly have belonged to “a culture.”
Cultural, therefore, can only mean that the division was made up of descriptive
units which themselves pertain to culture as a whole, not to one particular
culture. This difference, which is so neglected or unrecognized by many archeo-
ologists, will be discussed below when it comes time to go into the matter of
the concept culture.®® Yet in many places in his writings, we find that he has
used interchangeably the terms aspect and culture (meaning a discrete cultural
entity)*°° and that he has identified in at least one instance an aspect with a
linguistic unit.*° However, since both these contradictions deal with the Mid-
western taxonomic system, they will be passed over here to await further
treatment later when the problems of archeological classification and typology
are discussed (see Chapter 5). It is sufficient to note that these ambivalences
are quite typical of those who employ the classificatory systems, and this seems
to point to some basic confusion between descriptive and cultural categories.
This in turn may be the result of a failure to come to some conclusion as to a
definition of culture and to decide what has significance for the study of culture
and for the construction of a particular cultural context.
     With the above, and additional, data it will now be possible to hazard
some judgments as to Griffin’s theoretical beliefs on archeological topics. In the
first place, it seems evident that he believes presence-and-absence trait lists
satisfactorily represent, and may be used to define, human cultures. Trait lists
are the only assemblages or syntheses which he derives from his discrete
archeological data. When, therefore, he refers to these lists, these “total com-
plexes” from his various sites, as “cultures,” the implication is obvious. For
example, his work entitled An Analysis of the Fort Ancient Culture (1935)
consists of an analysis of his Fort Ancient trait lists. Later he says:
This analysis [of Baum Focus trait lists] represents what might be called the more
objective statement of the characteristics of the cultural content of the Baum Focus
and of its interrelationships with other groups. (1943, p. 69, italics mine)

One of the primary obligations of an archaeologist in preparing a report is to furnish
an accurate inventory of the cultural content of the units he is describing. . . . In
88


this paper it has been done by analyzing the material      available into traits.   (1943,
p. 335)

If records of a reasonable number of communities having a high degree of correlation
are obtained, a complete trait list will represent, to some extent at least, the material
remains of a human group or groups who were united by identical or nearly identical
cultural habits. In a comparison of this order one is dealing with concrete data that
have the most intimate connection with ethnography and that come closest to a part
of the culture of a pre-existing human group. (1943, pp. 335-336)19?

    In the second place, Griffin seems to believe that the importance of the
cultural data lies ‘in their value for comparative purposes. This is taken to be
the case since nowhere has he attempted to construct a cultural context, to
paint a picture of the life as it was lived at any site. In one report, he (among
others) says that no comparative study was done but that an effort was made
to place the data on record in such a fashion that they could be used for
future comparative studies (Griffin and others, 1941, p. 47). Nothing was
said about leaving the material in shape for other purposes. In another paper,
he says:
There is no record of the [particular] mound from which the various specimens
came, but, since the entire group is undoubtedly of Hopewellian character, this lack
of information is not of great importance. (1941, p. 184)

It is true that this lack is not of importance for certain purposes. But the pur-
poses for which this lack is unimportant are obviously comparative on a purely
presence-and-absence basis. The lack of provenience is most certainly an im-
portant, and a very important, omission if one is interested in looking at the
culture in a more-than-two-dimensional perspective.
In the focus summaries the specific groups were linked with each other and with
surrounding cultures and areas. This was done primarily on the basis of traits which
were not characteristic of the unit as a whole, but which, nevertheless, belong to
various facets of the Fort Ancient Aspect and are, therefore, of considerable im-
portance in interpreting this cultural group. (1943, p. 195)

In this quotation, there can be only one construction put upon the claim that
these traits are important “in interpreting the cultural group.” It is not the
group’s cultural life that is to be interpreted. It is the group’s “cultural and
chronological position” (1943, subtitle) that is to be understood, not the details
of its culture-structure but the details of its comparative relationships with
surrounding groups. The delineation of the time-and-space coordinates and not
the development of a more-than-two-dimensional, more-than-time-space, picture
was the factor which gave these traits their importance for Griffin.
    This leads us to the third belief which seems to be a part of Griffin’s theo-
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                89


retical premises. It appears that to him culture history signifies this very “cul-
tural and chronological position” relative to other sites or areas, with the
added feature of a temporal continuity. For example, after going most exten-
sively into the possible relationships, both cultural and chronological, of the
Fort Ancient Aspect, he says:
An attempt has been made in this study to gather all the available evidence bearing
upon the cultural history and position of the Fort Ancient cultural division in the
archaeology of the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. (1943, p. 208)1°

Griffin is not thinking of a culture history consisting of events against their
background of local human culture and local natural environment. He is think-
ing of a purely time-space, two-dimensional chronicle. He is not concerned with
the acquiring and development of cultural complexes among the individual
peoples of the Ohio and Mississippi valleys, and not with the implications of
such cultural dynamics for an understanding of culture itself as an abstraction.
    There are three things that interest Griffin in his archeological work: the
cultural and chronological positions of sites and groups of sites relative to
other sites; and the connections of the archeological manifestations with docu-
mented, i.e., “historic” tribes. These goals are plainly indicated by the nature
of his work, and he has several times stated them explicitly in print.°* I am
aware of only one place where there is a hint that he might have other ideas
with regard to his archeological material:
It [Ritchie’s Pre-Jroquoian Occupations of New York State] can be viewed as almost
a “necessary” step in providing the skeletal outline upon which future interpretations
will lean for the data to substantiate theories regarding local cultural evolution and
for “ethnological” reconstructions of the life of the people. (1945b, p. 407, italics
mine)

As was mentioned in the case of the Maya archeology of the Carnegie Institu-
tion, information for archeological “reconstructions” of an “ethnological” nature
is not to be found in most publications written with a purely taxonomic, com-
parative approach. The “ethnological” goal must be visualized at the inception
of archeological work, not at the end.
     From the above discussion of Griffin’s work, it is quite apparent that he
is not concerned with culture, its nature and dynamics. Nor is he concerned
with the construction of cultural contexts for the purpose of picturing the mode
of life of bygone peoples. Ritchie has already pointed out (1945b, p. 399) that
Griffin’s “running description” of the non-pottery data from the Fort Ancient
Aspect leaves much to be desired as to completeness and detail. To this may
be added the notation that Griffin has entirely neglected to summarize Fort
Ancient physical type, house type, cache pits, burials, implements, etc., etc.
His summaries of the various foci are occupied with comparative studies of
90


individual artifact types for the purpose of discovering “cultural and chronologi-
cal” relationships between the various taxonomic units. Furthermore, Griffin
has seemed to overlook the fact that the more detailed and successful the
cultural picture of a site, the more sound and the better grounded will be the
cultural comparisons drawn therefrom. Like other American archeologists, he
proceeds on the basis of comparing descriptive types, claiming to be objective
because there is a certain mathematical element in his comparisons, and failing
to abstract, or at least to provide, many of the culturally significant factors
from his data. Griffin is using his great and valuable knowledge for building a
two-dimensional structure, for “doing” comparative chronicle. He is not attempt-
ing to construct a more-than-two-dimensional picture, to “do” either historiog-
raphy or anthropology as defined in the present study.

     Before closing this analytical and critical discussion, it might serve to
clarify the points I wish to make if I were to name some of the publications
which, in my opinion, follow lines other than the purely comparative or taxono-
mic and which seem to indicate some feeling on the part of their respective
authors for the broader potentialities and cultural character of the archeological
data. In thus identifying these publications, it is beside the present point to
argue whether or not the factual details or the derived inferences presented
therein can be accepted as established by the evidence adduced. Here it will
be sufficient to state that, whether evidence and conclusions are valid or not,
the authors seem to have felt, or envisioned consciously, the fact that the
potentials of archeological data go beyond mere time-space correlates. It will
be enough to show that they have attempted to make their facts tell a broader,
deeper story than usually is derived from excavated material by Americanists.
It will be enough to show that they have tried to study the nature and workings
of culture as an abstraction or have tried to substantiate particular facts which
would be of help in constructing fuller cultural contexts. When archeologists,
reporting in detail upon site excavation, include as a regular part of their
monographs discussions and analyses such as are contained in the following
cited publications, then Americanist archeology will be on its way toward
fulfilling its implied obligations of writing American Indian history and making
a study of human culture.                                                      ;
     W. R. Wedel’s paper on the Environment and Native Subsistence Economies
in the Central Great Plains (1941b) provides an analysis of the culture-
environment relationship which is an imperative requirement for every archeo-
logical report or every report which deals with a region for the first time.
Wedel had the vision to see that there might have been other factors than
historical accident which had reacted with local cultural manifestations to
produce the stratigraphic and areal picture uncovered by archeological excava-
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                               91

tion. Until these environmental factors could be assessed, it would have been
futile to make specific statements as to the role played by interacting cultures
within the area. Without some knowledge of the environmental aspects, it would
be foolhardy to evaluate the relative importance of cultural and environmental
influences in the ebb and flow of life in the Central Plains—or anywhere for
that matter. When tHis paper of Wedel’s is taken in conjunction with certain
passages (e.g., 1941a, pp. 153-156; 1943, pp. 185-191) in others of his publica-
tions, there is evidence of a feeling for the picture of life as it was led and for
the development of a fuller cultural context. Despite the fact-that he is keenly
and, it must be said, predominantly aware of the taxonomic aspects, Wedel
seems to sense the fact that taxonomy is not the only product that may be
forthcoming from the manipulation of archeological materials.
     Several papers by J. W. Bennett make it very evident that he also is con-
cerned with going beyond mere taxonomy and chronology. Although most of
his publications follow the taxonomic line, he has shown another and most
significant side to his archeological interests. In fact, his article Recent Develop-
ments in the Functional Interpretation of Archaeological Data (1943b) says, if
in slightly different words, many of the things that have been, and will be,
said in the present study. In that publication he cites other archeologists who
have viewed their data from what he calls a “functional” point of view, naming,
among others, P. S. Martin (1938, pp. 295ff; 1939, pp. 467ff), P. Holder and
A. J. Waring, Jr. (1945), and J. Adams. These particular citations most assuredly
indicate a trend among certain archeologists to include in their interpretations
more than the usual Americanist range. And Bennett himself has given us two
of our most ambitious and provocative papers: his study of the interaction of
culture and environment among Indian and White settlers in southern Illinois
(1944a) and his discussion of Middle American Influences on Cultures of the
Southeastern United States (1944b) in which he notes the “organizational-
structural” accretions. In my opinion, Bennett’s three papers cited here comprise
the most significant group of contributions, by a single author, from the standpoint
of promise for archeological historiography and cultural anthropology, that have
appeared to date. Once again, however, I wish to say that I am not prepared to
argue the facts of these papers, merely that they represent an idea and an ap-
proach which I believe to be very much to the present point.
   In the field of Middle American studies, G. C. Vaillant has written an account
of the so-called Middle Cultures of the Valley of Mexico which is historiographic
in the sense defined in the present study. It is to be found in his Aztecs of Mexico
(1941, pp. 28-47) and provides a very fine and much-needed cultural background
for the later developments of civilizations in that area. His accounts of the
Toltec and Chichimec occupations contain less interpretation and picturization,
are more purely descriptive of objects, and are more concerned with episodic
 92


 events such as the succession of rulers and peoples. The sources for his detailed,
 cultural, and most excellent picture of Aztec culture are mostly documentary
 and therefore remove that section of the volume from consideration here. It is
 this last circumstance which also prevents crediting archeology with the accounts
 of Maya culture which Thompson and Gann have written (Gann and Thompson,
 1931; Thompson, 1927). In a short paper in the Gazette des Beaux-Arts,
 G. Kubler (1943) has made some very interesting and suggestive inferences,
 based on sculpture, as to certain mental characteristics of the Aztecs. His remarks
 are definitely in a category which transcends the purely comparative and
 chronological and might, if corroborated by further testing of his hypothesis,
 lead to a better understanding of aspects of Aztec culture or of Aztec culture
 as a whole. In the Maya field, several papers on astronomy, mathematics, and
 measurement have already been cited as going beyond the usual time-space
 limits of Americanist archeology (Cramer, 1938; Roys, 1934; Thompson, 1934,
  1939a, 1942a).
        Tucked away in the midst of an archeological bibliography that otherwise
 ' consists entirely of descriptive and comparative studies lies W. C. Bennett’s
   short article entitled Interpretations of Andean Archeology (1945). Here he
‘ has pointed to cultural situations which, if their implications are developed and
   their details elaborated by further work with a view to testing and broadening
   the inferences, will instigate in that area some of the most valuable investiga-
   tions upon archeological historiography and cultural anthropology that will have
   been conducted in the Americanist field. In what can only be called a complete
   reversal of form, Bennett has demonstrated that he too, when given the oppor-
   tunity and when expressing himself before an audience other than the usual
   professional archeological one, is thinking along the lines of fuller cultural
   pictures and the meaning of his data for problems of culture dynamics. This
   paper of only four and one-half pages is a remarkably stimulating document—
   if one is interested in more than the chronology and classification of cultural
   manifestations.
        For all the years that archeologists from the United States have been
   engaged in Peruvian archeology, it remained for one who is not an archeologist
   to attempt to derive more than the obvious technical and comparative informa-
    tion from the vast and varied textile industry preserved in the arid coastal region.
   In her monograph on Paracas Embroideries (1941), Stafford says:
  To show some of the thought-processes underlying the repeating patterns of Paracas
  embroideries is the major purpose of this study. (p. 13)

  She then proceeds to write one of the most pertinent, important, and interesting
  accounts of an archeological cultural feature that has been published. If we had
  many such intensive studies and if at least some analysis of this type were done
TAYLOR                      A STUDY    OF ARCHEOLOGY                                93

during the writing of all archeological site-reports, we would have a body of data
which would indeed be cultural. It will not be until other researches have been done
in similar channels that we shall really have knowledge of the peoples and the cul-
tures which we are so diligently arranging in chronological order and setting within
a web of cultural interrelationships.
    Before closing this section, mention should be made of some other arche-
ologists who have in one way or another treated their material from a more
cultural and less purely taxonomic viewpoint than is the usual case. As long ago
as 1899, Harlan I. Smith wrote a paper suggesting the advantages of The
Ethnological Arrangement of Archaeological Material, describing how he had
made museum displays of the material from a site in Kentucky in order to show
the tribal life and ethnology “of those ancient villagers” (p. 1). His words have
taken a long time to reach his public, but of recent years several eastern arche-
ologists have heeded his words and employed cultural categories and/or com-
plexes in the presentation of their data. I refer to Cole and Deuel (1937), Fair-
banks (1941, 1942), and Setzler and Jennings (1941). Problems of a cultural
nature are also to be found discussed in Colton’s Reconstruction of Anasazi
History (1943b) and in the pages on painted pottery designs in Archaeological
Studies in Northeast Arizona (Beals, Brainerd, and Smith, 1945). Finally, Os-
good has drawn a cultural picture of the life around Lake Valencia, Venezuela,
by the use of archeological evidence excavated from the ground (1943).

     We may now return to the dichotomy which at the beginning of the second
chapter was noted to occur within the conceptual structure of Americanist
archeology in the United States. That the discipline as a whole should claim
affiliations with cultural anthropology while maintaining that its objective is the
reconstruction of history is a confusion which, unanalyzed and unresolved as it
is, points to a significant disinterest in the fundamental structure of the discipline
itself. It is quite apparent that the archeologists have accepted the admonition to
do and die without the incumbrance of reasoning why!
    The origin of this confusion may be attributed in part, if not entirely, to an
uncritical appropriation of theoretical principles which impinged upon the dis-
cipline during its development. Contrary to the origin of cultural anthropology
which evolved from an intensification along a single line of interest, namely cul-
ture, the present status of archeology (and this is as true of European as of
Americanist) is the result of a break in tradition. In the first chapter of the
present study it was shown that archeology, as it developed both abroad and in
the United States, had for its major interest the past, the “history,” of the
people whose cultural remains were being investigated. “Historical reconstruc-
tion,” then, became its purpose.
   However, when the growing discipline of cultural anthropology began to take
94


over the study of “primitives” and non-literate peoples, that part of archeology
which dealt with such subjects was duly and promptly absorbed. The important
factor is, however, that although incorporated within anthropology, archeology
retained its major interest in “historical reconstruction” and made no effort to
reconcile this purpose with the aims and objectives of the larger discipline of
which it claimed to be a part. It seems that Americanist archeologists thought
that, just because they were working on the culture of American Indians, i-e.,
“primitives,” they were ipso facto anthropologists. They have not bothered to
analyze their own activities or to inquire into exactly what, if anything, “histori-
cal reconstruction” has to do with anthropology./Furthermore, and for reasons
which are not at allclear, they have come to look upon “historical reconstruction”
as meré chronicle, ‘the ordering of cultural materials in temporal sequence together
with an attempt fo demonstrate their derivations and cross-cultural relationships
They have failed to see, as Kroeber has stated it so well, that:
All history—whatever the field—which is worth its salt does deal with relations,
with functions, with meanings. It certainly is not a tracing of the wanderings of
detached and unrelated items through time and space, nor a precise but arid roster
of names, dates, and places. (1946, p. 2)

They have categorized events and items, tagged them, but not investigated them
in their contexts or in their dynamic aspects. As a result of these conditions,
Americanist archeology is not in a healthy state. Its metabolism has gone awry.
It is wasting and not assimilating its foodstuffs.
                                       jeeRA Bed

                                 INTRODUCTION
  D ESPITE the claims of Americanist archeologists that their discipline
         belongs within the range of anthropological studies and that they them-
  selves are anthropologists, and despite the espousal of “historical reconstruction”
  as their major objective, it is the blunt fact that archeology, as it is currently
  practiced by the majority of Americanists, is neither historiography nor anthro-
  pology. These levels of procedure have not been reached.
      Of recent years, fellow students have more or less openly subscribed to the
   popular conception of the archeologist as a lover-of-the-great-out-of-doors or a
   dirt-scratching mental codger who interests himself prodigiously in the paste of
   Patameragouche pottery but not at all in Man as a biologically and socially
   functioning organism. They have accused the archeologist of tatting endless taxo-
   nomic rosettes out of the same old ball of “material culture” and maintained
   that his findings are next to useless for the purposes of history and culture study.
   It seems that the archeologists are becoming, as Tolstoy once said of modern
  historians, like deaf men answering questions which no one has asked them.
        In their broader implications, these accusations are all too true. Today more
   than ever archeologists have become engrossed, to the virtual exclusion of all
   else, in the building of chronological sequences and so-called culture classifica-
  tions with purely taxonomic inherencies. Their outlook has turned, in full face,
   toward temporal and spatial comparisons with the explicit or implicit purpose of
   writing cultural chronicles. The apparent be-all and end-all of archeological
  excavation appears to be the placing of the resultant finds in one or another of
   the taxonomic pigeonholes, and a glance at the Conclusions of most monographs
  will show them to be chiefly concerned with comparative studies and seldom with
  the cultural integration or implications of the data themselves.
        This approach to archeological research has been called the comparative or
  taxonomic approach. It is primarily an attempt to determine the significance of
  specific cultural items with regard to relationships outside the cultural unit being
  investigated. Instead of seeking to construct as full a cultural picture as possible
  for the particular manifestation, this approach applies itself mainly, if not
  wholly, to those phenomena which have comparative significance outside of the
  site or component. It neglects much of the local cultural “corpus.” It is narrow
  and therefore wasteful of the potentialities of the archeological data.
                                                                                             i7
       The conjunctive approach, on the other hand, has as its primary goal the eluci-
_ dation of cultural conjunctives,   the associations and relationships, the “affinities,”
 _within the manifestation under investigation. It aims at drawing the completest
                                             95
 96


 possible picture of past human life in terms of its human and geographic enyiron-
 ment. It is chiefly interested in the relation of item to item, trait to trait, complex
‘to complex (to use Linton’s concepts) within the culture-unit represented and only
 subsequently in the taxonomic relation of these phenomena to similar ones out-
 side of it.
     It is an integral part of this major aim to make every effort to interpret the
 concrete, empirical findings of archeology in terms of culture itself, of cultural
 behavior, and of the non-material results of cultural behavior whereby the
 materialistic and “lifeless” data may be given life and depth. Such objectives
  should help not only to bring about the construction of fuller cultural contexts
  but also to provide material for the study of culture itself, ie., for anthropology
  on a fifth level of procedure. It is one of the premises of the conjunctive approach
  that, when the archeological data have been gathered in satisfactory fashion and
  subjected to an intensive analysis, they may be expected to provide adequate bases
  for deriving information on the so-called non-material aspects of culture and
  cultural behavior.
       While it is perfectly true that all the evidence for a complete cultural context
  cannot be obtained by archeologists from archeological sites, it is equally true
  that all the evidence cannot be obtained by historians or ethnographers from
  their sources either. Since, as Pirenne has pointed out, only the events and not
_ their inferred relationships are empirically demonstrable in any study dealing with _
  man’s past, the difference between the archeological, documentary, and ethno-
  graphic records is merely one of degree, not of kind, and the archeologists should
  not consider that the limitations of their finds impose interpretive strictures upon
  them any more than upon other students dealing with past actuality. Up to the
  limits of their evidence, theirs are the same privileges and the same obligations
  that impinge upon ethnologists and historians.
       Furthermore, it is probable that much more of the archeological evidence than
  has been obtained in the past can be obtained in the future merely by approach-
  ing the material with a different attitude. This attitude, the conjunctive approach,
  considers a site to be a discrete entity with career and cultural expression(s) of
   its own. It is no longer just one more unit in a spatial and temporal range of
   comparable units. With a vigorous effort to reveal and interpret the minute asso-
   ciations and relationships within the site, much more information of a cultural,
   as well as of a purely comparative nature may be expected. When such studies
   have been made for many localities and upon many time-planes, archeology will
   have a body of data from which the social sciences may draw with profit. It is
   hoped that archeology may thus progress beyond mere description and chronicle
   to attain, within the limits of its empirical data, the level of historiography.
